oH       -^^ 


,0  o. 


'OO' 


•0-    ,"^ 


,>l   -r^ 


\V  '/», 


*  O    "^      '.  ''^^  •'     »    4    ■>  ,\    ^ 


'  '   .  <.  s  '^     . 


5    M   0 


0    N   O  ^        .  ^^ 

V^        ^   ■•    *   °  A 


'oo^ 


;  *  -,      9j,  ,0^    c  «  ^  •■  ♦     "^^        '  ^         a\      .via 


.^'?-' 


A"         'V' 


\.^  ,0-' 


,v^' 


>o 


^ 


\  .  1    I    «    .         -^^  O  e    *. 


cP- 


THE 

HOME   BOOK  OF   VERSE 


THE   HOME   BOOK 
OF   VERSE 

AMERICAN  AND   ENGLISH 

1580-191 8 


With  an  Appendix   Containing  a  Few  Well-known  Poems 
in  Other  Languages 


Selected  and  arranged 
By 

BURTON  EGBERT  STEVENSON 


THIRD  EDITION 
REVISED  AND  ENLARGED 


^^^i^^ 


NEW  YORK 
HENRY  HOLT  AND  COMPANY 

1918 


^ 


^^ 


K' 


\ 


<\V 


■  -i.pvsrr.i,  ;     ,9,2.  igijj, 

IlENRV  HOLT  AND  COMPANY 


■jCT  "'^  '^Vto 


/oB-h 


COPYRIGHT  NOTICE 

i  or  the  use  of  the  copyrighted  material  included  in  this  volume,  per- 
■ssion  has  been  secured  either  from  the  author  or  from  his  authorized 
iblisher,  and  special  arrangements  have  also  been  made  with  the  au- 
thorized publishers  of  the  older  American  poets  whose  works,  in  whole 
or  in  part,  have  lapsed  from  copyriglit.  All  rights  in  these  poems  are 
reserved  by  the  holders  of  the  copyright,  or  the  authorized  publishers, 
as  named  below: 

D.  Appleton  &  Company:  The  poems  by  William  Cullen  Bryant  and 
Henry  Newbolt. 

Barse  &  Hopkins:  "The  Law  of  the  Yukon,"  by  Robert  W.  Service, 
trom  "The  Spell  of  the  Yukon  and  Other  Verses,"  and  "Carry  On,"  from 
"Rhymes  of  a  Red  Cross  Man." 

The  Bobbs-Merrill  Company:  The  poems  by  James  Whitcomb  Riley, 
from  .the  Biographical  Edition  of  his  complete  works,  copyright  igi3. 

Bnentano's:  "The  Good  Inn,"  by  Herman  Knickerbocker  Viele,  from 
"The  Inn  of  the  Silver  Moon."  • . 

Edmund  D.  Brooks:  The  poems  by  Arthur  Upson. 

The  Century  Company:  The  poems  by  Richard  Watson  Gilder,  Rob- 
ert Underwood  Johnson  and  Aubrey  de  Vere;  S.  Weir  Mitchell,  James 
Oppenheim,  and  L.  Frank  Tooker;  "Nebuchadnezzah,"  by  Irwin  Rus- 
sell; "The  Secret,"  by  G.  E.  Woodberry;  "High  Tide  at  Gettysburg," 
by  Will  Henry  Thompson;  "Farragut,"  by  William  Tucker  Meredith. 

Henry  T.  Coates  &  Company:  "The  Picket  Guard,"  by  Ethel  Lynn 
Beers,  and  "Monterey"  by  Charles  Fenno  Hoffman. 

W.  B.  Conkey  Co.:  The  poems  by  Ella  Wheeler  Wilcox,  by  special 
permission  of  the  W.  B.  Conkey  Co.,  who  are  the  exclusive  American 
publisliers  of  her  works. 

Copcland  &  Day:  The  poems  by  Alice  Brown,  from  "The  Road  to 
Castaly." 

Dana  Estes  &  Company:  The  poems  by  Samuel  Minturn  Peck  and 
Mrs.  Laura  E.  Richards;  "July"  by  Susan  H.  Swett. 

Dodd,  Mead  &  Company:  The  poems  by  Austin  Dobson  and  Paul 
Laurence  Dunbar;  "My  Catbird,"  by  William  Henry  Venable;  "The 
Poster  Girl,"  by  Carolyn  Wells. 

George  H.  Doran  Company:  The  poems  by  May  Byron,  Amelia 
Josephine  Burr  and  Joyce  Kilmer. 

Duffield  &  Company:  The  poems  by  Elsa  Barker,  Eugene  Lee-Ham- 
ilton, George  Santayana,  William  Sharp,  and  Helen  Hay  Whitney. 

E.  P.  Dutton  &  Company:  "The  Spires  of  O.xford,"  by  Winifred  Letts. 
Forbes  &  Company:  The  poems  by  Ben  King  and  Nixon  Waterman. 
The  Four  Seas  Company:  The  poems  by  Richard  Aldington. 
Laurence  J.  Gomme:  The  poems  by  Hilaire  Belloc. 

The  Grafton  Press:  The  poems  by  John  S.  McGroarty. 

Harper  &  Brothers:  The  poems  by  Guy  Wetmore  Carrvl,  Charles 
Graham  Halpme,  Don  Marquis,  Ada  Foster  Murray,  and  Justin  Huntly 
McCarthy,  the  latter  from  his  novel,  "If  I  were  King,"  copyright  igoi, 
oy  Kobert  Howard  Russell;  "An  Omar  for  Ladies,"  by  Josephine  Daskam 
liacon;     Driving  Home  the  Cows,"  by  Kate  Putnam  Osgood. 

Henry  Holt  &  Company.  The  poems  by  Susan  N.  Clcghorn,  Arthur 
Colton,  Walter  de  la  Mare,  Francis  Miles  Finch,  Robert  Frost,  Charles 
Leonard   Moore,    Herbert   Trench,    Louis    Untermeyer   and    Margaret 


Widdemer. 


vi  Copyright  Notice 

Waldo  Emerson,  James  Thomas  Fields,  Richard  Watson  Gilder,  Louise 
Imogen  Guiney,  Bret  Harte,  John  Hay,  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  Lucy 
Larcom,  Emma  Lazarus,  Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow,  James  Russell 
Lowell,  William  Vaughn  Moody.Alice  Freeman  Palmer,  Thomas  William 
Parsons,  Josephine  Preston  Peabody,  Nora  Perry,  Lizette  Woodworth 
Reese,  John  Godfrey  Saxe,  Robert  Haven  Schaufiler,  Paul  Shivell,  Ed- 
ward Rowland  Sill,  Harriet  Prescott  Spofford,  Ernest  Clarence  Stedman, 
William  Wetmore  Story,  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe,  Bayard  Taylor,  Celia 
Thaxter,  Edith  M.  Thomas,  Maurice  Thompson,  Henry  David  Thoreausn 
John  Townsend  Trowbridge,  Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps  Ward,  John  Green- 
leaf  Whittier. 

The  Howard  University  Print:  "The  Babie,"  by  Jeremiah  Eames 
Rankin. 

B.  W.  Huebsch:  The  poems  by  Irene  Rutherford  McLeod. 

P.  J.  Kenedy:  The  poems  by  Abram  J.  Ryan. 

Mitchell  Kennerley:  The  poems  by  Arthur  Davison  Ficke,  William 
Samuel  Johnson,  Harry  Kemp,  Vachel  Lindsay,  Richard  Middleton  and 
Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall. 

Alfred  A.  Knopf:  The  poems  by  William  H.  Davies. 

John  Lane  Company:  The  poems  by  Laurence  Binyon,  Rupert 
Brooke,  G.  K.  Chesterton,  T.  A.  Daly,  John  Davidson,  Ernest  Dowson, 
A.  E.  Housman,  Laurence  Hope,  Benjamin  R.  C.  Low,  Alice  Meynell, 
Henry  Newbolt,  Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall,  and  Francis  Thompson. 

J.  B.  Lippincott  Company:  The  poems  by  George  Henry  Boker, 
Harrison  S.  Morris,  Thomas  Buchanan  Read  and  Mary  Ashley  Town- 
send. 

Little,  Brown  &  Company:  The  poems  by  Richard  Burton,  Susan 
Coolidge,  Emily  Dickinson,  Helen  Hunt  Jackson,  Louise  Chandler 
Moulton. 

Lothrop,  Lee  &  Shepard  Company:  The  poems  by  Charles  Follen 
Adams,  Mary  Emily  Bradley,  Alfred  Domett,  Paul  Hamilton  Hayne, 
William  Morris,  Emilie  Poulsson,  Horatio  Nelson  Powers,  David  Atwood 
Wasson. 

The  Macmillan  Company:  The  poems  by  Matthew  Aniokl,  Alfred 
Austin,  Wilfrid  Wilson  Gibson,  Thomas  Hardy,  Ella  Higginson,  Charles 
Kingsley,  Amy  Lowell,  John  Masefield,  Harriet  Monroe,  John  G.  Nei- 
hardt,  George  William  Russell,  John  Addington  Symonds,  Sara  Teasdale, 
William  Watson,  George  E.  Woodberry  and  William  Butler  Yeats. 

The  Manas  Press:  The  poems  by  Adelaide  Crapsey. 

Thomas  B.  Mosher:  The  poems  by  Cecily  Fo.x-Smith,  Lucy  Lyttleton 
and  Edith  M.  Thomas. 

L.  C.  Page  &  Company:  The  poems  by  Bliss  Carman  and  Charles  G. 
D.  Roberts. 

G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons:  The  poems  by  William  Henry  Drummond  and 
Norman  Gale;  "The  Rosary,"  by  Robert  Cameron  Rogers. 

Norman  Remington  Company:  The  poems  by  Patrick  R.  Chalmers, 
from  "Green  Days  and  Blue  Days." 

Charles  Scribner's  Sons:  The  poems  by  Josephine  Daskam  Bacon, 
H.  C.  Bunner,  George  W.  Cable,  Mary  Mapes  Dodge,  Eugene  Field, 
John  Galsworthy,  Josiah  Gilbert  Holland,  Sidney  Lanier,  George  Mer- 
edith, A.  T.  Quiller-Couch,  Corinne  Roosevelt  Robmson,  George  Santa- 
yana,  Alan  Seeger,  Robert  Louis  Stevenson,  Charles  Warren  Stoddard, 
Benjamin  F.  Taylor  and  Henry  Van  Dyke. 

Sherman,  French  &  Company:  "The  Lonely  Road,  by  Kennetn 
Rand;  "Sunday  Evening  in  the  Common,"  by  John  Hall  Wheelock. 

Small,  Maynard  &  Company:  The  poems  by  Charlotte  Perkms  Stetson 
Gilman,  Richard  Hovey,  CUnton  Scollard,  John  B.  Tabb  and  Walt 

Whitman. 

Stewart  &  Kidd  Co. :  The  poem  by  Wm.  Haynes  Lytle. 

F.  A.  Stokes  Company:  The  poems  by  Gelett  Burgess,  Alfred  Noyes, 
and  Samuel  Minturn  Peck.  ,       .,  .      ,,.,,  _ 

Whitaker  &  Ray-Wiggin  Company:  The  poems  by  Joaquin  Miller, 
from  his  copyrighted  and  complete  poetical  works. 


Copyright  Notice  vii 

Express  personal  permission  has  been  received  by  the  editor  from  the 
following  authors  for  the  use  of  such  of  their  poems  as  appear  in  this 
collection,  all  rights  to  which  are  reserved  by  them: 

Henry  Abbey,  Zee  Akins,  John  Albee,  Elizabeth  Akers  Allen,  Henry 
Mills  A.lden,  ^iargaret  Steele  Anderson,  Everard  Jack  Appleton. 

Josephine  Daskam  Bacon,  Karle  Wilson  Baker,  John  Kendrick  Bangs, 
Kendall  Banning,  Elsa  Barker,  H.  H.  Bashford,  Herbert  Bashford.Arlo 
Bates  Katherine  Lee  Bates,  Hilaire  Belloc  (by  Joyce  Kilmer),  William 
Rose  Benet  Henry  Holcomb  Bennett,  John  Bennett,  Charles  G.Blanden, 
Augustus  Wight  Bomberger,  Robert  Adger  Bowen,  Wilham  ^^^^'^^^ 
Braithwaite,  Anna  Hempstead  Branch,  Mary  Boll(^  Branch,  Albert 
Fletcher  Bridges,  Abbie  Farwell  Brown,  Alice  Brown,  Wilham  Laird 
Brown  Alice  Learned  Bunner  (for  H.  C.  Bunner),  Gelett  Burgess,  Dana 
Burnett,  Amelia  Josephine  Burr,  Richard  Burton,  Samuel  H.  M.  Byers, 
Witter  Bvnner  (by  Mrs.  A.  L.  Wellington). 

Bliss  Carman,  W.  H.  Carruth,  Charles  E.  Carryl,  Willa  Sibert  Gather, 
Madison  Cawein,  Robert  W.  Chambers,  Arthur  Chapman,  John  Vance 
Cheney  G  K.  Chesterton,  Joseph  I.  C.  Clarke,  Virginia  Woodward 
Cloud,  Florence  Earle  Coates,  Zitella  Cocke,  Robert  CoUyer,  Helen  Gray 
Cone,  Grace  Hazard  Conkling,  Ellen  Mackay  Hutchinson  Cortissoz. 

T.  A.  Daly,  Mary  Carolyn  Davies,  William  H.  Davies,  Margaret  De- 
land,  Charles  M.  Dickinson,  Austin  Dobson,  Digby  Mackworth  Dolben 
(by  Gerald  Dolben  Paul),  Julia  C.  R.  Dorr,  Walter  G.  Doty,  Arthur 
Conan  L)oyle. 

Elaine  Goodale  Eastman,  Florence  Wilkinson  Evans. 

Arthur  Davison  Ficke  (by  C.  A.  Ficke),  Sara  Teasdale  Filsinger,  .A^ 
Hugh  Fisher,  Mahlon  Leonard  Fisher,  Sam  Walter  Foss. 

HamHn  Garland,  Theodosia  Garrison,  Ellen  M.  Huntington  Gates, 
Helena  de  Kay  Gilder  (for  Richard  Watson  Gilder),  Joseph  B.  Gilder, 
Strickland  W.  Gillilan,  Charlotte  Perkins  Gilman,  J.  Scott  Glasgow, 
Charles  Buxton  Going,  Dora  Read  Goodale,  Homer  Greene,  Sarah  P. 
McLean  Greene,  William  Griffith. 

Hermann  Hagedorn,  Ruth  Guthrie  Harding,  Virginia  Bioren  Harrison, 
Jerome  A.  Hart,  Hildegarde  Hawthorne,  Frederick  Henry  Hedge, 
Theresa  Helburn,  Barbara  Henderson,  Oliver  Herford,  Ella  Higginson, 
Katherine  Tynan  Hinkson,  William  Dean  Howells,  Helen  Huntington. 

Wallace  Irwin. 

Margaret  Janvier,  Orrick  Johns,  Robert  Underwood  Johnson,  William 
Samuel  Johnson,  Amanda  T.  Jones,  Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr. 

Reginald  Wright  Kauffman,  James  B.  Kenyon,  Joyce  Kilmer,  Harriet 
McEwen  Kimball,  Gcorgiana  Goddard  King,  Rudyard  Kipling  (for 
"L'Envoi"),  D.  C.  Knowles  (for  Frederic  Lawrence  Knowles),  George 
M.  W.  Kobbe  (for  Gustave  Kobbe). 

.\ndrew  Lang,  Walter  Learned,  Louis  V.  Le  Doux,  Richard  Le  Gal- 
lienne,  Nicholas  Vachel  Lindsay,  Grace  Denio  Litchfield,  Robert  Love- 
man,  Benjamin  R.  C.  Low,  Amy  Lowell. 

John  S.  McGroarty,  Isabel  E.  Mackay,  Frederick  Manning,  Edwin 
Markham,  Josephine  Peabody  Marks,  Don  Marquis,  Edward  Sandford 
Martin,  Caroline  Atwater  Mason,  Alice  Meynell,  Lloyd  Mifflin,  Edna 
St.  Vincent  Millay,  Emily  Huntington  Miller,  Harriet  Monroe,  David 
Morton,  Ada  Foster  Murray,  Kenton  Foster  Murray. 

John  G.  Neihardt,  Henry  Newbolt,  Grace  Fallow  Norton,  Alfred 
Noyes. 

Oliver  Opdyke,  James  Oppenheim,  Shaemas  O  Sheel. 

Albert  Bigelow  Paine,  Alice  Freeman  Palmer  (by  G.  H.  Palmer), 
Randall  Parrish,  Harry  Thurston  Peck,  Samuel  Minturn  Peck,  William 
Alexander  Percy,  H"rederick  Peterson, Sarah  M.  B.  Piatt,  Emilie  Poulsson, 
Harriet  Waters  Preston,  Edna  Dean  Proctor. 

Kenneth  Rand,  Lizette  Woodworth  Reese,  Cale  Young  Rice,  Wall^c 
Rice,  Laura  E.  Richards,  James  Whitcomb  Riley  (by  E.  H.  Eitel),  I^gj, 
son  Robertson,  Corinne  Roosevelt  Robinson,  Edwin  Arlington  ROugsell'. 
Robert  Cameron  Rogers,  John  Jerome  Rooney,  George  William-  ^ 


viii  Copyright  Notice 

Margaret  E.  Sangster,  Joseph  Sargent  (for  the  poems  by  Guy  Wetmore 
Larryl)  Robert  Haven  Schauffler,  Edmund  H.  Sears,  Paul  Shivell 
David  Banks  Sickels,  Harriet  Prescott  Spofford,  Victor  Starbuck  Wil- 
liam Force  Stead,  Laura  Stedman  (for  Edmund  Clarence  Stedman), 
George  Sterling,  Mildred  McNeal  Sweeney. 

Joseph  Russell  Taylor,  William  Roscoe  Thayer,  Edith  M    Thomas 
Rose  Hartwick  Thorpe,  L.  Frank  Tooker,  Ridgely  Torrence,  Charles 
Hanson  Powne,  Amelie  Rives  Troubetzkoy,  John  Townsend  Trowbridge 
Louis  Untermeyer. 

Henry  Van  Dyke,  William  Henry  Venable. 

Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps  Ward,  Lydia  Avery  Coonley  Ward  William 
Hayes  Ward,  Nixon  Waterman,  Carolyn  Wells,  Robert  Gilbert  Welsh 
C  arl  Werner,  Edward  J.  Wheeler,  John  Hall  Wheelock,  Margaret  V\i(l- 
demer,  Ella  Wheeler  Wilcox,  Francis  Howard  Williams,  William  Winter 
(ieoige  Edward  Woodberry,  William  Harvey  Woods,  Willard  Huntins- 
ton  Wright. 

Ruth  Comfort  Mitchell  Young. 

The  compiler  is  indebted  to  the  editors  of  the  following  magazines  for 
permission  to  use  the  poems  mentioned: 

The  Atlantic:  "Aller  Seelen,"  Mabel  Earle;  "Birthright,"  John 
Dnnkwater;  "Emiha,"  Ellen  Angus  PVench  (Sarah  N.  Cleghorn);  "The 
Valley  of  Vain  Verses,"  Henry  Van  Dyke;  "To  Daisies,"  Francis  Thomp- 
son. 

The  Bellman:  "Immortalis,"  David  Morton. 
The  Catholic  Standard  and  Times:  The  poems  by  T.  A.  Daly. 
The  Century:  "The  Year's  End,"  Timothy  Cole;  "Kinchinjunga," 
Cale  Young  Rice;  "Nested,"  Habberton  Lulham;  "To  Her— Unspoken," 
Amelia  Josephine  Burr;  "A  Lover's  Envy,"  Henry  Van  Dyke;  "Her 
Pathway,"  Cornelia  Kane  Rathbone;  "Love  is  a  Terrible  Thing,"'  Grace 
Fallow  Norton;  "Chavez,"  Mildred  McNeal  Sweeney. 

Contemporary  Verse:  "Tropical  Town,"  Solomon  de  la  Selva;  "A 
Little  Page's  Song,"  William  Alexander  Percy. 

Harper's  Magazine:  "I  Shall  not  Cry  Return,"  Ellen  M.  H.  Gates; 
"Wise,"  Lizette  Woodworth  Reese;  "Wild  Wishes,"  Ethel  M.  Hewitt. ' 
House  and  Garden:  "Gates  and  Doors,"  Joyce  Kilmer. 
Life:  "Finnigin  to  Flannigan,"  S.  W.  Gillilan. 
The  Outlook:  "A  Poet  Enlists,"  Amelia  Josephine  Burr. 
Poetry:  "Sunrise  on  Rydal  Water,"  John  Drinkwater;  "Night  for 
Adventures,"  Victor  Starbuck;  "An  Immorality,"  Ezra  Pound;  "A  Very 
Old  Song,"  William  Laird  Brown. 
Reedy's  Mirror:  "Nora,"  Zoe  Akins. 

Scribner's  Magazine:  "Comrades,"  George  Edward  Woodberry; 
"Constancy,"  Minor  Watson;  "Turn  of  the  Road,"  Alice  RoUett  Coe; 
"Where  Love  Is,"  Amelia  Josephine  Burr;  "Azrael,"  Robert  Gilbert 
Welsh. 


TO 
HENRY  HOLT 

WITH  SINCERE  REGARD 


INTRODUCTION 


The  attempt  is  made  in  this  collection  to  bring  together 
the  best  short  poems  in  the  English  language  from  the  time 
of  Spenser  to  the  present  day,  together  with  a  body  of  verse 
which,  if  not  great  poetry,  has  at  least  the  distinction  of 
wide  popularity.  In  what  degree  this  attempt  has  been 
successful  the  book  itself  must  show;  but  it  may  be  worth 
while  to  state  briefly  certain  purposes  which  the  compiler 
had  in  mind  when  he  undertook  the  task,  and  which  he  has 
carried  out  as  faithfully  as  he  could. 

These  purposes  were  to  include  nothing  which  did  not 
seem  to  him  to  ring  true,  but,  at  the  same  time,  to  recognize 
the  validity  of  popular  taste  as  well  as  of  classical  taste;  to 
preserve  in  authentic  form  certain  fugitive  poems  which 
everyone  admires  but  which  few  know  where  to  find;  to 
lay  emphasis  upon  the  lighter  forms  of  verse;  and  to  pay 
especial  attention  to  the  work  of  living  English  and  Ameri- 
can poets,  particularly  of  the  younger  generation. 

It  would  be  idle  to  suppose  that  everything  included  here 
will  appeal  to  everyone  as  good  poetry.  Tastes  in  poetry 
differ  even  more  inevitably  than  tastes  in  food;  but  the 
compiler  has  tried  to  spread  his  table  in  such  a  manner 
that  every  healthy  taste  may  be  abundantly  satisfied 
without  having  to  eat  of  any  dish  it  does  not  care  for.  In 
one  respect,  he  is  free  to  confess  that,  in  arranging  the 
banquet,  he  has  not  relied  upon  his  own  taste  alone.  There 
is  a  note  of  pensive  sentiment — the  note  which  Longfellow 
knew  how  to  strike  so  successfully — which,  according  to 
Professor  Trent,  "finds  an  echo  in  the  universal  human 
heart,"  and  this  note  the  compiler  did  not  feel  justified  in 
disregarding,  or  even  regarding  lightly,  simply  because  his 
own  heart  happens  to  be  indifferent  to  it.  Nor  has  he  been 
deterred  from  using  a  poem  because  it  was  the  common 


xii  Introduction 

property  of  anthologists,  or  tempted  to  include  any  be- 
cause it  was  little  known.  For  this  is  a  collection,  not  of 
curious  or  unusual,  but  of  favorite  verse. 

There  will  be  much  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  merit 
of  the  selections  from  the  work  of  living  writers  included 
here.  Where  the  test  of  time  is  not  available,  and  the 
stamp  of  wide  approval  is  withheld,  there  remains  only  the 
test  of  individual  preference,  and  here  the  compiler  has 
consulted  no  judgment  but  his  own.  He  has  been  hampered 
by  human  limitations  as  applied  to  a  mass  of  material  so 
overwhelming  in  bulk;  but  he  hopes  that  the  selection  will 
be  found  fairly  representative,  and  that  no  really  great 
poem  of  recent  years  has  been  overlooked.  And  while  the 
restrictions  of  copyright  have  somewhat  limited  the  rep- 
resentation given  certain  American  poets,  he  believes  that 
American  verse,  as  a  whole,  receives  far  more  attention 
here  than  in  any  other  general  anthology. 


II 

Practically  the  first  decision  the  compiler  made  with 
regard  to  this  work  was  that  it  should  be  a  collection,  not 
of  fragments,  but  of  complete  poems;  and  this,  while  it  did 
not,  of  course,  preclude  the  use  of  poems  within  poems — 
of  lyrics  from  the  dramatists,  of  songs  from  Scott's  met- 
rical romances,  or  of  such  parentheses  as  Byron's  stanzas 
on  Waterloo— while  it  did  not  prevent  the  excision  of 
such  obvious  digressions  as  the  final  stanzas  of  Timrod's 
"Spring,"  and  while  it  was  not  construed  to  mean  that  a 
sequence  such  as  "Sonnets  from  the  Portuguese"  must  be 
given  entire,  has,  nevertheless,  resulted  in  some  depriva- 
tions. No  passages  will  be  found  here  from  any  of  Shake- 
speare's plays,  no  stanzas  from  the  "Fairy  Queen,"  no  lines 
from  "Paradise  Lost."  But  the  compiler  feels  that  such 
loss,  if  it  be  a  loss,  is  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the 
satisfaction  of  knowing  that,  throughout  the  book,  one  gets 
complete  the  poet's  thought,  as  he  embodied  it  in  his  verse. 

The  decision  to  give  every  poem  entire  has  resulted  in  a 
few  exclusions  from  another  cause  than  that  of  length;  for 
m  some  lyrics,  especially  of  Restoration  days,  there  is  oc- 


Introduction  xiii 

casionally  a  line  or  stanza  too  free  for  modern  taste.  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  Suckling's  inimitable  "Ballad  of  a 
Wedding"  will  not  be  found  between  these  covers,  since  it 
contains  one  stanza  certainly,  and  perhaps  three  or  four, 
not  fitted  for  a  "Home  Book  of  Verse."  A  few  other  poems 
which  had  got  through  the  winnowing  as  far  as  the  first 
proofs,  were  finally  cut  out  for  the  same  reason,  rather  than 
presented  in  a  mangled  or  Bowdlerized  version. 

And,  as  already  mentioned,  the  enforcement  of  copyright 
restrictions  has  prevented  the  use  of  a  small  number  of 
poems  which  the  compiler  wished  to  include.  There  are  a 
few  publishers  who  seem  to  regard  with  pronounced  dis- 
favor any  collection  such  as  this,  and  who  will  permit  the 
use  of  poems  which  they  control  either  not  at  all,  or  only 
upon  conditions  which  are,  in  effect,  prohibitive.  Because 
of  this,  the  admirers  of  Henry  Cuyler  Bunner  will  look  in 
vain  through  these  pages  for  any  example  of  his  delicate 
art;  and  for  the  same  reason  a  few  other  American  poets 
are  either  absent  altogether  or  only  meagerly  represented. 
But  the  losses  from  this  cause  are  unimportant  when  com- 
pared with  the  great  body  of  the  work,  and  the  compiler 
feels  that  he  has  little  reason  to  complain.  For  the  most 
part,  his  requests  for  copyright  permissions  have  been 
granted  with  a  most  gratifying  courtesy  and  generosity. 

Ill 

Great  care  has  been  taken  to  secure  accuracy  of  text,  a 
task  whose  difficulty  only  the  anthologist  can  appreciate. 
In  so  far  as  possible,  the  copy  used  was  taken  from  the 
standard  editions  of  the  various  poets;  and  where  there 
was  any  question  of  authenticity,  as  in  the  case  of  fugitive 
poems,  the  poem,  if  the  author  was  living  and  could  be 
found,  was  submitted  to  him  for  correction.  In  the  older 
poems,  where  there  were  varied  readings  of  equal  authority, 
the  editor  has  used  that  which  seemed  to  him  the  best;  and 
where  there  have  been  repeated  revisions  of  a  poem,  that 
has  been  chosen  which  seemed  the  better  version.  This  has 
not  been,  in  every  case,  the  final  version;  for,  as  in  the  case 
of  Coates  Kinney's  "Rain  on  the  Roof,"  over-refinement 


xiv  Introduction 

has  sometimes  destroyed  the  spontaneity  of  the  earlier 
work. 

The  spelling  has  been  modernized  throughout,  as  there 
seemed  no  reason  to  preserve  an  archaism  not  intended  by 
the  poet;  and  such  eccentricities  of  spelling  as  various 
writers  affected  have  been  made  to  conform  to  the  ac- 
cepted American  usage.  The  numbering  of  stanzas  has 
been  omitted  as  unnecessary  and  cumbersome.  In  every 
case  where  a  short  poem  has  been  taken  from  a  longer  one, 
a  line  has  been  added  to  indicate  its  source,  and  where  the 
author  himself  did  not  supply  a  title  for  his  poem,  the 
present  editor  has  usually  preferred  to  quote  the  first  line 
as  the  title,  rather  than  use  a  title  invented  by  someone 
else.  In  the  old  ballads,  a  modern  version  has  been  used 
in  preference  to  the  earliest  one,  which  would  be  unintelligi- 
ble to  many  readers;  and  the  use  of  the  apostrophe  to  in- 
dicate an  imaginary  shortening  of  a  syllable  has  been  done 
away  with.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  is,  for  example,  no 
real  difference  between  the  pronunciation  of  "kiss'd,"  "kist" 
and  "kissed,"  and  so  no  reason  why  the  regular  spelling 
should  not  be  used. 

IV 

The  classification  used  in  this  volume  has  been  made  to 
fit  the  poems,  and  not  the  poems  the  classification.  In 
other  words,  with  the  exception  of  some  of  the  children's 
verse,  the  work  of  selection  was  completed  before  that  of 
classification  was  begun.  The  compiler  can  claim  for  it  no 
fundamental  originality,  since  most  poetry  falls  into  certain 
well-recognized  classes;  but  he  has  tried  to  make  it  more 
searching  and  exhaustive  than  is  usually  attempted.  He 
has  tried,  for  instance,  to  group  the  poemsdcaling  with  the 
emotions  not  only  by  meaning,  but  by  shades  of  meaning, 
so  that  one  poem  would  seem  naturally  to  suggest  the  next. 
This  has,  of  course,  been  a  task  too  fine  for  accomplish- 
ment with  anything  like  complete  success;  but,  as  he  has 
looked  through  the  final  proofs,  he  has  been  conscious  of  at 
least  a  few  happy  juxtapositions. 

Classification  is  a  nerve-racking  task,  and,  even  at  the 
best,  must  sometimes  be  purely  arbitrary;  as,  for  example, 


Introduction  xv 

where  the  present  compiler  has  placed  his  selection  from 
Meredith's  "Modern  Love"  under  "Love  Sonnets."  For 
Meredith's  stanzas  are  not  sonnets  at  all,  since  they  con- 
sist of  sixteen  lines  each;  and  yet  they  have  essentially  a 
sonnet  effect,  and  their  place  seemed  to  be  with  the  other 
famous  sequences.  Then,  too,  there  are  many  poems  which 
may  equally  well  be  placed  under  various  headings,  so  that  it 
was,  more  or  less,  an  arbitrary  decision  which  placed  "The 
Courtin'  "  under  "The  Comedy  of  Love"  rather  than  with 
the  humorous  poems,  and  "Kathleen  Mavourneen"  under 
"The  Parted  Lovers"  rather  than  "At  Her  Window." 

And,  however  complete  the  classification  may  be,  the 
anthologist  must  inevitably,  at  the  end,  find  himself  with  a 
number  of  poems  on  his  hands  which  belong  distinctly 
nowhere,  and  which  must  yet  go  somewhere.  It  has  been 
rather  the  fashion  to  solve  the  difficulty  by  putting  them 
anywhere;  but  the  present  compiler  has  chosen,  rather  than 
break  the  continuity  of  arrangement,  to  set  up,  in  one 
section  of  Part  VI,  a  sort  of  scrap-bag  in  which  these  odds 
and  ends  are  assembled. 

V 

Where  every  collection  such  as  this  must  fail  of  complete 
success,  as  representing  the  whole  field  of  English  poetry,  is 
that  it  exalts  the  writers  of  brief  lyrics  at  the  expense  of  the 
writers  of  long  odes  and  epics  and  narrative  poems.  Such 
poets  as  Milton,  Pope  and  Collins  do  not  loom  as  large  in 
these  pages  as  their  stature  merits;  to  attempt  to  represent 
Shakespeare  by  a  few  of  his  songs  and  sonnets,  or  Swift  by 
an  epigram,  is  manifestly  absurd;  so  that  this  collection 
can  claim  to  be  adequate  only  as  a  representation  of  English 
lyric  poetry.  That,  it  is  hoped,  it  will  be  found  to  be- 
something  more  than  that,  indeed,  since  many  of  the  more 
famous  longer  poems  are  also  included;  and  it  should  be 
valuable,  too,  as  bringing  together  in  one  index  a  wide 
range  of  verse  not  to  be  found  in  the  average  private  library. 

In  closing  this  resume  of  a  task  which  has  occupied  some 
three  years  in  the  doing,  the  compiler  wishes  to  acknowl- 
edge his  deep  indebtedness  for  many  kindnesses  to  the  living 
writers  whose  work  is  represented  here.     They  have  been 


xvi  Introduction 

uniformly  helpful  and  obliging;  not  only  have  they  cordially 
assented  to  this  use  of  their  poems,  but  they  have  made 
suggestions,  have  revised  copy  and  have  read  proofs.  Their 
sympathy  and  interest  have  been  never-failing,  and  it  was 
very  largely  their  enthusiasm  and  encouragement  which 
enabled  the  compiler  to  carry  through  to  completion  a  task 
before  which  he  faltered  more  than  once.  To  them  and  to 
their  predecessors  in  the  field  of  English  song  belong  what- 
ever honor  and  glory  it  may  bring;  for,  to  paraphrase 
Montaigne,  the  compiler  has  contributed  to  this  nosegay 
nothing  but  the  thread  which  binds  it;  theirs  is  its  perfume 
and  its  beauty. 

B.  E.  S. 

Chillicothe,  Ohio, 
May  lo,  191 2 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  THIRD 
EDITION 

When  the  first  edition  of  this  book  waspubKshed  in  191 2, 
there  was  a  tentative  agreement  between  pubhsher  and  com- 
piler that,  if  it  was  still  alive  at  the  end  of  ten  years,  it  should 
be  revised  in  an  efifort  to  keep  it  abreast  of  the  times,  and  so 
for  every  decade  thereafter.  On  neither  side  was  there  any 
real  expectation  that  the  agreement  would  ever  need  to  be 
carried  out;  certainly  there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
such  a  revision  would  be  possible,  or  in  any  way  necessary, 
at  the  end  of  five  years;  and  yet  this  third  edition  represents 
a  far  more  complete  revision  than  was  then  contemplated 
— the  addition  of  five  hundred  and  ninety  poems,  and  the 
deletion  of  one  hundred  and  sixty-nine;  entire  repagination, 
and  innumerable  minor  changes. 

It  is,  of  course,  primarily  because  the  book  has  been  com- 
mercially successful  that  the  publisher  is  able  to  spend  still 
more  upon  it,  but  that  alone  would  not  have  warranted  a 
revision  such  as  this.  What  really  warranted  it — almost 
compelled  it — was  the  astonishing  renaissance  in  English 
and  American  poetry  which  the  present  century  has  wit- 
nessed. "The  Home  Book  of  Verse"  was  launched,  by  a 
fortunate  chance,  just  when  this  renaissance  was  gathering 
volume,  and  its  success  was  due  largely,  no  doubt,  to  the 
new  interest  in  poetry  thus  evoked.  But  this  also  had  the 
effect  of  putting  the  book  more  quickly  out  of  date,  and  any- 
one in  touch  with  modern  verse  could  not  but  be  disap- 
pointed to  look  through  a  volume  such  as  this  and  find 
nothing  by  such  poets  as  Lascelles  Abercrombie,  and  John 
INlasefield,  and  G.  K.  Chesterton,  and  Walter  de  la  Mare, 
and  Robert  Frost,  and  Vachel  Lindsay,  and  Richard  Middle- 
ton,  and  Ralph  Hodgson,  and  Rupert  Brooke. 

It  is  from  the  work  of  this  younger  choir  that  the  additions 

have  very  largely  been  made,  and  among  them  will  be  found 

some  lyrics  as  fresh  and  lovely  as  any  in  the  volume— and 

as  true  to  the  great  traditions  of  Fnglish  poetry.    The  dele- 

xvii 


xviii      Introduction  to  the  Third   Edition 

tions  are  partly  of  verses  whose  inclusion  was  originally 
determined — as  the  compiler  now  realizes — -by  quotability 
rather  than  by  merit,  and  partly  of  those  which  failed  to 
stand  tlie  test  of  repeated  re-reading — the  deadUest  test 
there  is.  The  revision  is  based  upon  a  careful  examination 
of  every  significant  book  of  poetry  published  in  this  country 
since  191 2,  and  of  many  pubhshed  in  England,  as  well  as  of  a 
number  of  older  books  to  which  the  compiler  had  not  pre- 
viously had  access. 

He  has  also  had  the  assistance  of  the  many  columns  of 
critical  comment  evoked  by  the  appearance  of  the  original 
edition,  and  he  is  not  ashamed  to  say  that  his  attention  was 
called  in  this  way  to  many  notable  poems  with  which  he 
was  entirely  unfamiliar.  Second  in  value  only  to  the 
printed  criticism  was  the  great  mass  of  correspondence 
which  came  and  is  still  coming  from  all  over  the  country — 
dehghtful  letters  which  prove  how  widespread  and  genuine 
is  the  love  of  poetry. 

The  one  general  criticism^as  against  specific  complaints 
of  certain  omissions — which  seemed  best  founded  was  that 
no  adequate  representation  was  given  to  the  great  odes  of 
English  poetry.  The  compiler's  first  thought  had  been  that 
they  were  too  long  to  be  included  in  a  book  which  is  essen- 
tially a  collection  of  lyrics;  but  reflection  convinced  him  that 
these  odes  did  have  a  place  here,  and  some  six  or  seven  of 
them  have  been  added. 

The  well-grounded  specific  criticisms  were  too  numerous 
to  be  enumerated;  but  a  particularly  striking  one  was  that, 
while  the  "Rubaiyat,"  the  great  skeptical  poem  of  the  nine- 
teenth century,  was  given  entire,  there  was  nothing,  or 
practically  nothing,  from  the  century's  great  poem  of  faith, 
" In  Memoriam."  A  careful  selection  from  "  In  Memoriam " 
will  be  found  in  this  edition,  preceded  by  two  sections  from 
another  great  poem,  which  also  in  a  way  counters  the 
"Rubaiyat,"  though  from  a  vastly  different  angle— Sir 
Richard  Burton's  "Kasidah." 

Then,  too,  the  prestige  which  the  book  had  gained  made  it 
possible  to  secure  permission  to  use  certain  poems  which  were 
denied  to  an  unknown  adventure.  Lovers  of  H.  C.  Bunner 
will  find  nine  of  his  poems  here,  and  a  number  of  other 


Introduction  to  the   Third   Edition    xix 

poets  are  represented  more  adequately  than  was  possible 
five  years  ago.  When  the  compiler  says  that  he  believes 
this  third  edition  to  be  a  far  finer  achievement  than  was 
the  first  one,  he  will  be  pardoned,  since  the  merit  is  so  largely 
that  of  others. 

Not  least  that  of  other  anthologists.  Every  general 
collection  such  as  this  must  have  its  foundations  in  other 
collections,  from  the  very  first  ones  which  preserved  the 
"Reliques"  and  "Pastorals,"  to  the  very  latest  which  pre- 
serves the  magazine  verse  of  the  year.  The  debt  varies,  of 
course,  but  it  is  nevertheless  a  debt  w^hich  the  compiler  has 
often  felt  should  have  been  acknowledged  in  his  original 
introduction,  and  which  is  most  heartily  acknowledged  here. 

The  general  plan  of  the  book  has  remained  unchanged, 
except  in  one  or  two  very  minor  details.  The  compiler 
found  that,  in  spite  of  his  best  efforts,  a  few  incomplete 
poems  had  crept  into  the  first  edition.  These  have  either 
been  completed  or  labelled  as  extracts;  and  two  or  three 
other  incomplete  ones  have  been  added — notably  Suckling's 
"Ballad  Upon  a  Wedding,"  minus  five  stanzas.  It  simply 
had  to  come  in !  Several  questions  of  uncertain  authorship 
have  been  solved.  There  is  no  longer  any  doubt  in  the  com- 
piler's mind  as  to  who  wrote  "Hoch!  der  Kaiser,"  and 
"There  is  no  Death,"  and  "Little  Drops  of  Water,"  and  "At 
a  Cowboy  Dance."  And  a  number  of  disputed  readings 
have  been  settled — to  his  satisfaction,  at  least.  For  example, 
after  examining  forty-three  editions  of  the  "New  England 
Primer,"  he  has  found  the  weight  of  authority  to  lie  on  the 
side  of 

"Now  I  lay  me  down  to  sleep, 
I  pray  the  Lord  my  soul  to  keep, 
rather  than 

"I  pray  Thee,  Lord,  my  soul  to  keep." 

He  has  taken  a  real  joy,  by  discovering  a  misplaced  comma, 
in  changing  the  mediocre  line, 

"Her  hand  seemed  milk,  in  milk  it  was  so  white," 

to  the  far  more  striking 

"Her  hand  seemed  milk  in  milk,  it  was  so  white." 


XX      Introduction  to  the  Third  Edition 

He  has  corrected  all  the  typographical  errors  he  had  himself 
discovered  or  which  had  been  pointed  out  by  many  cor- 
respondents; he  has  labored  to  make  the  biographical  data 
as  complete  as  possible ;  he  has  checked  up  the  poems  in  the 
book  with  such  definitive  or  revised  or  collected  editions 
as  have  appeared  since  191 2;  and  he  feels  that  the  text  may 
be  relied  upon  as  accurate  and  authoritative. 

Finally,  he  must  again  express  his  deep  sense  of  obligation 
to  those  living  poets,  both  English  and  American,  who  have 
been  so  unstinted  in  appreciation,  and  so  generous  in  per- 
mitting the  use  of  their  work.  Without  their  help,  this  new 
edition  would  have  been  impossible. 

B.  E.  S. 
Chillicothe,  Ohio, 

December  i,  191 7. 


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS 

PART  I 
POEMS  OF  YOUTH  AND  AGE 

The  Human  Seasons .John  Kcals 


THE  BABY 

"  Only  a  Baby  Small " Matthias  Ban 3 

Only Harriet  Prcscott  Spofford  ....  3 

Infant  Joy William  Blake 4 

Baby Gcori^r  Macdonald 4 

To  a  New-Born  Baby  Girl Grace  Hazard  ConkliiiR 5 

To  Little  Renee William  Aspenwall  Bradley .  .  6 

A  Rhyme  of  One Frederick  Locker-Lam pson ...  8 

To  a  New-Born  Child Cosmo  Moiikhonse 9 

Baby  May William  Cox  Bennett 10 

Alice Herbert  Bas/iford n 

Songs  for  Fragoletta Richard  Lc  Gallienne 12 

Choosing  a  Name Alary  Lamb 14 

Weighing  the  Baby Ethel  Lynn  Beers 15 

Etude  Realiste Algernon  Charles  Swinburne. .  16 

Little  Feet Elizabeth  A  kers 17 

The  Babie Jeremiah  Eamcs  Rankin 19 

Little  Hands Laurence  Binyon 20 

Bartholomew Norman  Gale 20 

The  Storm-Child May  Byron 20 

"On  Parent  Knees" William  Jones 21 

"Philip,  My  King" Dinah  Maria  Mulock  Craik  .  .  zi 

The  King  of  the  Cradle Joseph  Ashby-Stcrry 22 

The  Firstborn John  Arthur  Goodc'hild 24 

No  Baby  in  the  House Clara  Dolliver 25 

Our  Wee  White  Rose Gerald  Massey 26 

Into  the  World  and  Out Sarah  M.  P.  Piatt 27 

"Baby  Sleeps" Samuel  Hinds 27 

Baby  Bell Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 28 

IN  THE  NURSERY 

Mother  Goose's  Melodies Unknown 31 

Jack  and  Jill Unknoim 39 

The  Queen  of  Hearts Unknown 39 

Little  Bo-Peep Unknown 39 

Mary's  Lamb Unknown 40 

The  Star Jane  Taylor 41 

" Sing  a  Song  of  Sixpence" Unknown 41 

Simple  Simon Unknown 42 

The  Breakfast  Song Emilie  Poulsson 42 

"I  Had  a  Little  Husband " Unknown 43 

"  When  I  Was  a  Bachelor  " Unknown 43 

"Johnny  Shall  Have  a  New  Bonnet"..  Unknown 44 

The    City    Mouse   and    the    Garden 

Mouse Christina  Rossctli 44 

Robin  Redbreast Unknown 45 


xxii  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

Solomon  Grundy Vnknoivn 45 

"Merry  Are  the  Bells" Unknown 45 

"When  Good  King  Arthur  Ruled  This 

Land" Unknown 46 

"I  Had  a  Little  Doggy" Unknown 46 

"A  Farmer  Went  Trotting" Unknown 46 

"The  Owl  and  the  Eel  and  the  Warm- 
ing Pan" Laura  E.  Richards 47 

The  Cow Ann  Taylor 47 

The  Lamb William  Blake 48 

Little  Raindrops Unknown 48 

"Moon,  So  Round  and  Yellow" Matthias  Barr 49 

The  House  That  Jack  Built Unknown 49 

Old  Mother  Hubbard Unknown 51 

The  Death  and  Burial  of  Cock -Robin. .  Unknown 53 

Baby-Land George  Cooper 55 

The  First  Tooth William  Brighty  Rands 56 

Baby's  Breakfast Emilie  Poulsson 56 

The  Moon Eliza  Lee  Pollen 57 

Baby  at  Play Unknown 58 

The  Difference Laura  E.  Richards 59 

Foot  Soldiers John  Banister  Tabb 59 

Tom  Thumb's  Alphabet Unknown 60 

Grammar  in  Rhyme Unknown 60 

Days  of  the  Month Unknown 6r 

The  Garden  Year Sara  Coleridge 61 

Riddles Unknown 62 

Proverbs Unknoivn 64 

Weather  Wisdom Unknown 66 

Old  Superstitions Unknown 66 

THE  ROAD  TO  SLUMBERLAND 

Wynken,  Blynken,  and  Nod Eugene  Field 68 

The  Sugar-Plum  Tree Eugene  Field 69 

When  the  Sleepy  Man  Comes Charles  G.  D.  Roberts 70 

Auld  Daddy  Darkness James  Ferguson 71 

Willie  Winkie William  Miller 72 

The  Sandman Margaret  Thomson  Janvier. .  .  72 

The  Dustman Frederick  Edward  Weathedy. .  73 

Sephestia's  Lullaby Robert  Greene 74 

"(lolden  Slumbers  Kiss  Your  Eyes" .Thomas  Dekkcr 75 

"Sleep,  Baby,  Sleep" George  Wither. 75 

Mother's  Song Unknown 77 

A  Lullaby Richard  Rowlands 78 

A  Cradle  Hymn Isaac  Watts 79 

Cradle  Song William  Blake 8r 

Lullaby Carolina  Nairne 81 

Lullaby  of  an  Infant  Chief Walter  Scott 82 

Good-Night Jane  Taylor 82 

"  Lullaby,  O  Lullaby  " William  Cox  Bennett 83 

Lullaby Alfred  Tennyson 83 

The  Cottager  to  Her  Infant Dorothv  Wordsworth 84 

Trot,  Trot! Mary  F.  Butts 84 

Holy  Innocents Christina  Georgina  Rossetti. .  .  85 

Lullaby Josiah  Gilbert  Holland 86 

Cradle  Song Josiah  Gilbert  Holland 86 

An  Irish  Lullaby Alfred  Perceval  Graves 88 

Cradle  Song Josephine  Preston  Peabody ...  88 

Mother-Song  from"Prince  Lucifer".. 4 //reti  Austin 90 

Kentucky  Babe Richard  Henry  Buck 91 

Minnie  and  Winnie Alfred  Tennyson 92 


Table  of  Contents  xxiii 

PAGE 

Bed-Time  Song Emilie  Poulsson 92 

Tucking  the  Baby  In Curtis  May 93 

"Jenny  VVi'  the  Aim  Teeth" Alexander  Anderson 94 

Cuddle  Doon Alexander  Anderson 95 

Bedtime Francis  Robert  St.  Clair  Erskine  97 


THE  DUTY  OF  CHILDREN 

Happy  Thought Robert  Louis  Stevenson 98 

Whole  Duty  of  Children Robert  Louis  Stevenson 98 

Politeness Elizabeth  Turner 98 

Rules  of  Behavior Unknown 98 

Little  Fred Unknown 99 

The  Lovable  Child Emilie  Poulsson 99 

Good  and  Bad  Children Robert  Louis  Stevenson 100 

Rebecca's  After-Thought Elizabeth  Turner 100 

Kindness  to  Animals Unknown loi 

A  Rule  for  Birds'  Nesters Unknown loi 

"Sing  on,  Blithe  Bird" William  Motherwell 102 

"I  Like  Little  Pussy" Jane  Taylor 102 

Little  Things Julia  Fletcher  Carney 103 

The  Little  Gentleman Unknown 103 

The  Crust  of  Bread Unknown 104 

"How  Doth  the  Little  Busy  Bee".  .  .Isaac  Watts 104 

The  Brown  Thrush Lucy  Larcom 105 

The  Sluggard Isaac  Watts 106 

The  Violet Jane  Taylor 106 

Dirty  Jim Jane  Taylor 107 

The  Pin Ann  Taylor 108 

Jane  and  Eliza Ann  Taylor 109 

Meddlesome  Matty Ann  Taylor no 

Contented  John Jane  Taylor in 

Friends Abbie  Farwell  Brown 112 

Anger Charles  and  Mary  Lamb 113 

"There  Was  a  Little  Girl" Unknown 113 

The  Reformation  of  Godfrey  Gore. .  .  William  Brighty  Rands 114 

The  Best  Firm Walter  G.  Doty 114 

A  Little  Page's  Song William  Alexander  Percy.  ...  115 

How  the  Little  Kite  Learned  to  Fly. .  Unknown 115 

The  Butterfly  and  the  Bee William  Lisle  Bowles 116 

The  Butterfly Adelaide  O'Keefe 116 

Morning Jane  Taylor 116 

Buttercups  and  Daisies Mary  Howitt 117 

The  Ant  and  the  Cricket Unknown 118 

After  Wings Sarah  M.  B.  Piall 119 

Deeds  of  Kindness Epes  Sargent 119 

The  Lion  and  the  Mouse Jeffreys  Taylor 1 20 

The  Boy  and  the  Wolf John  Ilookham  Frerc 121 

The  Story  of  Augustus,  Who  Would 

Not  Have  Any  Soup Heinrich  Hoffman 122 

The  Story  of  Little  Suck-A-Thumb .  . .  Heinrich  II  of  man 123 

Written  in  a  Little  Lady's  Little  Al- 
bum   Frederick  William  Fabcr 124 

My  Lady  Wind Unknown 1 24 

To  a  Child William  Wordsworth 125 

A  Farewell Charles  Kingslcy 125 

RHYMES  OF  CHILDHOOD 

Reeds  of  Innocence William  Blake 126 

The  Wonderful  World William  Brighty  Rands 126 


xxiv  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

The  World's  Music Gabriel  Seloun 127 

A  Boy's  Song James  Hogf; 128 

Going  Down  Hill  On  a  Bicycle Henry  Charles  Beeehing 129 

Playgrounds Laurence  Alma-Tadema 130 

"Who  Has  Seen  the  Wind?" Chrislina  Gcorgina  Rossetti. .  .    130 

The  Wind's  Song Gabriel  Seloun 131 

The  Piper  on  the  Plill Dora  Sigerson  Shorter 132 

The  Wind  and  the  Moon George  Macdonald 133 

Child's  Song  in  Spring Edith  Nesbit 135 

Baby  Seed  Song Edith  Nesbit 135 

Little  Dandelion Helen  Barron  Bostwick 13.6 

Little  White  Lily George  Macdonald 137 

Wishing William  Allingham 138 

In  the  Garden Ernest  Crosby 13S 

The  Gladness  of  Nature William  Cullen  Bryant 139 

Glad  Day W.  Graham  Robertson 139 

The  Tiger William  Blake 140 

Answer  to  a  Child's  Question Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge 141 

How  the  Leaves  Came  Down Susan  Coolidgc 142, 

A  Legend  of  the  Northland Phoebe  Cary 143 

The  Criclcet's  Story Emma  H unlinglon  Nason. . . .   145 

The  Singing-Lesson Jean  Ingelow 147 

Chanticleer Katherine  Tynan 149 

"What  Does  Little  Birdie  Say?".  . .  .Alfred  Tennyson 150 

Nurse's  Song William  Blake 151 

Jacli  Frost Gabriel  Seloun 151 

October's  Party George  Cooper 152 

The  Shepherd William  Blake .............    153 

Nikolina Celia  Thaxtcr .  .  .  . 153 

Little  Gustava Celia  Thaxler 154 

Prince  Tatters Laura  E.  Richards 155 

The  Little  Black  Boy William  Blake 156; 

The  Blind  Boy Colley  Gibber 157 

The  Witch  in  the  Glass Sarah  M.  P.  Piatt 157 

My  Shadow Robert  Louis  Stevenson 158 

The  Land  of  Counterpane Robert  Louis  Stevenson 158 

The  Land  of  Story-Books Robert  Louis  Stevenson 159 

The  Gardener Robert  Louis  Stevenson 160 

Foreign  Lands Robert  Louis  Stevenson 160 

My  Bed  is  a  Boat Robert  Louis  Stevenson 161 

The  Peddler's  Caravan William  Brighly  Rands 161 

Mr.  Coggs Edward  Verrall  Lucas 162 

The  Building  of  the  Nest Margaret  Sangsler 163 

"There  was  a  Jolly  Miller" Isaac  Bickcrstaff 163 

One  and  One Mary  Mapcs  Dodge 164 

A  Nursery  Song Laura  E.  Richards 165 

A  Mortifying  Mistake Anna  Maria  Pratt 166 

The  Raggedy  Man James  Whitcomb  Riley 166 

The  Man  in'the  Moon James  Whikomb  Riley 168 

Little  Orphant  Annie James  Whitcomb  Riley 169 

Our  Hired  Girl James  Whitcomb  Riley 171 

Seein'  Things Eugene  Field 172 

The  Duel Eugene  Field i73 

Holy  Thursday William  Blake 174 

A  Story  for  a  Child Bayard  Taylor i75 

The  Spider  and  the  Fly Mary  Howitt 176 

The  Captain's  Daughter James  Thotnas  Fields 178 

The  Nightingale  and  the  Glow-Worm .  William  Cowper i7Q 

Sir  Lark  and  King  Sun:  A  Parable.  .  .George  Macdonald 180 

The  Courtship,  Merry  Marriage,  and 

Picnic  Dinner  of  Cock  Robin  and 

Jenny  Wren Unknown 181 


Table  of  Contents  xxv 

PAGE 

The  Babes  in  the  Wood Unknown .185 

God's  Judgment  on  a  Wicked  Bishop. /Joic/-/  Soulhey i8g 

The  Pied  Piper  of  Hamelin Robert  Browning iga 

THE  GLAD  EVANGEL. 

A  Carol Unknown 201 

"God  Rest  You  Merry  Gentlemen".  Unknown 201 

"0  Little  Town  of  Bethlehem" Phillips  Brooks 203 

A  Christmas  Hymn A IJrcd  Domelt 204 

"While    Shepherds    Watched    their 

Flocks  by  Night " Nahum  Tale 205 

Christmas  Carols Edmund  Hamilton  Scars 206 

The  Angels William  Drummond 207 

The  Burning  Babe Robert  Soiitlrwcll 208 

Tryste  Noel Louise  Imogen  Giiiney 209 

Christmas  Carol Unknown 209 

"  Brightest  and  Best  of  the  Sons  of 

the  Morning" Reginald  Ileber 210 

Christmas  Bells Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow .  211 

A  Christmas  Carol Gilbert  Keith  C 'hcstcrlon 212 

The  House  of  Christmas Gilbert  Keith  Chesterton 213 

The  Feast  of  the  Snow Gilbert  Keith  Chesterton 214 

Mary's  Baby Shaemas  OSheel 214 

Gates  and  Doors Joyce  Kilmer 215 

The  Three  Kings Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow.  216 

Lullaby  in  Bethlehem Henry  Howarth  Bashford 218 

A  Child's  Song  of  Christmas Marjoric  L.  C.  Fickt/iall 219 

Jest  'Fore  Christmas Eugene  Field 220 

A  Visit  from  St.  Nicholas Clement  Clarke  Moore 221 

Ceremonies  for  Christmas Robert  Herrick 223 

On  the  Morning  of  Christ's  Nativity.  .John  Milton 223 

FAIRYLAND 

The  Fairy  Book Norman  Gale 231 

Fairy  Songs William  Shakespeare 231 

Queen  Mab Ben  Jonson 233 

The  Elf  and  the  Dormouse Oliver  Herford.  ...  ->  54 

"Oh!  Where  Do  Fairies  Hide  Their 

Heads?  " Thomas  Haynes  Baylv 235 

Fairy  Song I^cigh  Hunt. '. 235 

Dream  Song Richard  Middlcton 236 

Fairy  Song John  Keats 237 

Queen  Mab Thomas  Hood 237 

The  Fairies  of  the  Caldon-Low Mary  Howitt 238 

The  Fairies William  Allingham 241 

The  Fairy  Thrall Mary  C.  G.  Byron 243 

Farewell  to  the  Fairies Richard  Corbet 244 

The  Fairy  Folk Robert  Bird 24s 

The  Fairy  Book 1  bbie  Earwell  Brown 246 

The  Visitor Patrick  R.  Chalmers 2.^7 

The  Little  Elf John  Kendriek  Banvs 248 

The  Satyrs  and  the  Moon Herbert  S.  Gorman 249 

THE  CHILDREN 

The  Children Charles  Monroe  Dickinson  ...  250 

The  Children's  Hour Henry  Wadsworth  Lonefellow.  252 

Laiis  Lifantium William  Canton " 253 

The  Desire Katherine  Tynan 253 


xxvi  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

A  Child's  Laughter Algernon  Charles  Swinburne. .    254 

Seven  Years  Old Algernon  Charles  Swinburne. .    255 

Creep  Afore  Ye  Gang James  Ballanline 256 

Castles  in  the  Air James  Ballanline 257 

Under  My  Window Thomas  Westwood 258 

Little  Bell Thomas  Weslivood 259 

The  Barefoot  Boy John  Greenleaf  Whiitier 261 

The  Heritage James  Russell  Lowell 263 

Letty's  Globe Charles  Tennyson  Turner ....    265 

Dove's  Nest Joseph  Russell  Taylor 266 

The  Oracle Arthur  Davison  Picke 266 

To  a  Little  Girl Helen  Parry  Eden 267 

To  a  Little  Girl Guslav  Kobbc 267 

A  Parental  Ode  to  My  Son Thomas  Hood 268 

A  New  Poet William  Canton 269 

To  Laura  W — ,  Two  Years  Old Nathaniel  Parker  Willis 270 

To  Rose Sara  Teasdale 272 

To  Charlotte  Pulteney Ambrose  Philips 273 

The  Picture  of  Little  T.  C.  in  a  Pros- 
pect of  Flowers Andrew  Marvell 273 

To  Hartley  Coleridge William  Wordsworth 275 

To  a  Child  of  Quality Matthew  Prior 276 

Ex  Ore  Infantium Prancis  Thompson 277 

Obituary Thomas  WiUiam  Parsons ....    278 

The  Child's  Heritage John  G.  Neihardt 279 

A  Girl  of  Pompeii Edward  Sandjord  Martin ....    280 

On  the  Picture  of  a  "Child  Tired  of 

Play" Nathaniel  Parker  Willis 280 

The  Reverie  of  Poor  Susan William  Wordsworth 281 

Children's  Song Ford  Madox  Hueffer 282 

The  Mitherless  Bairn William  Thom 283 

The  Cry  of  the  Children Elizabeth  Barrett  Broivning-  ■  ■    283 

The  Shadow-Child Harriet  Monroe 2S8 

Mother  Wept Joseph  Skipsey 289 

Duty Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 290 

Lucy  Gray William  Wordsworth 290 

In  the  Children's  Hospital Alfred  Tennyson 292 

"If  I  Were  Dead" Coventry  Patmore 296 

The  Toys Coventry  Patmore 296 

A  Song  of  Twilight Unknown 297 

Little  Boy  Blue Eugene  Field 298 

The  Discoverer Edmund  Clarence  Stedman .  .  .    298 

A  Chrysalis Mary  Emily  Bradley 300 

Mater  Dolorosa William  Barnes 301 

The  Little  Ghost Katherine  Tynan 302 

Motherhood Josephine  Daskam  Bacon ....   303 

The  Mother's  Prayer Dora  Sigerson  Shorter 304 

Da  Leetla  Boy Thomas  Augustin  Daly 306 

On  the  Moor Cale  Young  Rice 307 

Epitaph  of  Dionysia Unknoivn 307 

For  Charlie's  Sake John  Williamson  Palmer 308 

"Are  the  Children  at  Home?" Margaret  Songster 3it 

The  Morning-Glory Maria  White  Lotuell 312 

She  Came  and  Went James  Russell  Lowell 314 

The  First  Snow-fall James  Russell  Lowell 31S 

"We  Are  Seven" William  Wordsworth 316 

My  Child -^"^^  Pierpont 3^8 

The  Child's  Wish  Granted George  Parsons  iMhrop 320 

Challenge Kenton  Foster  Murray 320 

Tired  Mothers. May  Riley  Smith 321 

My  Daughter  Louise Homer  Greene 322 

"I  Am  Lonely" George  Eliot 323 


Table  of  Contents  xxvii 


PAGE 

Sonnets  from  "Mimma  Bella" Eugene,  Lce-II amilion 323 

Rose-Marie  of  the  Angels Adelaide  Crapsey 326 

MAIDENHOOD 

Maidenhood IJenry  Wadstvorlh  Longfellow .  327 

To  the  Virgins,   to   Make  Much  of 

Time Robert  Uerrick 328 

To  Mistress  Margaret  Hussey John  Skclton 329 

On  Her  Coming  To  London Edmund  Waller 330 

"O,  Saw  Ye  Bonny  Lesley" Robert  Burns 331 

To  a  Young  Lady William  Cowpcr 332 

Ruth Thomas  Hood 332 

The  Solitary  Reaper William  Wordszvorlk s:^^ 

The  Three  Cottage  Cirls William  W ordsworlh 334 

Blackmwore   Maidens William^  Barnes 336 

A  Portrait Elizabeth  Barrett  Broivning. .  .    338 

To  a  Child  of  Fancy Lewis  Morris 340 

Daisy Francis  Thompson 341 

To  Petronilla,  Who  Has  Put  Up  Her 

Hair Henry  IJoivarth  Bashjord 343 

The  Gipsy  Girl Henry  Alford 344 

Fanny A  nne  Reeve  A Idrich 344 

Somebody's  Cliild Louise  Chandler  Moulton ....   345 

Emilia Sarah  N.  Cleghorn 346 

To  a  Greek  Girl Austin  Dobson 347 

"Chamber  Scene" Nathaniel  Parker  Willis 348 

"Ah,  Be  Not  False" Richard  Watson  Gilder 349 

A  Life-Lesson James  Whitcomb  Riley 349 

THE  MAN 

The  Breaking Margaret  Steele  Anderson ....  351 

The  Flight  of  Youth Richard  Henry  Stoddard 351 

"Days  of  My  Youth" 67.  George  Tucker 352 

Ave  Atque  Vale Rosamund  Marriott  Watson  .  .  353 

To  Youth Walter  Savage  Landor 354 

Stanzas   Written   on    the   Road   Be- 
tween Florence  and  Pisa George  Gordon  Byron 354 

Stanzas  for  Music George  Gordon  Byron 355 

"When  As  a  Lad" Isabel  Ecclestone  Mackay .  .  .  .  356 

"Around  the  Child" Walter  Savage  Landor 356 

Aladdin James  Russell  Lowell 357 

The  Quest Ellen   Mackey  Hutchinson 

Corlissoz 357 

My  Birth-Day Thomas  Moore 358 

Sonnet  on  His  having  Arrived  to  the 

Age  of  Twenty-Three John  Milton 359 

On  This  Day  I  Complete  My  Thirty- 
Sixth  Year George  Gordon  Byron 360 

Growing  Gray A ustin  Dobson 361 

The  One  White  Hair IValter  Savage  Landor 362 

Ballade  of  Middle  Age Andrew  Lang 363 

Middle  Age Rudolph  Chambers  Lehmann. .  363 

To  Critics Walter  Learned 366 

The  Rainbow William  Words-worth 366 

Leavetaking William  Watson 366 

Equinoctial Adeline  D.  T.  Whitney 367 

"  Before  the  Beginning  of  Years  " A  Igernon  Charles  Swinburne. .  368 

Man Henry  Vaughan 369 

The  Pulley George  Herbert 370 


xxviii  Table  of  Contents 


Orle  on  the  Intimations  of  Immortal- 
ity from  Recollections  of  Early 
Childhood William  Wordsworth 371 

THE  WOMAN 

Woman Eaton  Stannard  Barrett 377 

Woman From  the  Sanskrit  of  Calidasa.  377 

Simplex  Munditiis Ben  Jonson 377 

Delight  in  Disorder Robert  Herrick 378 

A  Praise  of  His  Lady John  Heywood 378 

On  a  Certain  Lady  at  Court Alexander  Pope 380 

Perfect  Woman William  Wordsworth 380 

The  Solitary-Hearted Hartley  Coleridge 381 

Of  Those  Who  Walk  Alone Ricliard  Burton 382 

"She  Walks  in  Beauty" George  Cordon  Byron 383 

Preludes   from    "The   Angel    in    the 

House  " Coventry  Patniore 384 

A  Health Edward  Coate  Finkney .......  387 1 

Our  Sister Horatio  Nelson  Powers ......  389' 

From  Life Brian  Hooker 390 

The  Rose  of  the  World William  Butler  Yeats 390 

Dawn  of  Womanhood Harold  Monro 391 

The  Shepherdess Alice  Meynell 393 

A  Portrait Brian  Hooker 393 

The  Wife Theodosia  Garrison 394 

"Trusty,  Dusky,  Vivid,  True" Robert  Louis  Stevenson 394 

The  Shrine Digby  Mackworth  Dolben ....  395 

The  Voice ; ; .  .•'. Norman  Gale 395 

Mother Theresa  Uelburn 396 

Ad  Matrem Julian  Fane 396 

C.  L.  M John  Masefield 397 

STEPPING  WESTWARD 

Stepping  Westward William  Wordsworth 398 

A  Farewell  to  Arms George  Peek .sgg 

The  World Francis  Bacon 399 

"When  That  I  Was  and  a  Little  Tiny 

Boy  " William.  Shakespeare 400 

Of  the  Last  Verses  in  the  Book Edmund  Waller 401 

A  Lament Chidiock  Tichborne 401 

To-morrow Jolin  Collins 402 

Late  Wisdom George  Crabbe 403 

Youth  and  Age Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge 403 

The  Old  Man's  Comforts Robert  Soulhey 405 

To  Age Walter  Savage  Landor 40b 

Late  Leaves Walter  Savage  Landor 406 

Years Walter  Savage  Landor 407- 

The  River  of  Life Thomas  Campbell 407 

"Long  Time  a  Child" Hartley  Coleridge 40S 

The  World  I  am  Passing  Through  .  .  .  Lydia  Maria  Child 408 

Terminus Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 410 

Rabbi  Ben  Ezra Robert  Broivning 411 

Human  Life Aubrey  Thomas  de  Vere 416 

Young  and  Old Charles  Kingsley 417 

The  Isle  of  the  Long  Ago Benjamin  Franklin  Taylor.  .  .   417 

Growing  Old Matthew  Arnold 418 

Past John  Galsworthy 420 

Twilight A.  Mary  F.  Robinson 420 

Youth  and  Age George  Arnold 421 


Table  of  Contents  xxix 

PAGE 

Forty  Years  On Edward  Ernest  Bowen 421 

Dregs . , Ernest  Dowson 422 

The  Paradox  of  Time . ^ 'A  ustin  Dolison 423 

Age ■.  i^^hk  .  ?}.  .  .William  Winter 424 

Omnia  Somiiia Rosamund  Marriott  Watson .  .   424 

The  Year's  End Timothy  Cole 425 

An  Old  Man's  Song Richard  Le  Gallienne 425 

Songs  of  Seven Jean  Inaclow 426 


LOOKING  BACKWARD 

The  Retreat Henry  Vaughan 434 

A  Superscription Dante  Gabriel  Rossetii 435 

The  Child  in  the  Garden Henry  Van  Dyke 435 

Castles  in  the  Air Thomas  Love  Peacock 435 

Sometimes Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr ■  436 

The  Little  Ghosts Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr 436 

My  Other  Me .  .Grace  Denio  Litchfield 436 

A  Shadow  Boat .  .Arlo  Bates 437 

A  Lad  That  is  Gone Robert  Louis  Stevenson 438 

Carcassonne Johii  R.  Thompson 438 

Childhood John  Banister  Tabb .*. .  440 

The  Wastrel Reginald  Wrii^ht  Kaujfman. .  .  440 

Troia  Fuit Reginald  Wright  Kauffman. .  .  441 

Temple  Garlands A.  Mary  E.  Robinson 442 

Time  Long  Past Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 442 

" I  Remember,  I  Remember" Thomas  Hood 443 

My  Lost  Youth Henry  Wadsworth  Longj'elloiv .  444 

"Voice  of  the  Western  Wind" Edmund  Clarence  Sledman.  . .  446 

"Langsyne,  When  Life  Was  Bonnie  ".yl/r.ra«(/f;'  Anderson 447 

The  Shoogy-Shoo Winthrop  Packard 447 

Babylon Viola  Taylor 448 

The  Road  of  Remembrance Lizette  Woodivorth  Reese 449 

The  Triumph  of  Forgotten  Things..  .Edith  M.  Thomas 440 

In  the  Twilight James  Russell  Lowell 450 

An  Immorality Ezra  Pound 452 

Three  Seasons Christina  Georgina  Rossetti. .  .  452 

The  Old  Familiar  Faces ......,,,,.,  Charles  Lamb 453 

The  Light  of  Other  Days/.  ir«Vv\Vj , . .  Thomas  Moore 454 

"Tears,  Idle  Tears".  . .  >\  .\.V'.A\.N  , , .  .Alfred  Tennyson 454 

The  Pet  Name '. Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning. .  .  455 

Threescore  and  Ten Richard  Henry  Stoddard 457 

Rain  on  the  Roof Coates  Kinney 458 

Alone  by  the  Hearth George  Arnold 460 

The  Old  Ma.n  Dreams Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 461 

The  Garret William  Makepeace  Thackeray  463 

Auld  Lang  Syne Robert  Burns 464 

Rock  Me  to  Sleep Elizabeth  Akers 465 

The  Bucket Samuel  Woodworth 46(3 

The  Grape-V^ine  Swing William  Gilmnre  Simnis 467 

The  Old  Swimmin'-Hole James  Whitcomb  Riley 468 

Forty  Years  Ago Francis  Huston 469 

Ben  Bolt Thomas  Dunn  English 470 

" Break,  Break,  Break " Alfred  Tennyson 472 


XXX  Table  of  Contents 

PART  II 
POEMS  OF  LOVE 

PAGE 

Eros Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 474 

"NOW  WHAT  IS  LOVE" 

"Now  What  is  Love" Walter  Raleigh 475 

Wooing  Song,  "Love  is  the  blossom 

where  there  blows" Giles  Fletcher 476 

RosaUnd's   Madrigal,    "Love  in  my 

bosom  " Thomas  Lodge 477 

Song,    "Love    is   a   sickness   full    of 

woes  " Samuel  Dafiiel 478 

Love's  Perjuries William  Shakespeare 479 

Venus'  Runaway Be7i  Jonson 479 

What  is  Love John  Fletcher 481 

Love's  Emblems John  Fletcher 482 

The  Power  of  Love John  Fletcher 482 

Advice  to  a  Lover Unknown 483 

Love's  Horoscope Richard  Crashaw 484 

"Ah,  how  Sweet  it  is  to  Love" John  Dryden 485 

Song,  "Love  still  has  something  of  the 

sea  " Charles  Sedley 486 

The  Vine James  Thomson 487 

Song,    "Fain   would   I    change   that 

note" Unknown 487 

Cupid  Stung Thomas  Moore 488 

Cupid  Drowned Leigh  Hunt 488 

Song,  "Oh!  say  not  woman's  heart  is 

bought" Thomas  Love  Peacock 480 

"In  the  Days  of  Old" Thomas  Love  Peacock 489 

Song,  "How  delicious  is  the  winning"  Thomas  Ca?nphell 490 

Stanzas,  "Could  love  for  ever" George  Gordon  Byron 491 

"They  Speak  o'  Wiles" William  Thorn 493 

"Love  will  Find  Out  the  Way" Unknoivn 494 

A  Woman's  Shortcomings Elisabeth  Barrett  Browning..  495 

"Love  hath  a  Language" Helen  Sclina  Sheridan 496 

Song,  "O,  let  the  solid  ground" Alfred  Tennyson 497 

Amaturus William  Johnson-Cory 497 

The  Surface  and  the  Depths Lewis  Morris 499 

A  Ballad  of  Dreamland Algernon  Charles  Sivinburne.  499 

Endymion Henry  Wadsivorth  Longfellow  500 

Fate Susan  Marr  Spalding 502 

"Give  all  to  Love" Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 502 

"O,  Love  is  not  a  Summer  Mood".  .Richard  Watson  Gilder 504 

"When  will  Love  Come" Pakcnham  Beatty 504 

"Awake,  My  Heart" Robert  Bridges 505 

The  Secret George  Edward  Woodberry. .  .  505 

The  Rose  of  Stars George  Edward  Woodberry. . .  506 

Song  of  Eros  from  "Agathon" George  Edward  Woodberry.. .  507 

Love  is  Strong Richard  Burton 507 

"P.  once  was  like  an  April  Dawn  " .  Robert  Undenvood  Johnson . .  508 

'°n  of  Shadow Ernest  Dowson 508 

Reginald  Wright  Kaufman. .  509 

Louise  Driscoll 509 

Richard  Le  Gallienne 5 10 

....  William  Butler  Yeats 511 

"•'d  Noyes S" 


Table  of  Contents  xxxi 

PAGE 

"Child,  Child" Sara  Teasdalc 512 

Wisdom Ford  Madox  Ilurjfcr 512 

Epilogue  from  "Emblems  of  Love".  .Lascdles  Ahcrcrombie 513 

On  Hampstead  Heath Wilfrid  Wilson  Gibfon 516 

Once  on  a  Time Kendall  Banning 517 

IN  PRAISE  OF  HER 

First     Song     from     "Astrophel     and 

Stella  " Philip  Sidney 518 

Silvia William  Shakespeare 519 

Cupid  and  Campaspe John  Lyly 520 

Apollo's  Song  from  "Midas" John  Lyly 520 

"Fair  is  my  Love  for  April's  in  her 

Face" Robert  Greene 520 

Samela Robert  Greene 521 

Damelus'  Song  of  His  Diaphenia.  .  .  .Henry  Constable 522 

Madrigal,   "My   Love  in   her  attire 

doth  show  her  wit" Unknoivn 522 

Chloris  in  the  Snow Unknown 523 

"There  is  a  Lady  Sweet  and  Kind"..  Unknown 523 

Cherry-Ripe Thomas  Campion 524 

Amarillis Thomas  Campion 524 

Elizabeth  of  Bohemia Henry  Wotton 525 

Her  Triumph Ben  Jonson 526 

Of  Phillis William  Drummond 527 

A  Welcome ]]'illiam  Browne 527 

The  Complete  Lover William  Browne 528 

Rubies  and  Pearls Robert  Herrick 528 

Upon  Julia's  Clothes Robert  Herrick 529 

To  Cynthia  on  Concealment  of  her 

Beauty Francis  Kynaston 529 

Song,  "Ask  me  no  more  where  Jove 

bestows" Thomas  Careiu 530 

A  Devout  Lover Thomas  Randolph $:ii 

On  a  Girdle Edmund  Waller 531 

Castara William  Habington 53 1 

To  Amarantha  that  She  would  Dis- 
hevel her  Hair Richard  Lovelace 533 

Chloe  Divine Thomas  D'UrJey 533 

My  Peggy Allan  Ramsay 534 

Song,  "O  ruddier  than  the  cherry  "  .  .John  Gay 535 

"Tell  me,  my  Heart,  if  this  be  Love"  .  George  Lylllelon 535 

The  Fair  Thief Charles  Wyndham 536 

Amoret Mark  A kenside 537 

Song,    "The  shape  alone  let  others 

prize  " Mark  A  kenside 537 

Kate  of  Aberdeen John  Cunningham 538 

Song,   "Who  has  robbed  the  ocean 

cave  " John  Shaw 539 

Chloe Robert  Burns 540 

"O  Mally's  Meek,  Mally's  Sweet"..  .Robert  Burns 541 

The  Lover's  Choice Thomas  Bcdingfield 541 

Rondeau  Redouble John  Payne 542 

"My  Love  She's  but  a  Lassie  yet"..  .James  Hogg 543 

Jessie,  the  Flower  o'  Dunblane Robert  Tannahill 544 

Margaret  and  Dora Thomas  Campbell 544 

Dagonet's  Canzonet Ernest  Rhys 5.^5 

Stanzas  for  Music,  "There  be  none  of 

Beauty's  daughters" George  Gordon  Byron 546 

"Flowers  1  would  Bring" Aubrey  Thomas  dc  Vere    .  .  .  546 

"It  is  not  Beauty  I  Demand" George  Darlcy 547 


xxxii  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

Song,   "She  is  not  fair  to  outward 

view" ..._...._ Ilarlley  Coleridge 548 

Song,  "A  violet  in  her  lovely  hair"  .  .Charles  Swain 548 

Eileen  Aroon Gerald  Griffin 549 

Annie  Laurie Unknown 550 

To  Helen Edgar  Allan  Poe 551 

"A  Voice  by  the  Cedar  Tree" Alfred  Tennyson 552 

Song,  "Nay,  but  you,  who  do  not  love 

her  " Robert  Brouming 553 

The  Henchman John  Grccnlcaf  Whillicr 553 

Lovely  Mary  Donnelly William  AUingham SS4 

Love  in  the  Valley George  Meredith 556 

Marian George  Meredith 562 

Praise  of  My  Lady William  Morris 562 

Madonna  Mia Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  565 

"Meet  we  no  Angels,  Pansie" Thomas  Ashe 567 

To  Daphne Walter  Besant 568 

"Girl  of  the  Red  Mouth" Martin  MacDcrmott 568 

The  Daughter  of  Mendoza Mirabcaii  Bonaparte  Lamar .  569 

"If  She  be  made  of  White  and  Red".  .Herbert  P.  Home S7o 

The  Lover's  Song Edward  Rowland  Sill. ......  571 

"When  First  I  Saw  Her" George  Edivard  Woodberry..  .  571 

My  April  Lady Henry  Van  Dyke 572 

The  Milkmaid A  ustin  Dobson 573 

Song,  "This  peach  is  puik  with  such  a 

pink" Norman  Gale 574 

In  February Henry  Simpson 574 

"Love,  I  Marvel  What  You  Are " .  .  .  .  Trumbull  Stickney 575 

Ballade  of  My  Lady's  Beauty Joyce  Kilmer 575 

LTrsula Robert  U ndenvood  Johnson. .  576 

Villanelle  of  His  Lady's  Treasures.  .  .Ernest  Doivson 576 

Song,  "Love,  by  that  loosened  hair ". ZJ/m  Carwaw 577 

Song,  "O,  like  a  queen's  her  happy 

tread  " William  Watson 577 

Any  Lover,  Any  Lass .  .  . Richard  Middleton 578 

Songs  Ascending Witter  Bynner 579 

Song,  "  'Oh!  Love,'  they  said,  'is  King 

of  Kings'" Rupert  Brooke 580 

Song,  "How  do  I  love  you" Irene  Rutherford  McLeod .  .  .  580 

To  ...  .  In  Church  .  . Alan  Seeger 581 

After  Two  Years Richard  Aldington 581 

Praise Scumas  0' Sullivan 582 


PLAINTS  AND  PROTESTATIONS 

"  Forget  not  Yet " Thomas  Wyatt 583 

Fawnia Robert  Greene 583 

The  Passionate  Shepherd  to  His  Love. Christopher  Marlowe 584 

The  Nymph's  Reply  to  the  Passionate 

Shepherd Walter  Raleigh 585 

"Wrong  not.  Sweet  Empress  of  My 

Heart " Walter  Raleigh 586 

To  His  Coy  Love Michael  Drayton 586 

Her  Sacred  Bower •. . . .  Thomas  Campion 587 

To  Lesbia Thomas  Campion 588 

"Love  me  or  Not" Thomas  Campion 589 

"There  is  None,  O  None  but  You " .  .  Thomas  Campion 589 

Of  Corinna's  Singing Thotnas  Campion .■ .  .  ^590 

"  Were  my  Heart  as  some  Men's  are".  Thomas  Campion SQo 

"Kind  are  her  Answers" Thomas  Campion sgi 

To  Celia Ben  Jonson 591 


Table  of  Contents  xxxiii 

PAGE 

Song,  "O,  do  not  wanton  with  those 

eyes" Ben  Jonson Sga 

Song,  "Go  and  catch  a  falHng  star".  .John  Donne 592 

The  Message John  Donne 59,3 

Song,  "Ladies,  though  to  your  con- 
quering eyes" George  Etherege 594 

To  a  Lady  Asking  Him  how  Long  He 

would  Love  Her George  Etherege 594 

To  /Enone Robert  Herrick 595 

To  Anthea,  who  may  Command  him 

Anything Robert  Herrick 595 

The  Bracelet:  To  Juha Robert  Herrick 596 

To  the  Western  Wind Robert  Herrick 596 

To  my  Inconstant  Mistress Thomas  Carew 597 

Persuasions  to  Enjoy Thomas  Carr^v 597 

Mediocrity  in  Love  Rejected Thomas  Carew 598 

The  Message Thomas  Hcywood 598 

"  How  Can  the  Heart  forget  Her" ....  Francis  Davison 599 

To  Roses  in  the  Bosom  of  Castara ....  William  Habington 600 

To  Flavia Edmund  Waller 600 

"  I^ove  not  Me  for  Comely  Grace  ". .  .  .  Unknown 601 

"When,    Dearest,    I    but    Think    of 

Thee  " John  Suckling 60 1 

A  Doubt  of  Martyrdom John  Suckling 602 

To  Chloe William  Cartwright 603 

"I'll  Never  Love  Thee  More" James  Graham 604 

To  Althea,  from  Prison Richard  Lovelace. 605 

Why  I  Love  Her Alexander  Brome 606 

To  his  Coy  Mistress Andrew.  Marvcll 607 

A  Deposition  from  Beauty Thomas  Stanley . 60S 

"Love  in  thy  Youth,  Fair  Maid". .  .  .  Unknoivn 609 

To  Celia Charles  Cotton 6og 

To  Celia Charles  Scdlcy 610 

A   Song,   "My   dear  mistress  has  a 

heart" John  Wilmot 610 

Love  and  Life John  Wilmot 611 

Constancy John  Wilmot 611 

Song,   "Too  late,  alas,  I  must  con- 
fess"   John  Wilmot 612 

Song,    "Come,    Celia,   let's   agree  at 

last " John  Sheffield 612 

The  Enchantment Thomas  Olway 61,5 

Song,  "Only  tell  her  that  I  love".  . .  .John  Cults 613 

"  False  though  She  be" William  Congreve 613 

To  Silvia Anne  Finch 614 

" Why,  Lovely  Charrrrer" Unknown 614 

Against  Indifference Charles  Wcbbc 615 

A  Song  to  Amoret Henry  Vatighan 615 

The  Lass  of  liichmond  Hill James  Upton ^  .  .  616 

Song,   "Let  my  voice  ring  out  and 

over  the  earth" ^.  .James  Thomson 6t6 

Gifts James  Thomson 617 

Amynta Gilbert  Elliot . 617 

"O  Nancy!  wilt  Thou  go  with  Me".  .  .Thomas  Tercy 618 

Cavalier's  Song Robert  Ciinninghamc-Graham  619 

"My  Heart  is  a  Lute" Anne  Barnard 620 

Song,  "Had  I  a  heart  for  falsehood 

framed  " Richard  Brinslcy  Sheridan  .  .  620 

Meeting George  Crabbe 621 

"O  Were  my  Love  yon  Lilac  Fair"  .  .  .  Robert  Burns 621 

"Bonnie  Wee  Thing" Robert  Burns 622 

Rose  Aylmer Waller  Savage  Landor 622 


xxxiv  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

"Take  back  the  Virgin  Page" Thomas  Moore 623 

"Believe  me,  if  all  Those  Endearing 

Young  Charms" Thomas  Moore 624 

The  Nun Leigh  Hunt 624 

Only  of  Thee  and  Me Louis  Unlermeycr 625 

To Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 625 

From  the  Arabic Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 626 

The  Wandering  Knight's  Song John  Gibson  Lockharl 626 

Song,  "Love's  on  the  highroad"  .  .  .  .Dana  Burnett 627 

The  Secret  Love A.  E 627 

The  Flower  of  Beauty George  Darky 628 

My  Share  of  the  World Alice  Furlong 62S 

Song,  "A  lake  and  a  fairy  boat" ....  Thomas  Hood 630 

"Smile  and  Never  Heed  Me" Charles  Swain 630 

Are  They  not  all  Ministering  Spirits.  .Robert  Stephen  Haivkcr 631 

Maiden  Eyes Gerald  Griffin 631 

Hallowed  Places Alice  Freeman  Palmer 632 

The  Lady's  "Yes" Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning. .  632 

Song,  "It  is  the  miller's  daughter".  .  .Alfred  Tennyson 633 

Lilian Alfred  Tennyson 634 

Bugle  Song,  from  "The  Princess" .  .  .  .Alfred  Tennyson 635 

Ronsard  to  His  Mistress William   Makepeace   Thack- 
eray   635 

"When  You  are  Old" William  Butler  Yeats 636 

Song,  "You'll  love  me  yet,  and  I  can 

tarry  " Robert  Browning 637 

Love  in  a  Life Robert  Browning 637 

Life  in  a  Love Robert  Browning 638 

The  Welcome , Thomas  Osborne  Davis 638 

Urania Matthew  Arnold 639 

Three  Shadows Dante  Gabriel  Rossetii 640 

Since  we  Parted Edivard  Robert  Bulwer  Lytlon  641 

A  Match Algernon  Charles  Swinburne .  6^41 

A  Ballad  of  Life Algernon  Charles  Sunnburne .  642 

A  Leave-Taking Algernon  Charles  Swinburne .  645 

A  Lyric Algernon  Charles  Swinburne .  646 

Maureen John  Todhunier 647 

A  Love  Symphony Artliur  O'Shauglmessy 647 

Love  on  the  Mountain Thomas  Boyd 648 

Kate  Temple's  Song Mortimer  Collins 640 

My  Queen Unknown 64Q 

"Darling,  Tell  me  Yes" John  Godfrey  Saxe 650 

"Do  I  Love  Thee" John  Godfrey  Saxe 651 

"O  World,  be  Nobler" Laurence  Binyon 652 

"In  the  Dark,  in  the  Dew" Mary  Newmarch  Prescolt .  .  .  652 

Nanny Francis  Davis 653 

A  Trifle Henry  Timrod 654 

Romance Robert  Louis  Stevenson 654 

"Or  Ever  the  Knightly  Years  were 

Gone" William  Ernest  Henley 655 

Rus  in  Urbe ,  Clement  Scott 656 

My  Road Oliver  Opdyke 657 

A  White  Rose John  Boyle  O'Reilly 657 

"Some  Day  of  Days" Nora  Perry 658 

The  Telephone Robert  Frost 658 

Where  Love  is A  mclia  Josephine  Burr 659 

That  Day  You  Came Lizette  Woodworth  Reese.  .  .  .  660 

Amantium  Irae Ernest  Dowson 660 

In  a  Rose  Garden John  Bennett 661 

"God  Bless  You,  Dear,  To-day".  .  .  .John  Bennett 662 

To-day Benjamin  R.  C.  Low 663 

To  Arcady Charles  Buxton  Going 664 


Table  of  Contents  xxxv 


PAGE 

Wild  Wishes Ethel  M.  Hewitl 664 

"Because  of  You" Sophia  Alnion  llcnsley 665 

Then Rose  Terry  Cooke 666 

The  Missive Edmund  Gossc 666 

Plymouth  Harbor Mrs.  Ernest  Radford 667 

The  Serf's  Secret William  Vaughn  Moody ....  667 

"O,  Inexpressible  as  Sweet" George  Edward  Woodbcrry. .  .  668 

The  Cyclamen Arlo  Bales 668 

The  West-Country  Lover Alice  Brown 66g 

"  Be  Ye  in  Love  with  April-Tide  " .  .  .  .  Clinton  Scollard 670 

LTnity A  If  red  Noyes 670 

The  Queen William  Winter 671 

A  Lover's  Envy Henry  Van  Dyke 672 

Star  Song Robert  Undenuood  Johnson .  .  673 

"My  Heart  Shall  be  Thy  Garden". .  .Alice  Meynell 673 

At  Night Alice  Meynell 674 

Song,  "  Song  is  so  old  " Hermann  Hagedorn 674 

"All  Last  Night" Lascelles  Abercrombic 674 

The  Last  Word Frederic  Lawrence  Knowles. .  675 

"Heart  of  my  Heart" Unknown 676 

My  I-addie A  melic  Rives 676 

The  Shaded  Pool Norman.  Gale 677 

Good-Night S'.  Weir  Mitchell 679 

The  Mystic Witter  Bynner 680 

"I  Am  the  Wind" Zo'e  Akins 680 

"I  Love  my  Life,  But  not  Too  WcW'.Harriet  Monroe 681 

"This  is  my  Love  for  You" Grace  Fallow  Norton 681 

MY  LADY'S  LIPS 

Lips  and  Eyes Thomas  Middlcton 682 

The  Kiss Ben  Jonson 682 

"Take,  O  Take  Those  Lips  Away  " .  .  .John  Fletcher 683 

A  Stolen  Kiss George  Wither 683 

Song,  "My  Love  bound  me  with  a 

kiss  " Unknown 684 

To  Electra Robert  Hcrrick 684 

"Come,  Chloe,  and  Give  Me  Sweet 

Kisses" Charles  H anbury  Williams .  .  685 

A  Riddle William  Cowper 685 

To  a  Kiss John  Wolcot 686 

Song,  "Often  I  have  heard  it  said".  .Waller  Savage  Landor 686 

The  First  Kiss  of  Love George  Gordon  Byron 6S6 

"Jenny  Kissed  Me" Leigh  Hunt 687 

"I  FearThy  Kisses,  Gentle  Maiden ".  Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 688 

Love's  Philosophy Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 688 

Song,  "The  moth's  kiss,  first" Robert  Browning 688 

Summum  Bonum Robert  Browning 689 

The  First  Kiss Theodore  Watts-Dunton 689 

To  My  Love Johi  Godfrey  Saxe 690 

To  Lesbia John  Godfrey  Saxe 690 

Make  Believe Alice  Cary 691 

Kissing's  No  Sin Unknown 692 

To  Anne William  Maxwell 692 

Song,  "There  is  many  a  love  in  the 

land,  my  love" Joaquin  Miller 693 

Phyllis  and  Corydon Arthur  Collon 693 

AT  HER  WINDOW 

"Hark,  Hark,  the  Lark " William  Shakespeare 694 

"Sleep,  Angry  Beauty" Thomas  Campion 694 


xxxvi  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

Matin  Song Nathaniel  Field 694 

The  Night-Piecc:  To  Julia Robert  Ilerrick 695 

Morning William  D  Avenant 695 

Matin  Song Thomas  Jleyivood 696 

The  Rose ,  .  Richard  Lovelace 696 

Song,  "See,  see,  she  wakes!     Sabina 

wakes" William  Congrcve 697 

Mary  Morison Robert  Burns 697 

Wake,  Lady Joanna  Baillie 698 

The  Sleeping  Beauty Samuel  Rogers 699 

"The  Young  May  Moon" Thomas  Moore.  . 699 

"Row  Gently  Here" Thomas  Moore 700 

Morning  Serenade Madison  Cawein 700 

Serenade Aubrey  Thomas  De  Vcre. . . .  701 

Lines  to  an  Indian  Air Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 702 

Good-Night Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 703 

Serenade George  Darley 703 

Serenade Thomas  Hood 704 

Serenade Edward  Coale  Pinkney 704 

Serenade Henry  Timrod 705 

Serenade Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  705 

"Come  into  the  Garden,  Maud".  .  .  .Alfred  Tennyson 706 

At  Her  Window Frederick  Locker-Lam pson..  .  708 

Bedouin  Song Bayard  Taylor 709 

Night  and  Love Edward  George  Earlc  Buhvcr- 

Lytton 710 

Nocturne Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 711 

Palabras  Carinosas Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 711 

Serenade Oscar  Wilde 712 

The  Little  Red  Lark Alfred  Perceval  Graves 713 

Serenade Richard  Middlclon 714 

THE  COMEDY  OF  LOVE 

A  Lover's  Lullaby George  Gascoigne 715 

Phillida  and  Corydon Nicholas  Breton 716 

"Crabbed  Age  and  Youth" William  Shakespeare 717 

"It  Was  a  Lover  and  His  Lass" William  Shakespeare 717 

"I  Loved  a  Lass" George  Wither 718 

To  Chloris Charles  Sedley 720 

Song,  "The  merchant,  to  secure  his 

treasure " Matthew  Prior 720 

Pious  Selinda William  Congrcvc 721 

Fair  Hebe John  West 721 

A  Maiden's  Ideal  of  a  Husband Henry  Carey 722 

"Phillada  Flouts  Mc" Unknown 722 

"When  Molly  Smiles " Unknown 725 

Contentions Unknown 725 

"I  Asked  My  Fair,  One  Happy  Day  "  Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge ....  726 

The  Exchange Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge .  .  .  .  726 

"Comin'  Through  the  Rye" Robert  Burns 727 

"Green  Grow  the  Rashes,  O" Robert  Burns 727 

Defiance Walter  Savage  Landor 728 

Of  Clementina Walter  Savage  Landor 729 

"The  Time  I've  Lost  in  Wooing"  .  .  .  Thomas  Moore 729 

Dear  Fanny Thomas  Moore 730 

A  Certain  Young  Lady Washington  Irving 731 

"Where  Be  You  Going,  You  Devon 

Maid" John  Keats 732 

Love  in  a  Cottage Nathaniel  Parker  Willis .  .  .  .  732 

Song  of  the  Milkmaid  from  "Queen 

Mary  " Alfred  Tennyson 733 


Table  of  Contents  xxxvii 

PAGE 

"Wouldn't  You  Like  to  Know" John  Godfrey  Saxe 734 

"Sing  Heigh-ho" Charles  Kingsley 735 

The  Golden  Fish Geon;c  Arnold 736 

The  Courtin' James  Russell  Lowell 736 

L'Eau  Dormante Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 739 

A  Primrose  Dame Gleeson  While 740 

If James  Jejfrey  Roche 740 

Don't James  Jeffrey  Roche 741 

An  Irish  Love-Song Robert  Underwood  Johnson..  741 

Growing  Old Waller  Learned 742 

Time's  Revenge Walter  Learned 743 

In  Explanation Walter  Learned 743 

Omnia  Vincit A  IJred  Cochrane 744 

A  Pastoral Norman  Gale 744 

A  Rose Arlo  Bates 745 

"Wooed  and  Married  and  A'" Alexander  Ross 746 

"Owrethe  Moor  Amang  the  Heather  "ycj;;  Glover 747 

Marriage  and  the  Care  O't Robert  Lochore 748 

The  Women  Folk James  Hogg 749 

"Love  is  Like  a  Dizziness" James  Hogg 750 

"Behave  Yoursel'  before  Folk" Alexander  Rodger 751 

Rory  O'More;  or,  Good  Omens Samuel  Lover 753 

Ask  and  Have Samuel  Lover 754 

Kitty  of  Coleraine Charles  Dawson  Shanly 755 

The  Plaidie Charles  Sibley 755 

Kitty  Neil John  Francis  Waller 756 

"The  Dule's  i'  this  Bonnet  o'  Mine".£(^wi«  Waugh 757 

The  Ould  Plaid  Shawl Francis  A .  Fahy 758 

Little  Mary  Cassidy Francis  A.  Fahy 759 

The  Road Patrick  R.  Chalmers 760 

Twickenham  Ferry Theophilc  Marzials 761 

THE  HUMOR  OF  LOVE 

Song,  "I  prithee  send  me  back  my 

heart" John  Suckling 763 

A  Ballad  LTpon  a  Wedding John  Suckling , . . . .  763 

To  Chloe  Jealous Matthew  Prior 766 

Jack  and  Joan Thomas  Campion 767 

Phillis  and  Corydon Richard  Greene 768 

Sally  in  Our  Alley Henry  Carey 769 

The  Country  Wedding Unknown 771 

"O  Merry  may  the  Maid  be" John  Clerk 772 

The  Lass  o'  Gowrie Carolina  Nairne 773 

The    Constant   Swain   and   Virtuous 

Maid Unknown 774 

When  the  Kye  Comes  Hame James  Hogg 775 

The  Low-Backed  Car Samuel  Lover 777 

The  Pretty  Girl  of  Loch  Dan Samuel  Ferguson 779 

Muckle-Mouth  Meg Robert  Browning 781 

Muckle-Mou'd  Meg James  Ballantine 782 

Glenlogie Unknown 783 

Lochinvar Walter  Scott 784 

Jock  of  Hazeldean Walter  Scott 786 

Candor Henry  Cuyler  Bunner 787 

"Do  you  Remember" Thomas  Haynes  Bayly 788 

Because Edward  Fitzgerald 788 

Love  and  Age Thomas  Love  Peacock 790 

To  Helen Winthrop  Mackworth  Praed .  791 

At  the  Church  Gate William    Makepeace    Thack- 
eray   792 

Mabel,  in  New  Hampshire James  Thomas  Fields 793 


xxxviii  Table  of  Contents 

PAGE 

Toujours  Amour Edmun'd  Clarence  Stedman .  .  793 

The  Doorstep Edmund  Clarence  Sledman .  .  794 

The  White  Flag John  Hay 796 

A  Song  of  the  Four  Seasons Austin  Dobson 797 

The  Love-Knot Nora  Perry 798 

Riding  Down Nora  Perry 799 

"  Forgettin' " Moira  O'Neill 800 

"Across  the  Fields  to  Anne" Richard  Burton 801 

Pamela  in  Town Ellen     Mackay     Hutchinson 

Cortissoz 802 

Yes? Henry  Ctiyler  Bunner 804 

The  Prime  of  Life Walter  Learned 805 

Thoughts  on  the  Commandments .  .  .  .George  Augustus  Baker 806 

THE  IRONY  OF  LOVE 

"Sigh  no  More,  Ladies" William  Shakespeare 807 

A  Renunciation Edward  Vere 807 

A  Song,   "Ye  happy  swains,   whose 

hearts  are  free" George  Etherege 808 

To  His  Forsaken  Mistress Robert  Ayton 808 

To  an  Inconstant Robert  Ayton 809 

Advice  to  a  Girl Thomas  Campion 810 

Song,  "Follow  a  shadow,  it  still  flies 

you  " Ben  Jonson 811 

True  Beauty Francis  Beaumont 811 

The  Indifferent Francis  Beaumont 812 

The  Lover's  Resolution George  Wither 813 

His  Further  Resolution Unknown 814 

Song,  "  Shall  I  tell  you  whom  I  love" .  William  Browne 815 

To  Dianeme Robert  Herrick 816 

Ingrateful  Beauty  Threatened Thomas  Carew 816 

Disdain  Returned Thomas  Carew 817 

"  Love  Who  Will,  forl'll  LoveNone".  r/?o?«ai  Browne 817 

Valerius  on  Women Thomas  Heywood 818 

Dispraise  of  Love,  and  Lovers'  Fol- 
lies  Francis  Davison 818 

The  Constant  Lover John  Suckling 819 

Song,  "Why  so  pale  and  wan,  fond 

lover" John  Suckling S20 

Wishes  to  His  Supposed  Mistress Richard  Crashaw 820 

Song,    "Love    in    fantastic    triumph 

sate  " A phra  Behn 824 

Les  Amours Charles  Cotton 825 

Rivals William  Walsh 826 

"I    Lately    Vowed,    but    'Twas    in 

Haste" John  Oldmixon 826 

The  Touchstone Samuel  Bishop 826 

Air,  "I  ne'er  could  any  luster  see " .  .  .  .  Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan.. .  827 

"I  Took  a  Hansom  on  To-day William  Ernest  Henley S27 

Da  Capo Henry  Cuylcr  Bunner 828 

Song  Against  Women Willard  Huntington  Wright..  S29 

Song  of  Thyrsis Philip  Frcneau 830 

The  Test Waller  Savage  Lander 831 

"The  Fault  is  not  Mine" Walter  Savage  Landor 831 

The  Snake Thomas  Moore 831 

"When  I  Loved  You " Thomas  Moore 832 

A  Temple  to  Friendship Thomas  Moore 832 

The  Glove  and  the  Lions Leigh  Hunt 833 

To  Woman ■ George  Gordon  Byron 834 

Love's  Spite A  ubrey  Thomas  de  Vere 834 

Lady  Clara  Vere  de  Vere Alfred  Tennyson 835 


I 


Table  of  Contents  xxxix 

PAGE 

Shadows Richard  Monckton  Milnes. .  .  837 

Sorrows  of  Werther William    Makepeace    Thack- 
eray    838 

The  Age  of  Wisdom William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray   838 

Andrea  del  Sarto Robert  Browning, 839 

My  Last  Duchess Robert  Brownint; 846 

Adam,  Lihth,  and  Eve Robert  Browning 848 

The  Lost  Mistress Robert  Browning 848 

Friend  and  Lover Mary  Ainge  de  Vere 849 

Lost  Love A  ndre-w  Lang 849 

Vobiscum  est  lope Thomas  Campion 850 

Four  Winds Sara  Teasdale 850 

To  Marion Wilfrid  Scawen  Blunt 851 

Crowned A  my  Lowell 85 1 

Hebe James  Russell  Lowell 852 

"Justine,  You  Love  me  Not" John  Godfrey  Saxe 853 

Snowdrop William  Wetmore  Story 854 

When  the  Sultan  Goes  to  Ispahan.  .  .  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 854 

The  Shadow  Dance Louise  Chandler  Moul'.on  .  .  .  856 

"Along  the  Field  as  we  Came  by  " ilfrcd  Edward  Ilousman. .  .  .  856 

"When  I  was  One-and-Twenty " .  .  .  .Alfred  Edward  Housman.  .  .  857 

"Grieve  Not,  Ladies" Anna  Hetnpstead  Branch.  .  .  857 

Suburb Harold  Monro 859 

The  Betrothed Rudyard  Kipling 860 

LOVE'S  SADNESS 

"The  Night  has  a  Thousand  Eyes".  .Francis  William  Bourdillon .  863 

"I  Saw  my  Lady  Weep" Unknown 863 

Love's  Young  Dream Thomas  Moore 864 

"Not  Ours  the  Vows" Bernard  Barton 865 

The  Grave  of  Love Thomas  Love  Peacock 86s 

"We'll  go  no  More  a  Roving" George  Gordon  Byron 866 

Song,  "Sing  the  old  song,  amid  the 

sounds  dispersing" Aubrey  Thomas  de  Vere.  .  .  .  866 

The  (Question - Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 867 

The  Wanderer Austin  Dobson . 868 

Egyptian  Serenade George  William  Curtis 868 

The  Water  Lady Thomas  Hood 869 

"Tripping  Down  the  Field-path Charles  Swain 870 

Love  Not Caroline    Elizabeth    Sarah 

Norton 871 

"A  Place  in  Thy  Memory'' Gerald  Griffin 871 

Inclusions Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning.  .  872 

Mariana Alfred  Tennyson 873 

"Ask  Me  no  More" Alfred  Tennyson 875 

A  Woman's  Last  Word Robert  Browning 876 

The  Last  Ride  Together Robert  Browning 877 

Youth  and  Art Robert  Browning 880 

Two  in  the  Campagna Robert  Browning 882 

One  Way  of  Love' Robert  Browning 884 

"Never  the  Time  and  the  Place" Robert  Browning 885 

Song,  "Oh!  that  we  two  were  May- 
ing '' Charles  Kinesley 885 

For  He  Had  Great  Possessions Richard  Middlc'ton 886 

Windle-straws Edward  Dowden 887 

Jessie Thomas  Edward  Brown 887 

The  Chess-board Edward  Robert  Bulwer  Lytlon  888. 

Aux  Italiens Edward  Robert  Bulwer  Lytlon  889 

Song,   "I  saw  the  day's  white  rap- 

.  ture  " Charles  Hanson  Toume 892 


xl  Table  of  Contents 

PAGE 

The  Lonely  Road Kenneth  Rand 893 

Evensong Ridiiely  Torrence 893 

The  Nymph's  Song  to  Hylas William  Morris 894 

No  and  Yes Thomas  Ashe 895 

Love  in  Dreams John  Addmglon  Symonds .  . .  895 

"A  Little  While  I  fain  would  Linger 

Yet" Paul  Ilamillon  Hayne 895 

Song,  "I  made  another  garden,  yea."  .Arthur  O'Shaughnessy 896 

Song,  "Has  summer  come  without  the 

rose" Arthur  O'Shaughnessy 897 

After Philip  Bourke  Marston 898 

After  Summer Philip  Bourke  Marston 899 

Rococo Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  900 

Rondel Algernon  Charles  Swinhiirne  902 

The  Oblation Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  903 

The  Song  of  the  Bower Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti 903 

Song,   "We   break   the  glass,   whose 

sacred  wine  " Edward  Coate  Pinkney 905 

Maud  MuUer John  Greenleaf  Whitlicr 90s 

La  Grisette Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 909 

The  Dark  Man Nora  Hopper 910 

Eury dice Francis  William  Bourdillon .  911 

A  Woman's  Thought Richard  Watson  Gilder 913 

Laus  Veneris Louise  Chandler  Moulton .  .  .  913 

Adonais Will  Wallace  Harney 914 

Face  to  Face Frances  Cochrane 915 

Ashore Laurence  Hope 916 

Khristna  and  His  Flute Laurence  Hope 916 

Impenitentia  Ultima Ernest  Dawson 917 

Non    Sum    QuaHs   Eram    Bonic   sub 

Regno  Cynane Ernest  Dawson 918 

Quid  non  Speremus,  Amantes? Ernest  Dowson 919 

"  So  Sweet  Love  Seemed  " Robert  Bridges 920 

An  Old  Tune Andrnv  Lang 920 

Refuge William  Winter 921 

Midsummer Fllla  Wheeler  Wilco.x 922 

Ashes  of  Roses Elaine  Goodale 923 

Sympathy Althea  Gyles 923 

The  Look Sara  Teasdale 923 

"When  My  Beloved  Sleeping  Lies".  .Irene  Rutherford  McLeod.  .  .  924 

Love  and  Life Julie  Mathilde  Lippman. .  .  .  924 

Love's  Prisoner Mariana  Griswold  Vatt  Rens- 
selaer   925 

Rosies Agnes  I.  Hanrahan 92s 

At  the  Comedy Arthur  Stringer 926 

" Sometime  It  may  Be" Arthur  Colton 927 

"I  heard  a  Soldier" Herbert  Trench 927 

The  Last  Memory Arthur  Symonds 928 

"Down  by  the  Salley  Gardens" William  Butler  Yeats 928 

Ashes  of  Life Edna  St.  Vincent  Millay. .  .  .  929 

A  Farewell Alice  Brown 929 


THE  PARTED  LOVERS 

Song,   "O  mistress  mine,   where  are 

you  roaming" William.  Shakespeare 930 

" Go,  Lovely  Rose" Edmund  Waller 930 

To  the  Rose:  A  Song Robert  Herrick 931 

Memory William  Browne 93 1 

To  I-ucasta,  Going  to  the  Wars Richard  Lovelace 933 

To  Lucasta,  Going  beyond  the  Seas .  .  Richard  Lovelace 933 


Table  of  Contents  xli 

PAGE 

Song  to  a  Fair  Young  Lady,  Going 

out  of  the  Town  in  the  Spring John  Drydcn 934 

Song,    "To    all    you    ladies    now    at 

land  " Charles  Sackville 935 

Song,  "In  vain  you  tell  your  parting 

lover " Matlheiv  Prior 937 

Black-Eyed  Susan John  Gay 937 

Irish  Molly  O Unkiown 939 

Song,    "At    setting    day    and    rising  .     . 

morn" Allan  Ramsay 940 

Lochaher  no  More Allan  Ramsay 940 

Willie  and  Helen Ucu<  A  inslie 941 

Absence Richard  J  ago 942 

"My  Mother  Bids  me  Bind  my  Hair"  Anne  Hunter 942 

"Blow  High!  Blow  Low" Charles  Dibdin 942 

The  Siller  Croun Susanna  Blamirc 943 

"  My  Nannie's  Awa' " Robert  Burns 944 

"Ae  Fond  Kiss" Robert  Burns 945 

"The  Day  Returns" Robert  Burns 945 

My  Bonnie  Mary Robert  Burns 946 

A  Red,  Red  Rose, Robert  Burns 946 

I  Love  My  Jean Robert  Burns  and  John  Ham- 
ilton    947 

The  Rover's  Adieu,  from  "  Rokehy  "  AV alter  Scott 948 

"Loudoun's     Bonnie     Woods     and 

Braes" Robert  Tannahill 949 

"Fare  Thee  Well" George  Gordon  Byron 950 

"Maid  of  Athens,  Ere  We  Part".  . .  .George  Gordon  Byron 951 

"When  We  Two  Parted" George  Gordon  Byron 952 

" Go,  Forget  Me" Charles  Wolfe 953 

Last  Night George  Darley 954 

Adieu Thomas  Carlylc 954 

Jeanic  Morrison William  Motherwell 955 

The  Sea-lands Orrick  Johns 958 

Fair  Ines Thomas  Hood 959 

A  Valediction Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning .  .  960- 

Farewell John  Addington  Symonds .  .  .  962 

"I  Do  Not  Love  Thee" Caroline    Elizabeth    Sarah 

Norton 962 

The  Palm-tree  "and  the  Pine Richard  Monckton  Milnes..  .  963 

"O  Swallow,  Swallow  Flying  South" .Alfred  Tennyson 963 

The  Flower's  Name Robert  Browning 964 

To  Marguerite Matthrcv  Arnold 966 

Separation Matthew  Arnold. 966 

Longing .'.'.;;i'.  i . . . Matthew  Arnold 967 

Divided .'jV.^H Jean  Ingelow 968 

My  Playmate .John  Grccnleaf  Whillicr.  ...  972 

A  Farewell Coventry  Patmorc 974 

Departure Coventry  Patmorc 974 

A  Song  of  Parting //.  C.  Compton  Mackenzie.. .  975 

Song,  "Fair  is  the  night,  and  fair  the 

day  " William  Morris 977 

At  Parting Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  978 

"If  She  But  Knew" Arthur  O'Shaughnessy .  .  ....  978 

Kathleen  Mavourneen Louisa  Macartney  Crawford.  979 

Robin  .'Vdair Caroline  Keppel. 979 

"If  You  Were  Here" Philip  Bourke  Marslon 981 

"  (7ome  to  Me,  Dearest " Joseph  Brenan 982 

Song,  'Tis  said  that  absence  conquers 

love" Frederick  William  Thomas .  .  983 

Parting Gerald  Massey 984 

The  Parting  Hour Olive  Custanc.e. 985 


xlii  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

A  Song  of  Autumn Rennell  Rodd 985 

The  Girl  I  Left  Behind  Me Unknown g86 

"When  We  are  Parted" Hamillon  Aide 987 

Remember  or  Forget" Hamilton  Aide 987 

Nancy  Dawson Herbert  P.  Home 988 

My  Little  Love Charles  B.  Hawlcy 989 

For  Ever William  Caldwell  Roscoe ....  ggo 

Auf  Wiedersehen James  Russell  Lowell 990 

"Forever  and  a  Day " .  .» Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 991 

Old  Gardens Arthur  Upson 992 

Ferry  Hinksey Laurence  Binyon 992 

Wearyin'  fer  You Frank  L.  Stanton 993 

The  Lovers  of  Marchaid Marjoric  L.  C.  Pickthall .  . . .  994 

Song,  "She's  somewhere  in  the  sun- 
light strong" Richard  Le  Gallienne 995 

The  Lover  Thinks  of  His  Lady  in  the 

North Shacmas  O  Sheel 996 

Chanson  de  Rosemonde Richard  Hovey 997 

Ad  Domnulam  Suam Ernest  Dowson 907 

Marian  Drury Bliss  Carman 998 

Love's  Rosary Alfred  Noycs 909 

When  She  Comes  Home James  Whilcnmb  Riley 1000 

THE  TRAGEDY  OF  LOVE 

Song,  "My  silks  and  fine  array" ....  William  Blake looi 

The  Flight  of  Love Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 100  r 

"Farewell!  If  ever  Fondest  Prayer ". George  Gordon  Byron 1002 

Porphyria's  Lover Robert  Browning 1003 

Modern  Beauty Arthur  Symons 1004 

La  Belle  Dame  Sans  Merci John  Keats 1005 

Tantalus — Texas Joaquin  Miller 1007 

Enchainment Arthur  0\Shaughncssy 1008 

Auld  Robin  Gray Anne  Barnard 1009 

Lost  Light Elizabeth  Akers loio 

A  Sigh Harriet  Prescott  Spofford. .  .  .    ion 

Hereafter Harriet  Prescott  Spoford. .  .  .    1012 

Endymion Oscar  Wilde 1013 

"Love  is  a  Terrible  Thing" Grace  Fallow  Norton 1014 

The  Ballad  of  the  Angel Theodosia  Garrison 1015 

"Love  Came  Back  at  Fall  o' Dew" . .  .Lizette  Woodworth  Reese.  .  .  .    1016 

I  Shall  not  Care Sara  Tcasdale 1017 

Outgrown Julia  C.  R.  Dorr 1017 

A  Tragedy Edith  Nesbit 1019 

Left  Behind Elizabeth  Akers 1020 

The  Forsaken  Merman Matthciv  Arnold 102 1 

The  Portrait Edward  Robert  Bulwer  Lytlon   1025 

The  Rose  and  Thorn Paul  Hamilton  Hayne 102S 

To  Her — Unspoken Amelia  Josephine  Burr 1029 

A  Light  Woman Robert  Browning 1029 

From  the  Turkish George  Gordon  Byron 1031 

A  Summer  Wooing Louise  Chandler  Moulton .  .  .    1032 

Butterflies John  Davidson 1032 

Unseen  Spirits Nathaniel  Parker  Willis .  .  .  .    1032 

"  Grandmither,  Think  Not  I  Forget " .  Willa  Sibcrt  Gather 1033 

Little  Wild  Baby Margaret  Thomson  Janvier .  .    1035 

A  Cradle  Song Nicholas  Breton 1036 

Lady  Anne  Bothwell's  Lament Unknown 1037 

A  Woman's  Love John  Hay 1038 

A  Tragedy Theophile  Marzials 1040 

"Mother,     I      Cannot      Mind     My 

Wheel" Walter  Savage  Landor 1040 


Table  of  Contents  xliii 

PAGE 

Airly  Beacon Charles  Kingsley 1040 

A  Sea  Child Bliss  Carman 1041 

From  the  Harbor  Hill Gtislav  Kobbe 1041 

Allan  Water Mattheiv  Gregory  Lewis 1042 

Forsaken Unknown 1042 

Bonnie  Doon Robert  Burns 1044 

The  Two  Lovers Richard  Uovey 1044 

The  Vampire Riidyard  Kipling 1045 

Agatha Alfred  A  uslin 1046 

"A  Rose  Will  Fade" Dora  Sigcrson  Shorter 1047 

Affaire  d' Amour Margaret  Deland 1048 

A  Casual  Song Roden  Noel 1049 

The  Way  of  It John  Vance  Cheney 1049 

"When    Lovely    Woman    Stoops    to 

Folly  " Oliver  Goldsmith 1050 

Folk-Song Lotiis  Untcrmeyer 1050 

A  Very  Old  Song William  Laird 1051 

"She   Was   Young    and    Blithe    and 

Fair  " Harold  Monro 1051 

The  Lass  that  Died  of  Love Richard  Middlelon 1052 

The  Passion-Flower Margaret  Fuller 1053 

Norah Zo'e  A  kins 1054 

Of  Joan's  Youth Louise  Imogen  Guiney 1054 

There's  Wisdom  in  Women Rupert  Brooke 1055 

Goethe  and  Frederika Henry  Sidgwick 1055 

The  Song  of  the  King's  Minstrel ....  Richard  Middleton 1056 

Annie  Shore  and  Johnnie  Doon Patrick  Orr 1057 

Emmy Arthur  Symons 1058 

The  Ballad  of  Camden  Town James  Elroy  Flecker 1058 

LOVE  AND  DEATH 

Helen  of  Kirconnell Unknown 1060 

Willy  Drowned  in  Yarrow Unknown 1061 

Annan  Water Unknown 1062 

The  Lament  of  the  Border  Widow ....  Unknown 1063 

Aspatia's    Song    from    "The    Maid's 

Tragedy  " John  Fletcher 1064 

A    Ballad,    "'Twas    when    the    seas 

were  roaring" John  Gay 1064 

The  Braes  of  Yarrow John  Logan 1065 

The  Churchyard  on  the  Sands Lord  de  Tabley 1067 

The  Minstrel's  Song  from  "^lla". . .  Thomas  Chatterton 1070 

Highland  Mary Robert  Burns 107 1 

To  Mary  in  Heaven Robert  Burns 1072 

Lucy William  Wordsworth 1073 

Proud  Maisie Walter  Scott 1076 

Song,    "Earl    March   looked    on    his 

dying  child" Thomas  Campbell 1077 

The  Maid's  Lament Walter  Savage  Landor 1077 

"  She  is  Far  from  the  Land  " Thomas  Moore 1078 

"At  the  Mid  Hour  of  Night" Thomas  Moore 1079 

On  a  Picture  by  Poussin John  Addington  Symonds. . .  .  1079 

Threnody Ruth  Guthrie  Harding 1080 

Strong  as  Death Henry  Cuyler  Bunner 1080 

"I  Shall  not  Cry  Return" Ellen  M.  H.  Gates 1081 

"Oh!     Snatched   away   in   Beauty's 

Bloom  " George  Gordon  Byron 1082 

To  Mary Charles  Wolfe 1082 

My  Heart  and  I Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning.  .  1083 

Rosalind's  Scroll Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning.  .  1085 

Lament  of  the  Irish  Emigrant Helen  Sclina  Sheridan 1086 


xliv  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

The  King  of  Denmark's  Ride Caroline  Elizabeth  Sarah  N or- 

ton 1088 

The  Watcher James  Stephens 1089 

The  Three  Sisters Arthur  Davison  Fickc 1090 

Ballad May  Kendall logo 

"O  that  'Twere  Possible" Alfred  Tennyson 1092 

"Home  They  Brought  Her  Warrior 

Dead  " Alfred  Tennyson 1093 

Evelyn  Hope Robert  Broimting. ,,,,  1094 

Remembrance Emily  Bronte 1;,  y;  ^..  .1^1095 

Song,  "The  linnet  in  the  rocky  dtWs" .Emily  Bronte 1096 

Song  of  the  Old  Love Jean  Ingelow 1097 

Requiescat Matthew  Arnold 1098- 

Too  Late Dinah  Maria  Mulock  Craik .  1099 

Four  Years Dinah  Maria  Mulock  Craik.  1099 

Barbara Alexander  Smith iioo 

Song,  "  WhenI  am  dead,  my  dearest"  Christina  Georgina  Rossctti.  .  1102 

Helen Sarah  Chauncey  Woolsey. .  .  .  1102 

Love  and  Death Rosa  Midholland 1 104 

To  One  in  Paradise Edgar  Allan  Foe 1105 

Annabel  Lee Edgar  Allan  Foe 1105 

For  Annie Edgar  Allan  Foe 1107 

Telling  the  Bees John  Grcenleaf  Whittier 1109 

A  Tryst Louise  Chandler  Moulton ...  1 1 1 1 

Love's  Resurrection  Day Louise  Chandler  Moulton.  .  .  11 12 

Heaven Martha  Gilbert  Dickinson ...  1 1 1 2 

Janette's  Hair Charles  Graham  II alpine  .  .  11 12 

The  Dying  Lover Richard  Henry  Stoddard.  ...  1114 

"When  the  Grass  Shall  Cover  Me"..  .Ina  Coolbrith 11 14 

Give  Love  Today Ethel  Talbot mS 

Until  Death Elizabeth  Akers 1116 

Florence  Vane Philip  Pendleton  Cooke 11 17 

"If  Spirits  Walk" Sophie  Jcivetl 1118 

Requiescat . Oscar  Wilde 1 1 ig 

Lyric,  "You  would  have  understood 

me,  had  you  waited  " Ernest  Dowson 1 1 20 

Romance Andrew  Lang 1121 

Good-Night Hester  A.  Benedict 11 21 

Requiescat Rosamund  Marriott  Watson.  11 22 

The  Four  Winds Charles  Henry  Liiders 1 1 23 

The  King's  Ballad Joyce  Kilmer 1 123 

Heliotrope Harry  Thurston  Peck 1 1 24 

"Lydia is  Gone  this  Many  a  Year".  .  .Lisette  Woodworth  Reese.  .  .  .  1126 

After Lizette  Woodworth  Reese ....  1 1 27 

Memories Arthur  Stringer 11 27 

To  Diane Helen  Hay  Whitney 11 28 

"Music  I  Heard " Conrad  A ikcn 1 129 

Her  Dwelling-place Ada  Foster  Murray 1129 

The  Wife  from  Fairyland Richard  Le  GaUienne 1 130 

In  the  Fall  o'  Year Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr 1131 

The  Invisible  Bride Edwin  Markham 1132 

Rain  on  a  Grave Thomas  Hardy 1 133 

Patterns A  my  Loivell 1 134 

Dust Rupert  Brooke 1 137 

Ballad,  "The  roses  in  my  garden  ". .  .  .  Maurice  Baring 1 138 

"The  Little  Rose  is  Dust,  My  Dear". Gracp  Hazard  Conkling 1139 

Dirge A  delaide  Crapsey 1 139 

The  Rosary Robert  Cameron  Rogers 1 140 

LOVE'S  FULFILLMENT 

"My  True-love  Hath  my  Heart".  .  .Philip  Sidney 1141 

Song,  "O  sweet  delight" Thomas  Campion 1141 


Table  of   Contents  xlv 

PAGE 

The  Good-Morrow John  Donne 1142 

"There's  Gowd  in  the  Breast" James  Hogg 1142 

The  Beggar  Maid Alfred  Tennyson 1 143 

Refuge A.  E 1143 

At  Sunset Louis  V .  Ledoux 1 144 

"One  Morning,  Oh!  so  Early" Jean  Ingeloiv 1144 

Across  the  Door Padraic  Colutn 1 145 

May  Margaret Theophile  Marzials 1145 

Rondel,    "Kissing    her    hair,    I    sat 

against  her  feet" Algernon  Charles  Sivinburne.  1146 

A  Spring  Journey Alice  Freeman  Palmer 1 147 

The  Brookside Richard  Monckton  Milncs..  .  1147 

Song,  "For  me  the  jasmine  buds  un- 
fold " Florence  Earle  Coates 1 148 

What  My  Lover  Said Homer  Greene 1149 

May-Music Rachel  Annand  Taylor 1150 

Song,    "Flame    at    the    core    of    the 

world  " A  rthur  Upson 1151 

A 'Memory Frederic  Lawrence  Kno'wles. .  1 152 

Love  Triumphant Frederic  Lawrence  Knoides. .  1 153 

Lines,     "Love    within     the     lover's 

breast " George  Meredith 1 153 

Love  among  the  Ruins Robert  Browning 1154 

Earl  Mertoun's  Song Robert  Browning 1156 

Meeting  at  Night Robert  Browning 1157 

Parting  at  Morning Robert  Browning 11 57 

The  Turn  of  the  Road Alice  Rollit  Coe 1 158 

"My  Delight  and  Thy  Delight" Robert  Bridges 1158 

"O,  Saw  Ye  the  Lass" Richard  Ryan 1 159 

Love  at  Sea Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  1159 

Mary  Beaton's  Song Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  1160 

Plighted Dinah  Maria  Mnlock  Craik .  i  i6r 

A  Woman's  Question Adelaide  Anne  Procter 1162 

"Dinna  Ask  Me" John  Dunlop 1163 

A  Song,  "Sing  me  a  .sweet,  low  song  of 

night " Hildegarde  Hawthorne 1 164 

The  Reason :... ; James  Oppenheim 1 164 

"  My  Own  Cailin  Donn''ii.v.v.-'.'i'. .  .  .George  Sigerson 1165 

Nocturne. .  .  • A  melia  Josephine  Burr 1 166 

Surrender Amelia  Joscphiitc  Burr i  i6f) 

"By  Yon  Burn  Side" Robert  Tannahill 11 66 

A  Pastoral,  "  Flower  of  the  medlar" .  .  Theophile  Marzials 1 167 

"When  Death  to  Either  shall  Com&"  .Robert  Bridges 116S  ■ 

The  Reconciliation Alfred  Tennyson 1168 

Song,  "Wait  but  a  little  while" Norman  Gale i  j 60 

Content Norman  Gale 1 1 70 

Che  Sara  Sara Victor  Plarr 1 170 

"Bid  .Adieu  to  Girlish  Days" James  Joyce 1170 

To  F.  C .Mortimer  Collins 1171 

Spring  Passion Joel  Elias  Spingarn 1171 

Advice  to  a  Lover ^S'.  Charles  Jellicoe 1171 

"Yes" Richard  Doddridge  Blackmore  1172 

Love Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge ....  1 173 

Nested Habberton  Lulham 1 176 

The  Letters Alfred  Tennyson ii77 

Prothalamion Edmund  Spenser 1178 

Epithalamion Edmund  Spenser 1 183 

The  Kiss Sara  Teasdale 1 194 

Marriage Wilfrid  Wilson  Gibson 1 19s 

The  Newly-wedded Winlhrop  Mackworth  Praed .  1195 

"I   Saw  Two   Clouds   at    Morn\ng''JohnGardiner Calkins  Brain- 

ard 1 196 


xlvi  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

Holy  Matrimony John  Kehle 1 197 

The  Bride Laurence  Hope 1198 

A  Marriage  Charm Nora  Hopper i  iqq 

"Like  a  Laverock  in  the  Lift " Jean  Ingeloiv 1200 

My  Owen Ellen  Mary  Patrick  Downing  1200 

Doris:  A  Pastoral Arthur  Joseph  Mtinhy 1201 

"He'd  Nothing  but  His  Violin" Mary  Kyle  Dallas 1202 

Love's  Calendar William  Bell  Scott 1203 

Home Dora  Greenwell 1 204 

Two  Lovers George  Eliot 1 204 

The  Land  of  Heart's  Desire Emily  Huntington  Miller .  .  .  1206 

My  Ain  Wife Alexander  Laing 1206 

The  Irish  Wife Thomas  d'A  rcy  McGee 1 207 

My  Wife's  a  Winsome  Wee  Thing ....  Robert  Burns 1 208 

Lettice Dinah  Maria  Miilock  Craik .  1 208 

"If   Thou   Wert   by   My    Side,    My 

Love  " Reginald  Heber 1 209 

The  Shepherd's  Wife's  Song Robert  Greene 12 10 

"Truth  doth  Truth  Deserve" Philip  Sidney 1212 

The  Married  Lover Coventry  Palmare 1212 

My  Love James  Russell  Lowell 12 13 

Margaret  to  Dolcino Charles  Kingsley 1215 

Dolcino  to  Margaret Charles  Kingsley 1215 

At  Last Richard  Henry  Stoddard ....  1215 

The  Wife  to  Her  Husband Unknown 1216 

A  Wife's  Song William  Cox  Bennett 12 17 

The  Sailor's  Wife William  Julius  Mickle 12 17 

Jerry  an'  Me Hiram  Rich 1219 

"Don't  be  Sorrowful,  Darling" Rembrandt  Peale 1220 

Winifreda Unknown 1221 

An  Old  Man's  Idyl Richard  Real/ 1222 

The  Poet's  Song  to  his  Wife Bryan  Waller  Procter 1223 

John  Anderson Robert  Burns 1224 

To  Mary Samuel  Bishop 1225 

The  Golden  Wedding David  Gray 1226 

Moggy  and  Me James  Hogg 1227 

"O,  Lay  Thy  Hand  in  Mine,  Dear"..  .Gerald  Massey 1228 

The  Exequy Henry  King 1228 

LOVE  SONNETS 

Sonnets  from  "Amoretti" Edmund  Spotser 1232 

Sonnets  from  ' '  Astrophel  and  Stella " .  Philip  Sidney 1235 

Sonnets  from  "To  Delia" Samuel  Daniel 1239 

Sonnets  from  "Idea" Michael  Drayton 1242 

Sonnets  from  "Diana" Henry  Constable 1245 

Sonnets William  Shakespeare. .... .,.  1246 

"Alexis,  Here  She  Stayed" William  Drummond..].ii.:i,j.  1,1252 

"Were  I   as  Base  as  is  the  Lowly                                    '       .>  '•' 

Plain  " Joshua  Sylvester 1253 

A  Sonnet  of  the  Moon Charles  Best 1253 

To  Mary  Unwin William  Co'wper 1254 

"Why  art  Thou  Silent" William  Wordsworth 1254 

Sonnets  from  "  The  House  of  Life  "  .  .   Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti 1255 

Sonnets ■. Christina  Georgina  Rossetti. .  1 259 

How  My  Songs  of  Her  Began Philip  Bourkc  Marston 1260 

At  the  Last Philip  Bourke  Marston 1261 

To  One  who  Would  Make  a   Con- 
fession   Wilfrid  Scaiven  Blunt 1261 

The  Pleasures  of  Love Wilfrid  Scawen  Blunt 1262 

"Were  but  my  Spirit  Loosed  upon 

the  Air" Louise  Chandler  Moulton .  .  .  1262 


Table  of  Contents  xlvii 

PAGE 

Renouncement Alice  Meynell. 1263 

"My  LoveJor  Thee" Richard  Watson  Gilder 1263 

Sonnets  after  the  Italian Richard  Watson  Gilder 1264 

Stanzas  from  "Modern  Love" George  Meredith 1264 

Love  in  the  Winds Richard  Hovey I26g 

"Oh.  Death  Will  Find  Me" Rupert  Brooke 1269 

The  Busy  Heart Rupert  Brooke 1270 

The  Hill Rupert  Brooke 1270 

Sonnetsfrom"Sonnets  to  Miranda". .IFi//iow  Watson 1271 

Sonnets  from  "Thysia" Morton  Luce 1273 

Sonnets    from    "Sonnets    from     the 

Portuguese" Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning.  .  1276 

One  Word  More Robert  Browning 1284 


PART  III 
POEMS  OF  NATURE 

"The  World  is  too  Much  With  Us  ". .  .  William  Wordsworth 1 292 

MOTHER  NATURE 

The  Book  of  the  World William  Drummond 1293 

Nature Jones  Very 1 293 

Compensation Celia  Thaxter 1294 

The  Last  Hour Ethel  Clifford 1295 

Nature Ilcnry  David  Thoreau 1 295 

Song  of  Nature Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 1 296 

"  Great  Nature  is  an  Army  Gay  " Richard  Watson  Gilder 1 298 

To  Mother  Nature Frederic  Laxvrence  Knowles..  1299 

Quiet  Work Matthew  A  mold 1300 

Nature Ilenty  Wadsworth  Longfellow  1301 

"As  an  Old  Mercer" Mahlon  Leonard  Fisher 1301 

Good  Company Karle  Wilson  Baker 1301 

"Here  is  the  Place  where  Loveliness 

Keeps  House  " Madison  Cawein 1302 

God's  World Edna  St.  Vincent  Millay. .  .  .  1302 

Sic  Vita William  Stanley  Braithwaite.  1303 

Patmos Edith  M.  Thomas 1303 

DAWN  AND  DARK 

Song,  "Phoebus,  arise" William  Drummond X305 

Hymn  of  Apollo Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 1306 

Prelude  to  "The  New  Day" Richard  Watson  Gilder 1307 

Dawn  on  the  Headland William  Watson 1308 

The  Miracle  of  the  Dawn Madison  Cawein 1308 

Dawn-angels A.  Mary  F.  Robinson 1309 

I^Iusic  of  the  Dawn Virginia  Bioren  Harrison.  .  .  1310 

Sunrise  on  Mansfield  Mountain Alice  Brown 1311 

Ode  to  Evening William  Collins 13 13 

"It   is   a   Beauteous   Evening   Calm 

and  Free" William  Wordsworth 13 14 

Gloaming Robert  Adger  Bowen 1315 

■Evening  Melody Aubrey  de  Vere 1315 

In  the  Cool  of  the  Evening .Alfred  Noyes 1316 

Twilight Olive  distance 1317 

Twilight  at  Sea Amelia  C.  Welby 1317 

"This  is  My  Hour" Zo'e  Akins 1318 


xlviii  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

Song  to  the  Evening  Star Thomas  Campbell 1319 

The  Evening  Cloud John  Wilson 1320 

Song:  To  Cynthia Ben  Jonson 1320 

My  Star Robert  Broicmiin; 1321 

Night William  Blake 1321 

To  Night Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 1323 

To  Night Jose'ph  Blanco  White 1324 

Night John  Addington  Symonds ...  1324 

Night James  Montgomery 1325 

He  Made  the  Night Lloyd  Mifflin 1326 

Hymn  to  the  Night Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  1^27 

Night's  Mardi  Gras Edward  J.  Wheeler 1328 

Dawn  and  Dark Norman  Gale 1328 

Dawn George  B.  Logan,  Jr 1328 

A  Wood  Song Ralph  I^odgson 1329 

THE  CHANGING  YEAR 

A  Song  for  the  Seasons Bryan  Waller  Procter 1330 

A  Song  of  the  Seasons Cosmo  Monkhoiise 1331 

Turn  o'  the  Year Katherine  Tynan 1332 

The  Waking  Year Emily  Dickinson 1332 

Song,  "The  year's  at  the  spring"..  .  .Robert  Browning 1333 

Early  Spring Alfred  Tennyson 1333 

Lines  Written  in  Early  Spring William  Wordsworth 1334 

In  Early  Spring Alice  Meynell 1335 

Spring Thomas  Nashe 1336 

A  Starling's  Spring  Rondel James  Cousins 1337 

"When  Daffodils  begin  to  Peer" ....  William  Shakespeare 1337 

Spring,  from  "In  Memoriam" Alfred  Tennyson 1338 

The  Spring  Returns Charles  Leonard  Moore 1339 

"When  the  Hounds  of  Spring"' Algernon  Charles  Swinburne .  1339 

Song,  "Again  rejoicing  Nature  sees" .  .Robert  Burns. 1341 

To  Spring William  Blake 1342 

An  Ode  on  the  Spring Thomas  Gray 1343 

Spring Henry  Timrod 1344 

The  Meadows  in  Spring Edward  Fitzgerald 1346 

The  Spring William  Barnes 1347 

"When  Spring  Comes  Back  to  Eng- 
land"   Alfred  Noyes 1348 

New  Life Amelia  Josephine  Burr i349 

"Over the  Wintry  Threshold" Bliss  Carman 1349 

March William  Morris 1350 

Song  in  March William  Gilmore  Simms ....  1351 

March Nora  Hopper. 135 1 

Written  in  March William  Wordsworth 1352 

The  Passing  of  March Robert  Burns  Wilson ■.  .  1353 

Home  Thoughts,  from  Abroad Rol)ert  Browning 1353 

Song,  "April,  April" William  Watson 1354 

An  April  Adoration Charles  G.  D.  Roberts 1354 

Sweet  Wild  April William  Force  Stead 1355 

Spinning  in  April Josephine  Prrston  Pcabody.  .  1357 

Song:  On  May  Morning John  Milton 1358 

A  May  Burden Francis  Thompson 1358 

Corinna's  Going  a  Maying. Robert  Herrick i3S9 

"Sister,  Awake" Unknown 1361 

May Edward  Hovell-Thurlow 1361 

May Henry  Sylvester  Cormvell. .  .  .  1362 

A  Spring  Lilt : . .  Unknown 1363 

Summer  Longings Denis  Florence  MacCarlhy .  .  1363 

Mids\immer John  Townsend  Trowbridge.  .  1364 

A  Midsummer  Song .Richard  Watson  Gilder 1366 


Table  of  Contents  xlix 

PAGE 

June,  from  "The  Vision  of  Sir  Laun- 

fal " fames  Russell  Lmvcll 1367 

June Harrison  Smilh  Morris 1369 

Harvest Ellen     Mackay    Bulchimon 

Cortissoz 1370 

Scythe  Song Andrew  Lang 1371 

September George  Arnold 1371 

Indian  Summer Emily  Dickinson. 1373 

Prevision Ada  Foster  Murray 1373 

A  Song  of  Early  Autumn Richard  Walson  Gilder 1374 

To  Autumn John  Keats 1375 

Ode  to  Autumn Thomas  Hood 1376 

Ode  to  the  West  Wind Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 1378 

Autumn:  a  Dirge Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 1380 

Autumn Emily  Dickinson 1381 

"When  the  Frost  is  on  the  Punkin"..  .James  Whilcomh  Riley 1381 

Kore Frederic  Manning 1382 

Old  October Thomas  Constable 13S3 

November.  .  .  ." C.  L.  Cleaveland 1384 

November Mahlon  Leonard  Fisher 1385 

Storm  Fear Robert  Frost 1385 

Winter:  a  Dirge Robert  Burns 1386 

Old  Winter Thomas  Noel 1386 

The  Frost Hannah  Flagg  Gould 1387 

The  Frosted  Pane Charles  G.  D.  Roberts 1388 

The  Frost  Spirit John  Grecnleaf  Whitticr 1388 

Snow Elizabeth  A  kers 1390 

To  a  Snowflake Francis  Thompson 1391 

The  Snow-Shower William  Cullen  Bryant 1391 

Midwinter John  To-ivnscnd  Trowbridge..  1393 

A  Glee  for  Winter Alfred  Domett 1394 

The  Death  of  the  Old  Year Alfred  Tennyson 1395 

Dirge  for  the  Year Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 1396 

WOOD  AND  FIELD  AND  RUNNING  BROOK 

Waldemsamkeit Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 1398 

"When  in  the  Woods  I  Wander  all 

Alone" Edward  Hovell-Thurlow 1399 

Aspects  of  the  Pines Paul  Hamilton  Hayne 1400 

"The  Woods  that  Bring  the  Sunset 

Near  " Richard  Watson  Gilder 1400 

Under  the  Leaves Albert  Laighton.. 1401 

"On  Wenlock  Edge" Alfred  Edward  Housman. .  .  .  140 e 

"What  Do  We  Plant" Henry  Abbey 1402 

The  Tree Jones  Very 1403 

The  Brave  Old  Oak Henry  Folhergill  Chorlev.  ...  1405 

"The  Girt  Weak  Tree  that's  in  the 

Dell " William  Barnes 1404 

To  the  Willow-tree Robert  Herrick 1406 

Enchantment Madison  Cawein 1406 

Trees Joyce  Kilmer 1407 

The  Holly-tree Robert  Southev 1407 

The  Pine Augusta  Webster 1408 

"Woodman,  Spare  that  Tree" George  Pope  Morris 1409 

The  Beech  Tree's  Petition Thomas  Campbell 14 10 

The  Poplar  Field William  Cowpcr 1411 

The  Planting  of  the  Apple-Tree William  Cullen  Bryant 1411 

Of  an  Orchard Katherine  Tynan  .'. 1414 

An  Orchard  at  Avignon 4.  Mary  F.  Robinson 14 14 

The  Tide  River Charles  Kingsley 1415 

The  Brook's  Song Alfred  Tennysm 1416 


Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

Arethusa Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 1418 

The  Cataract  of  Lodore Robert  Southey 1420 

Song  of  the  Chattahoochee Sidney  Lanier 1423 

"Flow  Gently,  Sweet  Afton" Robert  Burns 1425 

Canadian  Boat-Song Thomas  Moore 1426 

The  Marshes  of  Glynn Sidney  Lanier 1426 

The  Trosachs William  Wordsworth 1430 

Hymn  before  Sunrise  in  the  Vale  of 

Chamouni Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge.  .  . .  1430 

The  Peaks Stephen  Crane 1433 

Kinchinjunga Cale  Young  Rice 1434 

The  Hills Julian  Grenfell I435 

Hemlock  Mountain Sarah  N.  Cleghorn 1436 

Sunrise  on  Rydal  Water John  Drinkwater 1436 

The  Deserted  Pasture Bliss  Carman 1438 

To  Meadows Robert  Herrick 1430 

The  Cloud Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 1440 

April  Rain Robert  Loveman 1442 

Summer  Invocation William  Cox  Bennett 1443 

April  Rain Mathilde  Blind 1443 

To  the  Rainbow Thomas  Campbell 1444 

GREEN  THINGS  GROWING 

My  Garden Thomas  Edward  Brown 1446 

The  Garden Andrew  Marvell 1446 

A  Garden 1  ndrav  Marvell 1448 

A  Garden  Song 1  ustin  Dobson 1449 

In  Green  Old  Gardens Violet  Fane 1450 

A  Benedictine  Garden Alice  Brown 145 1 

An  Autumn  Garden Bliss  Carman 1452 

Unguarded Ada  Foster  Murray 1455 

The  Deserted  Garden Elizabeth  Barrett  Brouming.  .  1455 

A  Forsaken  Garden Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  1459 

Green  Things  Growing Dinah  Maria  MulockCraik..  1461 

A  Chanted  Calendar Sydney  Dobcll 1462 

Flowers Henry  W adsworth  Longfellow  1463 

Flowers Thomas  Hood 1465 

A  Contemplation  Upon  Flowers Henry  King 1466 

Almond  Blossom Edwin  Arnold 1466 

White  Azaleas Harriet  McEwen  Kimball.  . .  1467 

Buttercups Wilfrid  Thorley 1468 

The  Broom  Flower Mary  Howitt 1468 

The  Small  Celandine William  W ordsworth 1469 

To  the  Small  Celandine William  Wordsworth 1470 

Four-leaf  Clover Ella  Higginson 1472 

Sweet  Clover Wallace  Rice 1472 

"I  Wandered  Lonely  as  a  Cloud  "  .  .  .  .  William  W ordsworth 1473 

To  Daffodils Robert  Herrick 1474 

To  a  Mountain  Daisy Robert  Burns 1474 

A  Field  Flower James  Montgomery 1476 

To  Daisies,  Not  to  Shut  so  Soon  ....  Robert  Herrick 1477 

Daisies Bliss  Carman 1478 

To  the  Daisy William  Wordsworth 1478 

To  Daisies Francis  Thompson 1479 

To  the  Dandelion James  Russell  Lowell T481 

Dandelion Annie  Rankin  Annan 1483 

The  Dandelions Helen  Gray  Cone 1483 

To  the  Fringed  Gentian William  Cullen  Bryant 1484 

Goldenrod Elaine  Goodale  Eastman ....  1485 

Lessons  from  the  Gorse Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning .  .  i486 

The  Voice  of  The  Grass Sarah  Roberts  Boyle 1487 


Table  of  Contents  li 

PAGE 

A  Song  the  Grass  Sings Charles  G.  Blanden 1488 

The  Wild  Honeysuckle Philip  Freneau 1488 

The  Ivy  Green Charles  Dickens 1489 

Yellow  Jessamine Constance  Fenimorc  Woolson  1490 

Knapweed Arthur  Christopher  Benson .  .  1491 

Moly t^dith  Matilda  Thomas 1493 

The  Morning-Glory Florence  Earle  Coales 1494 

The  Mountain  Heart's-Ease Bret  II arte 1494 

The  Primrose Robert  Herrick 1495 

To    Primroses    filled    with    Morning 

Dew Robert  Herrick 1496 

To  an  Early  Primrose Henry  Kirke  White 1496 

The  Rhodora Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 1497 

The  Rose William  Browne 1498 

Wild  Roses Edgar  Fawcctt 1498 

The  Rose  of  May Mary  Howitl 1499 

A  Rose Richard  Fanshawe 1500 

The  Shamrock Maurice  Francis  Egan 1501 

To  Violets Robert  Herrick 1501 

The  Violet William  Wetmore  Story ....  1502 

To  a  Wood-Violet John  Banister  Tabb 1503 

The  Violet  and  the  Rose Augusta  Webster 1503 

To  a  Wind-Flower Madison  Cawein 1503 

To  Blossoms Robert  Herrick ■ 1504 

'"Tis  the  Last  Rose  of  Summer". .  .  .  Thomas  Moore 1505 

The  Death  of  the  Flowers William  Cullen  Bryant 1505 

GOD'S  CREATURES 

Once  on  a  Time Margaret  Benson 1507 

To  a  Mouse Robert  Burns 1507 

The  Grasshopper Abraham  Cowley 1509 

On  the  Grasshopper  and  Cricket John  Keats 1510 

To  the  Grasshopper  and  the  Cricket .  .  Leigh  Hunt 15 10 

The  Cricket William  Coivper 1511 

To  a  Cricket William  Cox  Bennett 1512 

To  an  Insect Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 1512 

The  Snail William  Coivper 1514 

The  Housekeeper Charles  Lamb 1514 

The  Humble-Bee Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 1515 

To  a  Butterfly William  Wordsworth 1517 

Ode  to  a  Butterfly Thomas  Wentworth  Higginson  1517 

The  Butterfly Alice  Freeman  Palmer 1519 

Fireflies Edgar  Fawcctt 1519 

The  Blood  Horse Bryan  Waller  Procter 1520 

Birds Moira  (VNcill 1521 

Birds Richard  Henry  Stoddard.  .  .  1522 

Sea-Birds Elizabeth  Akers 1522 

The  Little  Beach  Bird Richard  Henry  Dana 1522 

The  Blackbird Frederick  Tennyson 1523 

The  Blackbird .Alfred  Edward  Housman. .  .  .  1526 

The  Blackbird ,. . .  >,-..••  William  Ernest  Henley 1527 

The  Blackbird 31  :V'.  tv.. . . .  William  Barnes 1527 

Robert  of  Lincoln .'. . '.  William  Cullen  Bryant 1528 

The  O'Lincon  Family Wilson  Flagg 1530 

The  BoboHnk Thomas  Hill 1531 

My  Catbird William  Henry  Venable 1533 

The  Herald  Crane HamUn  Garland 1535 

The  Crow William  Canton 1536 

To  the  Cuckoo John  Logan 1536 

The  Cuckoo Frederick  Locker-Lam pson .  .  1537 

To' the  Cuckoo William  Wordsworth 1538 


lii  I'able  of  Contents 


The  Eagle V')V<-'>sV  i .•  .■  -Alfred  Tennyson 

The  Hawkbit ...VMi.a  . .  .Charles  G.  D.  Roberts 

The  Heron Edward  Hovell-Thnrloiv 

The  Jackdaw William  Cowper , 

The  Green  Linnet William  Wordsworlk 

To  the  Man-of-War-Bird   Wall  Whitman 

The  Maryland  Yellow-Throat Henry  Van  Dyke 

Lament  of  a  Mocking-bird Frances  Anne  Kcmhle 

"O  Nightingale!    Thou  Surely  Art".  .William  Wordsworth 

Philomel Richard  Barnefield 

Philomela Matthetv  Arnold 

On  a  Nightingale  in  April William  Sharp 

To  the  Nightingale William  Drummond 

The  Nightingale Mark  Akenside 

To  the  Nightingale John  Milton 

Philomela Philip  Sidney 

Ode  to  a  Nightingale John  Keats 

Song,   'Tis  sweet  to  hear  the  merry 

lark Hartley  Coleridge 

Bird  Song Laura  E.  Richards 

The  Song  the  Oriole  Sings William  Dean  Howells 

To  an  Oriole Edf^ar  Fawcett 

Song:  the  Owl Alfred  Tennyson 

"Sweet  Suffolk  Owl" Thomas  Vaulor 

The  Pewee John  Toifnscnd  Troivbridge. . 

Robin  Redbreast George  Washington  Doane. .  . 

Robin  Redbreast William  Allingham 

The  Sandpiper Celia  Thaxter 

The  Sea-Mew Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning. . 

To  a  Skylark William  Wordsworth 

To  a  Skylark William  Wordsworth 

The  Skylark James  Hogg 

The  Skylark Frederick  Tennyson 

To  a  Skylark Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 

The  Stormy  Petrel Bryan  Waller  Procter 

The  First  Swallow Charlotte  Smith 

To   a   Swallow   Building   Under   our 

Eaves Jane  Welsh  Carlyle 

Chimney  Swallows Horatio  Nelson  Powers 

Itylus Algernon  Charles  Swinburne . 

The  Throstle Alfred  Tennyson 

Overflow John  Banister  Tabb 

Joy-Month David  Atwood  Wasson 

My  Thrush Mortimer  Collins 

"Blow  Softly,  Thrush" Joseph  Russell  Taylor 

The  Black  Vulture George  Sterling 

Wild  Geese Frederick  Peterson 

To  a  Waterfowl William  Cidlcn  Bryant    .... 

The  Wood-Dove's  Note Emily  Huntington  Miller .  .  . 

THE  SEA 

Song  for  all  Seas,  all  Ships Walt  Whitman 1584 

Stanzas    from     "The    Triumph     of 

Time" Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  1585 

The    Sea     from     "Childc     Harold's 

Pilgrimage" George  Gordon  Byron 1586 

On  the  Sea John  Keats 1588 

"With  Ships  the  Sea  was  Sprinkled ". .  William  Wordsworth 1580 

A  Song  of  Desire Frederic  Lawrence  Knoida. .  is8g 

The  Pines  and  the  Sea Christopher  Pearse  Cranch.  .  isqo 

Sea  Fever John  Masefteld •  1590 


PAGE 

539 
539 
540 
540 
541 
542 
543 
544 
545 
54  (' 
547 
548 
S4S 
549 
551 
551 
552 

554 
555 
556 
557 
557 
558 
558 
561 
561 
562 
563 
565 
566 
566 
567 
560 
572 
573 

573 
575 
576 
578 
579 
579 
5  So 
sSi 
581 
5S2 
=;82 
583 


Table  of  Contents  liii 

PAGE 

Hastings  Mill C.  Fox  Smith 1591 

"  A  Wet  Sheet  and  a  Flowing  Sea" Mian  Cunningham 1592 

The  Sea Bryan  Waller  Procter 1502 

Sailor's    Song    from    "Death's   Jest- 
Book"  Thomas  Lovell  Bcddoes 1593 

"A  Life  on  the  Ocean  Wave" Epes  Sargent 1594 

Tacking  Ship  off  Shore Walter  Mitchell '. .  . .  1595 

In  Our  Boat Dinah  Maria  Miilock  Craik..  1597 

Poor  Jack Charles  Dibdin 1597 

"Rocked  in  tlie  Cradle  of  the  Deep".. Tiwwa  Ilarl  Willard 1599 

Outward John  G.  Neihardl 1599 

A  Passer-by Robert  Bridges : 1600 

Off  Riviere  du  Loup Duncan  Campbell  Scott 1601 

Christmas  at  Sea Robert  Louis  Stevenson 1602 

The  Port  o'  Heart's  Desire John  S.  McGroarty 1604 

On  the  Quay John  Joy  Bell 1605 

The  Forging  of  the  Anchor Samuel  Ferguson 1606 

Drifting Thomas  Buchanan  Read.  .  . .  1609 

"How's  My  Boy" Sydney  Dobell 1612 

The  Long  White  Seam Jean  Ingehnv 1613 

Storm  Song Bayard  Taylor 1614 

The  Mariner's  Dream William  Dimnnd 1615 

The  Inchcape  Rock Robert  Southey i()i7 

The  Sea Richard  Henry  Stoddard.  ...  1619 

The  Sands  of  Dee Charles  Kingsley 1619 

The  Three  Fishers Charles  Kingsley 1620 

Ballad Harriet  Prescott  Spofford. .  . .  1621 

The  Northern  Star Lhiknown 162 1 

The  Fisher's  Widow Arthur  Symons 1622 

Caller  Herrin' Carolina  Nairne 1622 

Hannah  Binding  Shoes Lucy  Larcom 1624 

The  Sailor William  Allingham 1O25 

The  Burial  of  the  Dane Henry  Howard  Brownell.  . . .  1O26 

Tom  Bowling Charles  Dibdin 1628 

Messmates Henry  Newbolt 1629 

The  Last  Buccaneer Charles  Kingsley 1630 

The  Last  Buccaneer Thomas  Babington  Macaulay  1O31 

The  Lcadman's  Song Charles  Dibdin 1632 

Homeward  Bound William  Allingham 1633 

THE  SIMPLE  LIFE 

The  Lake  Isle  of  Innisfree William  Butler  Yeats 1634 

A  Wish Samuel  Rogers 1634 

Ode  on  Solitude Alexander  Pope 163S 

"Thrice  Happj'  He" William  Drummond 1635 

"Under  the  tireenwood  Tree" William  Shakespeare 1636 

Coridon's  Song fohn  Chalkhill 1(336 

The  Old  S(]uire Wilfrid  Scawen  Blunt 1O38 

Inscription  in  a  Hermitage Thomas  Warton 1O40 

The  Retirement Charles  Cotton 164 1 

The  Country  Faith Norman  Gale 1644 

Truly  Great William  H.  Davics 1O44 

Early  Morning  at  Bargis Hermann  Hagedorn 1645 

The  Cup John  Toivnsend  Troicbridge. .    1645 

A  Strip  of  Blue Lucy  Larcom 1647 

An  Ode  to  Master  .'Anthony  Stafford .-.  Thomas  Randolph 1640 

"The  Midges  Dance  Aboon  the  Burn "/?()6(T/  Tannahill 1652 

The  Plow Richard  Hcngist  Home   ....    1652 

The  Useful  Plow .  .  .  .  : Unknoiun 1653 

"To  One  Who  has  Been  Long  in  City 
Pent" John  Keats 1653 


liv  Table  of  Contents 

PAGE 

The  Quiet  Life William  Byrd Ji  .'i.  ,'i('ii6iSJ)J 

The  Wish Abraham  Cowley..y,.\-j'lix  ri^$ 

Expostulation  and  Reply William  Wordsworth 1656 

The  Tables  Turned William  Wordsworth 1657 

Simple  Nature George  John  Romanes 1658 

"I  Fear  no  Power  a  Woman  Wields ". . Ernest  McGafey 1659 

A  Runnable  Stag John  Davidson 1659 

Hunting  Song Richard  Hovey 1662 

"A-Hunting  We  Will  Go" Henry  Fielding 1662  . 

The  Angler's  Invitation Thomas  Tod  Stoddart 1663 

The  Angler's  Wish Izaak  Walton 1664 

The  Angler . ." John  Chalkhill 1665 

WANDERLUST 

To  Jane:  the  Invitation Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 1667 

"My  Heart's  in  the  Highlands" Robert  Burns 1669 

"Afar  in  the  Desert" Thomas  Pringle 1669 

Spring  Song  in  the  City Robert  Buchanan 1672 

In  City  Streets Ada  Smith 1674 

The  Vagabond Robert  Louis  Stevenson 1674 

In  the  Highlands Robert  Louis  Stevenson 1675 

The  Song  my  Paddle  Sings E.  Pauline  Johnson 1676 

The  Gipsy  Trail Rudyard  Kipling 1677 

Wanderlust Gerald  Gould 1679 

The  Footpath  Way Kathcrine  Tytian 1679 

A  Maine  Trail Gertrude     Huntington     Mc- 

Gijfert i68r 

Afoot Charles  G.  D.  Roberts 1682 

From  Romany  to  Rome Wallace  Irwin 1683 

The  Toil  of  the  Trail Hamlin  Garland 1684 

"Do  You  Fear  the  Wind?" Hamlin  Garland 1684 

The  King's  Highway John  S.  McGroarty 1685 

The  Forbidden  Lure Fannie  Stearns  Davis 1686 

The  Wander-Lovers Richard  Hovev 1686 

The  Sea-Gipsy Richard  Hovey 1688 

A  Vagabond  Song Bliss  Carman 1689 

Spring  Song Bliss  Carman i68g 

The  Mendicants Bliss  Carman 1692 

The  Joys  of  the  Road Bliss  Carman 1694 

The  Song  of  the  Forest  Ranger Herbert  Bashjord 1696 

A  Drover Padraic  Coliim 1698 

Ballad  of  Low-lie-down Madison  Cawein 1699 

The  Good  Inn Herman  Knickerbocker  Vicle.  1 700 

Night  for  Adventures Victor  Starbuck 1701 

Song,  "  Something  calls  and  whispers "Geor^/awa  Goddard  King. .  .  .  1703 

The  Foreloper Rudyard  Kipling 1703 

The  Long  Trail Rudyard  Kipling 1704 


PART  IV 

FAMILIAR  VERSE,  AND  POEMS  HUMOROUS  AND 
SATIRIC 

Ballade  of  the  Primitive  Jest ,.  Andrew  Lang 1708 

THE  KINDLY  MUSE 

Time  to  be  Wise Walter  Savage  Landor 1709 

Under  the  Lindens Walter  Savage  Landor.  .....   1710 


Table  of  Contents  Iv 

PAGE 

Advice Walter  Savage  Landor 1710 

To  Fanny Thomas  Moore 1711 

"I'd  be  a  Butterfly" Thomas  Uaynes  Bayly 1712 

"I'm  not  a  Single  Man" Thomas  Hood 1713 

To Winlhrop  Mackworth  Pracd .  1714 

The  Vicar Winlhrop  Mackworth  Pracd.  17 15 

The  Belle  of  the  Ball-room Winthrop  Mackworth  Pracd.  17 18 

The  Fine  Old  English  Gentleman..  .  .  Unknown 1721 

A  Ternerie  of  Littles,  upon  a  Pipkin  of 

Jelly  Sent  to  a  I^ady Robert  Herrick 1723 

Chivalry  at  a  Discount Edward  Fitzgerald 1724 

The  Ballad  of  Bouillabaisse William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray   1726 

To  my  Grandmother Frederick  Locker -Lampson .  .  1728 

My  Mistress's  Boots Frederick  Locker-Lampson .  .  1730 

A  Garden  Lyric Frederick  Lockcr-Lampson .  .  1732 

Mrs.  Smith Frederick  Lockcr-Lampson  .  .  1733 

The  Skeleton  in  the  Cupboard Frederick  Lockcr-Lampson .  .  1734 

A  Terrible  Infant Frederick  Lockcr-Lampson .  .  1736 

Companions Charles  Siuart  Calvcrley 1736 

Dorothy  Q Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 1 738 

My  Aunt Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 1740 

The  Last  Leaf Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 1741 

Contentment Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 1743 

The  Boys Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 1745 

The  Jolly  Old  Pedagogue George  Arnold 1746 

On  an  Intaglio  Head  of  Minerva.  .  .  .  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 1748 

Thalia Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 1750 

Pan  in  Wall  Street Edmund  Clarence  Stcdman .  .  1751 

Upon  Lesbia — Arguing Alfred  Cochrane 1754 

To  Aiithea,  who  May  Command  Him 

Anything Alfred  Cochrane 1755 

The  Eight-Day  Clock Alfred  Cochrane 1756 

A  Portrait Joseph  Ashby-Sterry 1758 

"Old  Books  are  Best" Beverly  ChrcO 1759 

Impression Edmund  Gosse i7S9 

"  With  Strawberries" William  Ernest  Henley 1760 

Ballade  of  Ladies'  Names William  Ernest  Henley 1761 

To  a  Pair  of  Egyptian  Slippers Edwin  Arnold 1762 

Without  and  Within James  Russell  Lowell 1764 

"She  was  a  Beauty" Henry  Ciiyler  Bunner 1765 

Nell  G Wynne's  Looking-Glass Laman  Blanchard 1766 

Mimnermus  in  Church William  Johnson-Cory 1767 

Clay Edward  Verrall  Lucas 1768 

Aucassin  and  Nicolete Francis  William  Bourdillon .  1768 

Ballade  of  Summer.  .  .' Andreiv  Lang 176Q 

The  Ballad  of  Prose  and  Rhyme Austin  Dobson i770 

"Good-Night,  Babette" Austin  Dobson 1771 

A  Dialogue  from  Plato Austin  Dobson 1773 

The  Ladies  of  St.  James's Austin  Dobson i775 

The  Cure's  Progress Austin  Dobson 1776 

A  Gentleman  of  the  Old  School Austin  Dobson 1777 

On  a  Fan A ustin  Dobson 1781 

"Whea  I  Saw  You  Last,  Rose" Austin  Dobson 1782 

Urceus  Exit Austin  Dobson 1782 

A  Corsage  Bouquet Charles  Henry  Luders 1783 

Two  Triolets Harrison  Robertson 1783 

The  Ballad  of  Dead  Ladies Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti 1783 

Ballade  of  Dead  Ladies 'Indrno  Lang 1784 

A  Ballad  of  Dead  Ladies Justin  Hunily  McCarthy. .  .  .  1 785 

If  I  Were  King Justin  Huntly  McCarthy. .  .  .  1786 

A  Ballade  of  Suicide Gilbert  Keith  Chesterton 1787 


Ivi  Table  of  Contents 

PAGE 

Chiffons! William  Samuel  Johnson .  .  .  1788 

The  Court  Historian Walter  Thornbury 1789 

Miss  Lou Walter  de  la  Marc 1790 

The  Poet  and  the  Wood-louse Helen  Parry  Eden 1791 

Students Florence  Wilkinson 1792 

A  Likeness Willa  Sibcrt  Gather 1794 

The  Chaperon Henry  Ciiyler  Bunncr 1795 

"A  Pitcher  of  Mignonette" Henry  Cuylcr  Biinner 1796 

Old  King  Cole Edivin  Arlington  Robinson .  .  1.797 

The  Master  Mariner George  Sterling 1799 

A  Rose  to  the  Living Nixon  Waterman 1800 

A  Kiss A  list  in  Dobson 1800 

Biftek  aux  Champignons Henry  Aiigialin  Beers 1800 

Miss  Nancy's  Gown Zitella  Cocke 1S02 

Wing  Tee  Wee J .  P.  Denison 1803 

My  Grandmother's  Turkey -Tail  Ya.\\.Sa7nuel  Minium  Peck 1804 

A  Moral  in  Sevres Mildred  Hoicells 1805 

On  the  Fly-leaf  of    a  Book  of   Old 

Plays Walter  Learned 1806 

The  Talented  Man Winthrop  Mackivorth  Pracd.  1807 

A  Letter  of  Advice Winthrop  Mackworth  Praed .  1809 

A  Nice  Correspondent Frederick  Locker-Lampson .  .  1812 

A  Dead  Letter Austin  Dobson 1814 

The    Nymph    Complaining    for    the 

Death  of  her  Fawn indrcw  Marvell 1817 

On    the   Death    of    a    P'avorite    Cat 

Drowned  in  a  Tub  of  Goldfishes. .  .  Thomas  Gray 1821 

Verses  on  a  Cat Charles  Daubeny 1822 

Epitaph  on  a  Hare William  Cov.<per 1823 

On  the  Death  of  Mrs.  Throckmor- 

ten's  BuUfmch William  Cowpcr . .'. 1S24 

An  Elegy  on  a  Lap-Dog John  Gay 1826 

My  Last  Terrier John  Halsham 1827 

Geist's  Grave Malthnv  Arnold 1828 

Laddie Katharine  Lee  Bates 1831 

"Hold" Patrick  R.  Chalmers 1S32 

THE  BARB  OF  SATIRE 

The  Vicar  of  Bray Unknown 1835 

The  Lost  Leader Robert  Broimiing 1836 

Ichabod John  Greenleaf  Whittier 1837 

What  Mr.  Robinson  Thinks James  Russeli  Lowctl 1839 

The  Debate  in  the  Sennit James  Russell  Lowell 1840 

The  Marquis  of  Carabas Robert  Broue.h 1843 

A  Modest  Wit Selleck  Osbohi 1845 

Jolly  Jack William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray.   1847 

The  King  of  Brentford William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray   1S4S 

Hoch!  der  Kaiser A.  Macgregor  Rose 1849 

Nongtongpaw Charles  Dibdin 1S50 

The  Lion  and  the  Cub John  Gay 1852 

The  Hare  with  Many  Friends John  Gay 1853 

The  Sycophantic  Fox  and  the  Gullible 

Raven Guy  Welmore  Carryl 1854 

The   Friend    of   Humanity    and    the 

Knife-Grinder George  Canning 1856 

Villon's    Straight   Tip    to    all    Cross 

Coves William  Ernest  Henley 1857 

Villon's  Bailade Andreiv  Lang 1858 

A  Little  Brother  of  the  Rich Edward  Sandford  Martin .  .  .  1859 


Table  of  Contents  Ivii 

PAGE 

The  World's  Way Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich i860 

For  My  Own  Monument Matthew  Prior 1861 

The  Bishop  Orders  His  Tomb  at  Saint 

Praxed's  Church Robert  Browning 1862 

Up  at  a  Villa — Down  in  the  City..  .  .Robert  Browning 1865 

All  Saints', Edmund  Vales 1868 

An  Address  to  the  Unco  Guid Robert  Burns i86g 

The  Deacon's  Masterpiece Oliver  We>!dell  Holmes 1871 

Ballade  of  a  Friar Andrew  Lang 1874 

The-Chameleon James  Merrick 1875 

The  Blind  Men  and  the  Elephant ....  John  Godfrey  Saxe 1877 

The  Philosopher's  Scales Jane  Taylor i87g 

The  Maiden  and  the  Lily John  Fraser 1880 

The  Owl-Critic James  Thomas  Fields 1881 

The  Ballad  of  Imitation Austin  Dobson 1883 

The  Conundrum  of  the  Workshops.  .  .Rudyard  Kiplint; 1884 

The  V-a-s-e James  JeJJrey  Roche 1886 

Hem  and  Haw Bliss  Carman 1887 

Miniver  Cheevy Edwin  Arlington  Robinson .  .  1888 

Then  .Ag'in Sam  Walter  Foss 1889 

A  Conservative Charlotte  Perkins  Stetson  Gil- 
man  1890 

Similar  Cases Charlotte  Perkins  Stetson  Gil- 
man  1891 

Man  and  the  Ascidian Andrew  Lang 1895 

The  Calf-Path Sam  Walter  Foss 1896 

Wedded  Bliss Charlotte  Perkins  Stetson  Gil- 
man  1898 

The  Hindoo's  Death George  Birdscye 1899 

Ad  Chloen,  M.  A Mortimer  Collins 1899 

"As  Like  the  Woman  as  You  Can  " . .  .  William  Ernest  Henley 1900 

"No  Fault  in  Women" Robert  Herrick 1901 

".Are  Women  Fair" Francis  Davison  {?) 1902 

A  Strong  Hand A  aron  Hill 1902 

Women's  Longing John  Fletcher 1903 

Triolet Robert  Bridges 1903 

The  Fair  Circassian Richard  Garnetl 1903 

The  Female  Phaeton Alatthcw  Prior 1904 

The  Lure John  Boyle  O'Reilly 1905 

The  Ballad  of  Cassandra  Brown Helen  Gray  Cone 1906 

A  Reasonable  Affliction Matthew  Prior 1907 

The    Woman     with     the     Serpent's 

Tongue William  Watson igoS 

Suppose Anne  Reeve  Aldrich igo8 

Too  Candid  by  Half John  Godfrey  Saxe 1909 

Fable Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 1909 

Woman's  Will Unknown igio 

Woman's  Will John  Godfrey  Saxe igio 

Plays Waller  Savage  Landor 1910 

The  Remedy  Worse   than   the  Dis- 
ease   Mattheiv  Prior 1910 

The  Net  of  Law fames  Jeffrey  Roche 191 1 

Cologne Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge.  ...  191 1 

Epitaph  on  Charles  II John  Wilmot 191 1 

Certain  Maxims  of  Hafiz Rudyard  Kipling 191 1 

A  Baker's  Duzzen  uv  Wize  Sawz Edward  Rowland  Sill 1915 

Epigrams igi.?,  1916,   1917,   1918,  1910 

Written  on  a  Looking-glass Unknown igig 

An  Epitaph George  John  Cayley 1919 

On  a  Henpecked  Squire Robert  Burns 1919 

General  Summary Rudyard  Kipling igig 


Iviii  Table  of.  Contents 


THE  MIMICS 

PAGE 

An  Omar  for  Ladies Josephine  Daskam  Bacon.  .  .  igai 

"When  Lovely  Woman" Phoebe  Gary ig23 

P'ragment  in  Imitation  of  Wordsworth. Ca//!cr/»e  M.  Fanshaw 1923 

Only  Seven Henry  Sambrooke  Leigh 1925 

Lucy  Lake Newton  Mackintosh 1926 

Jane  Smith Rudyard  Kipling 1926 

Father  William Lewis  Carroll 1927 

The  New  Arrival George  Washitiglon  Cable. .  .  .  1.928 

Disaster Charles  Stuart  Calverley 1929 

Twas  Ever  Thus Henry  Sambrooke  Leigh 1930 

A  Grievance James  Kenneth  Stephen 193 1 

"Not  a  Sou  Had  he  Got" Richard  Harris  Barham .  .  .  .  1933 

The  Whiting  and  the  Snail Leivis  Carroll 1934 

The  Recognition William  Sawyer I93S 

The  Higher  Pantheism  in  a  Nutshell .  .  Algernon  Charles  Swiyiburne.  1935 
The  Willow-tree William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray   1936 

Poets  and  Linnets Tom  Hood,  the  Younger 1938 

The  Jam-pot Rudyard  Kipling i939 

Ballad C/iarlrs  Sliiart  Calverley 1939 

The  Poster-girl Carolyn  Wells 1941 

After  Dilletante  Concetti Henry  Duff  Traill 1942 

If Mortimer  Collins 1944 

Nephilidia Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  1944 

Commonplaces Rudyard  Kipling 1046 

The  Promissory  Note Bayard  Taylor 1Q46 

Mrs.  Judge  Jenkins Bret  Harte 1948 

The  Modern  Hiawatha George  A.  Strong i9SO 

How  Often Ben  King 1950 

"If  I  should  Die  To-night" Ben  King 1950 

Sincere  Flattery James  Kenneth  Stephen 1951 

Culture  in  the  Slums William  Ernest  Henley igsr 

The  Poets  at  Tea Barry  Pain 1953 

Wordsworth James  Kenneth  Stephen I9S6 

SONS  OF  THE  EMERALD  ISLE 

Father  OTlynn Alfred  Perceval  Graves 1957 

Father  Molloy Samuel  Lover 1958 

Paddy  O'Rafther Samuel  Lover i960 

Larrie  O'Dee William  W.  Fink 1961 

The  Irishman  and  the  Lady William  Maginn 1962 

Irish  Astronomy.  .  .  -. Charles  Graham  Halpine. .  .  .  1964 

The  Fiddler  of  Dooney William  Butler  Yeats 1965 

The  Birth  of  St.  Patrick Samuel  Lover 1966 

Saint  Patrick Henry  Bennett 1966 

Mr.  Molony's  Account  of  the  Ball.  .  .William    Makepeace    Thack- 
eray    1968 

Bachelor's  Hall John  Finley 1970 

The  Sabine  Farmer's  Serenade Francis  Sylvester  Mahony. . .  197 1 

The  Widow  Malone Charles  James  Lever 1973 

Widow  Machree Samuel  Lover 1974 

The  Peaceable  Race TItomas  Augustin  Daly 1976 

The  Recruit Robert  William  Chambers .  .  .  1977 

Finnigin  to  Flannigan ?.  IF.  Gillilan i979 

Barney  McGee Richard  Hovey 1980 

PIPE  AND  CAN 

A  Religious  Use  of  Tobacco Robert  Wisdome  (?) 1983 

Ode  to  Tobacco Charles  Stuart  Calverley 1983 


Table  of  Contents  lix 

PAGE 

The  Pipe  of  Tobacco John  Usher 1Q84 

Inter  Sodales William  Ernest  Henley 1986 

An  Invitation Unknown 1986 

Ad  Miuistram William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray   1987 

A  Salad Sydney  Smith 1987 

Verses  placed  over  the  Door  at  the 
Entrance  into  the  Apollo  Room  at 

the  Devil  Tavern Ben  Jonson 1988 

Lines  on  the  Mermaid  Tavern John  Keats 1989 

"  Give  Me  Ale  " Unknown 1989 

"Jolly  Good  Ale  and  Old" John  Still 1990 

Drink  To-day John  Fletcher 19Q1 

Coronemus     nos     Rosis     Antequam 

Marcescant Thomas  Jordan 1902 

The  Epicure Abraham  Cowley I993 

Drinking A  braham  Cowley 1993 

The  Winter  Glass Charles  Cotton i9Q4 

Harry  Carey's  Reply Henry  Carey i995 

Gaffer  Gray Thomas  Holcroft 1996 

"A  Reason  Fair  to  Fill  my  Glass  " . . . .  Charles  Morris i997 

"Let  the  Toast  Pass" Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan .  .  1999 

"The  Year  that's  Awa' " John  Dimlop 2000 

John  Barleycorn Robert  Burns 2000 

" Fill  the  Bumper  Fair" Thomas  Moore 2002 

"Wreathe  the  Bowl " Thomas  Moore 2003 

Saint  Peray Thomas  William  Parsons .  . .  2005 

"Sparkling  and  Bright" Charles  Fenno  Hojfman 2007 

The  Mahogany  Tree . '. William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray    2008 

Todlin'  Hame Unknown 2009 

The  Cruiskeen  Lawn Unknown 2010 

Give  Me  the  Old Robert  Hinckley  Messinger .  .  201  r 

The  Spirit  of  Wine William  Ernest  Henley 2013 

"Day  and  Night  my  Thoughts  In- 
cline"   Richard  Henry  Stoddard.  .  . .  2014 

Falstaff's  Song Edmund  Clarence  Stcdinan.  .  2014 

The  Maltworm's  Madrigal Austin  Dobson 2015 

The  Power  of  Malt Alfred  Edward  Housman. .  .  .  2016 

A  Stein  Song Richard  Hovcy 2016 

The  Kavanagh Richard  Hovcy 2017 

GLINTS  O'  SUNSHINE 

Song,  "When  daisies  pied  and  violets 

blue" William  Shakespeare 2019 

The  Widow 1  llan  Ramsay 2020 

Sneezing Leigh  Hunt 2021 

Cautionary  Verses  to  Youth  of  Both 

Sexes Theodore  Edward  Hook 2021 

A  Credo William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray    2022 

The   Lay  of  the  Levite William  Edmonstoune  Ay- 

toun 2023 

Early  Rising John  Godfrey  Saxe 2024 

El  Capitan-General Charles  Godfrey  Leland 2026 

The  Legend  of  Heinz  von  Stein Charles  Godfrey  Leland 2028 

Hallowe'en John  Mayne 2028 

"  Yaw,  Dot  is  So " Charles  FoUen  Adams 2030 

Two  Hundred  Years  Ago William  Henry  Drummond. .  2031 

Wreck  of  the  "Julie  Plante" William  Henry  Drummond..  2033 

Humpty  Durnpty Adeline  D.  T.  Whitney 2034 


Ix  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

Strictly  Germ-proof Arthur  Giiiterman 2035 

Cave  Sedem ! Theodore  F.  MacManus ....  2036 

Revival  Hymn Joel  Chandler  Harris 2037 

The  Power  of  Prayer Sidney  and  Clifford  Lanier.  .  2038 

Nebuchadnezzar Irwin  Russell 2046 

Kentucky  Philosophy Harrison  Robertson 2041 

A  Plantation  Ditty Frank  Lcbby  Stanton 2043 

Angelina Paul  Laurence  Dunbar 2043 

A  Lay  of  Ancient  Rome Tlwmas  Ybarra 2044 

The  Wisdom  of  Folly Ellen  Thorneycrojt  Fowler..  .  2045 

The  Post  that  Fitted Rudyard  Kipling 2046 

JUST  NONSENSE 

No Thomas  Hood 2048 

To  Minerva Thojnas  Hood 2048 

The  Alphabet Charles  Stuart  Calverley .  .  .  .  2049 

A  Tragic  Story William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray    2049 

The  Jumblies Edward  Lear 2050 

The  Owl  and  the  Pussy-Cat Edward  Lear 2052 

The  Pobble  Who  Has  no  Toes Edward  Lear 2053 

The     Courtship     of     the     Yonghy- 

Bonghy-B6 Edward  Lear 2054 

Nonsense  Verses Edward  Lear 2057 

The  Turtle  and  Flamingo James  Thomas  Fields 2058 

Jabberwocky Lewis  Carroll 2059 

The  Gardener's  Song Lewis  Carroll 2060 

The  Walrus  and  the  Carpenter Lewis  Carroll 2062 

Songs  without  Sense Bret  Harte 2065 

The  Lovers Phoebe  Cary  {?) 2067 

The  Twins Henry  Sambrooke  Leigh 2068 

A  Threnody George  Thomas  Lanigan ....  2069 

The  Fastidious  Serpent Henry  Johistone 2070 

My  Recollectcst  Thoughts Charles  Edward  Carryl 2071 

Mr.  Finney's  Turnip Unknown 2071 

The  Siege  of  Belgrade Unknoivn 2072 

Ellen  M 'Jones  Aberdeen William  Schwenck  Gilbert.  .  .  2073 

To  the  Terrestrial  Globe William  Schwenck  Gilbert .  .  .  2075 

"His  Heart  was  True  to  Poll" Francis  Cowley  Burnand. .  .  .  2076 

Red  Riding  Hood Guy  Wetmore  Carryl 2077 

A  Nautical  Ballad Charles  Edteard  Carryl 2079 

The  Plaint  of  the  Camel Charles  Ed'ward  Carryl 2080 

The  Frog Hilaire  Belloc 2081 

Sage  Counsel Arthur  T.  Ouiller-Couch ....  2082 

Child's  Natural  History Oliver  Hcrford 2082 

In  Foreign  Parts Laura  E.  Richards 2084 

A  Mosquito  Triolet Aristine  Anderson 2085 

A  Grain  of  Salt Wallace  Irwin 2085 

The  Purple  Cow Gelett  Burgess. 2085 

Nonsense  Verses Gelett  Burgess 2086 

Vers  Nonsensiques George  du  Maurier 2087 

Home Unknown 2087 

Four  Limericks Carolyn  Wells 2088 

More  Limericks Unknown 2089 

OLD  FAVORITES 

An  Elegy  on  the  Death  of  a  Mad  T)oz.  Oliver  Goldsmith 2091 

An  Elegy  on  That  Glory  of  her  Sex, 

Mrs.  Mary  Blaize Oliver  Goldsmith 2092 

The  Diverting  History  of  John  Gilpin .  William  Cowper 2093 


Table  of  Contents  Ixi 

PAGE 

The  Razor-Seller John  Wolcot 2ior 

The  Three  Warnings Ilcsler  Tliralc  Piozzi 2102 

The  Sailor's  Consolation Charles  Dibdin 2105 

Tarn  O'Shanler Robert  Burns 2106 

(Jlugsity  Gliig George  Colman  the  Younger .  .  21 12 

The  Laird  o'  Cockpen Carolina  Nairne  and  Susan 

Ferrier 21 13 

The  Well  of  St.  Keyne Robert  Soulhey 21 14 

Address  to  a  Mummy Horace  Smith 2116 

John  CIrumlie Allan  Cunningham 2118 

The  Needle Samuel  Woodworlh 2120 

Misadventures  at  Margate Richard  Harris  Barham 2120 

"Tiie    Captain    Stood    on    the    Car- 

ronade  " Frederick  Marryat 21 25 

Faithless  Nelly  Gray Thomas  Hood 2126 

Faithless  Sally  Brown .  ." Thomas  Hood 2128 

"JMease  to  Ring  the  Belle" Thomas  Hood 2130 

Old  (irimes Albert  Gorton  Grcev.  ■    2131 

The  Annuity George  Oulram..  .  :"     ■ ... .  . .  2132 

The  Smack  in  School William  Pitt  Palmer .  .:'....  2136 

"The  Pope  He  Leads  a  Happy  \aIc'' ..Charles  Lever 2137 

The  Height  of  the  Ridiculous Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 2138 

The  Ballad  of  the  Oysterman Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 2139 

Little  Billee William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray   2140 

The  Jackdaw  of  Rheims Richard  Harris  Barham.  ...  2 141 

The  Alarmed  Skipper James  Thomas  Fields 2146 

The  I'uzzled  Census  Taker John  Godfrey  Saxe 2147 

I'yramus  and  Thisbe John  Godfrey  Sa.xe 2148 

My  Familiar John  Godfrey  Saxe 2151 

Hans  Breitmann's  Party Charles  Godfrey  Leland 2152 

"Nothing  to  Wear" William  Allen  Butler 2154 

Darius  Green  and  his  FIying-Machine./o/7K  Townsend  Trowbridge..  2163 

The  Society  upon  the  Stanislaus Bret  Harte 2170 

Dow's  Flat Bret  Harte.  . 2171 

Plain  Language  from  Truthful  James.  Bret  Harte 2174 

The  Retort George  Pope  Morris 2175 

The  I'"litch  of  Dunmow James  Carnegie 2176 

The  Yarn  of  the  "Nancy  Bell" William  Sclnvenck  Gilbert .  .  .  2177 

Captain  Reece William  Schvenck  Gilbert .  .  .  2180 

"Spiicially  Jim" Bessie  Morgan 2183 

Robin.son  Crusoe Charles  Edward  Carryl 2184 

Casey  at  the  Bat Ernest  Lawrence  Thayer.  ...  2185 

At  a  Cowboy  Dance James  Barton  Adams 2187 

Behold  the  Deeds Henry  Cuyler  Bunner 2189 

De  Fust  Banjo .' Irwin  Russell 2 190 


PART  V 
POEMS  OF  PATRIOTISM,  HISTORY,  AND  LEGEND 

"How  Sleep  the  Brave" William  Collins 2194 

MY  COUNTRY 

America Samuel  Francis  Smith 2195 

The  Star-Spangled  Banner Francis  Scott  Key 2196 

The  American  Flag Joseph  Rodman  Drake 2197 

Yankee  Doodle Edward  Bangs  {?) 2198 

Hail!  Columbia Joseph  Hopkinson 2200 

Columbia —,,•■.•.  v>  • Timothy  Dwight , .  .  2202 


Ixii  Table  of  Contents 

PAGE 

"OhMotherof  a  Mighty  Race" William  Cullen  Bryant 2203 

Hymn  of  the  West Edmund  Clarence  Stedman.  .  2204 

Concord  Hymn Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 2205 

Battle-Hymn  of  the  Republic Julia  Ward  Howe 2206 

The  Eagle's  Song Richard  Mansfield 2207 

The  Flag  Goes  By Henry  Holcomb  Bennett 2208 

Unmanifest  Destiny Richard  Hovey J209 

On  a  Soldier  Fallen  in  the  Philippines.  William  Vaughn  Moody.  ...  2210 

An  Ode  in  Time  of  Hesitation William  Vaughn  Moody.  .  . .  2211 

The  Parting  of  the  Ways Joseph  B.  Gilder 2217 

Dixie Daniel  Decatur  Emmell 2218 

Dixie Albert  Pike 2219 

My  Maryland James  Ryder  Randall 2220 

The  Virginians  of  the  Valley Francis  Orray  Ticknor 2223 

America  to  Great  Britain Washington  Allston 2223 

To  England George  Henry  Boker 2225 

America Sydney  Dohcll 2225 

To  America i;y-- Alfred  Austin 2226 

Saxon  Gri-:  .:'..'. Robert  Collycr 2227 

At  Gibraltar George  Edward  Woodbcrry. .  .  2229 

Gibraltar Wilfrid  Scawcn  Blunt 2230 

Mother  England Edith  M .  Thomas 2230 

"God  Save  the  King" Henry  Carey  (?) 2231 

Rule,  Britannia James  Thomson 2232 

"  Ye  Mariners  of  England  " Thomas  Campbell 2233 

"Ready,  Ay,  Ready" Herman  Charles  Merivale.  .  .  2234 

"Of  Old  Sat  Freedom  on  the  Utighis" Alfred  Tennyson 2235 

An  Ode  in  Imitation  of  Alcaeus William  Jones 2236 

England,  1802 William  Wordsivorth 2237 

"England,  My  England  " William  Ernest  Henley 2239 

England Gerald  Masscy 2240 

The  Song  of  the  Bow Arthur  Conan  Doyle 2241 

An  English  Mother Robert  Underwood  Johnson..  2242 

Ave  Imperatrix Oscar  Wilde 2244 

Recessional -. Rudyard  Kipling 2248 

The  Wearin'  o'  the  Green Unknown 2249 

Dark  Rosaleen James  Clarence  Mangan ....  2249 

Exile  of  Erin Thomas  Campbell 2252 

Andromeda James  Jeffrey  Roche 2253 

Ireland Lionel  Johnson 2253 

To  the  Dead  of  '98 Lionel  Johnson 2261 

The  Memory  of  the  Dead John  Kelts  Ingram 2262 

Cushla  ma  Chree John  Philpot  Curran 2263 

The  Green  Little  Shamrock  of  \Te\a.nA. Andrew  Cherry 2264 

My  Land Thomas  Osborne  Davis 2265 

Fainne  Gael  an  Lae Alice  Milligan 2265 

Ireland Stephen  Lucius  Gwynnc 2266 

" Hills o'  My  Heart" Elhna  Carbery 2267 

Scotland  Yet Henry  Scott  Riddell 2268 

The  Watch  on  the  Rhine After  the  German  of  Max 

Schneckenbcrger 2269 

The  German  Fatherland From  the  German   of  Ernst 

Moritz  Arndt 2270 

The  Marseillaise After  the  French  of  Rouget  de 

Lisle 2271 

SOLDIER  SONGS 

"Charlie  is  My  Darling" Unknown 2273 

The  Farewell Robert  Burns 2274 

"Here's   a   Health   to  Them   That's 

Awa'" Robert  Burns 2275 


Table  of  Contents  Ixiii 


PAGE 

The  Blue  Bells  of  Scotland Unknown 2276 

The  Bonny  Earl  of  Murray Unknown 2276 

Pibroch  of  Donald  Dhu Waller  Scoll 2277 

Border  Ballad Waller  Scoll 2278 

"When  Banners  are  Waving" Unknoivn 2279 

The  British  Grenadiers Unknown 2280 

Heart  of  Oak David  Garrick 2280 

The  Soldier's  Dream Thomas  Campbell 2281 

The  Cavalier's  Song William  Motherwell 2282 

Cavalier  Tunes Robert  Browning 2283 

The  Song  of  the  Camp Bayard  Taylor 2285 

Reveille Michael  O'Connor 2286 

"I  Give  my  Soldier  Boy  a  Blade" ....  William  Maginn 2287 

Stonewall  Jackson's  Way John  Williamson  Palmer .  .  .  2288 

Music  in  Camp John  Reuben  Thompson 2289 

The  "Grey-horse  Troop" Robert  W.  Chambers 2291 

Danny  Deever Rudyard  Kipling 2293 

Gunga  Din Rudyard  Kipling 2294 

The  Men  behind  the  Guns John  Jerome  Rooney 2297 

The  Fighting  Race Joseph  I.  C.  Clarke 2298 

"HOW  SLEEP  THE  BRAVE" 

"Soldier,  Rest,  thy  Warfare  O'er". .  .  Waller  Scoll 2301 

"Peace  to  the  Slumberers" Thomas  Moore 2302 

The  Minstrel-Boy Thomas  Moore 2302 

"It  is  (ireat  for  our  Country  to  Die"..  Ja^HM  Gales  Percival 2303 

A  Ballad  of  Heroes Austin  Dobson 2304 

The  Captain's  Feather Samuel  Minium  Peck 2305 

England's  Dead Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans..  .  .  2306 

The  Pipes  o'  Gordon's  Men /.  Scoll  Glasgow 2307 

The  Blue  and  the  Gray Francis  Miles  Finch 2308 

The  Bivouac  of  the  Dead Theodore  O'Hara 2310 

RoU-Call Nathaniel  Graham  Shepherd.  2313 

Dirge Thomas  William  Parsons.  .  .  2314 

Dirge  for  a  Soldier George  Henry  Bokcr 2315 

"Blow,  Bugles,  Blow" John  S.  McGroarty 2316 

"  Such  is  the  Death  the  Soldier  Dies".  i?o6c/-/  Burns  Wilson 2317 

The  Brave  at  Home Thomas  Buchanan  Read.  .  . .  2318 

Somebody's  Darling Marie  R.  La  Cosle 2318 

Little  GifTen Francis  Orray  Ticknor 2320 

Ode Henry  Timrod 2321 

Sentinel  Songs Abram  J.  Ryan 2322 

Heroes Edna  Dean  Proctor 2323 

The  Only  Son Henry  Newboll 2324 

Young  Windebank Margaret  L.  Woods 2325 

A  Harrow  Grave  in  Flanders Robert  Offlcy  Ashburlon 2326 

V.  D.  F Unknown 2326 

POEMS  OF  HISTORY 

The  Destruction  of  Sennacherib George  Gordon  Byron 2327 

The  Vision  of  Belshazzar George  Gordon  Byron 2328 

Horatius  at  the  Bridge Thomas  Babington  Macaulay  2329 

Leonidas George  Croly 2345 

Antony  to  Cleopatra William  Haines  Lytic 2346 

Boadicca William  Cowper 2348 

"He  Never  Smiled  Again" Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans.. . .  2349 

Bruce  to  his  Men  at  Bannockburn. .  .  .  Robert  Burns 2350 

Coronach Walter  Scoll 2351 

Crefy Francis  Turner  Palgrave.  . . .  2352 

The  Patriot's  Pass-word James  Montgomery 2353 


Ixiv  Table   of  Contents 


PAGE 

The  Battle  of  Otterburu Unhiown 2356 

Agincourt Michael  Draylon 2361 

A  Ballad  of  Orleans A.  Mary  F.  Robinson 2364 

Columbus Lydia  Huntley  Sigonrncy .  .  .   2365 

Columbus Joaquin  Miller . 2366 

'  A  Lament  for  Floddcn Jane  Elliot ' 2368 

Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  2368 

The  Armada Thomas  Babington  Macaulay  2370 

"God  Save  Elizabeth" Francis  Turner  Palgrave.  .  .  .    2373 

Ivry Thomas  Babington  Macaulay  2374 

The  " Revenge" Alfred  Tennyson 2377 

The  Song  of  the  Spanish  Main John  Bennett 2381 

Henry  Hudson's  Quest Burton  E'^bcrl  Stevenson.  .  .  .    2382 

To  the  Virginian  Voyage Michael  Drayton 2384 

" The  Word  of  God  to  Leyden  Cume". Jeremiah  Fames  Rankin.  .  .  .    2386 
The  Landing  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers. .  .Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans. .  .  .    2387 

The  May  Sower Erastus  Wolcott  Ellsivorlh .  .  .    23CS9 

The  Pilgrim  Fathers John  Pierpont ' .  .  .    2390 

The  Battle  of  Naseby Thomas  Babington  Macaulay  2392 

The  Execution  of  Montrose William    Edmonstoune    Ay- 

loun 2394 

An  Horatian  Ode  Upon  Cromwell's 

Return  from  Ireland A  ndrcw  Marvell 2400 

On  the  Late  Massacre  in  Piedmont .  .  .  John  Milton .  . 2404 

Morgan Edmund  Clarence  Stedman  .  .    2404 

The  Lamentable  Ballad  of  the  Bloody 

Brook Edward  Everett  Hale 2406 

The  Song  of  the  Western  Men Robert  Stephen  Hazcker 2407 

Bonnie  Dundee Waller  Scott 2408 

A  Ballad  of  Sarsfield 4  uhrey  Thomas  De  Vere.  .  .  .    2410 

The  Battle  of  Blenheim Robert  Southey 2410 

Lovewell's  Fight Unhiown 2412 

Admiral  Hosier's  Ghost Richard  Glover 241S 

Fontenoy Thomas  Osborne  Davis 2417 

Lament  for  Culloden Robert  Burns 2420 

A  Ballad  of  the  French  Fleet Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  2421 

Paul  Revere's  Ride Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  2422 

New  England's  Chevy  Chase Edivard  Everett  Hale 2426 

Warren's  Address  at  Bunker  Hill.  .  .  .John  Pierpont 2428 

The  Maryland  Battalion Jolin  Williamson  Palmer..  .  .   2429 

Seventy-Six William  Ciillen  Bryant 2431 

Song  of  Marion's  Men William  Cullen  Bryant 2432 

Carmen  Bellicosum (iuy  Humphreys  McMastcr..    2433 

OntheLossof  the  "Royal  George"..  .William  Coicper 243s 

Cremona Arthur  Conan  Doyle 2436 

Casablanca Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans. .  .  .    2439 

Hohenlinden Thomas  Campbell 2440 

Battle  of  the  Baltic Thomas  Campbell 2441 

The  Fighting  Temeraire Henry  Nai<bolt 2444 

Skipper  Ireson's  Ride John  Greenleaf  Whittier 2445 

The  Burial  of  Sir  John  Moore  after 

Corunna Charles  Wolfe 2448 

Incident  of  the  French  Camp Robert  Browning 2449 

The  Eve  of  Waterloo George  Gordon  Byron 2450 

Waterloo A  ubrey  de  Vere 2452 

Marco  Bozzaris Fitz-Greene  Halleck 2453 

Old  Ironsides ■ Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 2456 

The  Valor  of  Ben  Milam Clinton  Scollard 2457 

The  Defence  of  the  .Alamo Joaquin  Miller 2458 

The  Fight  at  San  Jacinto Tohn  Williamson  Palmer .  .  .    24.59 

The  Wreck  of  the  Hesperus Henry  Wads-worth  Longfellow  2461 

The  Lost  Colors Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps  Ward  2464 


Table  of  Contents  IxV 

PAGE 

A  Ballad  of  Sir  John  Franklin. .....  .George  Ilcnry  Bokcr 2465 

Monterey Charles  Fcnno  Hoffman 2470 

Peschiera Arthur  HuRh  Clough 2471 

The  Loss  of  the  Birkenhead Francis  Hastings  Doyle 2472 

The  Charge  of  the  Light  Brigade Alfred  Tennyson 2473 

The  Relief  of  Lucknow Robert  Traill  Spence  Lowell .    2475 

The  Private  of  the  Buffs Francis  Hastings  Doyle 2478 

How     Old     Brown    Took     Harper's 

Ferry Edtniind  Clarence  Stedman .  .    2479 

Brown  of  Ossawatomie John  Grceiilraf  Whiilier 2484 

Brother  Jonathan's  Lament  for  Sister 

Caroline Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 2485 

The  Reveille Bret  Harle 2487 

The  Washers  of  the  Shroud James  Russell  Lowell 2488 

The  Picket-Guard Ethel  Lynn  Beers 2491 

Civil  War Charles  Dawson  Shanly 2492 

Kearny  at  Seven  Pines Edmund  Clarence  Stedman.  .    2493 

Barbara  Frietchie John  Greenlcaf  Whittier.  .  .  .    2494 

Kcenan's  Charge George  Parsons  Lalhrop 2497 

The  Black  Regiment George  Henry  Bokcr 2500 

The  High  Tide  at  Gettysburg Will  Henry  Thompson 2502 

Johns  Burns  of  Gettysburg Bret  Harle 2504 

Farragut William  Tucker  Meredith.  .  .    2507 

Craven Henry  Nnvholt 2509 

Sheridan's  Ride.  T'-. Thomas  Buchanan  Read.  ...    2510 

Song  of  Sherman's  March  to  the  Sea.  .Samuel  H.  M.  Byers 2512 

A  Second  Review  of  the  Grand  Army .  Bret  Hartc 2513 

-  The  Conquered  Banner Ahram  J .  Ryan 2515 

Driving  Home  the  Cows Kate  Putnam  Osgood 2517 

Ode  Recited  at  the  Harvard   Com- 
memoration  - James  Russell  Lowell 2518 

Custer's  Last  Charge Frederick  Whitlaker 2529 

The  Last  Redoubt Alfred  A  usiin 2531 

"  Fuzzy-wuzzy  " Rudyard  Kipling 2533 

The  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Havana .  .  Richard  Hovey 2535 

Dewey  at  Manila Robert  Undencood  Johnson. .    2537 

Deeds  of  Valor  at  Santiago Clinton  Scollard 2540 

Breath  on  the  Oat Joseph  Russell  Taylor 2541 

When  the  Great  Gray  Ships  Comein..G«_v  Wetmore  Carry! 2543 

1914 Rupert  Brooke 2544 

The  Fourth  of  August Laurence  Binyon 2546 

August,  1914 John  Maseficid 2547 

A  Chant  of  Hate  Against  England.,  .  .  Barbara  Henderson,  tr 2549 

A  Chant  of  Love  for  England :  .  .Helen  Gray  Cone 2551 

Sonnets  Written  in  the  Fall  of  1914 .  .  .  George  Edward  Woodberry. .  .    2552 

Youth  in  Arms Harold  Monro 2555 

Magpies  in  Picardy Unknown 2556 

Songs  from  an  Evil  Wood Lord  Dunsany 2557 

"I  Have  a  Rendezvous  with  Death  ".  .Alan  Seeger 2560 

The  Spires  of  Oxford Winifred  M.  Letts 2560 

All's  Well F.  W.  Bonrdillon 2561 

Reveille Louis  Untermcyer 2562 

To  the  LTnited  States  of  America.  .  .  .  Robert  Bridges 2562 

Your  Lad,  and  my  Lad Randall  Parrish 2563 

A  Poet  Enlists Amelia  Josephine  Burr 2564 

POEMS  OF  PLACES 

On  the  Prospect  of  Planting  Arts  and 

Learning  in  America George  Berkeley 2565 

Bermudas 1  ndrew  Mar'-'"    2566 

Indian  Names Lydia  Himtle,        -nrncy .  .  .  2567 


fUCt* 


Ixvi  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

Mannahatta Wall  Whilman 2568 

Gloucester  Moors William  Vaughn  Moody .  .  . .    2569 

The  Song  of  the  Colorado Sharlot  M.  Hall 2571 

Now Ilarrirt  Monroe 2573 

Out  Where  the  West  Begins Arlliur  Chapman 2574 

The  Law  of  the  Yukon Robert  W .  Service 2575 

Lines  Composed  a  few  Miles  above 

Tintern  Abbey William  Wordsworth 2578 

The  Pass  of  Kirkstone William  Wordsworth 2582 

Yarrow  Unvisited William  Wordsworth 2584 

Yarrow  Visited William^  W ordsivorth 2586 

On  a  Distant  Prospect  of  Eton  Col- 
lege   Thomas  Gray 2589 

A  Song  of  Sherwood Alfred  Noyes 2591 

Godiva Alfred  Tennyson 2593 

Dover  Beach Maitheiv  A  mold 2595 

St.  Michael's  Mount John  Davidson 2596 

Sonnet  Composed  Upon  Westminster 

Bridge William  W ordsivorth 2597 

A  Song  of  Fleet  Street Alice  Werner 2597 

Song John  Davidson 2598 

St.  James's  Street Frederick  Locker-Lam pson .  .    2^99 

The  South  Country Hilaire  Bclloc 2601 

Edinburgh Alfred  Noyes 2603 

Corrymeela Moira  O'Neill.  .^ 2604 

The  Little  Waves  of  Breffny Eva  Gore-Booth 2605 

A  Song  of  Glenann .Moira  O'Neill 2605 

The  Maiden  City Charlotte  Elizabeth  Tonna.  .  .    2606 

The  Dead  at  Clonmacnois T.  M.  Rolleston 2607 

Sweet  Innisfallen Thomas  Moore 2607 

"Ah,  Sweet  is  Tipperary '' Denis  Aloysius  McCarthy.  .  .    2608 

The  Groves  of  Blarney Richard  Alfred  MiUikin.  .  .  .    2609 

The  Bells  of  Shandon Francis  Sylvester  Mahony.  . .   2610 

"De  Gustibus — " Robert  Browning 2611 

Italian  Rhapsody Robert  Underwood  Johnson..    2613 

Above  Salerno Ada  Foster  Murray 2616 

Venice George  Gordon  Byron 2618 

Venice , John  Addington  Symonds .  . .   2619 

On   the  Extinction  of  the  Venetian 

Republic William  Wordsworth 2619 

The  Guardian- Angel. Robert  Browning. ._.  ........    2620 

Perugia A  melia  Josephine  Burr .....    2621 

"There  is  a  Pool  on  Garda" Clinton  Scollard 2623 

Chorus  from  "Hellas" Percy  Bysshc  Shelley 2623 

The  Isles  of  Greece George  Gordon  Byron 2625 

The  Belfry  of  Bruges Henry  Wadsivorth  Longfellow  2627 

Nuremberg Henry  Wadsworth  Lotigfellow  2632 

Bingen  on  the  Rhine Caroline  Elizabeth  Sarah  Nor- 
ton      2634 

"As  I  Came  Down  from  Lebanon  " .  .  .Clinton  Scollard 2637 

Ceylon A.  Hugh  Fisher 2638 

Mandalay Rudyard  Kipling 2638 

Nubia Bayard  Taylor 2640 

BALLADS  OLD  AND  NEW 

Thomas  the  Rhymer Unknown ^ 2641 

Earl  Mar's  Daughter Unknown 2643 

The  Twa  Sisters Unknown 2648 

The  Wife  of  Usher's  Well Unknoimi 2650 

A  Lyke-Wake  Dirge- Unknown 2652 

The  Douglas  Trsie  H/ Unknown 2653 

^olors.  . 


Tabic  of  Contents  Ixvii 

PAGE 

Fair  Annie Unknown 2656 

The  Lass  of  Lochroyan Unknown 2660 

Young  Beichan  and  Susie  Pye Unknown 2666 

The  Gay  Cos-Hawk Unknown 267 1 

Sweet  William  and  May  Marg'ret .  .  .  Unknown 2676 

Willy  Reilly Unknown 267S 

The  Twa  Corbies Unknown 2680 

The  Three  Ravens Unknown 2680 

Lord  Randal Unknown 2681 

Edward,  Edward Unknown 2682 

Riddles  Wisely  Expounded Unknown 2683 

Sir  Patrick  Spens Unknown 2685 

Edom  o'  Gordon Unknown 2688 

Robin  Hood  and  Allen-a-Dale Unknoicn 2692 

Chev^y-Chase Unknown 2695 

Barbara  Allen's  Cruelty Unknown * 2704 

The  Bailiff's  Daughter  of  Islington .  . .  Unknown 2705 

King  John  and  the  Abbot  of  Canter- 
bury   Unknown 2707 

The  Friar  of  Orders  Gray Thomas  Percy 2710 

Bonnie  George  Campbell Unknown 2714 

Rosabelle Walter  Scoll 2715 

.\lice  Brand Walter  Scoll 2716 

Song  from  "Rokeby  " Waller  Scott 2720 

Glenara Thomas  Campbell 2722 

Lord  Ullin's  Daughter Thomas  Campbell 2723 

Sir  Galahad , Alfred  Tennyson 2724 

Lady  Clare Aifred  Tennyson 2727 

Glenkindie William  Bell  Scoll 2730 

"How  They  Brought  the  Good  News 

from  Ghent  to  Aix" Robert  Browning 2732 

The  Old  Scottish  Cavalier William    Edmonstoiine    Ay- 

toun 2734 

The  Ballad  of  Keith  of  Ravelston ....  Sydney  Dobcll 2736 

The  Mistletoe  Bough.  T. Thomas  Haynes  Bayly 2738 

The  Abbot  of  Inisfalen William  Allingham 2739 

The  Cavalier's  Escape Waller  Thornbury 2742 

The  Three  Troopers Walter  Thornbury 2743 

The  Sally  from  Coventry Waller  Thornbury 2745 

Shameful  Death William.  Morris .  .  .  ._. 2746 

The  Rime  of  the  Ancient  Mariner.  .  .Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge. . . .  2747 

The  Dream  of  Eugene  Aram Thomas  Hood 2767 

The  Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol Oscar  Wilde 2773 

The  Ballad  of  Judas  Iscariot Robert  Buchanan 2791 

He  Fell  Among  Thieves Henry  Nc7vboll '.  2797 

The  Last  Hunt William  Roscoe  Thayer 2799 

Andre's  Ride.  .  ■ A.  H.  Beesly 2801 

The  Ballad  of  Father  Gilligan William  Butler  Yeats 2803 

Herve  Riel Robert  Browning 2804 

The  Highwayman Alfred  Noycs 2809 

Lancelot  and  Guinevere Gerald  Gould 2813 

Ballad  of  the  Goodly  Fere Tlzra  Pound 2S14 

Eve Ralph  Hodgson 2816 

"Time,  You  Old  Gipsy  Man" Ralph  Hodgson 2817 

Chanson  of  the  Bells  of  Oseney Cale  Young  Rice 2818 

The  Waste  Places James  Stephens 2819 

The  Warrior  Maid Anna  Hempstead  Branch..  .  .  2821 

The  Songs  of  Guthrum  and  Alfred. .  .  .  Gilbert  Keilh  Chesterton 2823 

The  Pageant  of  Seamen May  Byron 2827 

The  Ballad  of  East  and  West Rudyard  Kipling 2830 

The  Maid Theodore  Roberts 2834 


Ixviii  Table   of  ("intents 


PART  VI 
POEMS  OF  SENTIMENT  AND  REFLECTION 

PAGE 

The  Noble  Nature Ben  Jonson 2836 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LIFE 

Sweet  and  Sour Edmu?id  Spenser 2837 

On  the  Life  of  Man Henry  Kini; 2837 

All  is  Vanity Philip  Rosscter 2838 

Times  Go  by  Turns Robert  Southwell 2938 

"Say  not,  the  Struggle  Naught  Avail- 

eth" Arthur  Hugh  Clough 2839 

Kyrielle John  Payne 2840 

"Let  Me  Enjoy  " Thomas  Hardy 2841 

Song,  "Because  the  rose  must  fade"  .  . Richard  Watson  Gilder 2841 

"Where  Runs  the  River" Francis  William  Bourdillon.  284:? 

Sclf-Dependence Matthew  Arnold 2843 

Hope  and  Fear Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  2844 

On  His  Blindness John  Milton 2844 

Ozymandias  of  Egypt Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 2844 

A  Turkish  Legend Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 2845 

"Even  This  Shall  Pass  Away" Theodore  Tilton 2845 

Sesostris Lloyd  MiUlin.'.  .  . 2847 

Three  Sonnets  on  Oblivion George  Sterling 2847 

The  Magic  Mirror Henry  Mills  Aidcn 2849 

Ebb  and  Flow George  William  Curtis 2849 

The  King  of  Dreams Clinton  Scollard 2850 

If  Only  the  Dreams  Abitie Clinton  Scollard 2850 

New  Dreams  for  Old Cale  Young  Rice 285 1 

"Lord  of  My  Heart's  Elation " Bliss  Carman 2852 

The  Higher  Pantheism Alfred  Tennyson 2852 

The  White  Peace William  Sharp 2853 

The  Mystic's  Prayer William  Sharp 2854 

The  Play James  B.  Kenyan 2854 

The  Wayfarer Helen  Huntington 2854 

Bookra Charles  Dudley  Warnrr 2856 

Into  the  Twilight William  Butler  Yeats 2856 

Tears Lisetlc  Woodworlh  Reese.  .  .  .  2857 

Vers  la  Vie A  rthur  Upson 2855 

Leaves Sara  Teasdalc 2855 

Pre-Existence Paul  Hamilton  Haync 2854 

Envoy    from    "Songs    from    Vaga- 

bondia  " Bliss  Carman 2858 

The  Petrified  Fern Mary  Bolles  Branch 2859 

The  Question  Whither George  Meredith 2860 

The  Good  Great  Man Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge.  . .  .  2860 

Human  Frailty William  Cowper 2861 

Stanzas,  "Where  forlorn  sunsets  f3are 

and  fade" William  Ernest  Henley 2862 

The  Seekers John  Maseficld 2863 

The  Beleaguered  City Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  2863 

A  Doubting  Heart A  delaidr  A  nne  Procter 2865 

Vain  Virtues Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti 2866 

Evolution John  Banister  Tabb 2866 

Each  in  His  Own  Tongue William  Herbert  Carruth..  .  .  2867 

The  Name Don  Marquis 2866 

"In  God's  Eternal  Studios" Paul  Shivell 2869 

Indirection Richard  Real/ 2870 


Table  of  Contents  Ixix 

PAGE 

A  Grammarian's  Funeral Robert  Browning 2871 

The  Rubaiyatof  OmarKhaj'yam.  .  .  .Edward  Filzs,crald 2875 

The  Kasidah Richard  Francis  Burton  ....  2887 

Gaudeamiis  Igitur John  Addini^ton  Symonds,  Ir.  2805 

Laurigcr  Horatius John  Addington  Symands,  tr.  2806 

The  Conclusion  of  the  Whole  Matter. .  Frederic  Ridgely  Torrence . . .  2807 

In  Memoriam Alfred  Tennyson 28g8 

Driftwood Trumbull  Slickney 2906 

"What  Riches  Have  You" George  Santayana 2907 

"0  World  " George  Santayana 2007 

The  Rustic  at  the  Play George  Santayana 2008 

To  Hasekawa Walter  Conrad  Arensberg. .  .  .  2qo8 

Life,  a  Question Corinne  Roosevelt  Robinson. .  2908 

The  Earth  and  Man Stopford  Augustus  Brooke. .  .  2Q00 

Deservings Unknown 2qoo 

"A  Little  Work" George  du  Maurier 2910 

Man's  Days Fdcn  Phill potts 2910 

A  Little  While Don  Marquis 291 1 

THE  CONDUCT  OF  LIFE 

Integer  Vitrp Thomas  Campion 2912 

The  Chambered  Nautilus Oliver  Wendell  Holmes    .  .  2913 

A  Psalm  of  Life Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  2914 

Excelsior Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  2915 

The  Village  Blacksmith Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  291O 

Four  Things Henry  Van  Dyke 2918 

Labor  and  Love Edmund  Gossc 2918 

What  is  Good John  Boyle  O'Reilly 2918 

Faith Frances  Anne  Kcmblc      ....  2919 

A  Charge Herbert  Trench 2919 

To-day Thomas  Carlyle 2920 

"My    Days    Among    the    Dead    are 

Passed  " Robert  Southey 2920 

Opportunity John  James  Lngalls 2921 

Opportunity Walter  M alone 2922 

Opportunity Edward  Rowland  Sill 2923 

The  Arrow  and  the  Song Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  2923 

Calumny Frances  Sargent  Osgood 2924 

The  Effect  of  Example John  Keble 2924 

Little  and  Great Charles  Mackay '. . . .  2925 

The  Sin  of  Omission Margaret  Songster 2926 

The  Flower Alfred  Tennyson 2927 

Stanzas Family  Bronte 2928 

Solitude FJla  Wheeler  Wilcox 2929 

Recompense Nixon  Waterman 2929 

The  Lesson  of  the  Water-mill Sarah  Doudney 2930 

Life George  Herbert 2931 

Be  True Horatius  Bonar 2932 

To-day Lydia  Avery  Coonley  Ward. .  2932 

The  Valley  of  Vain  Verses Henry  Van  Dyke 2933 

A  Thanksgiving William  Dean  Howells 2933 

The  Lady  Poverty Alice  Meyncll 2934 

The  Lady  Poverty Jacob  Fischer 2934 

Character  of  the  Happy  Warrior William  Wordsworth 2935 

The  Great  Adventure Henry  David  Thorcau 2937 

"  He  Whom  a  Dream  Hath  Possessed  "Shaemas  O  Sheet 2938 

Mastery Sara  Tea-tdalc 2938 

A  Prayer Harry  Kemp 2939 

Prayer Louis  Untermeyer 2940 

Prayer  for  Pain John  G.  Neihardt 2940 

Carry  On! Robert  W.  Service 2941 


Ixx  Table  of  Contents 

PAGE 

The  Fighting  Failure Everard  Jack  Apple/on 2042 

The  Prayer  of  Beaten  Men Willia^n  Hervey  Woods 2944 

The  Last  Word Matthew  Arnold 2944 

lo  Victis William  Wetmore  Story 2945 

"They   Went    Forth   to   Battle   but 

They  Always  Fell" Shaemas  0  Shed 2946 

The  Masters Laurence  Hope 2947 

The  Kings Louise  Imogen  Giiincy 2949 

Failures A  rlhur  Upson 2950 

Don  Quixote A  iistin  Dobson 2950 

A  Prayer John  Drinkivater 3951 

Battle  Cry John  G.  Ncihardt 2952 

Rabia James  Freeman  Clarke 2953 

The  Joyful  Wisdom Coventry  Patmore 2953 

Ode  to  Duty William  Wordsworth 2955 

Chant  Royal  of  High  Virtue A.T.  Quiller-Couch 2957 

The  Splendid  Spur A.T.  Quiller-Couch 2959 

Sacrifice Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 2959 

THE  TR.\NSCENDENTALTSTS 

Conscience Henry  David  Thorcau 2960 

My  Prayer Henry  David  Thoreau 2961 

Inspiration Henry  David  Thoreau 2061 

Each  and  All Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 2962 

Brahma Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 2964 

Bacchus Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 2964 

The  Problem Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 2966 

FZvening  Hymn William  Henry  Furness.. . . .  2968 

The  Higher  Good Theodore  Parker 2969 

The  Idler Jones  Very 2970 

Questionings Frederic  Henry  Hedge 2970 

The  Great  Voices Charles  Timothy  Brooks. ....  2972 

Beautv  and  Duty Ellen  Hooper 2972 

The  Straight  Road Ellen  Hooper 2973 

The  Way Sydney  Henry  Morse 2973 

Inspiration Samuel  Johnson 2973 

I  in  Thee,  and  Thou  in  Me Christopher  Pearsc  Cranch.. .  2974 

Gnosis Christoplicr  Pearse  Cranch...  2975 

The  Future Edward  Rowland  Sill 2976 

Love's  Lord Edward  Dowden 2977 

A  MIND  CONTENT 

"Jog  On,  Jog  On" William  Shakespeare 2978 

On  a  Contented  Mind Thomas  Vaux 2978 

Maesia's    Song    from    "Farewell    to 

Folly" Robert  Greene 2979 

The  Means  to  Attain  Happy  Life Henry  Howard 2979 

Risposta Unknoum 2980 

A  Contented  Mind Joshua  Sylvester 2980 

The  Happy  Heart Thomas  Dekker 2981 

The  Miller  of  the  Dee Charles  Mackay 2982 

A  Philosopher John  Kendrick  Bangs 2983 

The  Good  Day Henry  Howarth  Bash/ord. .  .  .  2983 

"I  Saw  the  Clouds" Hervey  White 2984 

Coronation Helen  Hunt  Jackson 2985 

The  Character  of  a  Happy  Life Henry  Wotton 2986 

"My  Mind  to  Me  a  Kingdom  Is". .  .Edward  Dyer 2987 

Written  at  an  Inn  at  Henley William  Shenstone 2988 

Careless  Content John  Byrom 2989 

The  Golden  Mean William  Cowper 2991 


Table  of  Contents  Ixxi 

PAGE 

"It's  Ain  Drap  o'  Dew" James  Ballanliiir 2092 

Resignation Waller  Savage  Landor 2903 

"En  Voyage" Caroline  At'valcr  Mason.  .  .  .  2993 

The  Happiest  Heart lolin  Vance  Cheney 2994 

Good-bye Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 2995 

Sapientia  Lunm Ernest  Dowson 209S 

The  Beasts Walt  Whitman 2996 

Immoral James  Oppenheim 2997 

Diogenes ^lax  Eastman 2997 

Leisure William  IJ .  Davies 2998 

Poor  Kings William  H.  Davies 2998 

FRIENDSHIP  AND  BROTHERHOOD 

Salve Thomas  Edward  Brown 2999 

Abou  Ben  Adhem Leigh  Hunt 2999 

Envoy     from     "More     Songs    from 

Vagabondia  " Richard  Hovey 3000 

Friends Edward  Verrall  Eucas 3000 

A  Friend Lionel  Johnson 3001 

Bill  and  Joe Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 3002 

"As  Toilsome  I  Wandered  Virginia's 

Woods" Walt  Whitman 3004 

Gone Mary  E.  Coleridf^e 3005 

Comrades George  Edward  Woodherry. .  .   3005 

Comrades Lionel  Johnson 3006 

Comrades Laurence  Housman 3008 

At  the  Crossroads Richard  Hovey 3009 

Twilight  Song Edwin  Arlington  Robinson .  .   301 1 

The  Adventurers May  Byron 3012 

"Fame  is  a   Food  that   Dead   Men 

Eat " A  ustin  Dobson 3013 

Jaffar Leigh  Hunt 3013 

Counsel Mary  Evelyn  Moore  Davis.. .    3014 

To  a  Friend Hartley  Coleridge 3015 

"Farewell,  but  Whenever" Thomas  Moore 3015 

"Awake,  Awake" Tohn  Ruskin 3016 

The  Voice  of  Toil Williayn  Morris 3017 

Tom  Dunstan Robert  Buchanan 3018 

The  Common  Street Helen  Gray  Cone 3021 

To  a  New  York  Shop-Girl  Dressed  for 

Sunday Anna  Hempstead  Branch. . .  .   3021 

Saturday  Night Tames  Oppenheim 3024 

The  Barrel-Organ A  Ifred  Noyes 3025 

Amantium  Irae Richard  Edwards 303 1 

Qua  Cursum  Ventus Arthur  Hugh  Clough 3033 

"For  a'  That  and  a'  That" Robert  Burns 3034 

"We  are  Brethren  a'" Robert  NicoU 3035 

Fraternity John  Banister  Tabb 3036 

Sonnet Henry  Timrod 3036 

Sic  Itur A  rthur  Hugh  Clough 3037 

Verses William  Cowper 3038 

"  Blow,  Blow,  Thou  Winter  Wind  " . . .  William  Shakespeare 3030 

The  House  by  the  Side  of  the  Road .  .  .Sam  Walter  Foss 3040 

The  Man  with  the  Hoe Edwin  Markham 3041 

The  Man  with  the  Hoe,  a  Reply John  Vance  Cheney 3043 

The  Singing  Man Josephine  Preston  Peabody.  .   3045 

"Scum  o'  the  Earth " Robert  Haven  Schaujfler 3052 

The  Second  Coming Norman  Gale 3054 

The  Night  Court Ruth  Comfort  Mitchell 30SS 

The  Factories Margaret  Widdemer. . , 3057 

Black  Sheep Richard  Burton 3058 


Ixxii  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

The  Dream-Bearer Mary  Carolyn  Davies 3058 

Sunday  Evening  in  the  Common.  .  .  .John  Hall  Wheelock 305Q 

Caliban  in  the  Coal  Mines Louis  Untermcyer .3059 

Landscapes Louis  Vnlermcyer 3060 

Stupidity  Street Ralph  Hodgson 3061 

A  Troop  of  the  Guard Hermann  Hagedorn 3062 

The  God-maker.  Man Don  Marquis 3065 

The  Field  of  Glory Edwin  Arlington  Robinson .  .  3067 

The  Conquerors Harry  Kemp 3068 

The  Arsenal  at  Springfield Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  3069 

The  Little  Sister  of  the  Prophet Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall .  . . .  3071 

The  Sons  of  Martha Rudyard  Kipling 3072 

The  Tuft  of  Flowers Robert  Frost 3074 

Mending  Wall Robert  Frost 3075 

Forbearance Ralph  Waldo  Emerson 3076 

THE  MUSIC-MAKERS 

Israfel Edgar  Allan  Poe 3077 

Proem John  Greenleaf  Whitlier 3078 

Embryo Mary  Ashley  Townsend 3079 

The  Singer's  Prelude William  Morris 3080 

A  Prelude Maurice  Thompson 3081 

On    First    looking    into    Chapman's 

Homer John  Keats 3082 

The  Odyssey Andrrtv  Lang 3083 

Homeric  Unity Andrew  Lang 3083 

"Enamored       Architect       of      Airy 

Rhyme" Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 3083 

Divina  Commedia Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  308.-1 

"A    Man    Called    Dante,    I    Have 

Heard  " Georgiana  Goddard  King. .  .  .  3084 

The  Songs  I  Sing Charles  G.  Blanden 3085 

The  Dearest  Poets Leigh  Hunt 3085 

False  Poets  and  True Thomas  Hood 3085 

A  Singing  Lesson Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  3086 

Poetry Ella  Heath 3086 

The  Inner  Vision William  Wordsworth 3087 

On  an  Old  Song William     Edivard     Hart  pole 

Lecky 3087 

To  Song Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr 3088 

Verse — "Past  ruined  Ilion" Walter  Savage  Landor 3089 

An  Old-Fashioned  Poet Ada  Foster  Murray 3080 

Poet  and  Lark Mary  Ainge  Dc  Vcre 3089 

A  Hint  from  Herrick Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 3090 

To  the  Poets John  Keats 3090 

The  Progress  of  Poesy Thomas  Gray 3091 

Seaweed . Henry  Wadsivorlh  Longfellow  3094 

To  the  Muses. .  .  .  ; William  Blake 3096 

"Whither  is  Gone  the  Wisdom  and 

the  Power" Hartley  Coleridge 3096 

The  Muses Edith  Matilda  Thomas 3097 

Evoe! Edith  Matilda  Thotnas 3098 

An  Invocation William  Johnson-Cory 3099 

Invention William  ]]'alson 3100 

Joy  of  the  Morning Edwin  Markham 3100 

Cricket Clinton  Scollard 3101 

To  a  Poet  a  Thousand  Years  Hence. .  .  James  Elroy  Flecker 3  loi 

The  Moods Fannie  Stearns  Dams 3102 

The  Passionate  Reader  to  His  Poet.  .Richard  Le  Gallienne 3102 

The  Flight,  of  the  Goddess Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 3103 

The  Sovereigns Lloyd  Mifflin 3105 


Table  of  Contents  Ixxiii 

PAGE 

The  Argument  of  His  book Robert  Ilrrrick 3105 

Envoy Robert  Louis  Slcvcnson 3106 

Envoy Francis  Tliowpson 3106 

The  Sonnet's  Voice Theodore  W alts-Duulon 3106 

The  Sonnet Danle  Gabriel  Rossetll 3 107 

The  Sonnet Richard  Watson  Gilder 3 107 

The  Sonnet John  AJJington  Symonds .  .  .  3108 

"Scorn  not  the  Sonnet" William  Wordsworth 3109 

Vendor's  Song Adelaide  Crapscy 3109 

Thunderstorms William  II.  Ddvics. 3110 

Genius  Loci Margaret  Woods 3110 

The  Rondeau A  uslin  Dobson ..'....  3 1 1 1 

Metrical  Feet Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge.  ...  3111 

Accident  in  .\rt Richard  Ilovey 3 1 1 2 

A  Song  for  St.  Cecilia's  Day .John  Drydcn 3112 

Ale.xander's  Feast John  Dryden 3ir4 

The  Passions William  Collins 3119 

To  Music,  to  Becalm  his  Fever Robert  Iletrick 312.3 

A  Musical  Instrument Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning. .  3124 

At  a  Solemn  Music John  Milton 3125 

With  a  Guitar,  to  Jane Percy  Bysshc  Shelley 3126 

Ode — "We  are  the  music-makers"..  .Arthur  O'Shaughnessy 3128 

Music Edith  Matilda  Thomas 3 130 

On  Music Waller  .Savage  Landor 3131 

Music  at  Twilight George  Sterling 3 131 

The  Key-Board William  Wat.'^on 3132 

A  Tocatta  of  Galuppi's Robert  Browning 3133 

Abt  Vogler Robert  Browning 313S 

Hack  and  Hew Bliss  Carman 3139 

Ars  Victrix Austin  Dobson 3140 

FLOWER  O"  THE  MIND 

Fancies Jolm  Ford ■ 3142 

Tom  o'  Bedlam Unknown 3142 

L' Allegro John  Milton 3 143 

11  Penseroso John  Milton 3147 

Kilmeny James. Hogg 3151 

Kubla  Khan Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge.  ...   3160 

Hymn  of  Pan Percy  Bysshc  Shelley 3162 

Ode  on  a  Grecian  Urn John  Keats 3 163 

Ode  to  Psyche John  Keats 3164 

To  Fancy John  Keats 3166 

The  Haunted  Palace Edgar  Allan  Foe 3168 

The  Raven Edgar  Allan  Poe 3170 

The  Bells Edgar  Allati  Poe 3174 

The  Lotos-Eaters Alfred  Tennyson 31 78 

Ulysses Alfred  Tennyson 3179 

Morte  D'Arthur Alfred  Tennyson 3 181 

The  Lady  of  Shalott Alfred  Tennyson 3188 

Song  from  "Paracelsus" Robert  Browning 3192 

The  Swimmers George  Sterling 3194 

The  Blessed  Damozel Dante  Gabriel  Rossctii 3198 

.\  Song  of  Angiola  in  Heaven A ustin  Dobson 3202 

The  Hound  of  Heaven Francis  Thompson 3204 

Wild  Eden George  Ed'ccard  Woodberry. .  .   3209 

The  .Aztec  City Eugene  Fitch  Ware 321 1 

Before  a  Statue  of  .Achilles George  Santayana 3212 

"I  Flung  me  Round  Him" Roden  Noel 3213 

The  Queen's  Song James  Elroy  Flecker 3214 

Balkis Lascellis  Abercrombic 321S 

The  Gates  of  Dreamland George  William  Russell 3216 


Ixxiv  Table  of  Contents 

PAGE 

Edith William  Ellery  Channing.  . .   3217 

Tenants Wilfrid  Wihon  Gibson 3218 

The  Listeners Walter  dc  la  Mare 3219 

"CARE-CHARMER  SLEEP" 

Sleep John  Fletcher 3220 

"Sleep,  Silence'  Child" William  Driimmond 3220 

To  Sleep William  Wordsworth 3221 

Vixi UnknoKm 3221 

Sleep Ada  Louise  Martin 3222 

The  Quiet  Nights Katharine  Tynan 3222 

The  Night Hilaire  Belloc 3223 

O  Sleep Grace  Fallow  Norton 3224 

The  Wharf  of  Dreams Edwin  Markkam 3224 

HOME  AND  FATHERLAND 

"Hame,  Hame,  Hame" Allan  Cunningham 3226 

Home,  Sweet  Home John  Howard  Pay?ie .  ......  3226 

My  old  Kentucky  Home Stephen  Collins  Foster 3227 

Old  Folks  at  Home Stephen  Collins  Foster 3  2  28 

Home William  Ernest  Henley 3229 

Hot  Weather  in  the  Plains — India. .  .  .E.  H.  Tipple 3230 

Heart's  Content Unknown 3231 

Song — "Stay,  stay  at  home,  my  heart 

and  rest" Henry  Wadsworth  Jonsfeliow  3232 

My  Early  Home John  Clare 3233 

The  Old  Home Madison  Cawein 3233 

The  Auld  House Carolina  Nairne 3234 

The  Rowan  Tree Carolina  Nairne 3236 

The  Fire  of  Driftwood Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  3236 

My  Ain  Fireside Elizabeth  Hatnilton 3238 

The  Ingle-Side Hew  Ainslee 3239 

The  Cane-bottomed  Chair William   Makepeace    Thack- 
eray    3239 

Duna Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall    .  .  .   3241 

The  Old  Clock  on  the  Stairs Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  3242 

"Mother,  Home,  Heaven" William  Goldsmith  Brown..  .   3244 

The  Hero Robert  Nicoll 3244 

The  Cotter's  Saturday  Night Robert  Burns 3246 

On  the  Receipt  of  My  Mother's  Pic- 
ture   William  Cowper 3251 

The  Crowing  of  the  Red  Cock Emma  Lazarus 3254 

The  World's  Justice Emma  Lazarus 3255 

Dover  Cliffs William  Lisle  Bowles 3257 

The  Bridge Frederick  Peterson 3257 

The  Exile's  Song Robert  Gilfillan 3258 

"The  Sun  Rises  Bright  in  France".  .  .Allan  Cunningham 3259 

Father  Land  and  Mother  Tongue .  .  .  .Samuel  Lover 3259 

The  Fatherland James  Russell  Lowell 3260 

The  Call  to  a  Scot Ruth  Guthrie  Harding 3261 

NARRATIVE  AND  DESCRIPTIVE  POEMS 

The  Deserted  Village Oliver  Goldsmith 3262 

The  Prisoner  of  Chillon George  Gordon  Byron 3273 

The  Eve  of  St.  Agnes John  Keats 3284 

Locksley  Hall Alfred  Tennyson 3295 

The  Scholar-Gipsy .' Matthew  Arnold ,.f,:!33PS 

Juggling  Jerry j^'i.  j). George  Meredith.  .'.  u.  .^isi).')6S.i2 


Table  of  Contents  Ixxv 

PAGE 

A  Court  Lady Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning. .  3315 

The  HiRh  Tide  on  the  Coast  of  Lin- 
colnshire   Jean  Ingelow 3318 

The  Skeleton  in  Armor Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  3323 

Daniel  Gray Josiah  Gilbert  Holland 3327 

"Curfew  Must  not  Ring  To-night"..  .Rose  Hartiviek  Thorpe 3329 

The  Old  Sergeant Byron  Forccylhe  Wilhoti.  .  .  .  3332 

Jim  Bludso  of  the  Prairie  Bell John  Hay 3337 

Little  Breeches John  Hay 3339 

The  Vagabonds John  Townsend  Trowbridge..  3340 

How  We  Beat  the  Favorite Adam  Lindsay  Gordon 3344 


PART  VII 

POEMS  OF  SORROW,  DEATH,  AND  IMMORTALITY 

"Death  be  not  Proud" John  Donne 3348 

IN  THE  SHADOW 

Melancholy John  Fletcher 3349 

On  Melancholy John  Keats 3349 

The  Rainy  Day Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  3350 

The  Precept  of  Silence Lionel  Johnson 335 1 

"Moan,  Moan,  Ye  Dying  Gales"..  .  .Henry  Neck 335i 

Sorrow Aitbrcy  Thomas  De  Vere. . . .   3352 

Time  and  Grief William  Lisle  Bowles 3352 

Grief Elisabeth  Barrett  Browning. .   3353 

Pain St.  John  Lucas 3353 

A  Farewell Alfred  Tennyson 3354 

"The  Day  is  Done" Henry  Wadsworth  LongfeUotij  3355 

The  Bridge Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  3356 

"My  Life  is  Like  the  Summer  Rose".. /?«c^ar(i  Henry  Wilde 3358 

"As  I  Laye  A-Thynkynge" Richard  Harris  Barham 3359 

The  Harp  of  Sorrow Ethel  Clifford 3360 

The  Journey  Onwards. Thomas  Moore 3360 

Song,  "I  try  to  knead  and  spin".  .  .  .Louise  Imogen  Guiney 3361 

My  Sorrow Seumas  O'Sidlivan 3362 

Spirit  of  Sadness Richard  Le  Gallicnne 3362 

"  'Tis  But  a  Little  Faded  Flower" ....  Ellen  Clementine  Howarth. .  .   3363 

To  Each  His  Own Margaret  Root  Garvin 3363 

Song,  "Rarely,  rarely  comest  thou" .  .  Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 3364 

The  Nameless  One James  Clarence  Mangan.  . .  .   3365 

"De  Mortuis  Nil  Nisi  Bonum" Richard  Realf 3367 

Hope  and  Despair Lascelles  Abercrombie 336S 

Dejection:  An  Ode Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge.  . . .   3369 

Work  without  Hope Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge.  ...   3373 

Care Virginia  Woodward  Cloud. .  .   3373 

At-the  Salon Florence  Wilkinson  Evans. .  .   3373 

The  Wind's  Way Grace  Hazard  Conkling 3374 

Tropical  Town Salomon  de  la  Selva 3374 

Sunset  Wings Dante  Gabriel  Rossetli 3375 

Morality Matthew  Arnold 3376 

Cui  Bono Thomas  Carlyle 3377 

Mutability Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 3377 

A  Fancy  from  Fontenelle Austin  Dobson 337S 

"Oh,    Earlier    Shall    the    Rosebuds 

Blow" William  Johnson-Cory 3378 

The  Dove John  Keats 3379 

The  Whisperers Wilfrid  Wilson  Gibson 3379 


Ixxvi  Table  of  Contents 

PAGE 

On  a  Tear Samuel  Ro,qcrs 3380 

The  Rosary  of  My  Tears Abram  J.  Ryan 3^1 

Endurance Elizahclh  Akcrs 3382 

Langley  Lane Robert  Buehanan 3383 

The  Weakest  Thing Elizahclh  Barrell  Broivning.  .  3385 

Song — "We  only  ask  for  sunshine". .  .  Helen  Bay  Whilney 3386 

The  House  of  Pain Florence  Earle  Coates 3386 

Wise Lizctte  Woodivorth  Reese ....  3387 

"Multum  Dilexit" Hartley  Coleridge 3387 

Pierette  in  Memory William  Griffith 3388 

"Wind  me  a  Summer  Crown" Menella  Bute  Smcdley 3388 

To  the  Harpies Arthur  Davison  Fickc 338g 

The  Bridge  of  Sighs Thomas  Hood 3390 

The  Song  of  the  Shirt Thomas  Hood 3393 

Stanzas,    "In    a    drear-nighted    De- 
cember"  John  Keats 3395 

The  Dead  Faith Fannie  Heaslip  Lea 3396 

The  Ballad  of  The  Boat Richard  Garnett 3396 

Eldorado Edgar  A llan  Poe 3397 

A  Lost  Chord Adelaide  Anne  Procter 3398 

Little  Gray  Songs  from  St.  Joseph's. . Grace  Fallow  Norton    3399 

Birthright John  Drink'ivater 3401 

Immortalis David  Morton 3401 

Sonnets John  Masejicld 3401 

"THE  DESPOT'S  DESPOT" 

Vita?  Sumnia  Brevis  Spem  Nos  Vetat 

Incohare  Longam Ernest  Dowson 3404 

Death's  Final  Conquest James  Shirley 3404 

Death's  Subtle  Ways James  Shirley 3405 

Man's  Mortality Simon  Wastcll 3405 

To  Death Anne  Finch 3407 

The  Genius  of  Death George  Croly 3408 

"Oh,  Why  Should  the  Spirit  of  Mor- 
tal be  Proud  " William  Knox^ 3409 

The  Hour  of  Death Felicia  Dorothea  Hcmans.. .  .   3411 

The  Sleep Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning .  .   3412 

Azrael    Robert  Gilbert  Welsh 3414 

"Where  Lies  the  Land" Arthur  Hugh  Clough 3414 

U{>-hill Christina  Georgina  Rossetti. .    3415 

The  Bourne Christina  Georgina  Rossetti. .    3415 

The  Conqueror  Worm Edgar  Allan  Poe 3416 

The  City  in  the  Sea Edgar  Allan  Poe 3417 

The  Reaper  and  the  Flowers Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  3418 

The  Closing  Scene Thomas  Buchanan  Read.  .  .  .  3419 

Mors  et  Vita Samuel  Waddington 3422 

"What  is  to  Come" William  Ernest  Henley 3422 

A  Roundel  of  Rest Arthur  Symons 3423 

"When  the  Most  is  Said " Mary  A inge  de  Vere 3423 

The  Garden  of  Proserpine Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  3424 

The  Changing  Road Katherinc  Lee  Bates 3427 

The  Great  Misgiving William  Watson 3428 

The  Dead  Coach Katharine  Tynan 3429 

L'Envoi Willa  Sibert  Gather 3429 

Death Florence  Earle  Coates 3430 

A  Dirge   John  Webster 3430 

Dirge  from  "Cymbeline" William  Shakespeare 3431 

Dirge  in  Cymbeline William  Collins 3431 

Hallowed  Ground    Thomas  Campbell 3432 

The  Churchyard Robert  Buchanan 3435 

The  Old  Churchyard  of  Bonchurch.  .  .Philip  Bourke  Marston 3436 


Table   of  Contents  Ixxvii 

PACE 

The  Indian  Burying-grounc! Philip  Frcnrau 3438 

(lod's-Acrc Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfclloiv  3439 

The  City  of  the  Dead Richard  Burton 3440 

The  Garden  that  I  Love Florence  L.  Henderson 3441 

The  Old  Sexton Park  Benjamin 3441 

The  Two  Villages Rose  Terry  Cooke 3442 

Daybreak Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  3443 

Thanatopsis William  Cullcn  Bryant 3444 

The  Dance  of  Death A  ustin  Dobson 3446 

"FACING  THE  SUNSET" 

The  Lie Walter  Raleigh 3440 

His  Pilgrimage Walter  Raleigh 3451 

The  Conclusion Walter  Raleigh 3453 

Death's  Summons Thomas  Nashe 3453 

His  Winding-Sheet Robert  Herrick 34S4 

A  Prayer  in  the  Prospect  of  Death..  .Robert  Burns 3455 

Song  of  the  Silent  Land Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  3456 

June William  Cullen  Bryant ,3157 

Love,  Time,  and  Death Frederick  Locker-Lam pson .  .    345S 

A  Wish Matthew  Arnold 3450 

Next  of  Kin Christina  Georgina  Rossetti. .    3460 

A  Better  Resurrection Christina  Georgina  Rossetti. .    3461 

The  Summer  is  Ended Christina  Georgina  Rossetti. .    3462 

A  Little  Parable .Anne  Reeve  Aldrich 3462 

My  Cross Zitella  Cocke 3463 

In  the  Hospital Mary  Woolsey  Howland ....   3463 

When Sarah  Chauncey  Woolsey. .  . .   3464 

"  Ex  Libris  " A  rthur  Upson 3466 

In  Extremis George  Sterling 3466 

Spinning Helen  Hunt  Jackson 3467 

"Some  Time  at  Eve" Lizzie  Clark  Hardy 3468 

Night T.W.  Rolleston 3469 

Afterwards Violet  Fane 3469 

A  Hundred  Years  to  Come William  Goldsmith  Brown.    '.   3470 

The  Last  Camp-fire Sharlot  M.  Hall 3471 

Interlude Ella  Wheeler  Wilco.x 3472 

The  One  Hope Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti 3473 

The  Lamp  in  the  West F.lla  Higginson 3473 

The  Dying  Reservist Maurice  Baring 3474 

"If  Love  were  Jester  at  the  Court  of 

Death  " Frederic  Lawrence  Knowlcs. .    3474 

Constancy Minor  Watson 3475 

The  Wild  Ride Louise  Imogen  Guincy 3475 

"I  Would  not  Live  Alway" William   Augustus   Muhlen- 
berg    3476 

Traveller's  Hope Charles  Granville 3478 

Scaled  Orders Richard  Burton 3478 

Song,  "I  make  my  shroud" Adelaide  Crapsey 3478 

A  Song  of  Living Amelia  Josephine  Burr 3479 

Compensation Paul  Laurence  Dunbar 3470 

The  Recessional Charles  G.  D.  Roberts 3480 

Mountain  Song Harriet  Monroe 3481 

To  M.  E.  W Gilbert  Keith  Chesterton 3482 

Returning Ruth  Guthrie  Harding 3482 

"0  World,  be  not  So  Fair  " Grace  Fallow  Norton 3483 

"ONE  FIGHT  MORE" 

Prospice Robert  Bro^vning 3484 

Requiem Robert  Louis  Stevenson 4385 


Ixxviii  Table  of  Contents 

PAGE 

"Oh  May  I  Join  the  Choir  Invisible" .  George  Eliol 3485 

Last  Lines Emily  Bronte 3486 

Laus  Mortis Frederic  Lawrence  Knowles. .  3487 

"When  I  Have  Fears" John  Keats 3488 

Last  Sonnet John  Keats 2489 

The  Dying  Christian  to  His  Soul.  . .  .Alexander  Pope 3489 

"Beyond  the  Smiling  and  the  Weep- 
ing"  Iloratitis  Bonar 3490 

"I  Strove  with  None" Walter  Savaf;e  Lander 3491 

Death Walter  Savage  Lander 3491 

Life Anna  Lctilia  Barbauld 3491 

Dying  Hymn Alice  Cary 3492 

In  Harbor Paul  Hamilton  Ilayne 3493 

The  Last  Invocation Walt  Whitman 3494 

"  Darest  Thou  Now,  O  Soul " Wall  Whitman 3494 

Waiting John  Burroughs 3495 

In  the  Dark George  Arnold 3496 

Last  Verses William  Motherwell 3496 

The  Rubicon William  Winter 3497 

When  I  Have  Gone  Weird  Ways John  G.  Neihardl 3498 

A  Rhyme  of  Life Charles  Warren  Stoddard..  .  .  3499 

"Thalatta!  Thalatta" Joseph  Brownlec  Brown 3499 

Requiem F.  Norreys  Conncll 3500 

Invictus William  Ernest  Henley 3500 

"A    Late    Lark    Twitters    from    the 

Quiet  Skies" William  Ernest  Henley 3501 

"In  After  Days" Austin  Dobson 3502 

"Call  Me  Not  Dead" Richard  Watson  Gilder 3502 

Epilogue  from  "Asolando" Robert  Browning 3503 

Crossing  the  Bar Alfred  Tennyson 3504 

L'Envoi Rudyard  Kipling 3504 

Envoi John  G.  Neihardt 3505 

Greek  Folk  Song Margaret  Widdemer 3506 

"When  I  am  Dead  and  Sister  to  the 

Dust" Elsa  Barker 3So6 

A  Parting  Guest James  Whitcomb  Riley 3507 

The  Stirrup  Cup John  Hay 3507 

"THEY  ARE  ALL  GONE'.' 

Friends  Departed Henry  Vaughan 3508 

"Over  the  River" Nancy  Woodbury  Priest 3509 

Resignation Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  3510 

Afterward Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps  Ward  3512 

Sometime May  Riley  Smith 3513 

"The  Mourners  Came  at  Break  of 

Day" Sarah  Flower  Adams 35 14 

What  of  The  Darkness? Richard  Le  Gallienne 3515 

A  Sea  Dirge William  Shakespeare 3516 

Epitaphs Ben  Jonson 3516 

Song  from  "The  Devil's  Law  Case".  .John  Webster 3517 

On  the  Tombs  in  Westminster Francis  Beaumont 3517 

Epitaph  on  the  Countess  Dowager  of 

Pembroke William  Browne 3518 

An  Epitaph  Intended  for  Himself.. .  .James  Beattie 35  iS 

Lycidas John  Milton 3519 

To  the  Pious  Memory  of  the  Accom- 
plished  Young   Lady,    Mrs.   Anne 

Killigrew John  Dryden 3524 

Heraclitus William  Johnson-Cory 3529 

Elegy  to  the  Memory  of  an  Unfor- 
tunate Lady Alexander  Pope 3530 


Table  of  Contents  Ixxix 

PAGE 

Elegy  Written  in  a  Country  Church- 
yard   Thomas  Gray .^532 

The  Settlers Laurence  Housman 3536 

"He  Bringeth  Them  Unto  Their  De- 
sired Haven" L.  Frank  Tookcr 3537 

In  the  Lilac-rain Edith  Matilda  Thomas 3530 

A  Dead  March Cosmo  Monkhousc 3540 

Tommy's  Dead Sydney  Dobell 3542 

In  Memoriam Richard  Monckton  Milnes. .  .  3545 

Her  Epitaph Thomas  William  Parsons .  . .  3545 

The  Death  Bed Thomas  Hood 3S46 

Hester Charles  Lamb 3547 

"Softly  Woo  Away  Her  Breath" Bryan  Waller  Procter 3548 

A  Death-Bed James  Aldrich 3548 

"She  Died  in  Beauty" Charles  Doyne  Sillery 3548 

The  White  Jessamine John  Banister  Tabb 3549 

Early  Death Hartley  Coleridge 3550 

The  Moss-Rose Henry  Neu'boll 3550 

A  Requiem James  Thomson 355  r 

Dirge Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans.. . .  3551 

The  Lamp  of  Poor  Souls Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall. . . .  3552 

Sentence Witter  Bynner 3553 

Resurrection Harry  Kemp 3553 

The  Sleeper Clinton  Scollard 3553 

The  Widow's  Mite Frederick  Locker-Lampson .  .  3554 

Mother  and  Poet Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning. .  3555 

A  Mother  in  Egypt Marjorie^L.  C.  Pickthall. . . .  3558 

The  Dark  Road Ethel  Clifford 35SQ 

Out  of  Hearing Jane  Barlow 3560 

"John  Anderson,  My  Jo" Charles  G.  Blanden 3560 

The  Spring  of  the  Year Allan  Cunningham ,  3561 

The  Graves  of  a  Household Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans.. . .  3561 

The  Family  Meeting Charles  Sprague 3562 

The  Two  April  Mornings William  W ordsivorth 3564 

"Surprised  by  Joy " William  Wordsworth 3566 

The  Revel Bartholomew'  Dowling 3S66 

The  Choice '. .  .Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti 3568 

Readen  ov  a  Head-Stwone William  Barnes 3569 

The  Two  Mysteries Mary  Ma  pes  Dodge 357o 

Forever John  Boyle  O'Reilly 357 1 

Now  and  Afterwards Dinah  Maria  Mulock  Craik .  3572 

"Now  the  Laborer's  Task  isO'er"..  .  .John  Lodge  Ellerton 3573 

Love  and  Death Margaret  Dcland 3574 

Van  Elsen Frederick  George  Scott 3574 

The  Flight Lloyd  Mifflin 3575 

Ripe  Grain Dora  Reed  Goodale 3575 

"The      Land      Which      No      One 

Knows" Ebenezer  Elliott 3576 

The  Hills  of  Rest .Albert  Bigrlow  Paine 3577 

At  the  Top  of  the  Road Charles  Buxton  Going 3577 

Shemuel Edivard  Bowen 3578 

She  and  He Ed'win  A  mold 3579 

After  Death  in  Arabia Edxvin  Arnold 3582 

SENTINEL  SONGS 

To    the    Earl    of    Warwick,    on    the 

Death  of  Mr.  Addison Thomas  Tickell 3584 

The  Eagle  that  is  Forgotten Vachel  Lindsay 3587 

Elegiac  Stanzas William  Wordsworth 3587 

William  Blake James  Thomson 3589 

Edwin  Booth Alice  Brown 359P 


Ixxx  Table  of  Contents 


PAGE 

General  William  Booth  Enters  into 

Heaven Vachel  Lindsay 3593 

E.  B.  B James  Thomson 3594 

Robert  Burns William  Alexander 3595 

On  a  Fly-leaf  of  Burns's  Songs Frederic  Lawrence  Knowles. .    3596 

On  the  Deaths  of  Thomas  Carlyle  and 

George  Ehot Algernon  Charles  Sivinburne.  3596 

At  the  Grave  of  Champernowne John  Albee 3597 

The  Opening  of  the  Tomb  of  Charle- 
magne   Aubrey  de  Vere 3597 

By  the   Statue  of   King   Charles   at 

Charing  Cross Lionel  Johnson 3598 

Chavez Mildred  McNeal  Sweeney .  . .   3600 

Coleridge Theodore  Watls-Dunton 3601 

Cowper's  Grave Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning .  .    3601 

On  a  Bust  of  Dante Thomas  William  Parsons .  .  .   3604 

Dickens  in  Camp Bret  Harte 3606 

Drake's  Drum Henry  Ncwbolt 3607 

On    the    Death   of   Joseph    Rodman 

Dralre Fitz-Greene  Halleck 3608 

"Oh,  Breathe  Not  His  Name" Thomas  Moore 3609 

Vanquished Francis  Fisher  Browne 36og 

O.  Henry V achcl  Lindsay 3610 

Adonais Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 3612 

To  the  Sister  of  Elia Walter  Savage  Landor 3625 

In  Memory  of  Walter  Savage  Landor .  Algernon  Charles  Sivinburne.  3626 

On  the  Death  of  Mr.  Robert  Levet .  .  .  Samuel  Johnson 3628 

"O  Captain!  My  Captain  " Walt  Whitman 3629 

"When  Lilacs  Last  in  the  Dooryard 

Bloomed  " Walt  Whitman 3630 

Lincoln,  the  Man  of  the  People Edivin  Markham 3639 

The  Master Edwin  Arlington  Robinson .  .   3640 

On  the  Life-Mask  of  Abraham  Lin- 
coln   Richard  Watson  Gilder 3642 

Abraham  Lincoln Tom  Taylor 3642 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow Austin  Dobson 3645 

Mary  Queen  of  Scots C.  Tennyson-Turner 3O46 

The  Angelus Florence  Earle  Coates 3(146 

Under  The  Portrait  of  Milton John  Dryden 3647 

In  Memory  of  "Barry  Cornwall".. .  .Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.  3647 

In  Memoriam Edwin  Arnold 3648 

To  the  Memory  of  My  Beloved  Mas- 
ter William  Shakespeare Ben  Jonson 3650 

On  the  Portrait  of  Shakespeare Ben  Jonson 3652 

To  Shakespeare Hartley  Coleridge 3652 

Shakespeare Matthew  Arnold 3653 

An     Epitaph     on      the     Admirable 

Dramatic  Poet,  W.  Shakespeare. .  .  .  John  Milton 3653 

To  William  Sharp Clinton  Scollard 3<>54 

An  Ode  on  the  Unveiling  of  the  Shaw 

Memorial Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich 3655 

Memorabilia Robert  Browning 3657 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson Lizette  Woodivorth  Reese ....   3657 

Bayard  Taylor John  Greenleaf  Whittier 3658 

Lacrimre  Musarum William  Watson 3659 

Tennyson Thomas  Henry  Huxley 3663 

For  a  Copy  of  Theocritus Austin  Dobson 3664 

Theocritus Oscar  Wilde 3664 

The  Quiet  Singer Charles  Hanson  Towne 3665 

Thoreau's  Flute Louisa  May  Alcott 3667 

Ave  Atciue  Vale Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr 3668 

The  Warden  of  the  Cinque  Ports. . .  .Henry  Wadsworth  Longfelloiv  3670 


Table  of  Contents  Ixxxi 

PAGE 

Ode  on  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of 

Wellington Alfred  Tennyson 3672 

Memorial  Verses Matthew  Arnold 3680 

Wordsworth's  Grave William  Watson 3682 

JERUSALEM  THE  GOLDEN 

Jerusalem John  Mason  Neale 3689 

The  New  Jerusalem Unknown 3603 

Peace Henry  V'aughan 3(^95 

Paradise Frederick  William  Faber. .  . .  3695 

The  World Henry  Vdiighan 3&96 

The  White  Island Robert  llerrick 3698 

"This  World  is  all  a  Fleeting  Show" .  .  Thomas  Moore 3699 

The  Land  o'  the  Leal Carolina  Nairne 3^99 

Heavenward Carolina  Nairne 3700 

"Rest  is  Not  Here'' Carolina  Xairne 3701 

At  Home  in  Heaven James  Montgomery 3702 

Paradise .Christina  Georgina  Rosselti. .  3705 

"Heaven     Overarches     Earth     and 

Sea  " Christina  Georgina  Rosselti. .  3706 

The  Sunset  City Henry  Sylvester  CornweU. .  .  .  3706 

(Iradatim Josiah  Gilbert  Holland 3707 

The  Other  World Harriet  Beecher  Stowe 3708 

My  Ain  Countree Mary  Lee  Demarest 3710 

Home Ed'ward  Rowland  Sill 37  n 

Chartless Emily  Dickinson 37 11 

"It  Cannot  Be" David  Banks  Sickels 3712 

A  Thanksgiving  to  God  for  His  UoiKe. Robert  Herrick ...  3713 

The  Shepherd  Boy  Sings  in  the  Valley 

of  Humiliation John  Bunyan 3714 

The  Pilgrim John  Bunyan 37 15 

"The    Bird,    Let    Loose    in    Eastern 

Skies" Thomas  jMoore 371S 

"  He  Liveth  Long  who  Liveth  Well" . .  Horatius  Bonar 3716 

The  Master's  Touch Horatius  Bonar 3717 

How  We  Learn Horatius  Bonar 3717 

Love George  Herbert 3718 

The  Collar George  Herbert 3719 

Virtue George  Herbert 3720 

Discipline George  Herbert 3720 

Holy  Baptism George  Herbert 3721 

Unkindness George  Herbert 3722 

Prayer ^ ...........  .  Richard  Crashaw 3723 

Providence.  .  .  j\..i>iiiV(!.>'.i.J.  .yV.'j..v.v.J\  .  .Reginald  Heber 3726 

The  Beloved ': Katherine  Tynan 3727 

My  Legacy Helen  Hunt  Jackson 3727 

The  Starry  Host John  Lancaster  Spalding..  .  .  3729 

The  Celestial  Surgeon Robert  Louis  Stevenson 3729 

The  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life ....  Theodore  Parker 3730 

The  Inner  Light Frederic      William      Henry 

Myers 3730 

Heredity Lydia  Avery  Coonlcy  Ward..  3731 

Bringing  Our  Sheaves .,..'. FJizabeth  A  kers 373 1 

Take  Heart Edna  Dean  Proctor 3732 

Forward Edna  Dean  Proctor 3733 

"The  Harvest  Waits" Lloyd  Mifflin 3734 

One  Gift  I  Ask I  'irginia  Bioren  Harrison .  .  .  3734 

Magdalen Henry  Kingsley 3735 

God's  Will Mildred  Howells 373(> 

After  the  Martyrdom Seharmel  Iris 373^> 

The  Burial  of  Moses Cecil  Frances  Alexander      .  3736 


Ixxxii  Table  ot  Contents 

PAGE 

The  Crooked  Footpath Oliver  Wendell  Holmes 3739 

Allah's  Tent A  rlhur  Collon 3740 

St.  John  Baptist Arthur  O'Shaughnessy 3740 

For  the  Baptist William  Drummond 3741 

"The  Spring  is  Late" Louise  Chandler  MouUon.  .  .  3741 

The  Question Rachel  A nnand  Taylor 3742 

A  Divine  Rapture _. .  .Francis  Quarks 3742 

"If  I  Could  Shut  the  Gate  Against 

my  Thoughts" John  Daniel .:,:,i;-!,j.|..  j«j^743 

His  Litany  to  the  Holy  Spirit Robert  Uerrick .,..,..  3744 

To  Keep  a  True  Lent Robert  Uerrick 3745 

The  Fallen  Star George  Darley 3746 

"We   Need  not   Bid,   for  Cloistered 

Cell" Johti  Keble 3747 

"A  Child  My  Choice" Robert  Southwell , 3747 

An  Upper  Chamber Frances  Banncrman 3748 

The  Second  Crucifixion Richard  Le  Gallicnne 3740 

The  Voice  of  Christmas Harry  Kemp 3750 

Te  Martyrum  Candidatus Lionel  Johnson 375 1 

On  a  Sculptured  Head  of  the  Christ. .  .  Mahlon  Leonard  Fisher 3751 

Good  King  Wenceslas John  Neal 3752 

Simon  the  Cyrenean Lucy  Lyttleton 3753 

The  Winged  Worshippers Charles  Sprague 3754 

De  Sheepfol' Sarah  Pratt  McLean  Greene. .  SISS 

The  Lost  Sheep Elizabeth  Cecilia  Clephane.. .  3756 

Lost  but  Found Uoratius  Bonar 3757 

Stains Theodosia  Garrison 3758 

A  Hymn  to  God  the  Father John  Donne 3759 

Sheep  and  Lambs Katharine  Tynan 3759 

"All's  Well" William  Allen  Butler 3760 

Living  Waters Caroline  Spencer 3761 

One  by  One Adelaide  Anne  Procter 3761 

Unbehef Elizabeth  York  Case 3762 

"There  is  no  Death" John  Luckey  McCreery 3763 

The  Fool's  Prayer Edward  Rowland  Sill 3764 

The  Eclipse Henry  Vaughan 3766 

Comfort Elizabeth  Barrett  Broivning. .  3766 

St.  Agnes'  Eve Alfred  Tennyson 3767 

His  Banner  Over  Me Gerald  Massey 3768 

Jesus  the  Carpenter Catharine  C.  Liddell 3768 

"I  Saw  Thee" Ray  Palmer 3769 

The  Veteran  of  Heaven Fraiicis  'Thompson 3770 

Lucifer  in  Starlight George  Meredith 3771 

Hora  Christi Alice  Bro'wn 3772 

Christus  Consolator Rossiter     Worthington    Ray- 
mond   3773 

That  Holy  Thing George  Macdonald 3774 

What  Christ  Said George  Macdonald 3774 

San  Lorenzo  Giustiniani's  Mother. .  .  .Alice  Meynell. 3775 

A  Ballad  of  Trees  and  the  Master Sidney  Lanier 3776 

The  Mystery Ralph  Hodgson 3776 

SONGS  OF  PRAISE 

Dies  Ira? A  braham  Coles,  tr 3777 

Stabat  Mater  Dolorosa Abraham  Coles,  tr 3779 

Veni,  Sancte  Spiritus Catharine  Winkworth,  tr..  . .  3780 

Veni,  Creator  Spiritus John  Dryden,  tr 3782 

Stanzas  from  "Song  to  David" Christopher  Smart 3783 

Nox  Nocti  Indicat  Scientiam William  Habington 3786 

"The  Spacious  Firmament  on  Yi\g\\"  .Joseph  Addison 3787 


Table  of  Contents  Ixxxiii 

PAGE 

Universal  Prayer Alexander  Pope 3788 

"OGod,  Our  Help  in  Ages  Past" Isaac  Walls 37go 

"Jesus,  Lover  of  My  Soul" Charles  Wesley 379i 

"A  Charge  to  Keep  I  Have" Charles  Wesley 3792 

Coronation Edivard  Perronet 3792 

"Holy,  Holy,  Holy" Reginald  Heber 3793 

"The  Son  of  God  Goes  Forth  to  War"  Reginald  Ileber 3794 

"From  Greenland's  Icy  Mountains  "..i?cgi»a/(f  Heber 3795 

Light  Shining  Out  of  Darkness William  Cowper 3796 

Rock  of  Ages .Augustus  Monlague  Toplady .  3797 

Love  to  the  Church Timolhy  Dwighl 3797 

Good  Tidings  of   Great  Joy   to  All 

People James  Monlgomery 3798 

Christ  Our  Example  in  Suffering.  .  .  .James  Monlgomery 3799 

"Just  as  I  Am " Charlotle  Elliott 3S00 

"Blest  Be  the  Tie  that  Binds" John  Faivcett 3801 

"In  the  Cross  of  Christ  I  Glory". .  .  .John  Bowring 3802 

"Abide  with  Me" Henry  Francis  Lyte 3802 

The  Hour  of  Peaceful  Rest.  ........  .William  Bingham  Tappan.  .  3803 

The  Pillar  of  the  Cloud John  Henry  Newman 3804 

"Nearer  to  Thee" Sarah  Floiver  Adams 3805 

"  A  Mighty  Fortress  is  Our  God  " Frederick  Henry  Hedge 3806 

Prayer  to  the  Trinity James  Edmeston 3807 

In  Sorrow Thomas  Hastings 3808 

"Just  for  To-day" Sybil  F.  Partridge 3808 

Lovest  Thou  Me? William  Cowper 3809 

The  Voice  from  Galilee Horalius  Bonar 3810 

Faith Ray  Palmer 3810 

He  Standeth  at  the  Door Arthur  Cleveland  Coxe 3811 

"There  is  a  Green  Hill" Cecil  Frances  Alexander ....  3812 

Nearer  Home Phoebe  Cary . 3813 

"Onward,  Christian  Soldiers" Sabine  Baring-Gould 3814 

Evening George  Washington  Doane .  .  .  3815 

A  Dedication Rudyard  Kipling 3816 


APPENDIX 

CONTAINING  A  FEW  OF  THE  MORE  FAMOUS  POEMS  IN 
OTHER  LANGUAGES,  OF  WHICH  TRANSLATIONS  OR 
PARAPHRASES  OCCUR  IN  THE  FOREGOING  PAGES 

Dies  IrjE Tommdso  di  Celano 3819 

Stabat  Mater  Dolorosa Jacopone  da  Todi 3821 

Veni,  Sancte  Spiritus Robert  II.  of  France 3822 

Veni,  Creator  Spiritus St.  Gregory  the  Great  {?) ....  3823 

Urbs  Syon  Aurea Bernard  of  Cluny 3824 

Urbs  Beata  Hierusalem Unknown 3826 

Vivamus,  Mea  Lesbia Gaius  Valerius  Catullus 3827 

Persicos  Odi Quintus  Horalius  Flaccus ...  3827 

Integer  Vitae Quintus  Horalius  Flaccus .  . .  3828 

Rectius  Vives Quintus  Horalius  Flaccus .  .  .  3829 

De  Brevitate  Vitae Unknoivn 3829 

Lauriger  Horatius Utiknown 3831 

Ein  Feste  Burg Martin  Luther 3831 

Lied,  "Ins  stille  land" Johann  Gaudenz  von  Salis- 

Secwis 3832 

Die  Wacht  am  Rhein Max  Schneckcnburger 3833 

Des  Deutschen  Vaterland Ernst  Moritz  Arndt 3834 

La  Marseillaise Claude  Joseph  Rougel  de  Lisle  3836 


Ixxxiv  Table  of  Contents 


PAGB 

Ballade  des  Dames  du  Temps  Jadis. .  .  Francois  Villon 3837  , 

Ballade  de  Frere  Lubin Clement  Marol 3838 

Le  Grenier Pierre-Jean  dc  Beranger ....  3839 

Le  Roi  d'Yvetot Pierre-Jean  dc  Beranger .  .  .  .  3840 

Fantaisie Gerard  de  Nerval 3842 

L'Art Theophile  Gaulier 3842 

Carcassonne Gustave  Nadaud 3844 

Hassgesang  Gegen  England Ernsl  Lissaucr 3846 

Index  of  Authors 3849 

Index  of  First  Lines 3913 

Index  of  Titles , .  :^^  :,^„ >  . ^^y^.'^^  .....  3975 


PART  I 
POEMS  OF  YOUTH  AND  AGE 


THE  HUMAN   SEASONS 

Four  Seasons  fill  the  measure  of  the  year; 
There  are  four  seasons  in  the  mind  of  man: 
He  has  his  lusty  Spring,  when  fancy  clear 
Takes  in  all  beauty  with  an  easy  span: 

He  has  his  Summer,  when  luxuriously 

Spring's  honeyed  cud  of  youthful  thought  he  loves 

To  ruminate,  and  by  such  dreaming  high 

Is  nearest  unto  Heaven:  quiet  coves 

His  soul  has  in  its  Autumn,  when  his  wings 
He  furleth  close;  contented  so  to  look 
On  mists  in  idleness — to  let  fair  things 
Pass  by  unheeded  as  a  threshold  brook: — 

He  has  his  Winter  too  of  pale  misfeature, 
Or  else  he  would  forego  his  mortal  nature. 

John  Keats  [i 795-1 82 ij 


THE   BABY 

''ONLY  A  BABY   SMALL'- 

Only  a  baby  small, 

Dropped  from  the  skies, 
Only  a  laughing  face, 

Two  sunny  eyes; 
Only  two  cherry  lips, 

One  chubby  nose; 
Only  two  little  hands. 

Ten  Uttle  toes. 

Only  a  golden  head. 

Curly  and  soft ; 
Only  a  tongue  that  wags 

Loudly  and  oft; 
Only  a  little  brain, 

Empty  of  thought; 
Only  a  little  heart, 

Troubled  with  naught. 

Only  a  tender  flower 

Sent  us  to  rear; 
Only  a  life  to  love 

While  we  are  here; 
Only  a  baby  small, 

Never  at  rest; 
Small,  but  how  dear  to  us, 

God  knoweth  best. 

Matthias  Barr  [1831- 

ONLY 

Something  to  live  for  came  to  the  place. 
Something  to  die  for  maybe, 

Something  to  give  even  sorrow  a  grace, 
And  yet  it  was  only  a  baby! 
3 


Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Cooing,  and  laughter,  and  gurgles,  and  cries, 

Dimples  for  tenderest  kisses. 
Chaos  of  hopes,  and  of  raptures,  and  sighs, 

Chaos  of  fears  and  of  blisses. 

Last  year,  like  all  years,  the  rose  and  the  thorn; 

This  year  a  wilderness  maybe; 
But  heaven  stooped  under  the  roof  on  the  morn 

That  it  brought  them  only  a  baby. 

Harriet  Prescott  Spoford  [1835- 

INFANT  JOY 

"I  HAVE  no  name; 

I  am  but  two  days  old." 

What  shall  I  call  thee?    " 

"I  happy  am, 

Joy  is  my  name." 

Sweet  joy  befall  thee! 

Pretty  joy! 

Sweet  joy,  but  two  days  old. 

Sweet  joy  I  call  thee; 

Thou  dost  smile, 

I  sing  the  Vv^hile; 

Sweet  joy  befall  thee! 

William  Blake  [175  7-1 82 7] 

BABY 

From  "  At  the  Back  of  the  North  Wind  " 

Where  did  you  come  from,  baby  dear? 
Out  of  the  everywhere  into  the  here. 

Where  did  you  get  those  eyes  so  blue? 
Out  of  the  sky  as  I  came  through. 

What  makes  the  light  in  them  sparkle  and  spin? 
Some  of  the  starry  spikes  left  in. 

Where  did  you  get  that  Httle  tear? 
I  found  it  waiting  when  I  got  here. 


To  a   New-born    Baby   Girl 

What  makes  your  forehead  so  smooth  and  high? 
A  soft  hand  stroked  it  as  I  went  by. 

What  makes  your  cheek  like  a  warm  white  rose? 
I  saw  something  better  than  any  one  knows. 

Whence  that  three-cornered  smile  of  bhss? 
Three  angels  gave  me  at  once  a  kiss. 

Where  did  you  get  this  pearly  ear? 
God  spoke,  and  it  came  out  to  hear. 

Where  did  you  get  those  arms  and  hands? 
Love  made  itself  into  bonds  and  bands. 

Feet,  where  did  you  come,  you  darling  things? 
From  the  same  box  as  the  cherubs'  wings. 

How  did  they  all  just  come  to  be  you? 
God  thought  about  me,  and  so  I  grew. 

But  how  did  you  come  to  us,  you  dear? 
God  thought  about  you,  and  so  I  am  here. 

George  MacdonalJ  [1824-1905] 

TO  A  NEW-BORN  BABY  GIRL 

And  did  thy  sapphire  shallop  slip 
Its  moorings  suddenly,  to  dip 
Adown  the  clear,  ethereal  sea 
From  star  to  star,  all  silently? 
What  tenderness  of  archangels 
In  silver  thrilling  syllables 
Pursued  thee,  or  what  dulcet  hymn 
Low-chanted  by  the  cherubim?  '' 

And  thou  departing  must  have  heard 
The  holy  Mary's  farewell  word, 
Who  with  deep  eyes  and  wistful  smile 
Remembered  Earth  a  little  while. 

Now  from  the  coasts  of  morning  pale 
Comes  safe  to  port  thy  tiny  sail. 
Now  have  we  seen  by  early  sun, 
Thy  miracle  of  life  begun. 
All  breathing  and  aware  thou  art. 
With  beauty  templed  in  thy  heart 


6  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

To  let  thee  recognize  the  thrill 

Of  wings  along  far  azure  hill, 

And  hear  within  the  hollow  sky 

Thy  friends  the  angels  rushing  by. 

These  shall  recall  that  thou  hast  known 

Their  distant  country  as  thine  own, 

To  spare  thee  word  of  vales  and  streams. 

And  pubhsh  heaven  through  thy  dreams. 

The  human  accents  of  the  breeze 

Through  swaying  star-acquainted  trees 

Shall  seem  a  voice  heard  earlier, 

Her  voice,  the  adoring  sigh  of  her, 

When  thou  amid  rosy  cherub-play 

Didst  hear  her  call  thee,  far  away,    ''"  ^""'"'^ 

And  dream  in  very  Paradise  '■'.I-  .■.■>.>U 

The  worship  of  thy  mother's  eyes. 

Grace  Hazard  Conkling  [i8 

TO  LITTLE  RENEE  ON  FIRST  SEEING  HER  LYING 
IN  HER  CRADLE 

Who  is  she  here  that  now  I  see, 

This  dainty  new  divinity. 

Love's  sister,  Venus'  child?     She  shows 

Her  hues,  white  lily  and  pink  rose. 

And  in  her  laughing  eyes  the  snares 

That  hearts  entangle  unawares. 

Ah,  woe  to  men  if  Love  should  yield . 

His  arrows  to  this  girl  to  wield  j 

Even  in  play,  for  she  would  give 

Sore  wounds  that  none  might  take  and  live. 

Yet  no  such  wanton  strain  is  hers, 

Nor  Leda's  child  and  Jupiter's 

Is  she,  though  swans  no  softer  are 

Than  whom  she  fairer  is  by  far. 

For  she  was  born  beside  the  rill 

That  gushes  from  Parnassus'  hill, 

And  by  the  bright  Pierian  spring 

She  shall  receive  an  offering 

From  every  youth  who  pipes  a  strain 

Beside  his  flocks  upon  the  plain. 


'^~'     To   Little   Renee 

But  I,  the  first,  this  very  day, 
Will  tune  for  her  my  humble  lay, 
Invoking  this  new  Muse  to  render 
My  oaten  reed  more  sweet  and  tender, 
Within  its  vibrant  hollows  wake 
Such  dulcet  voices  for  her  sake 
As,  curved  hand  at  straining  ear, 
I  long  have  stood  and  sought  to  hear^ 
Borne  with  the  warm  midsummer  breeze 
With  scent  of  hay  and  hum  of  bees 
Faintly  from  far-off  Sicily.  .  .  . 

Ah,  well  I  know  that  not  for  us 

Are  Virgil  and  Theocritus, 

And  that  the  golden  age  is  past  ,  / 

Whereof  they  sang,  and  thou,  the  last, 

Sweet  Spenser,  of  their  god-like  line, 

Soar  far  too  swift  for  verse  of  mine 

One  strain  to  compass  of  your  song. 

Yet  there  are  poets  that  prolong         "f^ 

Of  your  rare  voice  the  ravishment 

In  silver  cadences;  content 

Were  I  if  I  could  but  rehearse 

One  stave  of  Wither's  starry  verse, 

Weave  such  wrought  richness  as  recalls 

Britannia's  lovely  Pastorals, 

Or  in  some  garden-spot  suspire  Jf 

One  breath  of  Marvell's  magic  fire 

When  in  the  green  and  leafy  shade 

He  sees  dissolving  all  that's  made. 

Ah,  little  Muse,  still  far  too  high 

On  weak,  clipped  wings  my  wishes  fly. 

Transform  them  then  and  make  them  doves, 

Soft-moaning  birds  that  Venus  loves, 

That  they  may  circle  ever  low 

Above  the  abode  where  you  shall  grow 

Into  yoiir  gracious  womanhood. 

And  you  shall  feed  the  gentle  brood 

From  out  your  hand— content  they'll  be 

Only  to  coo  their  songs  to  thee. 

William  Aspcnwall  Bradley  [1878- 


Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


A   RHYME  OF  ONE 

You  sleep   upon   your  mother's  breast, 

Your  race  begun, 
A  welcome,  long  a  wished-for  Guest, 

Whose  age  is  One. 

A  Baby-Boy,  you  wonder  why 

You  cannot  run; 
You  try  to  talk — how  hard  you  try!— = 

You're  only  One. 

Ere  long  you  won't  be  such  a  dunce: 

You'll  eat  your  bun, 
And  fly  your  kite,  like  folk  who  once 

Were  only  One. 

You'll  rhyme  and  woo,  and  fight  and  joke. 

Perhaps  you'll  pun! 
Such  feats  are  never  done  by  folk 

Before  they're  One. 

Some  day,  too,  you  may  have  your  joy. 

And  envy  none; 
Yes,  you,  yourself,  may  own  a  Boy, 

Who  isn't  One. 

He'll  dance,  and  laugh,  and  crow;  he'll  do 

As  you  have  done: 
(You  crown  a  happy  home,  though  you 

Are  only  One.) 

But  when  he's  grown  shall  you  be  here 

To  share  his  fun, 
And  talk  of  times  when  he  (the  Dear!) 

Was  hardly  One? 

Dear  Child,  'tis  your  poor  lot  to  be 

My  Httle  Son; 
I'm  glad,  though  I  am  old,  you  see,-^'' 

While  you  are  One. 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  [1821-1895] 


To  a  New-Born   Child 


TO  A  NEW-BORN   CHILD 

Small  traveler  from  an  unseen  shore, 
By  mortal  eye  ne'er  seen  before, 

To  you,  good-morrow. 
You  arc  as  fair  a  little  dame 
As  ever  from  a  glad  world  came 

To  one  of  sorrow. 

We  smile  above  you,  but  you  fret; 
We  call  you  gentle  names,  and  yet 

Your  cries  redouble.  ■ 

'Tis  hard  for  little  babes  to  prize 
The  tender  love  that  underlies 

A  life  of  trouble. 

And  have  you  come  from  Heaven  to  earth? 
That  were  a  road  of  little  mirth, 

A  doleful  travel. 
"Why  did  I  come?"  you  seem  to  cry, 
But  that's  a  riddle  you  and  I 

Can  scarce  unravel. 

Perhaps  you  really  wished  to  come, 
But  now  you  are  so  far  from  home 

Repent  the  trial. 
What!  did  you  leave  celestial  bliss 
To  bless  us  with  a  daughter's  kiss? 

What  self-denial! 

Have  patience  for  a  little  space, 

You  might  have  come  to  a  worse  place. 

Fair  Angel-rover. 
No  wonder  now  you  would  have  stayed, 
But  hush  your  cries,  my  httle  maid, 

The  journey's  over. 

For,  utter  stranger  as  you  are, 
There  yet  are  many  hearts  ajar 

For  your  arriving, 
And  trusty  friends  and  lovers  true 
Are  waiting,  ready-made  for  you, 

Without  your  striving. 


xo  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  earth  is  full  of  lovely  things, 
And  if  at  first  you  miss  your  wings, 

You'll  soon  forget  them; 
And  others,  of  a  rarer  kind 
Will  grow  upon  your  tender  mind--^  ''I    '-'' 

If  you  will  let  them —  '  ■ 

Until  you  find  that  your  exchange 

Of  Heaven  for  earth  expands  your  range 

E'en  as  a  flier, 
And  that  your  mother,  you  and  I, 
If  we  do  what  we  should,  may  fly 

Than  Angels  higher. 

Cosmo  Monkhouse  [1840-1901] 


BABY   MAY 

Cheeks  as  soft  as  July  peaches, 
Lips  whose  dewy  scarlet  teaches 
Poppies  paleness — round  large  eyes 
Ever  great  with  new  surprise, 
Minutes  filled  with  shadeless  gladness, 
Minutes  just  as  brimmed  with  sadness, 
Happy  "Smiles  and  wailing  cries. 
Crows  and  laughs  and  tearful  eyes,        ' 
Lights  and  shadows  swifter  born 
Than  on  wind-swept  Autumn  corn. 
Ever  some  new  tiny  notion 
Making  every  limb  all  motion — 
Catching  up  of  legs  and  arms, 
Throwings  back  and  small  alarms, 
Clutching  fingers — straightening  jerks, 
Twining  feet  whose  each  toe  works, 
Kickings  up  and  straining  risings. 
Mother's  ever  new  surprisings, 
Hands  all  wants  and  looks  all  wonder 
At  all  things  the  heavens  under, 
Tiny  scorns  of  smiled  reprovings 
'That  have  more  of  love  than  lovings, 


Alice  1 1 

Mischiefs  done  with  such  a  winning 
Archness,  that  we  prize  such  sinning, 
Breakings  dire  of  plates  and  glasses, 
Graspings  small  at  all  that  passes. 
Fallings  off  of  all  that's  able  ■ ' 

To  be  caught  from  tray  or  table;  ;  j- 

Silences — small  meditations, 
Deep  as  thoughts  of  cares  for  nations, 
Breaking  into  wisest  speeches 
In  a  tongue  that  nothing  teaches. 
All  the  thoughts  of  whose  possessing 
Must  be  wooed  to  light  by  guessing; 
Slumbers — such  sweet  angel-seemings. 
That  we'd  ever  have  such  dreamings, 
Till  from  sleep  we  see  thee  breaking, 
And  we'd  always  have  thee  waking; 
Wealth  for  which  we  know  no  measure, 
Pleasure  high  above  all  pleasure,  _.  i 

Gladness  brimming  over  gladness,  f/' 

Joy  in  care — delight  in  sadness, 
Loveliness  beyond  completeness, 
Sweetness  distancing  all  sweetness,         .  ,' 
Beauty  all  that  beauty  may  be — 
That's  May  Bennett,  that's  my  baby. 

William  Cox  Bennett  [1820-1895] 

ALICE 

Of  deepest  blue  of  summer  skies 
Is  wrought  the  heaven  of  her  eyes. 

Of  that  fine  gold  the  autumns  wear 
Is  wrought  the  glory  of  her  hair. 

Of  rose  leaves  fashioned  in  the  south  / 
Is  shaped  the  marvel  of  her  mouth. 

And  from  the  honeyed  lips  of  bliss 
Is  drawn  the  sweetness  of  her  kiss, 

'Mid  twilight  thrushes  that  rejoice 
Is  found  the  cadence  of  her  voice, 


12  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Of  winds  that  wave  the  western  fir 
Is  made  the  velvet  touch  of  her. 

Of  all  earth's  songs  God  took  the  half 
To  make  the  ripple  of  her  laugh. 

I  hear  you  ask,  "Pray  who  is  she?" — 
This  maid  that  is  so  dear  to  me. 

"A  reigning  queen  in  Fashion's  whirl?" 
Nay,  nay!     She  is  my  baby  girl. 

Herbert  Bashford  [187 1 

SONGS  FOR  FRAGOLETTA 

I 

Fragoletta,  blessed  one! 

What  think  you  of  the  light  of  the  sun?  ',. 

Do  you  think  the  dark  was  best, 

Lying  snug  in  mother's  breast? 

Ah!  I  knew  that  sweetness,  too, 

Fragoletta,  before  you! 

But,  Fragoletta,  now  you're  born, 

You  must  learn  to  love  the  morn, 

Love  the  lovely  working  light. 

Love  the  miracle  of  sight. 

Love  the  thousand  things  to  do — 

Little  girl,  I  envy  you! — 

Love  the  thousand  things  to  see. 

Love  your  mother,  and — love  me! 

And  some  night,  Fragoletta,  soon, 

I'll  take  you  out  to  see  the  moon; 

And  for  the  first  time,  child  of  ours. 

You  shall — think  of  it! — look  on  flowerSp 

And  smell  them,  too,  if  you  are  good. 

And  hear  the  green  leaves  in  the  wood 

Talking,  talking,  all  together 

In  the  happy  windy  weather; 

And  if  the  journey's  not  too  far 

For  Httle  limbs  so  lately  made. 

Limb  upon  limb  like  petals  laid, 

We'll  go  and  picnic  in  a  star. 


Songs  for  Fragoletta  13 


Blue  eyes,  looking  up  at  me, 
I  wonder  what  you  really  see, 
Lying  in  your  cradle  there, 
Fragrant  as  a  branch  of  myrrh? 
Helpless  little  hands  and  feet, 
O  so  helpless!    O  so  sweet! 
Tiny  tongue  that  cannot  talk, 
Tiny  feet  that  cannot  walk. 
Nothing  of  you  that  can  do 
Aught,  except  those  eyes  of  blue. 
How  they  open,  how  they  close! — 
EyeUds  of  the  baby-rose. 
Open  and  shut — so  blue,  so  wise, 
Baby-eyeUds,  baby-eyes. 

Ill 

That,  Fragoletta,  is  the  rain 

Beating  upon  the  window-pane; 

But  lo!   The  golden  sun  appears, 

To  kiss  away  the  window's  tears. 

That,  Fragoletta,  is  the  wind. 

That  rattles  so  the  window-blind; 

And  yonder  shining  thing's  a  star. 

Blue  eyes — you  seem  ten  times  as  fan 

That,  Fragoletta,  is  a  bird 

That  speaks,  yet  never  says  a  word; 

Upon  a  cherry  tree  it  sings, 

Simple  as  all  mysterious  things; 

Its  little  life  to  peck  and  pipe, 

As  long  as  cherries  ripe  and  ripe. 

And  minister  unto  the  need 

Of  baby-birds  that  feed  and  feed. 

This,  Fragoletta,  is  a  flower, 

Open  and  fragrant  for  an  hour, 

A  flower,  a  transitory  thing, 

Each  petal  fleeting  as  a  wing, 

All  a  May  morning  blows  and  blows, 

And  then  for  everlasting  goes. 


14  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

IV 

Blue  eyes,  against  the  whiteness  pressed 
Of  Httle  mother's  hallowed  breast, 
The  while  your  trembling  lips  are  fed, 
Look  up  at  mother's  bended  head, 
All  benediction  over  you — 
O  blue  eyes  looking  into  blue! 

Fragoletta  is  so  small, 

We  wonder  that  she  lives  at  all — 

Tiny  alabaster  girl, 

Hardly  bigger  than  a  pearl; 

That  is  why  we  take  such  care, 

Lest  some  one  run  away  with  her. 

Richard  Le  Gallienne  [1866- 


CHOOSING  A  NAME 

I  HAVE  got  a  new-born  sister: 
I  was  nigh  the  first  that  kissed  her. 
When  the  nursing-woman  brought  her 
To  papa,  his  infant  daughter, 
How  papa's  dear  eyes  did  glisten! 
She  will  shortly  be  to  christen; 
And  papa  has  made  the  offer, 
I  shall  have  the  naming  of  her. 

Now  I  wonder  what  would  please  her,- 

Charlotte,  Julia,  or  Louisa? 

Ann  and  Mary,  they're  too  common; 

Joan's  too  formal  for  a  woman; 

Jane's  a  prettier  name  beside; 

But  we  had  a  Jane  that  died. 

They  would  say,  if  'twas  Rebecca, 

That  she  was  a  little  Quaker. 

Edith's  pretty,  but  that  looks 

Better  in  old  English  books; 


-,r  -'Weighing  the   Baby  .15 

Ellen's  left  off  long  ago; 

Blanche  is  out  of  fashion  now. 

None  that  I  have  named  as  yet 

Is  so  good  as  Margaret. 

Emily  is  neat  and  fine; 

What  do  you  think  of  Caroline? 

How  I'm  puzzled  and  perplexed 

What  to  choose  or  think  of  next! 

I  am  in  a  little  fever 

Lest  the  name  that  I  should  give  her 

Should  disgrace  her  or  defame  her; — 

I  will  leave  papa  to  name  her. 

Mary  Lamb  [1764-1847] 


WEIGHING  THE  BABY 

"How  many  pounds  does  the  baby  weigh — 
Baby  who  came  but  a  month  ago? 

How  many  pounds  from  the  crowning  curl 
To  the  rosy  point  of  the  restless  toe?" 

Grandfather  ties  the  'kerchief  knot, 
Tenderly  guides  the  swinging  weight, 

And  carefully  over  his  glasses  peers 
To  read  the  record,  "only  eight." 

Softly  the  echo  goes  around: 

The  father  laughs  at  the  tiny  girl; 

The  fair  young  mother  sings  the  words, 

While  grandmother  smooths  the  golden  curl. 

And  stooping  above  the  precious  thing. 

Nestles  a  kiss  within  a  prayer. 
Murmuring  softly  "Little  one, 

Grandfather  did  not  weigh  you  fair." 

Nobody  weighed  the  baby's  smile. 

Or  the  love  that  came  with  the  helpless  one; 

Nobody  weighed  the  threads  of  care, 
From  which  a  woman's  life  is  spun. 


1 6  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

No  index  tells  the  mighty  worth 
Of  a  little  baby's  quiet  breath — 

A  soft,  unceasing  metronome, 
Patient  and  faithful  until  death. 


Nobody  weighed  the  baby's  soul. 
For  here  on  earth  no  weights  there  be 

That  could  avail;  God  only  knows 
Its  value  in  eternity. 

Only  eight  pounds  to  hold  a  soul 
That  seeks  no  angel's  silver  wing, 

But  shrines  it  in  this  human  guise, 
Within  so  frail  and  small  a  thing! 

Oh,  mother!  laugh  your  merry  note, 
Be  gay  and  glad,  but  don't  forget 

From  baby's  eyes  looks  out  a  soul 
That  claims  a  home  in  Eden  yet. 

Ethel  Lynn  Beers  [1827-1879] 


fiTUDE    REALISTE 


A  baby's  feet,  like  seashells  pink, 

Might  tempt,  should  heaven  see  meet, 
An  angel's  lips  to  kiss,  we  think, 
A  baby's  feet. 

Like  rose-hued  sea-flowers  toward  the  heat 

They  stretch  and  spread  and  wink 
Their  ten  soft  buds  that  part  and  meet. 

No  fllower-bells  that  expand  and  shrink 

Gleam  half  so  heavenly  sweet. 
As  shine  on  life's  untrodden  brink 
A  baby's  feet. 


Little  Feet  17 

II 

A  baby's  hands,  like  rosebuds  furled, 

Where  yet  no  leaf  expands, 
Ope  if  you  touch,  though  close  upcurled, — 
A  baby's  hands. 

Then,  even  as  warriors  grip  their  brands 

When  battle's  bolt  is  hurled. 
They  close,  clenched  hard  Uke  tightening  bands. 

No  rosebuds  yet  by  dawn  impearled 

Match,  even  in  lovehest  lands. 
The  sweetest  flowers  in  all  the  world,— 
A  baby's  hands. 

in 

A  baby's  eyes,  ere  speech  begin, 
Ere  lips  learn  words  or  sighs, 
Bless  all  things  bright  enough  to  win 
A  baby's  eyes. 

Love,  while  the  sweet  thing  laughs  and  lies, 

And  sleep  flows  out  and  in, 
Sees  perfect  in  them  Paradise! 

Their  glance  might  cast  out  pain  and  sin, 

Their  speech  make  dumb  the  wise, 
By  mute  glad  godhead  felt  within 
A  baby's  eyes. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1009] 


LITTLE   FEET 

Two  little  feet,  so  small  that  both  may  nestle 

In  one  caressing  hand, — 
Two  tender  feet  upon  the  untried  border 

Of  life's  mysterious  land. 


8  Poems  of  Youth   and  Age 

Dimpled,  and  soft,  and  pink  as  peach-tree  blossoms, 

In  April's  fragrant  days, 
How  can  they  walk  among  the  briery  tangles, 

Edging  the  world's  rough  ways? 

These  rose-white  feet,  along  the  doubtful  future. 

Must  bear  a  mother's  load; 
Alas!  since  Woman  has  the  heavier  burden, 

And  walks  the  harder  road. 

Love,  for  a  while,  will  make  the  path  before  them 
All  dainty,  smooth,  and  fair,— 

Will  cull  away  the  brambles,  letting  only 
The  roses  blossom  there. 

But  when  the  mother's  watchful  eyes  are  shrouded 

Away  from  sight  of  men. 
And  these  dear  feet  are  left  without  her  guiding, 

Who  shall  direct  them  then? 

How  will  they  be  allured,  betrayed,  deluded. 

Poor  Httle  untaught  feet! 
Into  what  dreary  mazes  will  they  wander, 

What  dangers  will  they  meet? 

Will  they  go  stumbling  blindly  in  the  darkness 

Of  Sorrow's  tearful  shades? 
Or  find  the  upland  slopes  of  Peace  and  Beauty, 

Whose  sunlight  never  fades? 

Will  they  go  toiUng  up  Ambition's  summit. 

The  common  world  above? 
Or  in  some  nameless  vale,  securely  sheltered. 

Walk  side  by  side  with  Love? 

Some  feet  there  be  which  walk  Life's  track  unwounded, 
Which  find  but  pleasant  ways: 

Some  hearts  there  be  to  which  this  life  is  only 
A  round  of  happy  days. 


The   Babie  19 

But  these  are  few.     Far  more  there  are  who  wander 

Without  a  hope  or  friend, — 
Who  find  their  journey  full  of  pains  and  losses, 

And  long  to  reach  the  end. 

How  shall  it  be  with  her,  the  tender  stranger. 

Fair- faced  and  gentle-eyed, 
Before  whose  unstained  feet  the  world's  rude  highway 

Stretches  so  fair  and  wide? 

Ah!  who  may  read  the  future?     For  our  darHng 

We  crave  all  blessings  sweet, 
And  pray  that  He  who  feeds  the  crying  ravens 

Will  guide  the  baby's  feet. 

Elizabeth  Akers  [1832-1911] 

THE   BABIE 

Nae  shoon  to  hide  her  tiny  taes, 

Nae  stockin'  on  her  feet; 
Her  supple  ankles  white  as  snaw, 

Or  early  blossoms  sweet. 

Her  simple  dress  o'  sprinkled  pink, 

Her  double,  dimplit  chin. 
Her  puckered  lips,  an'  baumy  mou', 

With  na  ane  tooth  within. 

Her  een  sae  like  her  mither's  een, 

Twa  gentle,  liquid  things; 
Her  face  is  like  an  angel's  face, — 

We're  glad  she  has  nae  wings. 

She  is  the  buddin'  of  our  luve, 

A  giftie  God  gied  us: 
We  maun  na  luve  the  gift  owre  weel, 

'Twad  be  nae  blessin'  thus. 

We  still  maun  luve  the  Giver  mair, 

An'  see  Him  in  the  given; 
An'  sae  she'll  lead  us  up  to  Him, 

Our  babie  straight  frae  Heaven. 

Jeremiah  Eames  Rankin  [1828-1^04] 


20  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


LITTLE  HANDS 

Soft  little  hands  that  stray  and  clutch, 

Like  fern  fronds  curl  and  uncurl  bold, 

While  baby  faces  lie  in  such 

Close  sleep  as  flowers  at  night  that  fold, 

What  is  it  you  would  clasp  and  hold,   • 

Wandering  outstretched  with  wilful  touch? 

O  fingers  small  of  shell-tipped  rose, 

How  should  you  know  you  hold  so  much? 

Two  full  hearts  beating  you  inclose, 

Hopes,  fears,  prayers,  longings,  joys  and  woes,— 

All  yours  to  hold,  O  little  hands! 

More,  more  than  wisdom  understands 

And  love,  love  only  knows. 

Laurence  Binyon  [1869- 

BARTHOLOMEW 

Bartholomew  is  very  sweet. 
From  sandy  hair  to  rosy  feet. 

Bartholomew  is  six  months  old, 
And  dearer  far  than  pearls  or  gold. 

Bartholomew  has  deep  blue  eyes, 

Round  pieces  dropped  from  out  the  skies. 

Bartholomew  is  hugged  and  kissed: 
He  loves  a  flower  in  either  fist. 

Bartholomew's  my  saucy  son: 
No  mother  has  a  sweeter  one! 

Norman  Gale  [1862- 

THE  STORM-CHILD 

My  child  came  to  me  with  the  equinox. 
The  wild  wind  blew  him  to  my  swinging  door, 
With  flakes  of  tawny  foam  from  oft"  the  shore, 
And  shivering  spindrift  whirled  across  the  rocks. 
Flung  down  the  sky,  the  wheeling  swallow-flocks 


"Philip,   My   King"  21 

Cried  him  a  greeting,  and  the  lordly  woods, 
Waving  lean  arms  of  welcome  one  by  one, 
Cast  down  their  russet  cloaks  and  golden  hoods, 
And  bid  their  dancing  leaflets  trip  and  run 
Before  the  tender  feet  of  this  my  son. 

Therefore  the  sea's  swift  fire  is  in  his  veins. 
And  in  his  heart  the  glory  of  the  sea; 
Therefore  the  storm-wind  shall  his  comrade  be, 
That  strips  the  hills  and  sweeps  the  cowering  plains. 
October,  shot  with  flashing  rays  and  rains, 
Inhabits  all  his  pulses;  he  shall  know 
The  stress  and  splendor  of  the  roaring  gales. 
The  creaking  boughs  shall  croon  him  fairy  tales. 
And  the  sea's  kisses  set  his  blood  aglow. 
While  in  his  ears  the  eternal  bugles  blow. 

May  Byron  |i86i- 


"ON   PARENT  KNEES" 

On  parent  knees,  a  naked  new-born  child, 
Weeping  thou  sat'st  while  all  around  thee  smiled: 
So  live,  that,  sinking  to  thy  life's  last  sleep. 
Calm  thou  may'st  smile,  while  all  around  thee  weep. 

William  Jones  [i 746-1 794] 


"PHILIP,   MY   KING" 

'  Who  bears  upon  his  baby  brow  the  round  and  top  of  sovereignty.' 

Look  at  me  with  thy  large  brown  eyes, 

Philip,  my  king! 
Round  whom  the  enshadowing  purple  lies 
Of  babyhood's  royal  dignities. 
Lay  on  my  neck  thy  tiny  hand 

With  love's  invisible  scepter  laden; 
I  am  thine  Esther  to  command 

Till  thou  shalt  find  a  queen-handmaiden, 
Philip,  my  king. 


22  Poems  ot   Youth  and  Age 

O  the  day  when  thou  goest  a-wooing, 

PhiUp,  my  king! 
When  those  beautiful  Ups  are  suing, 
And  some  gentle  heart's  bars  undoing,  j 

Thou  dcst  enter,  love-crowned,  and  there  :<\ 

Sittest  love-gloriiied.     Rule  kindly, 
Tenderly,  over  thy  kingdom  fair, 

For  we  that  love,  ah!  we  love  so  bhndly, 

PhiHp,  my  king.  i  \ 

Up  from  thy  sweet  mouth, — up  to  thy  brow, 

Philip,  my  king! 
The  spirit  that  there  lies  sleeping  now 
May  rise  like  a  giant  and  make  men  bow 
As  to  one  heaven-chosen  among  his  peers. 

My  Saul,  than  thy  brethren  taUer  and  fairer, 
Let  me  behold  thee  in  future  years! — 
Yet  thy  head  needeth  a  circlet  rarer, 
Philip,  my  king. 

— A  wreath  not  of  gold,  but  palm.     One  day, 

Phihp,  my  king!  .^  .^q 

Thou  too  must  tread,  as  we  trod,  a  way 
Thorny  and  cruel  and  cold  and  gray: 
Rebels  within  thee,  and  foes  without,  ^ 

Will  snatch  at  thy  crown.     But  march  on,  glorious, 
Martyr,  yet  monarch!  till  angels  shout. 

As  thou  sittest  at  the  feet  of  God  victorious, 
"Philip,  the  king!" 
Dinah  Maria  Mulock  Craik  [1826-1887] 

THE   KING  OF  THE   CRADLE 

Draw  back  the  cradle  curtains,  Kate, 

While  watch  and  ward  you're  keeping. 
Let's  see  the  monarch  in  his  state, 

And  view  him  while  he's  sleeping. 
He  smiles  and  clasps  his  tiny  hand, 

With  sunbeams  o'er  him  gleaming,— 
A  world  of  baby  fairyland 

He  visits  while  he's  dreaming. 


The   King  of  the  Cradle  23 

Monarch  of  pearly  powder-puff, 

Asleep  in  nest  so  cosy, 
Shielded  from  breath  of  breezes  rough 

By  curtains  warm  and  rosy: 
He  slumbers  soundly  in  his  cell, 

As  weak  as  one  decrepid. 
Though  King  of  Coral,  Lord  of  Bell, 

And  Knight  of  Bath  that's  tepid. 

Ah,  lucky  tyrant!     Happy  lot! 

Fair  watchers  without  number, 
Who  sweetly  sing  beside  his  cot. 

And  hush  him  off  to  slumber; 
White  hands  in  wait  to  smooth  so  neat 

His  pillow  when  its  rumpled — 
A  couch  of  rose  leaves  soft  and  sweet, 

Not  one  of  which  is  crumpled! 

Will  yonder  dainty  dimpled  hand — • 

Size,  nothing  and  a  quarter- 
E'er  grasp  a  saber,  lead  a  band 

To  glory  and  to  slaughter? 
Or,  may  I  ask,  will  those  blue  eyes — 

In  baby  patois,  "peepers" — 
E'er  in  the  House  of  Commons  rise, 

And  try  to  catch  the  Speaker's? 

Will  that  smooth  brow  o'er  Hansard  frown, 

Confused  by  lore  statistic? 
Or  will  those  lips  e'er  stir  the  town 

From  pulpit  ritualistic? 
Will  e'er  that  tiny  Sybarite 

Become  an  author  noted? 
That  little  brain  the  world's  delight, 

Its  works  by  all  men  quoted? 

Though  rosy,  dimpled,  plump,  and  round 

Though  fragile,  soft,  and  tender, 
Sometimes,  alas!  it  may  be  found 

The  thread  of  life  is  slender! 


24  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

A  little  shoe,  a  little  glove- 
Affection  never  waning — 

The  shattered  idol  of  our  love 
Is  all  that  is  remaining! 

Then  does  one  chance,  in  fancy,  hear, 

Small  feet  in  childish  patter, 
Tread  soft  as  they  a  grave  draw  near, 

And  voices  hush  their  chatter; 
'Tis  small  and  new;  they  pause  in  fear, 

Beneath  the  gray  church  tower, 
To  consecrate  it  with  a  tear, 

And  deck  it  with  a  flower. 

Who  can  predict  the  future,  Kate — 

Your  fondest  aspiration! 
Who  knows  the  solemn  laws  of  fate, 

That  govern  all  creation? 
Who  knows  what  lot  awaits  your  boy — 

Of  happiness  or  sorrow? 
Sufficient  for  to-day  is  joy, 

Leave  tears,  Sweet,  for  to-morrow! 

Joseph  Ashhy-Sterry  [iS.sS-nji?] 


THE   FIRSTBORN 

So  fair,  so  dear,  so  warm  upon  my  bosom, 
And  in  my  hands  the  little  rosy  feet. 
Sleep  on,  my  little  bird,  my  lamb,  my  blossom; 
Sleep  on,  sleep  on,  my  sweet. 

What  is  it  God  hath  given  me  to  cherish, 
This  living,  moving  wonder  which  is  mine — 
Mine  only?     Leave  it  with  me  or  I  perish. 
Dear  Lord  of  love  divine. 

Dear  Lord,  'tis  wonderful  beyond  all  wonder, 
This  tender  miracle  vouchsafed  to  me, 
One  with  myself,  yet  just  so  far  asunder 
That  I  myself  may  see. 


No   Baby  in   the  House  25 

Flesh  of  my  flesh,  and  yet  so  subtly  linking 
New  selfs  with  old,  all  things  that  I  have  been 
With  present  joys  beyond  my  former  thinking 
And  future  things  unseen. 

There  life  began,  and  here  it  links  with  heaven, 
The  golden  chain  of  years  scarce  dipped  adown 
From  birth,  ere  once  again  a  hold  is  given 
And  nearer  to  God's  Throne. 

Seen,  held  in  arms  and  clasped  around  so  tightly, — 
My  love,  my  bird,  I  will  not  let  thee  go. 
Yet  soon  the  little  rosy  feet  must  lightly 
Go  pattering  to  and  fro. 

Mine,  Lord,  all  mine  Thy  gift  and  loving  token. 
Mine — yes  or  no,  unseen  its  soul  divine? 
Mine  by  the  chain  of  love  with  links  unbroken. 
Dear  Saviour,  Thine  and  mine. 

John  Arthur  Goodchild  [1851- 


NO  BABY  IN  THE  HOUSE 

No  baby  in  the  house,  I  know, 

'Tis  far  too  nice  and  clean. 
No  toys,  by  careless  fingers  strewn. 

Upon  the  floors  are  seen. 
No  finger-marks  are  on  the  panes. 

No  scratches  on  the  chairs ; 
No  wooden  men  set  up  in  rows, 

Or  marshaled  off  in  pairs ; 
No  little  stockings  to  be  darned, 

All  ragged  at  the  toes ; 
No  pile  of  mending  to  be  done, 

Made  up  of  baby-clothes; 
No  little  troubles  to  be  soothed; 

No  Httle  hands  to  fold; 
No  grimy  fingers  to  be  washed; 

No  stories  to  be  told; 


>26  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

No  tender  kisses  to  be  given; 

No  nicknames,  "Dove"  and  "Mouse"; 
No  merry  frolics  after  tea, — 

No  baby  in  the  house! 

Clara  Dolliver  [i8 

OUR  WEE  WHITE  ROSE 

From  "  The  Mother's  Idol  Broken  " 

All  in  our  marriage  garden 

Grew,  smiling  up  to  God, 
A  bonnier  flower  than  ever 

Sucked  the  green  warmth  of  the  sod ; 
O,  beautiful  unfathomably 

Its  little  life  unfurled; 
And  crown  of  all  things  was  our  wee 

White  Rose  of  all  the  world. 

From  out  a  balmy  bosom 

Our  bud  of  beauty  grew; 
It  fed  on  smiles  for  sunshine, 

On  tears  for  daintier  dew: 
Aye  nestHng  warm  and  tenderly, 

Our  leaves  of  love  were  curled 
So  close  and  close  about  our  wee 

White  Rose  of  all  the  world. 

With  mystical  faint  fragrance 
Our  house  of  life  she  filled; 

Revealed  each  hour  some  fairy  tower 
Where  winged  hopes  might  build! 

We  saw — though  none  like  us  might  see- 
Such  precious  promise  pearled 

Upon  the  petals  of  our  wee 
White  Rose  of  all  the  world. 

But  evermore  the  halo 

Of  angel-light  increased, 
Like  the  mystery  of  moonlight 

That  folds  some  fairy  feast. 


"  Baby  Sleeps  "  27 

Snov;-whitc,  snow-soft,  snow-silently 

Our  darling  bud  uncurled, 
And  dropped  in  the  grave — God's  lap — our  wee 

White  Rose  of  all  the  world. 

Our  Rose  was  but  in  blossom, 

Our  life  was  but  in  spring, 
When  down  the  solemn  midnight 

We  heard  the  spirits  sing, 
"Another  bud  of  infancy 

With  holy  dews  impearled!" 
And  in  their  hands  they  bore  our  wee 

White  Rose  of  all  the  world. 

You  scarce  could  think  so  small  a  thing 

Could  leave  a  loss  so  large; 
Her  little  light  such  shadow  fling 

From  dawn  to  sunset's  marge. 
In  other  springs  our  life  may  be 

In  bannered  bloom  unfurled, 
But  never,  never  match  our  wee 

White  Rose  of  all  the  world. 

Gerald  Massey  [182S-1Q07] 

INTO  THE  WORLD   AND   OUT 

Into  the  world  he  looked  with  sweet  surprise; 
The  children  laughed  so  when  they  saw  his  eyes. 

Into  the  world  a  rosy  hand  in  doubt 

He  reached — a  pale  hand  took  one  rosebud  out. 

"And  that  was  all — quite  all!"     No,  surely!     But 
The  children  cried  so  when  his  eyes  were  shut. 
Sarah  M.  B.  Piatt  [1836- 

"BABY   SLEEPS" 

She  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth. — Luke  viii.  52. 

The  baby  wept; 
The  mother  took  it  from  the  nurse's  arms, 
And  hushed  its  fears,  and  soothed  its  vain  alarms, 

And  baby  slept. 


2  8  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Again  it  weeps, 
And  God  doth  take  it  from  the  mother's  arms, 
From  present  griefs,  and  future  unknown  harms, 

And  baby  sleeps. 

Samuel  Hinds  [1793-1872] 

BABY  BELL 

I 
Have  you  not  heard  the  poets  tell 
How  came  the  dainty  Baby  Bell 
Into  this  world  of  ours? 
The  gates  of  heaven  were  left  ajar: 
With  folded  hands  and  dreamy  eyes, 
Wandering  out  of  Paradise, 
She  saw  this  planet,  like  a  star, 
Hung  in  the  glistening  depths  of  even — 
Its  bridges,  running  to  and  fro. 
O'er  which  the  white-winged  Angels  go. 
Bearing  the  holy  Dead  to  heaven. 
She  touched  a  bridge  of  flowers — those  feet, 
So  light  they  did  not  bend  the  bells 
Of  the  celestial  asphodels, 
They  fell  like  dew  upon  the  flowers: 
Then  all  the  air  grew  strangely  sweet. 
And  thus  came  dainty  Baby  Bell 
Into  this  world  of  ours. 


She  came  and  brought  delicious  May; 
The  swallows  built  beneath  the  eaves; 
Like  sunlight,  in  and  out  the  leaves 
The  robins  went,  the  livelong  day; 
The  lily  swung  its  noiseless  bell; 
And  on  the  porch  the  slender  vine 
Held  out  its  cups  of  fairy  wine. 
How  tenderly  the  twilights  fell! 
Oh,  earth  was  full  of  singing-birds 
And  opening  springtide  flowers. 
When  the  dainty  Baby  Bell 
Came  to  this  world  of  ours. 


Baby   Bell  29 


in 

O  Baby,  dainty  Baby  Bell, 

How  fair  she  grew  from  day  to  day! 

What  woman-nature  filled  her  eyes, 

What  poetry  within  them  lay — 

Those  deep  and  tender  twilight  eyes, 

So  full  of  meaning,  pure  and  bright 

As  if  she  yet  stood  in  the  light 

Of  those  oped  gates  of  Paradise. 

And  so  we  loved  her  more  and  more: 

Ah,  never  in  our  hearts  before 

Was  love  so  lovely  born : 

We  felt  we  had  a  link  between 

This  real  world  and  that  unseen — 

The  land  beyond  the  morn; 

And  for  the  love  of  those  dear  eyes, 

For  love  of  her  whom  God  led  forth, 

(The  mother's  being  ceased  on  earth 

When  Baby  came  from  Paradise,) — • 

For  love  of  Him  who  smote  our  lives, 

And  woke  the  chords  of  joy  and  pain, 

We  said.  Dear  Christ! — our  hearts  bowed  down 

Like  violets  after  rain. 

IV 

And  now  the  orchards,  which  were  white 

And  pink  with  blossoms  when  she  came, 

Were  rich  in  autumn's  mellow  prime; 

The  clustered  apples  burnt  like  flame, 

The  folded  chestnut  burst  its  shell, 

The  grapes  hung  purpling,  range  on  range; 

And  time  wrought  just  as  rich  a  change 

In  little  Baby  Bell. 

Her  lissome  form  more  perfect  grew, 

And  in  her  features  wc  could  trace, 

In  softened  curves,  her  mother's  face. 

Her  angel-nature  ripened  too: 

We  thought  her  lovely  when  she  came, 

But  she  was  holy,  saintly  now  .  .  . 

Around  her  pale  angelic  brow 

We  saw  a  slender  ring  of  flame. 


y 


30  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


God's  hand  had  taken  away  the  seal 
That  held  the  portals  of  her  speech; 
And  oft  she  said  a  few  strange  words 
Whose  meaning  lay  beyond  our  reach. 
She  never  was  a  child  to  us, 
We  never  held  her  being's  key; 
We  could  not  teach  her  holy  things 
Who  was  Christ's  self  in  purity. 

VI 

It  came  upon  us  by  degrees, 

We  saw  its  shadow  ere  it  fell — 

The  knowledge  that  our  God  had  sent 

His  messenger  for  Baby  Bell. 

We  shuddered  with  unlanguaged  pain, 

And  all  our  hopes  were  changed  to  fears, 

And  all  our  thoughts  ran  into  tears 

Like  sunshine  into  rain. 

We  cried  aloud  in  our  belief, 

"Oh,  smite  us  gently,  gently,  God! 

Teach  us  to  bend  and  kiss  the  rod. 

And  perfect  grow  through  grief." 

Ah!  how  we  loved  her,  God  can  tell; 

Her  heart  was  folded  deep  in  ours. 

Our  hearts  are  broken,  Baby  Bell! 

VII 

At  last  he  came,  the  messenger, 

The  messenger  from  unseen  lands: 

And  what  did  dainty  Baby  Bell? 

She  only  crossed  her  httle  hands, 

She  only  looked  more  meek  and  fair! 

We  parted  back  her  silken  hair, 

We  wove  the  roses  round  her  brow — 

White  buds,  the  summer's  drifted  snow — 

Wrapped  her  from  head  to  foot  in  flowers  .  .  . 

And  thus  went  dainty  Baby  Bell 

Out  of  this  world  of  ours. 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [1837-1007] 


'Ml 


IN  THE  NURSERY 

MOTHER   GOOSE'S   MELODIES 

Mistress  Mary,  quite  contrary, 
How  does  your  garden  grow? 
With  cockle-shells,  and  silver  bells, 
And  pretty  maids  all  in  a  row. 


There  was  an  old  woman  who  lived  in  a  shoe, 
She  had  so  many  children  she  didn't  know  what  to  do; 
She  gave  them  some  broth  without  any  bread; 
Then  whipped  them  all  soundly  and  put  them  to  bed. 


Peter,  Peter,  pumpkin  eater, 
Had  a  wife  and  couldn't  keep  her; 
He  put  her  in  a  pumpkin  shell 
And  there  he  kept  her  very  well. 


RuB-a-dub-dub, 
Three  men  in  a  tub. 

And  who  do  you  think  they  be? 
The  butcher,  the  baker, 
The  candlestick-maker; 

Turn  'em  out,  knaves  all  three! 


I'll  tell  you  a  story 
About  Jack  a  Nory — 

And  now  my  storj^'s  begun; 
I'll  tell  you  another 
About  Johnny,  his  brother- 

And  now  my  story  is  done. 
31 


32  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Hickory,  dickory,  dock, 
The  mouse  ran  up  the  clock; 
The  clock  struck  one, 
The  mouse  ran  down, 
Hickory,  dickory,  dock. 


A  DiLLAR,  a  dollar, 

A  ten  o'clock  scholar. 

What  makes  you  come  so  soon? 

You  used  to  come  at  ten  o'clock 

But  now  you  come  at  noon. 


There  was  a  little  man. 

And  he  had  a  little  gun. 
And  his  bullets  were  made  of  lead,  lead,  lead; 

He  shot  Johnny  Sprig 

Through  the  middle  of  his  wig. 
And  knocked  it  right  off  his  head,  head,  head. 

There  was  an  old  woman,  and  what  do  you  think? 
She  lived  upon  nothing  but  victuals  and  drink: 
Victuals  and  drink  were  the  chief  of  her  diet: 
Yet  this  little  old  woman  could  never  be  quiet. 

She  went  to  a  baker  to  buy  her  some  bread. 

And  when  she  came  home,  her  husband  was  dead; 

She  went  to  the  clerk  to  toll  the  bell, 

And  when  she  came  back  her  husband  was  well. 


If  I  had  as  much  money  as  I  could  spend, 
I  never  would  cry  old  chairs  to  mend; 
Old  chairs  to  mend,  old  chairs  to  mend; 
I  never  would  cry  old  chairs  to  mend. 

If  I  had  as  much  money  as  I  could  tell, 
I  never  would  cry  old  clothes  to  sell ; 
Old  clothes  to  sell,  old  clothes  to  sell; 
I  never  would  cry  old  clothes  to  sell. 


Mother  Goose's   Melodies  23 

One  misty,  moisty  morning, 

When  cloudy  was  the  weather, 
I  met  a  Httle  old  man 

Clothed  all  in  leather; 
He  began  to  bow  and  scrape, 

And  I  began  to  grin, — 
How  do  you  do,  and  how  do  you  do, 

And  how  do  you  do  again? 


If  all  the  world  were  apple-pie, 

And  all  the  sea  were  ink, 

And  all  the  trees  were  bread  and  cheese, 

What  should  we  have  to  drink? 


Pease-pudding  hot. 

Pease-pudding  cold, 
Pease-pudding  in  the  pot. 

Nine  days  old. 
Some  like  it  hot. 

Some  like  it  cold, 
Some  like  it  in  the  pot, 

Nine  days  old. 


Hey,  diddle,  diddle. 

The  cat  and  the  fiddle, 
The  cow  jumped  over  the  moon; 

The  little  dog  laughed 

To  see  such  sport, 
And  the  dish  ran  away  with  the  spoon. 


Little  Jack  Horner  sat  in  the  corner 

Eating  a  Christmas  pie; 
He  put  in  his  thumb,  and  pulled  out  a  plum. 

And  said,  "What  a  good  boy  am  I!" 


34  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Little  Miss  Muffet, 

Sat  on  a  tuffet, 
Eating  of  curds  and  whey; 

There  came  a  great  spider 

That  sat  down  beside  her, 
And  frightened  Miss  Muffet  away. 


There  was  a  crooked  man,  and  he  went  a  crooked  mile. 
He  found  a  crooked  sixpence  against  a  crooked  stile: 
He  bought  a  crooked  cat,  which  caught  a  crooked  mouse, 
And  they  all  lived  together  in  a  little  crooked  house. 


Little  Polly  Flinders, 

Sat  among  the  cinders. 
Warming  her  pretty  little  toes; 

Her  mother  came  and  caught  her. 

And  whipped  her  little  daughter 
For  spoiling  her  nice  new  clothes. 


Barber,  barber,  shave  a  pig, 
How  many  hairs  will  make  a  wig? 
"  Four-and- twenty,  that's  enough." 
Give  the  barber  a  pinch  of  snuflf. 


Little  Boy  Blue,  come  blow  up  your  horn, 
The  sheep's  in  the  meadow,  the  cow's  in  the  corn; 
But  where  is  the  boy  that  looks  after  the  sheep? 
He's  under  a  hay-cock,  fast  asleep. 
Will  you  awake  him?     No,  not  I; 
For  if  I  do,  he'll  be  sure  to  cry. 


There  was  a  man  of  our  town, 
And  he  was  wondrous  wise, 

He  jumped  into  a  bramble  bush. 
And  scratched  out  both  his  eyes: 


Mother  Goose's    Melodies  ^^ 

But  when  he  saw  his  eyes  were  out, 

With  all  his  might  and  main, 
He  jumped  into  another  bush, 

And  scratched  'em  in  again. 


The  north  wind  doth  blow, 
And  we  shall  have  snow, 
And  what  will  poor  Robin  do  then, 
Poor  thing? 
He'll  sit  in  a  barn, 
And  to  keep  himself  warm, 
Will  hide  his  head  under  his  wing, 
Poor  thing! 


HiGGLEBY,  piggleby,  my  black  hen, 
She  lays  eggs  for  gentlemen; 
Sometimes  nine,  and  sometimes  ten, 
Higgleby,  piggleby,  my  black  hen. 


Three  wise  men  of  Gotham 
Went  to  sea  in  a  bowl; 
If  the  bowl  had  been  stronger, 
My  song  had  been  longer. 


There  was  an  old  woman  lived  under  a  hill. 
And  if  she's  not  gone,  she  lives  there  still. 


Puss'y-cat,  pussy-cat,  where  have  you  been? 
I've  been  to  London  to  look  at  the  Queen. 
Pussy-cat,  pussy-cat,  what  did  you  there? 
I  frightened  a  little  mouse  under  the  chair. 


There  were  two  blackbirds  sitting  on  a  hill, 
The  one  named  Jack,  the  other  named  Jill; 
Fly  away,  Jack !     Fly  away,  Jill! 
Come  again.  Jack!     Come  again,  Jill! 


36  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Goosey,  goosey,  gander, 

Whither  shall  1  wander, 

Up  stairs,  down  stairs. 

And  in  my  lady's  chamber. 

There  I  met  an  old  man 

Who  would  not  say  his  prayers; 

I  took  him  by  his  left  leg 

And  threw  him  down  the  stairs. 


Baa,  baa,  black  sheep,  have  you  any  wool? 

Yes,  "sir;  yes,  sir,  three  bags  full. 

One  for  my  master,  one  for  my  dame, 

And  one  for  the  little  boy  that  lives  in  the  lane. 


Bye,  baby  bunting. 
Daddy's  gone  a-hunting 
To  get  a  little  rabbit-skin 
To  wrap  the  baby  bunting  in. 


Old  King  Cole  was  a  merry  old  soul, 

And  a  merry  old  soul  was  he; 

He  called  for  his  pipe,  and  he  called  for  his  bowl, 

And  he  called  for  his  fiddlers  three. 

Every  fiddler,  he  had  a  fiddle,  and  a  very  fine  fiddle  had  he; 

Twee  tweedle  dee,  tweedle  dee,  went  the  fiddlers. 

Oh,  there's  none  so  rare,  as  can  compare 

With  King  Cole  and  his  fiddlers  three! 


Ride  a  cock-horse  to  Banbury  Cross, 
To  see  a  fine  lady  ride  on  a  white  horse. 
Rings  on  her  fingers,  and  bells  on  her  toes. 
She  shall  have  music  wherever  she  goes. 


Hector  Protector  was  dressed  all  in  green; 
Hector  Protector  was  sent  to  the  Queen. 
The  Queen  did  not  like  him,  no  more  did  the  King; 
So  Hector  Protector  was  sent  back  again. 


Mother  Goose's   Melodies  37 

Peter  Piper  picked  a  peck  of  pickled  peppers; 

A  peck  of  pickled  pepp>ers  Peter  Piper  picked; 

If  Peter  Piper  picked  a  peck  of  pickled  peppers, 

Where's  the  peck  of  pickled  peppers  Peter  Piper  picked? 


Jack  Sprat  could  eat  no  fat, 
His  wife  could  eat  no  lean. 

And  so,  betwixt  them  both,  you  see, 
They  licked  the  platter  clean. 


The  lion  and  the  unicorn 

Were  fighting  for  the  crown; 
The  lion  beat  the  unicorn 

All  round  about  the  town. 
Some  gave  them  white  bread, 

And  some  gave  them  brown; 
Some  gave  them  plum  cake, 

And  sent  them  out  of  town. 


As  Tommy  Snooks  and  Bessy  Brooks 
Were  walking  out  one  Sunday, 

Says  Tommy  Snooks  to  Bessy  Brooks, 
"To-morrow  will  be  Monday." 


Curly  locks!     Curly  locks! 

Wilt  thou  be  mine? 
Thou  shalt  not  wash  dishes 

Nor  yet  feed  the  swine; 
But  sit  on  a  cushion 

And  sew  a  fine  seam, 
And  feed  upon  strawberries, 

Sugar  and  cream. 


Blow,  wind,  blow!  and  go,  mill,  go! 

That  the  miller  may  grind  his  corn; 
That  the  baker  may  take  it  and  into  rolls  make  it. 

And  send  us  some  hot  in  the  morn. 


38  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Six  little  mice  sat  down  to  spin, 
Pussy  passed  by,  and  she  peeped  in. 
"What  are  you  at,  my  little  men?" 
"Making  coats  for  gentlemen." 
"  Shall  I  come  in  and  bite  off  your  threads?  " 
"No,  no,  Miss  Pussy,  you'll  snip  off  our  heads." 
"Oh,  no,  I'll  not,  I'll  help  you  to  spin." 
"That  may  be  so,  but  you  don't  come  in!" 


Bobby  Shaptoe's  gone  to  sea, 
Silver  buckles  at  his  knee; 
When  he  comes  back,  he'll  marry  me, 
Bonny  Bobby  Shaftoe. 

Bobby  Shaftoe's  fat  and  fair, 
Combing  down  his  yellow  hair; 
He's  my  love  for  evermair. 
Bonny  Bobby  Shaftoe. 


RoCK-A-BYE,  baby,  thy  cradle  is  green; 

Father's  a  nobleman,  mother's  a  queen; 

And  Betty's  a  lady,  and  wears  a  gold  ring; 

And  Johnny's  a  drummer,  and  drums  for  the  King. 

Hush-a-bye,  baby,  on  the  tree- top, 
When  the  wind  blows  the  cradle  will  rock; 
When  the  bough  breaks,  the  cradle  will  fall, 
Down  will  come  baby,  bough,  cradle,  and  all. 


To  market,  to  market,  to  buy  a  fat  pig, 
Home  again,  home  again,  jiggety-jig; 
To  market,  to  market,  to  buy  a  fat  hog, 
Home  again,  home  again,  jiggety-jog; 
To  market,  to  market,  to  buy  a  plum  bun, 
Home  again,  home  again,  market  is  done. 


Little   Bo-peep  39 


JACK  AND  JILL 

Jack  and  Jill  went  up  the  hill, 

To  fetch  a  pail  of  water; 
Jack  fell  down  and  broke  his  crown 

And  Jill  came  tumbling  after. 

Up  Jack  got  and  home  did  trot 
As  fast  as  he  could  caper, 

And  went  to  bed  to  mend  his  head 
With  vinegar  and  brown  paper. 


THE  QUEEN  OF  HEARTS 

The  Queen  of  Hearts 

She  made  some  tarts, 
All  on  a  summer's  day; 

The  Knave  of  Hearts 

He  stole  those  tarts, 
And  with  them  ran  away. 

The  King  of  Hearts 

Called  for  the  tarts. 
And  beat  the  Knave  full  sore; 

The  Knave  of  Hearts 

Brought  back  the  tarts. 
And  vowed  he'd  steal  no  more! 


LITTLE   BO-PEEP 

Little  Bo-peep  has  lost  her  sheep. 
And  can't  tell  where  to  find  them; 

Leave  them  alone,  and  they'll  come  home, 
And  bring  their  tails  behind  them. 

Little  Bo-peep  fell  fast  asleep, 

And  dreamed  she  heard  them  bleating; 
But  when  she  awoke,  she  found  it  a  joke. 

For  they  were  still  a-fleeting. 


40  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age     • 

Then  up  she  took  her  Httle  crook, 

Determined  for  to  find  them; 
She  found  them  indeed,  but  it  made  her  heart  bleed, 

For  they'd  left  their  tails  behind  them! 

It  happened  one  day,  as  Bo-peep  did  stray, 

Unto  a  meadow  hard  by, 
There  she  espied  their  tails  side  by  side. 

All  hung  on  a  tree  to  dry. 

She  heaved  a  sigh,  and  wiped  her  eye. 

And  over  the  hillocks  she  raced; 
And  tried  what  she  could,  as  a  shepherdess  should, 

That  each  tail  should  be  properly  placed. 


MARY'S  LAMB 

Mary  had  a  little  lamb. 

Its  fleece  was  white  as  snow; 

And  everywhere  that  Mary  went, 
The  lamb  was  sure  to  go. 

He  followed  her  to  school  one  day. 
Which  was  against  the  rule ; 

It  made  the  children  laugh  and  play 
To  see  a  lamb  at  school. 

And  so  the  teacher  turned  him  out, 

But  stUl  he  lingered  near. 
And  waited  patiently  about 

Till  Mary  did  appear. 

Then  he  ran  to  her,  and  laid 

His  head  upon  her  arm. 
As  if  he  said,  "I'm  not  afraid — 

You'U  keep  me  from  all  harm." 

"What  makes  the  lamb  love  Mary  so?  " 

The  eager  children  cried. 
"Oh,  Mary  loves  the  lamb,  you  know," 

The  teacher  quick  replied. 


"  Sing  a  Song  of  Sixpence  "  41 

And  you  each  gentle  animal 

In  confidence  may  bind, 
And  make  them  follow  at  your  will, 

If  you  are  only  kind. 


THE  STAR 

Twinkle,  twinkle,  little  star, 
How  I  wonder  what  you  are. 
Up  above  the  world  so  high, 
Like  a  diamond  in  the  sky. 

When  the  blazing  sun  is  set. 
And  the  grass  with  dew  is  wet, 
Then  you  show  your  little  light, 
Twinkle,  twinkle,  all  the  night. 

Then  the  traveler  in  the  dark 
Thanks  you  for  your  tiny  spark. 
He  could  not  see  where  to  go 
If  you  did  not  twinkle  so. 

In  the  dark  blue  sky  you  keep, 
And  often  through  my  curtains  peep. 
For  you  never  shut  your  eye 
Till  the  sun  is  in  the  sky. 

As  your  bright  and  tiny  spark 
Lights  the  traveler  in  the  dark, 
Though  I  know  not  what  you  are. 
Twinkle,  twinkle,  little  star. 

Jane  Taylor  [i 783-1 824] 


"SING  A  SONG  OF  SIXPENCE" 

Sing  a  song  of  sixpence, 

A  pocket  full  of  rye; 
Four-and-twenty  blackbirds 

Baked  in  a  pie; 


Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

When  the  pie  was  opened 

The  birds  began  to  sing; 
Wasn't  that  a  dainty  dish 

To  set  before  the  King? 

The  King  was  in  his  counting-house, 

Counting  out  his  money; 
The  Queen  was  in  the  parlor, 

Eating  bread  and  honey; 

The  maid  was  in  the  garden 

Hanging  out  the  clothes; 
When  down  came  a  blackbird, 

And  nipped  off  her  nose. 

SIMPLE   SIMON 

Simple  Simon  met  a  pieman 

Going  to  the  fair; 
Says  Simple  Simon  to  the  pieman, 

"Let  me  taste  your  ware." 

Says  the  pieman  to  Simple  Simon, 
"Show  me  first  your  penny"; 

Says-Simple  Simon  to  the  pieman. 
"Indeed  I  have  not  any." 

Simple  Simon  went  a-fishing 

For  to  catch  a  whale; 
All  the  water  he  had  got 

Was  in  his  mother's  pail. 

Simple  Simon  went  to  look  ,  ,   '-'• 
If  plums  grew  on  a  thistle; 

He  pricked  his  lingers  very  much. 
Which  made  poor  Simon  whistle. 

THE  BREAKFAST  SONG 

At  five  o'clock  he  milks  the  cow, 

The  busy  farmer's  man. 
At  six  o'clock  he  strains  the  milk 

And  pours  it  in  the  can. 


"When   I    Was  a   Bachelor"  43 

At  seven  o'clock  the  milkman's  horse 

Must  go  to  town — "get  up!" 
At  eight  o'clock  Nurse  Karen  pours 

The  milk  in  Baby's  cup. 

At  five  o'clock  the  Baby  sleeps 

As  sound  as  sound  can  be. 
At  six  o'clock  he  laughs  and  shouts, 

So  wide  awake  is  he. 

At  seven  o'clock  he's  in  his  bath, 

At  eight  o'clock  he's  dressed, 
Just  when  the  milk  is  ready,  too, 

S^  you  can  guess  the  rest. 

Emille  Poulssoii  [1853- 

'I   HAD   A   LITTLE   HUSBAND" 

I  HAD  a  little  husband 

No  bigger  than  my  thumb; 
I  put  him  in  a  pint  pot, 

And  there  I  bade  him  drum. 

I  bought  a  little  horse, 

That  galloped  up  and  down; 
I  bridled  him   and  saddled  him, 

And  sent  him  out  of  town. 

I  gave  him  some  garters. 

To  garter  up  his  hose, 
And  a  little  handkerchief. 

To  wipe  his  pretty  nose. 

'WHEN  I  WAS   A  BACHELOR" 

When  I  was  a  bachelor 

I  lived  by  myself; 
And  all  the  bread  and  cheese  I  got 

I  put  upon  the  shelf. 

The  rats  and  the  mice 
i    ,  They  made-such  a  strife, 
I  was  forced  to  go  to  London 
To  buy  me  a  wife. 


44  Poems  of  Youth   and  Age 

The  streets  were  so  bad, 

And  the  lanes  were  so  narrow, 

I  was  forced  to  bring  my  wife  home 
In  a  wheelbarrow. 

The  wheelbarrow  broke, 

And  my  wife  had  a  fall, 
Down  came  wheelbarrow, 

Little  wife  and  all. 

"JOHNNY  SHALL  HAVE  A  NEW  BONNET" 

Johnny  shall  have  a  new  bonnet, 
And  Johnny  shall  go  to  the  fair, 

And  Johnny  shall  have  a  blue  ribbon 
To  tie  up  his  bonny  brown  hair. 

And  why  may  not  I  love  Johnny, 
And  why  may  not  Johnny  love  me? 

And  why  may  not  I  love  Johnny 
As  well  as  another  body? 

And  here's  a  leg  for  a  stocking, 

And  here's  a  foot  for  a  shoe; 
And  he  has  a  kiss  for  his  daddy, 

And  one  for  his  mammy,  too. 

And  why  may  not  I  love  Johnny, 
And  why  may  not  Johnny  love  me? 

And  why  may  not  I  love  Johnny, 
As  well  as  another  body? 

THE  CITY  MOUSE  AND  THE  GARDEN  MOUSE 

The  city  mouse  lives  in  a  house; — 
The  garden  mouse  lives  in  a  bower. 

He's  friendly  with  the  frogs  and  toads. 
And  sees  the  pretty  plants  in  flower. 

The  city  mouse  eats  bread  and  cheese; — ■ 
The  garden  mouse  eats  what  he  can ; 

We  will  not  grudge  him  seeds  and  stocks, 
Poor  little  timid  furry  man. 

Christina  Georgina  Rosselti  [1830-1894] 


"  Merry  are   the   Bells  "  4^; 


ROBIN  REDBREAST  /- 

Little  Robin  Redbreast  sat  upon  a  tree, 

Up  went  pussy-cat,  and  down  went  he; 

Down  came  pussy-cat,  and  away  Robin  ran; 

Said  little  Robin  Redbreast,  "  Catch  me  if  you  can." 

Little  Robin  Redbreast  jumped  upon  a  wall. 
Pussy-cat  jumped  after  him,  and  almost  got  a  fall; 
Little  Robin  chirped  and  sang,  and  what  did  pussy  say? 
Pussy-cat  said  naught  but  "Mew,"  and  Robin  flew  away. 


SOLOMON  GRUNDY 

Solomon  Grundy, 
Born  on  a  Monday, 
Christened  on  Tuesday, 
Married  on  Wednesday, 
Took  ill  on  Thursday, 
Worse  on  Friday, 
Died  on  Saturday, 
Buried  on  Sunday, 
This  is  the  end  of 
Solomon  Grundy. 


"MERRY  ARE  THE  BELLS" 

Merry  are  the  bells,  and  merry  would  they  ring, 
Merry  was  myself,  and  merry  could  I  sing; 
With  a  merry  ding-dong,  happy,  gay,  and  free, 
And  a  merry  sing-song,  happy  let  us  be! 

Waddle  goes  your  gait,  and  hollow  are  your  hose: 
Noddle  goes  your  pate,  and  purple  is  your  nose: 
Merry  is  your  sing-song,  happy,  gay,  and  free; 
With  a  merry  ding-dong,  happy  let  us  be! 

Merry  have  we  met,  and  merry  have  we  been; 
Merry  let  us  part,  and  merry  meet  again; 
With  our  merry  sing-song,  happy,  gay,  and  free, 
With  a  merry  ding-dong,  happy  let  us  be! 


46  Poems  of  Youth   and  Age 


'WHEN  GOOD  KING  ARTHUR  RULED  THIS  LAND  " 

When  good  King  Arthur  ruled  this  land, 

He  was  a  goodly  king;  ,,  ] 

He  stole  three  pecks  of  barley  meal, 
.iiTo  make  a  bag-pudding. 

A  bag-pudding  the  queen  did  make, 

And  stuffed  it  well  with  plums: 
And  in  it  put  great  lumps  of  fat. 

As  big  as  my  two  thumbs.  ,  | 

The  king  and  queen  did  eat  thereof, 

And  noblemen  beside; 
And  what  they  could  not  eat  that  night, 

The  queen  next  morning  fried. 


"I  HAD   A  LITTLE  DOGGY" 

I  HAD  a  little  Doggy  that  used  to  sit  and  beg; 
But  Doggy  tumbled  down  the  stairs  and  broke  his  little  leg. 
Oh!  Doggy,  I  will  nurse  you,  and  try  to  make  you  well, 
And  you  shall  have  a  collar  with  a  little  silver  bell. 

Ah!  Doggy,  don't  you  think  that  you  should  very  faith- 
ful be. 
For  having  such  a  loving  friend  to  comfort  you  as  me? 
And  when  your  leg  is  better,  and  you  can  run  and  play. 
We'll  have  a  scamper  in  the  fields  and  see  them  making  hay. 

But,  Doggy,  you  must  promise  (and  mind  your  word  you 

keep) 
Not  once  to  tease  the  little  lambs,  or  run  among  the  sheep; 
And  then  the  little  yellow  chicks  that  play  upon  the  grass, 
You  must  not  even  wag  your  tail  to  scare  them  as  you  pass. 

"A  FARMER  WENT  TROTTING" 

A  FARMER  went  trotting  upon  his  gray  mare; 
Bumpety,  bumpety,  bump! 
With  his  daughter  behind  him,  so  rosy  and  fair; 
Lumpety,  lumpety,  lump! 


The  Cow  47 

A  raven  cried  croak!  and  they  all  tumbled  down; 
Bumpety,  bumpety,  bump! 

The  mare  broke  her  knees,  and  the  farmer  his  crown; 
Lumpety,  lumpety,  lump! 

The  mischievous  raven  flew  laughing  away; 
Bumpety,  bumpety,  bump! 

And  vowed  he  would  serve  them  the  same  the  next  day; 
Lumpety,  lumpety,  lump! 


"THE  OWL  AND  THE  EEL  AND  THE  WARMING 
PAN" 

The  owl  and  the  eel  and  the  warming-pan, 

They  went  to  call  on  the  soap-fat  man. 

The  soap-fat  man  he  was  not  within: 

He'd  gone  for  a  ride  on  his  roUing-pin. 

So  they  all  came  back  by  the  way  of  the  town, 

And  turned  the  meeting-house  upside  down. 

Laura  E.  Richards  [1850- 


THE  COW 

Thank  you,  pretty  cow,  that  made 
Pleasant  milk  to  soak  my  bread, 
Every  day,  and  every  night. 
Warm,  and  fresh,  and  sweet,  and  white. 

Do  not  chew  the  hemlock  rank, 
Growing  on  the  weedy  bank; 
But  the  yellow  cowslips  eat, 
They  will  make  it  very  sweet. 

Where  the  purple  violet  grows. 
Where  the  bubbling  water  flows. 
Where  the  grass  is  fresh  and  fine, 
Pretty  cow,  go  there  and  dine. 

Ann  Taylor  [1782-1S66] 


4^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


THE   LAMB 

Little  Lamb,  who  made  thee? 
Dost  thou  know  who  made  thee, 
Gave  thee  hfe,  and  bade  thee  feed 
By  the  stream  and  o'er  the  mead; 
Gave  thee  clothing  of  delight, 
Softest  clothing,  woolly,  bright; 
Gave  thee  such  a  tender  voice. 
Making  all  the  vales  rejoice? 

Little  Lamb,   who   made   thee? 

Dost  thou  know  who  made  thee? 

Little  Lamb,  I'll  tell  thee. 
Little  Lamb,  I'll  tell  thee; 
He  is  called  by  thy  name. 
For  He  calls  Himself  a  Lamb. 
He  is  meek,  and  He  is  mild; 
He  became  a  little  child. 
I  a  child,  and  thou  a  lamb, 
We  are  called  by  His  name. 

Little  Lamb,  God  bless  thee! 

Little  Lamb,  God  bless  thee. 

William  Blake  [175 7- 182 7] 

LITTLE  RAINDROPS 

Oh,  where  do  you  come  from, 

You  little  drops  of  rain, 
Fitter  patter,  pitter  patter, 

Down  the  window-pane? 

They  won't  let  me  walk. 

And  they  won't  let  me  play, 
And  they  won't  let  me  go 

Out  of  doors  at  all  to-day. 

They  put  away  my  playthings 

Because  I  broke  them  all. 
And  then  they  locked  up  all  my  bricks, 

And  took  away  my  ball, 


The   House  that  Jack   Built  49 

Tell  me,  little  raindrops, 

Is  that  the  way  you  play, 
Fitter  patter,  pitter  patter, 

All  the  rainy  day? 

They  say  I'm  very  naughty, 

But  I've  nothing  else  to  do 
But  sit  here  at  the  window; 

I  should  like  to  play  with  you. 

The  little  raindrops  cannot  speak. 

But  "pitter,  patter  pat" 
Means,  "We  can  play  oh  this  side: 

Why  can't  you  play  on  that?" 


"MOON,   SO  ROUND  AND  YELLOW" 

Moon,  so  round  and  yellow, 

Looking  from  on  high, 
How  I  love  to  see  you 

Shining  in  the  sky. 
Oft  and  oft  I  wonder, 

When  I  see  you  there. 
How  they  get  to  light  you, 

Hanging  in  the  air: 

Where  you  go  at  morning, 

When  the  night  is  past, 
And  the  sun  comes  peeping 

O'er  the  hills  at  last. 
Sometime  I  will  watch  you 

Slyly  overhead, 
When  you  think  I'm  sleeping 

Snugly  in  my  bed.  ' 

Matthias  Barr  [1831- 

THE  HOUSE  THAT  JACK  BUILT 

This  is  the  house  that  Jack  built. 

This  is  the  malt 
That  lay  in  the  house  that  Jack  built. 


^o  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

This  is  the  rat 
That  ate  the  malt 
That  lay  in  the  house  that  Jack  built. 

This  is  the  cat 
That  killed  the  rat 
That  ate  the  malt 
That  lay  in  the  house  that  Jack  built. 

This  is  the  dog 
That  worried  the  cat 
That  killed  the  rat 
That  ate  the  malt 
That  lay  in  the  house  that  Jack  built. 

This  is  the  cow  with  the  crumpled  horn 

That  tossed  the  dog 

That  worried  the  cat 

That  killed  the  rat 

That  ate  the  malt 
That  lay  in  the  house  that  Jack  built. 

This  is  the  maiden  all  forlorn 

That  milked  the  cow  with  the  crumpled  horn 

That  tossed  the  dog 

That  worried  the  cat 

That  killed  the  rat 

That  ate  the  malt 
That  lay  in  the  house  that  Jack  built. 

This  is  the  man  all  tattered  and  torn 

That  kissed  the  maiden  all  forlorn 

That  milked  the  cow  with  the  crumpled  horn 

That  tossed  the  dog 

That  worried  the  cat 

That  killed  the  rat 

That  ate  the  malt 
That  lay  in  the  house  that  Jack  built. 

This  is  the  priest  all  shaven  and  shorn 
That  married  the  man  all  tattered  and  torn 
That  kissed  the  maiden  all  forlorn 
That  milked  the  cow  with  the  crumpled  horn 


Old   Mother  Hubbard  51 

That  tossed  the  dog 
That  worried  the  cat 
That  killed  the  rat 
That  ate  the  malt 
That  lay  in  the  house  that  Jack  built. 

This  is  the  cock  that  crowed  in  the  morn 
That  waked  the  priest  all  shaven  and  shorn 
That  married  the  man  all  tattered  and  torn 
That  kissed  the  maiden  all  forlorn 
That  milked  the  cow  with  the  crumpled  horn 

That  tossed  the  dog 

That  worried  the  cat 

That  killed  the  rat 

That  ate  the  malt 
That  lay  in  the  house  that  Jack  built. 

This  is  the  farmer  sowing  his  corn 

That  kept  the  cock  that  crowed  in  the  morn 

That  waked  the  priest  all  shaven  and  shorn 

That  married  the  man  all  tattered  and  torn 

That  kissed  the  maiden  all  forlorn 

That  milked  the  cow  with  the  crumpled  horn 

That  tossed  the  dog 

That  worried  the  cat 

That  killed  the  rat 

That  ate  the  malt 
That  lay  in  the  house  that  Jack  built. 

OLD   MOTHER  HUBBARD 

Old  Mother  Hubbard 

Went  to  the  cupboard, 
To  get  her  poor  dog  a  bone: 

But  when  she  got  there 

The  cupboard  was  bare, 
And  so  the  poor  dog  had  none. 

She  went  to  the  baker's 

To  buy  him  some  bread, 
But  when  she  came  back 

The  poor  dog  was  dead. 


52  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 

She  went  to  the  joiner's  i 

To  buy  him  a  coffin, 

But  when  she  came  back 
The  poor  dog  was  laughing. 

She  took  a  clean  dish 
To  get  him  some  tripe, 

But  when  she  came  back 
He  was  smoking  a  pipe. 

She  went  to  the  fishmonger's 
To  buy  him  some  fish, 

But  when  she  came  back 
He  was  licking  the  dish. 

She  went  to  the  tavern 
For  white  wine  and  red. 

But  when  she  came  back 
The  dog  stood  on  his  head. 

She  went  to  the  hatter's 

To  buy  him  a  hat. 
But  when  she  came  back 

He  was  feeding  the  cat. 

She  went  to  the  barber's 

To  buy  him  a  wig, 
But  when  she  came  back 

He  was  dancing  a  jig. 

She  went  to  the  fruiterer's 
To  buy  him  some  fruit, 

But  when  she  came  back 
He  was  playing  the  flute. 

She  went  to  the  tailor's 

To  buy  him  a  coat, 
But  when  she  came  back 

He  was  riding  a  goat. 

She  went  to  the  cobbler's 
To  buy  him  some  shoes. 

But  when  she  came  back 
He  was  reading  the  news. 


The   Death   and   Burial  of  Cock   Robin     S3 

She  went  to  the  seamstress 

To  buy  him  some  hnen, 
But  when  she  came  back 

The  dog  was  spinning. 

She  went  to  the  hosier's 

To  buy  him  some  hose, 
But  when  she  came  back 

He  was  dressed  in  his  clothes. 

The  dame  made  a  curtesy, 

The  dog  made  a  bow. 
The  dame  said,  "Your  servant," 

The  dog  said,  "Bow-wow." 

This  wonderful  dog 
Was  Dame  Hubbard's  delight; 

He  could  sing,  he  could  dance, 
He  could  read,  he  could  write. 

She  gave  him  rich  dainties 

Whenever  he  fed, 
And  built  him  a  monument 

When  he  was  dead. 

THE  DEATH  AND  BURIAL  OF  COCK  ROBIN 

Who  killed  Cock  Robin? 

"I,"  said  the  Sparrow, 

"With  my  bow  and  arrow, 
I  killed  Cock  Robin." 

Who  saw  him  die? 

"I,"  said  the  Fly,       ,,   ; 

"  With  my  little  eye, 
I  saw  him  die." 

Who  caught  his  blood? 

"I,"  said  the  Fish, 

"With  my  little  dish, 
I  caught  his  blood." 


54  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Who'll  make  his  shroud? 
"I,"  said  the  Beetle, 
"With  my  thread  and  needle, 

I'll  make  his  shroud." 

Who'll  dig  his  grave? 
"I,"  said  the  Owl, 
"  With  my  spade  and  trowel, 

I'll  dig  his  grave." 

Who'll  be  the  parson? 
"I,"  said  the  Rook, 
"With  my  Httle  book. 

I'll  be  the  parson." 

Who'll  be  the  clerk? 
"I,"  said  the  Lark, 
"I'll  say  Amen  in  the  dark; 

I'll  be  the  clerk." 

Who'll  be  chief  mourner? 
"I,"  said  the  Dove, 
"I  mourn  for  my  love; 

I'll  be  chief  mourner." 

Who'll  bear  the  torch? 
"I,"  said  the  Linnet, 
"I'll  come  in  a  minute, 

I'll  bear  the  torch." 

Who'll  sing  his  dirge? 
"I,"  said  the  thrush, 
"As  I  sing  in  the  bush 

I'll  sing  his  dirge." 

Who'll  bear  the  pall? 
"We,"  said  the  Wren, 
Both  the  Cock  and  the  Hen; 

"We'll  bear  the  pall." 

Who'll  carry  his  coffin? 
"I,"  said  the  Kite, 
"If  it  be  in  the  night, 

I'll  carry  his  coffin." 


Baby-land  SS 

Who'll  toll  the  bell? 

"I,"  said  the  Bull, 

"Because  I  can  pull, 
I'U  toll  the  bell."  is3hT 

All  the  birds  of  the  air 

Fell  to  sighing  and  sobbing 
When  they  heard  the  bell  toll 

For  poor  Cock  Robin. 

BABY-LAND 

"Which  is  the  way  to  Baby-land?" 

"Any  one  can  tell;  '^ 

Up  one  flight, 
To  your  right; 
Please  to  ring  the  bell." 

"What  can  you  see  in  Baby-land?" 
"Little  folks  in  white- 
Downy  heads. 
Cradle-beds, 
Faces  pure  and  bright!" 

"What  do  they  do  in  Baby-land?" 
"Dream  and  wake  and  play, 

Laugh  and  crow, 

Shout  and  grow; 
Jolly  times  have  they!" 

"What  do  they  say  in  Baby-land?" 
"Why,  the  oddest  things; 

Might  as  well  ' 

Try  to  tell  ' 

What  a  birdie  sings!" 

"Who  is  the  Queen  of  Baby-land?" 
"Mother,  kind  and  sweet; 
And  her  love, 
Born  above, 
Guides  the  little  feet." 

George  Cooper  [1840- 


56  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


THE  FIRST  TOOTH 

There  once  was  a  wood,  and  a  very  thick  wood, 
So  thick  that  to  walk  was  as  much  as  you  could; 
But  a  sunbeam  got  in,  and  the  trees  understood. 

I  went  to  this  wood,  at  the  end  of  the  snows, 

And  as  I  was  walking  I  saw  a  primrose; 

Only  one!     Shall  I  show  you  the  place  where  it  grows? 

There  once  was  a  house,  and  a  very  dark  house, 

As  dark,  I  believe,  as  the  hole  of  a  mouse, 

Or  a  tree  in  my  wood,  at  the  thick  of  the  boughs. 

I  went  to  this  house,  and  I  searched  it  aright, 

I  opened  the  chambers,  and  I  found  a  light; 

Only  one!     Shall  I  show  you  this  little  lamp  bright? 

There  once  was  a  cave,  and  this  very  dark  cave 

One  day  took  a  gift  from  an  incoming  wave; 

And  I  made  up  my  mind  to  know  what  the  sea  gave. 

I  took  a  lit  torch,  I  walked  round  the  ness 
When  the  water  was  lowest;  and  in  a  recess 
In  my  cave  was  a  jewel.    Will  nobody  guess? 

0  there  was  a  baby,  he  sat  on  my  knee. 

With  a  pearl  in  his  mouth  that  was  precious  to  me, 
His  little  dark  mouth  like  my  cave  of  the  sea! 

1  said  to  my  heart,  "And  my  jewel  is  bright! 

He  blooms  like  a  primrose!    Pie  shines  like  a  light!" 
Put  your  hand  in  his  mouth!    Do  you  feel?    He  can  bite! 
William  Brighty  Rands  [1823-1882] 

BABY'S  BREAKFAST 

Baby  wants  his  breakfast. 

Oh!  what  shall  I  do? 
Said  the  cow,  "I'll  give  him 

Nice  fresh  milk — vaoo-op! " 


.,r, A     The  Moon,,   .msn*'  57 

Said  the  hen,  "Cut-dah  cut! 
I  have  laid  an  egg 

For  the  Baby's  breakfast- 
Take  it  now,  I  beg!" 

And  the  buzzing  bee  said, 

"Here  is  honey  sweet. 
Don't  you  think  the  Baby 

Would  like  that  to  eat?  " 

Then  the  baker  kindly 

Brought  the  Baby's  bread. 
"Breakfast  is  all  ready," 

Baby's  mother  said; 

"But  before  the  Baby 

Eats  his  dainty  food, 
Will  he  not  say  'Thank  you!' 

To  his  friends  so  good?" 

Then  the  bonny  Baby 

Laughed  and  laughed  away. 
That  was  all  the  "Thank  you" 

He  knew  how  to  say. 

Emilie  Pouhson  [1853- 


THE  MOON 

O,  LOOK  at  the  moon! 

She  is  shining  up  there; 
O  mother,  she  looks 

Like  a  lamp  in  the  air. 

Last  week  she  was  smaller, 
And  shaped  like  a  bow; 

But  now  she's  grown  bigger. 
And  round  as  an  O. 

Pretty  moon,  pretty  moon, 
How  you  shine  on  the  door, 

And  make  it  all  bright 
On  my  nursery  floor! 


m:> 


Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

You  shine  on  my  playthings, 
And  show  me  their  place, 

And  I  love  to  look  up 
At  your  pretty  bright  face. 

And  there  is  a  star 

Close  by  you,  and  maybe 

That  small  twinkling  star 
Is  your  little  baby. 

Eliza  Lee  Pollen  [1787-1850] 

BABY  AT  PLAY 

Brow  bender.  Eye  peeper, 
Nose  smeller^  Mouth  eater, 
Chin  chopper. 

Knock  at  the  door — peep  in, 
Lift  up  the  latch — walk  in. 

Heke  sits  the  Lord  Mayor,  here  sit  his  two  men, 
Here  sits  the  cock,  and  here  sits  the  hen; 
Here  sit  the  chickens,  and  here  they  go  in 
Chippety,  chippety,  chippety,  chin. 

This  little  pig  went  to  market; 

This  little  pig  stayed  at  home; 

This  little  pig  got  roast  beef; 

This  little  pig  got  none; 

This  little  pig  cried  wee,  wee,  all  the  way  home. 

One,  two. 
Buckle  my  shoe; 
Three,  four, 
Shut  the  door; 
Five,  six. 
Pick  up  sticks; 
Seven,  eight. 
Lay  them  straight; 
Nine,  ten, 
A  good  fat  hen; 
Eleven,  twelve, 
Who  will  delve? 


Foot  Soldiers  59 

Thirteen,  fourteen, 
Maids  a-courting; 
Fifteen,  sixteen, 
Maids  a-kissing; 
Seventeen,  eighteen, 
Maids  a- waiting; 
Nineteen,  twenty. 
My  stomach's  empty. 

THE  DIFFERENCE 

Eight  fingers, 

Ten  toes. 
Two  eyes. 

And  one  nose. 
Baby  said 

When  she  smelt  the  rose, 
"Oh!  what  a  pity 

I've  only  one  nose!" 

Ten  teeth 

In  even  rows. 
Three  dimples, 

And  one  nose. 
Baby  said 

When  she  smelt  the  snuflf, 
"Deary  me! 

One  nose  is  enough." 

Laura  E.  Richards  [1S50- 

FOOT  SOLDIERS 

'Tis  all  the  way  to  Toe-town, 

Beyond  the  Knee-high  hill, 
That  Baby  has  to  travel  down 

To  see  the  soldiers  drill. 

One,  two,  three,  four,  five,  a-row^-  ' 

A  captain  and  his  men — 
And  on  the  other  side,  you  know. 

Are  six,  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten. 

John  Banister  Tabb  [184 5- 1909] 


6o  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


TOM   THUMB'S  ALPHABET 

A  WAS  an  Archer,  who  shot  at  a  frog; 

B  was  a  Butcher,  who  had  a  great  dog; 

C  was  a  Captain,  all  covered  with  lace; 

D  was  a  Drunkard,  and  had  a  red  face; 

E    was  an  Esquire,  with  pride  on  his  brow; 

F  was  a  Farmer,  and  followed  the  plow; 

G  was  a  Gamester,  who  had  but  ill  luck; 

H  was  a  Hunter,  who  hunted  a  buck; 

I  was  an  Innkeeper,  who  loved  to  bouse; 

J  was  a  Joiner,  who  built  up  a  house; 

K  was  a  King,  so  mighty  and  grand ; 

L  was  a  Lady,  who  had  a  white  hand ; 

M  was  a  Miser,  and  hoarded  his  gold; 

N  was  a  Nobleman,  gallant  and  bold ; 

O  was  an  Oysterman,  who  went  about  town; 

P  was  a  Parson,  and  wore  a  black  gown; 

Q  was  a  Quack,  with  a  wonderful  pill; 

R  was  a  Robber,  who  wanted  to  kill; 

S  was  a  Sailor,  who  spent  all  he  got ; 

T  was  a  Tinker,  and  mended  a  pot; 

U  was  an  Usurer,  a  miserable  elf; 

V  was  a  Vintner,  who  drank  all  himself; 

W  was  a  Watchman,  who  guarded  the  door; 
X  was  Expensive,  and  so  became  poor; 

Y  was  a  Youth,  that  did  not  love  school; 
Z  was  a  Zany,  a  poor  harmless  fool. 


GRAMMAR  IN  RHYME 

Three  little  words,  you  often  see, 

Are  articles  A,  An,  and  The. 

A  Noun  is  the  name  of  anything, 

As  School,  or  Garden,  Hoop,  or  Swing. 

Adjectives  tell  the  kind  of  Noun, 

As  Great,  Small,  Pretty,  White,  or  Brown. 

Instead  of  Nouns  the  Pronouns  stand. 

Her  head.  His  face.  Your  arm.  My  hand. 


The  Garden  Year  6i 

Verbs  tell  of  something  being  done — 

To  Read,  Count,  Laugh,  Sing,  Jump,  or  Run. 

How  things  are  done  the  Adverbs  tell. 

As  Slowly,  Quickly,  111,  or  Well. 

Conjunctions  join  the  words  together — 

As  men  And  women,  wind  And  weather. 

The  Preposition  stands  before 

A  noun,  as  In  or  Through  a  door. 

The  Interjection  shows  surprise, 

As  Oh!  how  pretty!    Ah!  how  wise! 

The  Whole  are  called  nine  parts  of  speech, 

Which  reading,  writing,  speaking  teach. 


DAYS  OF  THE  MONTH 

Thirty  days  hath  September, 
April,  June,  and  November; 
All  the  rest  have  thirty-one; 
February  twenty-eight  alone, — 
Except  in  leap  year,  at  which  time 
February's  days  are  twenty-nine. 


THE  GARDEN  YEAR 

January  brings  the  snow. 
Makes  our  feet  and  fingers  glow. 

February  brings  the  rain, 
Thaws  the  frozen  lake  again. 

March  brings  breezes,  loud  and  shrill, 
To  stir  the  dancing  daffodil. 

April  brings  the  primrose  sweet, 
Scatters  daisies  at  our  feet. 

May  brings  flocks  of  pretty  lambs 
Skipping  by  their  fleecy  dams. 

June  brings  tulips,  lilies,  roses, 

Fills  the  children's  hands  with  posies. 


Gi  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Hot  July  brings  cooling  showers, 
nil/    Apricots,  and  gillyflowers. 

August  brings  the  sheaves  of  corn, 
Then  the  harvest  home  is  borne. 

Warm  September  brings  the  fruit; 
Sportsmen  then  begin  to  shoot. 

Fresh  October  brings  the  pheasant; 
Then  to  gather  nuts  is  pleasant. 

Dull  November  brings  the  blast; 
Then  the  leaves  are  whirling  fast. 

Chill  December  brings  the  sleet. 
Blazing  fire,  and  Christmas  treat. 

Sara  Coleridge  [1802-1852] 

RIDDLES 

There  was  a  girl  in  our  town. 

Silk  an'  satin  was  her  gown, 

S'ilk  an'  satin,  gold  an'  velvet, 

Guess  her  name,  three  times  I've  telled  it.     (Ann.) 

As  soft  as  silk,  as  white  as  milk, 

As  bitter  as  gall,  a  thick  green  wall. 

And  a  green  coat  covers  me  all.     (A  walnut.) 

Make  three  fourths  of  a  cross. 

And  a  circle  complete; 
And  let  two  semicircles 

On  a  perpendicular  meet;  , , 

Next  add  a  triangle  , 

That  stands  on  two  feet; 
Next  two  semicircles, 

And  a  circle  complete.     (TOBACCO.) 

Flour  of  England,  fruit  of  Spain, 

Met  together  in  a  shower  of  rain; 

Put  in  a  bag  tied  round  with  a  string. 

If  you'll  tell  me  this  riddle,  I'h  give  you  a  ring. 

(A  plum-pudding.) 


Riddles  63 

In  marble  walls  as  white  as  milk, 

Lined  with  a  skin  as  soft  as  silk, 

Within  a  fountain  crystal  clear, 

A  golden  apple  doth  appear. 

No  doors  there  are  to  this  stronghold. 

Yet  thieves  break  in  and  steal  the  gold.  (An  egg.) 

Little  Nanny  Etticoat, 

In  a  white  petticoat. 

And  a  red  nose; 

The  longer  she  stands. 

The  shorter  she  grows.  (A  candle.) 

Long  legs,  crooked  thighs. 

Little  head  and  no  eyes.  (A  pair  of  tongs.) 

Thirty  white  horses  upon  a  red  hill, 
Now  they  tramp,  now  they  champ,  now  they  stand  still. 

(The  teeth.) 
Formed  long  ago,  yet  made  to-day. 

Employed  while  others  sleep; 
What  few  would  like  to  give  away, 

Nor  any  wish  to  keep.  (A  bed.) 

Lives  in  winter, 
Dies  in  summer, 
And  grows  with  its  root  upwards.  (An  icicle.) 

Elizabeth,  Lizzy,  Betsy  and  Bess, 
All  went  together  to  seek  a  bird's  nest; 
They  found  a  nest  with  five  eggs  in  it; 
They  each  took  one  and  left  four  in  it. 

Thomas  a  Tattamus  took  two  T's, 

To  tie  two  tups  to  two  tall  trees. 

To  frighten  the  terrible  Thomas  a  Tattamus! 

Tell  me  how  many  T's  there  are  in  all  THAT! 

Old  Mother  Twitchett  had  but  one  eye, 

And  a  long  tail  which  she  let  fly; 

And  every  time  she  went  over  a  gap, 

She  left  a  bit  of  her  tail  in  a  trap.  (A  needle  and  thread.) 


64  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

As  I  went  through  a  garden  gap, 

Who  should  I  meet  but  Dick  Red-Cap! 

A  stick  in  his  hand,  a  stone  in  his  throat,  ,.  niffjiW 

If  you'll  tell  me  this  riddle,  I'll  give  you  a  groat.  ■  ■ 

(A  cherry). 
Humpty  Dumpty  sat  on  a  wall, 
Humpty  Dumpty  had  a  great  fall; 
All  the  king's  horses  and  all  the  king's  men 
Cannot  put  Humpty  Dumpty  together  again.     (An  egg.) 

As  I  was  going  to  St.  Ives, 

I  met  a  man  with  seven  wives, 

Every  wife  had  seven  sacks, 

Every  sack  had  seven  cats,  ' '  '*""-''  'jhoJ 

Every  cat  had  seven  kits — 

Kits,  cats,  sacks,  and  wives. 

How  many  were  going  to  St.  Ives?     (One.) 

Two  legs  sat  upon  three  legs. 
With  one  leg  in  his  lap; 
In  comes  four  legs 
And  runs  away  with  one  leg; 
Up  jumps  two  legs. 
Catches  up  three  legs, 
Throws  it  after  four  legs, 

And  makes  him  drop  one  leg.  ,,^ 

(A  man,  a  stool,  a  leg  of  mutton,  and  a  dog.) 


ol  variT 
PROVERBS  -     ;, 

Ir  wishes  were  horses, 

Beggars  would  ride; 
If  turnips  were  watches, 

I'd  wear  one  by  my  side. 

A  MAN  of  words,  and  not  of  deeds,      ,jy.  ^^j 
Is  like  a  garden  full  of  weeds;  1  r.  hnA 

For  when  the  weeds  begin  to  grow. 
Then  doth  the  garden  overflow. 


Proverbs  "  '^  6^ 

He  that  would  thrive 

Must  rise  at  five; 

He  that  hath  thriven 

]May  lie  till  seven; 

And  he  that  b)^  the  plough  would  thrive, 

Himself  must  either  hold  or  drive. 

A  SWARM  of  bees  in  May 
Is  worth  a  load  of  hay; 
A  swarm  of  bees  in  June 
Is  worth  a  silver  spoon; 
A  swarm  of  bees  in  July 
Is  not  worth  a  fly. 

They  that  wash  on  ]\Ionday 

Have  all  the  week  to  dry; 

They  that  wash  on  Tuesday 

Are  not  so  much  awry; 

They  that  wash  on  Wednesday 

Are  not  so  much  to  blame; 

They  that  wash  on  Thursday, 

Wash  for  shame; 

They  that  wash  on  Friday, 

Wash  in  need; 

And  they  that  wash  on  Saturday, 

Oh,  they  are  slovens,  indeed. 

Needles  and  pins,  needles  and  pins, 
When  a  man  marries,  his  trouble  begins. 

For  every  evil  under  the  sun. 
There  is  a  remedy,  or  there  is  none. 
If  there  be  one,  try  and  find  it; 
If  there  be  none,  never  mind  it. 

Tommy's  tears,  and  Mary's  fears. 
Will  make  them  old  before  their  years. 

If  "ifs"  and  "ands" 
Were  pots  and  pans, 
There  would  be  no  need  for  tinkers! 


66  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

For  want  of  a  nail,  the  shoe  was  lost; 
For  want  of  the  shoe,  the  horse  was  lost; 
For  want  of  the  horse,  the  rider  was  lost; 
For  want  of  the  rider,  the  battle  was  lost ; 
For  want  of  the  battle,  the  kingdom  was  lost; 
And  all  from  the  want  of  a  horseshoe  nail. 


WEATHER  WISDOM 

A  SUNSHINY  shower 
Won't  last  half  an  hour. 

Rain  before  seven, 
Fair  by  eleven. 

The  South  wind  brings  wet  weather, 
The  North  wind  wet  and  cold  together; 
The  West  wind  always  brings  us  rain, 
The  East  wind  blows  it  back  again. 

March  winds  and  April  showers 
Bring  forth  May  flowers. 

Evening  red  and  morning  gray 
Set  the  traveller  on  his  way. 
But  evening  gray  and  morning  red. 
Bring  the  rain  upon  his  head. 

Rainbow  at  night 
Is  the  sailor's  delight; 
Rainbow  at  morning, 
Sailors,  take  warning. 


OLD  SUPERSTITIONS 

See  a  pin  and  pick  it  up, 

All  the  day  you'll  have  good  luck; 

See  a  pin  and  let  it  lay, 

Bad  luck  you  will  have  all  day. 


Old  Superstitions  67 

Cut  your  nails  on  Monday,  cut  them  for  news; 
Cut  them  on  Tuesday,  a  pair  of  new  shoes; 
Cut  them  on  Wednesday,  cut  them  for  health; 
Cut  them  on  Thursday,  cut  them  for  wealth; 
Cut  them  on  Friday,  cut  them  for  woe; 
Cut  them  on  Saturday,  a  journey  you'll  go; 
Cut  them  on  Sunday,  you'll  cut  them  for  evil, 
For  all  the  next  week  you'll  be  ruled  by  the  devil. 

Marry  Monday,  marry  for  wealth ; 
Marry  Tuesday,  marry  for  health; 
Marry  Wednesday,  the  best  day  of  all; 
Marry  Thursday,  marry  for  crosses, 
Marry  Friday,  marry  for  losses. 
Marry  Saturday,  no  luck  at  all. 

Sneeze  on  a  Monday,  you  sneeze  for  danger; 
Sneeze  on  a  Tuesday,  you'll  kiss  a  stranger; 
Sneeze  on  a  Wednesday,  you  sneeze  for  a  letter; 
Sneeze  on  a  Thursday,  for  something  better; 
Sneeze  on  a  Friday,  you  sneeze  for  sorrow; 
Sneeze  on  a  Saturday,  your  sweetheart  to-morrow; 
Sneeze  on  a  Sunday,  your  safety  seek — 
The  devil  will  have  you  the  whole  of  the  week. 

Monday  's  child  is  fair  of  face, 
Tuesday 's  child  is  full  of  grace, 
Wednesday's  child  is  full  of  woe, 
Thursday's  child  has  far  to  go, 
Friday 's  child  is  loving  and  giving, 
Saturday's  child  works  hard  for  its  living, 
And  a  child  that 's  born  on  the  Sabbath  day 
Is  fair  and  wise  and  good  and  gay. 


THE  ROAD  TO  SLUMBERLAND 

WYNKEN,   BLYNKEN,   AND   NOD  - 

DUTCH    LULLABY 

Wynken,  Blynken,  and  Nod  one  night 

Sailed  off  in  a  wooden  shoe, — 
Sailed  on  a  river  of  crystal  light 

Into  a  sea  of  dew. 
"Where  are  you  going,  and  what  do  you  wish?" 

The  old  moon  asked  the  three. 
"We  have  come  to  hsh  for  the  herring  fish 
That  live  in  this  beautiful  sea; 
Nets  of  silver  and  gold  have  we! " 
Said  Wynken, 
Blynken, 
And  Nod. 

The  old  moon  laughed  and  sang  a  song, 

As  they  rocked  in  the  wooden  shoe; 
And  the  wind  that  sped  them  all  night  long 
.    Ruffled  the  waves  of  dew. 
The  little  stars  were  the  herring  fish 
That  lived  in  that  beautiful  sea — 
"Now  cast  your  nets  wherever  you  wish, — 
Never  afeard  are  we!" 
So  cried  the  stars  to  the  fishermen  three, 
Wynken, 
Blynken, 
And  Nod. 

All  night  long  their  nets  they  threw 
To  the  stars  in  the  twinkling  foam, — 

Then  down  from  the  skies  came  the  wooden  shoe, 
Bringing  the  fishermen  home: 
68 


The  Sugar-Plum   Tree  6g 

'Twas  all  so  pretty  a  sail,  it  seemed 

As  if  it  could  not  be; 
And  some  folk  thought  'twas  a  dream  they'd  dreamed 
Of  sailing  that  beautiful  sea; 
But  I  shall  name  you  the  fishermen  three: 
Wynken, 
Blynken, 
And  Nod. 

Wynken  and  Blynken  are  two  little  eyes, 

And  Nod  is  a  little  head, 
And  the  wooden  shoe  that  sailed  the  skies 

Is  a  wee  one's  trundle-bed; 
So  shut  your  eyes  while  JMother  sings 

Of  wonderful  sights  that  be, 
And  you  shall  see  the  beautiful  things 
As  you  rock  in  the  misty  sea 
Where  the  old  shoe  rocked  the  fishermen  three: — 
Wynken, 
Blynken, 
And  Nod. 

Eugene  Field  [1850-1895] 

THE  SUGAR-PLUM  TREE 

Have  you  ever  heard  of  the  Sugar-Plum  Tree? 

'Tis  a  marvel  of  great  renown! 
It  blooms  on  the  shore  of  the  Lollypop  sea 

In  the  garden  of  Shut-Eye  Town; 
The  fruit  that  it  bears  is  so  wondrously  sweet 

(.•\s  those  who  have  tasted  it  say) 
That  good  little  children  have  only  to  eat 

Of  that  fruit  to  be  happy  next  day. 

When  you've  got  to  the  tree,  you  would  have  a  hard  time 

To  capture  the  fruit  which  I  sing; 
The  tree  is  so  tall  that  no  person  could  climb 

To  the  boughs  where  the  sugar-plums  swing! 
But  up  in  that  tree  sits  a  chocolate  cat. 

And  a  gingerbread  dog  prowls  below— 
And  this  is  the  way  you  contrive  to  get  at 

Those  sugar-plums  tempting  you  so: 


70  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

You  say  but  the  word  to  that  gingerbread  dog 

And  he  barks  with  such  terrible  zest 
That  the  chocolate  cat  is  at  once  all  agog, 

As  her  swelling  proportions  attest. 
And  the  chocolate  cat  goes  cavorting  around 

From  this  leafy  limb  unto  that, 
And  the  sugar-plums  tumble,  of  course,  to  the  ground — 

Hurrah  for  that  chocolate  cat! 

There  are  marshmallows,  gumdrops,  and  peppermint  canes. 

With  stripings  of  scarlet  or  gold, 
And  you  carry  away  of  the  treasure  that  rains, 

As  much  as  your  apron  can  hold! 
So  come,  little  child,  cuddle  closer  to  me 

In  your  dainty  white  nightcap  and  gown. 
And  I'll  rock  you  away  to  that  Sugar-Plum  Tree 

In  the  garden  of  Shut-Eye  Town. 

Eugene  Field  [1850-1895] 

WHEN  THE   SLEEPY  MAN   COMES 

When  the  Sleepy  Man  comes  with  the  dust  on  his  eyes, 

(Oh,  weary,  my  Dearie,  so  weary!) 
He  shuts  up  the  earth,  and  he  opens  the  skies. 

(So  hush-a-by,  weary  my  Dearie!)  '"'^  "^T 

He  smiles  through  his  fingers,  and  shuts  up  the  sun;        -  '■ 

(Oh,  weary,  my  Dearie,  so  weary!) 
The  stars  that  he  loves  he  lets  out  one  by  one*  ■  -  -  -    ■ 

(So  hush-a-by,  weary  my  Dearie!)  yaodJ  g/- ) 

He  comes  from  the  castles  of  Drowsy-boy  Town;  / 

(Oh,  weary,  my  Dearie,  so  weary!)  ^ 

At  the  touch  of  his  hand  the  tired  eyelids  fall  down.  '^' 
(So  hush-a-by,  weary  my  Dearie!)    ,,            .| 

He  comes  with  a  murmur  of  dream  in  his  wings; 

(Oh,  weary,  my  Dearie,  so  weary!)  'i-  J^J^ 

And  whispers  of  mermaids  and  wonderful  things.  ''"^ 

(So  hush-a-by,  weary  my  Dearie!)  '^- 


Auld   Daddy    Darkness  71 

Then  the  top  is  a  burden,  the  bugle  a  bane; 

(Oh,  weary,  my  Dearie,  so  weary!) 
When  one  would  be  faring  down  Dream-a-way  Lane. 

(So  hush-a-by,  weary  my  Dearie!) 

When  one  would  be  wending  in  Lullaby  Wherry, 

(Oh,  weary,  my  Dearie,  so  wear}'!) 
To  Sleepy  Man's  Castle,  by  Comforting  Ferry. 

(So  hush-a-by,  weary  my  Dearie!) 

Charles  G.  D.  Roberts  [1860- 


AULD   DADDY  DARKNESS 

Auld  Daddy  Darkness  creeps  frae  his  hole, 
Black  as  a  blackamoor,  blin'  as  a  mole: 
Stir  the  fire  till  it  lowes,  let  the  bairnie  sit, 
Auld  Daddy  Darkness  is  no  wan  tit  yit. 

See  him  in  the  corners  hidin'  frae  the  licht, 
See  him  at  the  window  gloomin'  at  the  nicht; 
Turn  up  the  gas  licht,  close  the  shutters  a'. 
An'  Auld  Daddy  Darkness  will  flee  far  awa'. 

Awa'  to  hide  the  birdie  within  its  cosy  nest, 
Awa'  to  lap  the  wee  flooers  on  their  mither  's  breast, 
Awa'  to  loosen  Gaffer  Toil  frae  his  daily  ca'. 
For  Auld  Daddy  Darkness  is  kindly  to  a'. 

He  comes  when  we  're  weary  to  wean 's  frae  oor  waes. 
He  comes  when  the  bairnies  are  getting  aff  their  claes; 
To  cover  them  sae  cosy,  an'  bring  bonnie  dreams, 
i;i  So  Auld  Daddy  Darkness  is  better  than  he  seems. 

Steek  yer  een,  my  wee  tot,  ye '11  see  Daddy  then; 
He's  in  below  the  bed  claes,  to  cuddle  ye  he's  fain; 
Noo  nestle  to  his  bosie,  sleep  and  dream  yer  fill, 
1111  Wee  Davie  Daylicht  comes  keekin '  owre  the  hill. 

James  Ferguson  [iS    -    ?    ] 


72  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 


WILLIE  WINKIE 

Wee  Willie  Winkie  rins  through  the  town, 

Upstairs  and  doon  stairs,  in  his  nicht-gown, 

Tirlin'  at  the  window,  cryin'  at  the  lock, 

"Are  the  weans  in  their  bed? — for  it 's  noo  ten  o'clock." 

Hey,  Willie  Winkie!  are  ye  comin'  ben? 

The  cat's  singin '  gay  thrums  to  the  sleepin'  hen, 

The  doug's  speldered  on  the  floor,  and  disna  gie  a  cheep; 

But  here's  a  waukrife  laddie,  that  winna  fa'  asleep. 

Ouy thing  but  sleep,  ye  rogue! — glowrin'  like  the  moon, 
Rattlin'  in  an  airn  jug  wi'  an  airn  spoon, 
Rumblin',  tumblin'  roun'  about,  crawin'  like  a  cock, 
Skirlin'  like  a  kenna-what — wauknin'  sleepin'  folk! 

Hey,  Willie  Winkie!  the  wean's  in  a  creel! 
Waumblin'  aff  a  bodie  's  knee  like  a  vera  eel, 
Ruggin'  at  the  cat's  lug,  and  ravellin'  a'  her  thrums: 
Hey,  Willie  Winkie! — See,  there  he  comes! 

William  Miller  [i  810-187  2] 

THE   SANDMAN 

The  rosy  clouds  float  overhead, 

The  sun  is  going  down; 
And  now  the  sandman's  gentle  tread 

Comes  stealing  through  the  town. 
"White  sand,  white  sand,"  he  softly  cries, 

And  as  he  shakes  his  hand. 
Straightway  there  lies  on  babies'  eyes 

His  gift  of  shining  sand. 
Blue  eyes,  gray  eyes,  black  eyes,  and  brown. 
As  shuts  the  rose,  they  softly  close,  when  he  goes  through 
the  town. 

From  sunny  beaches  far  away — • 

Yes,  in  another  land — 
He  gathers  up  at  break  of  day 

His  store  of  shining  sand. 


The   Dustman      ■   '<  73 

No  tempests  beat  that  shore  remote, 

No  ships  may  sail  that  way; 
His  httlc  boat  alone  may  float 

Within  that  lovely  bay. 
Blue  eyes,  gray  eyes,  black  eyes,  and  brown, 
As  shuts  the  rose,  they  softly  close,  when  he  goes  through 
the  town. 

He  smiles  to  see  the  eyelids  close 

Above  the  happy  eyes; 
And  every  child  right  well  he  knows, — 

Oh,  he  is  very  wise! 
But  if,  as  he  goes  through  the  land, 

A  naughty  baby  cries. 
His  other  hand  takes  dull  gray  sand 

To  close  the  wakeful  eyes. 
Blue  eyes,  gray  eyes,  black  eyes,  and  brown, 
As  shuts  the  rose,  they  softly  close,  when  he  goes  through 
the  town. 

So  when  you  hear  the  sandman's  song 

Sound  through  the  twilight  sweet, 
Be  sure  you  do  not  keep  him  long 

A-waiting  in  the  street. 
Lie  softly  down,  dear  Httle  head, 

Rest  quiet,  busy  hands, 
Till,  by  your  bed  his  good-night  said, 

He  strews  the  shining  sands. 
Blue  eyes,  gray  eyes,  black  eyes,  and  brown, 
As  shuts  the  rose,  they  softly  close,  when  he  goes  through 

the  town. 

Margaret  Thomson  Janvier  [1845-1913] 


THE  DUSTMAN 

When  the  toys  are  growing  weary, 
And  the  twilight  gathers  in;   1' 

When  the  nursery  still  echoes 
With  the  children's  merry  din; 


74  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Then  unseen,  unheard,  unnoticed 
Comes  an  old  man  up  the  stair, 

Lightly  to  the  children  passes, 
Lays  his  hand  upon  their  hair. 

Softly  smiles  the  good  old  Dustman; 

In  their  eyes  the  dust  he  throws, 
Till  their  little  heads  are  falling, 

And  their  weary  eyes  must  close. 
Then  the  Dustman  very  gently 

Takes  each  little  dimpled  hand 
Leads  them  through  the  sweet  green  shadows, 

Far  away  in  slumberland. 

Frederic  Edward  Weatherly  [1848- 


SEPHESTIA'S  LULLABY 

From  "  Menaphon  " 

Weep  not,  my  wanton,  smile  upon  my  knee; 
When  thou  art  old  there's  grief  enough  for  thee. 

Mother's  wag,  prett}'  boy, 

Father's  sorrow,  father's  joy; 

When  thy  father  first  did  see 

Such  a  boy  by  him  and  me. 

He  was  glad,  I  was  woe; 

Fortune  changed  made  him  so, 

When  he  left  his  pretty  boy. 

Last  his  sorrow,  first  his  joy. 

Weep  not,  my  wanton,  smile  upon  my  knee; 

When  thou  art  old  there's  grief  enough  for  thee. 
Streaming  tears  that  never  stint, 
Like  pearl-drops  from  a  flint. 
Fell  by  course  from  his  eyes, 
That  one  another's  place  supphes; 
Thus  he  grieved  in  every  part. 
Tears  of  blood  fell  from  his  heart, 
When  he  left  his  pretty  boy. 
Father's  sorrow,  father's  joy. 


"Sleep,   Baby,   Sleep"  75 

Weep  not,  my  wanton,  smile  upon  nn'  knee; 
When  thou  art  old  there 's  grief  enough  for  thee. 

The  wanton  smiled,  father  wept, 

Mother  cried,  baby  leapt; 

More  he  crowed,  more  we  cried. 

Nature  could  not  sorrow  hide: 

He  must  go,  he  must  kiss 

Child  and  mother,  baby  bliss, 

For  he  left  his  pretty  boy, 

Father's  sorrow,  father's  joy. 
Weep  not,  my  wanton,  smile  upon  my  knee. 
When  thou  art  old  there 's  grief  enough  for  thee. 

Robert  Greene  [1560?- 159 2] 


GOLDEN  SLUMBERS  KISS  YOUR  EYES  " 

From  ■'  Patient  Grissel  " 

Golden  slumbers  kiss  your  eyes. 
Smiles  awake  you  when  you  rise. 
Sleep,  pretty  wantons,  do  not  cry, 
And  I  will  sing  a  lullaby. 
Rock  them,  rock  them,  lullaby. 

Care  is  heavy,  therefore  sleep  you. 
You  are  care,  and  care  must  keep  you. 
Sleep,  pretty  wantons,  do  not  cry, 
And  I  will  sing  a  lullaby. 
Rock  them,  rock  them,  lullaby. 

Thomas  Dekker  [i57o?-i64i?] 


"SLEEP,   BABY,   SLEEP" 

Sleep,  baby,  sleep!  what  ails  my  dear, 
What  ails  my  darling  thus  to  cry? 

Be  still,  my  child,  and  lend  tliine  ear. 
To  hear  me  sing  thy  lullaby. 

My  pretty  lamb,  forbear  to  weep; 

Be  still,  my  dear;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 


76  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

Thou  blessed  soul,  what  canst  thou  fear? 

What  thing  to  thee  can  mischief  do? 
Thy  God  is  now  thy  father  dear, 

His  holy  Spouse  thy  mother  too. 
Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 
Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

Though  thy  conception  was  in  sin, 
A  sacred  bathing  thou  hast  had; 

And  though  thy  birth  unclean  hath  been, 
A  blameless  babe  thou  art  now  made. 

Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 

Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

While  thus  thy  lullaby  I  sing. 

For  thee  great  blessings  ripening  be; 

Thine  Eldest  Brother  is  a  king. 

And  hath  a  kingdom  bought  for  thee. 

Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 

Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

Sweet  baby,  sleep,  and  nothing  fear; 

For  whosoever  thee  offends 
By  thy  protector  threatened  are, 

And  God  and  angels  are  thy  friends. 
Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 
Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

When  God  with  us  was  dwelhng  here,; 

In  httle  babes  He  took  dehght; 
Such  innocents  as  thou,  my  dear, 

Are  ever  precious  in  His  sight. 
Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 
Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

A  Uttle  infant  once  was  He ; 

And  strength  in  weakness  then  was  laid 
Upon  His  Virgin  Mother's  knee, 

That  power  to  thee  might  be  conveyed. 
Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 
Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 


Mother's   Song  77 

In  this  thy  frailty  and  thy  need 
He  friends  and  helpers  doth  prepare, 

Which  thee  shall  cherish,  clothe,  and  feed, 
For  of  thy  weal  they  tender  are. 

Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 

Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

The  King  of  Kings  when  He  was  born. 
Had  not  so  much  for  outward  ease; 

By  Him  such  dressings  were  not  worn, 
Nor  such  like  swaddling-clothes  as  these. 

Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 

Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby  sleep. 

Within  a  manger  lodged  th}^  Lord, 

Where  oxen  lay  and  asses  fed: 
Warm  rooms  we  do  to  thee  afford. 

An  easy  cradle  for  a  bed. 
Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 
Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

The  wants  that  He  did  then  sustain 

Have  purchased  wealth,  my  babe,  for  thee, 

And  by  His  torments  and  His  pain 
Thy  rest  and  ease  secured  be. 

My  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 

Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

Thou  hast,  yet  more,  to  perfect  this 

A  promise  and  an  earnest  got 
Of  gaining  everlasting  bliss, 

Though  thou,  my  babe,  perceiv'st  it  not. 
Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 
Be  still,  my  babe;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

George  Wither  [1588-1667] 

MOTHER'S  SONG 

My  heart  is  like  a  fountain  true 
That  flows  and  flows  with  love  to  you. 
As  chirps  the  lark  unto  the  tree 
So  chirps  mj'  pretty  babe  to  me. 
And  it's  O!  sweet,  sweet!  and  a  lullaby. 


7 8  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

There's  not  a  rose  where'er  I  seek, 
As  comely  as  my  baby's  cheek. 
There's  not  a  comb  of  honey-bee, 
So  full  of  sweets  as  babe  to  me. 
And  it's  0!  sweet,  sweet!  and  a  lullaby. 

There 's  not  a  star  that  shines  on  high. 
Is  brighter  than  my  baby's  eye. 
There 's  not  a  boat  upon  the  sea, 
Can  dance  as  baby  does  to  me. 
And  it's  O!  sweet,  sweet!  and  a  lullaby. 

No  silk  v/as  ever  spun  so  fine 

As  is  the  hair  of  baby  mine. 

My  baby  smells  more  sweet  to  me 

Than  smells  in  spring  the  elder  tree. 

And  it's  O!  sweet,  sweet!  and  a  lullaby. 

A  httle  fish  svs'ims  in  the  well, 

So  in  my  heart  does  baby  dwell. 

A  little  flower  blows  on  the  tree. 

My  baby  is  the  flower  to  mc. 

And  it's  0!  sweet,  sweet!  and  a  lullaby. 

The  Queen  has  sceptre,  crown  and  ball, 
You  are  my  sceptre,  crown  and  all. 
For  all  her  robes  of  royal  silk, 
More  fair  your  skin,  as  white  as  milk. 
And  it's  0!  sweet,  sweet!  and  a  lullaby. 

Ten  thousand  parks  where  deer  do  run, 

Ten  thousand  roses  in  the  sun, 

Ten  thousand  pearls  beneath  the  sea, 

My  babe  more  precious  is  to  me. 

And  it's  0!  sweet,  sweet!  and  a  lullaby. 

Unknown 
A  LULLABY 

Upon  my  lap  rny  sovereign  sits 
And  sucks  upon  my  breast; 
Meanwliile  his  love  sustains  my  life 
And  gives  my  body  rest. 

Sing  lullaby,  my  Httle  boy, 

Sing  lullaby,  mine  only  joy! 


A  Cradle   Hymn  79 

When  thou  hast  taken  thy  repast, 
Repose,  my  babe,  on  me; 
So  may  thy  mother  and  thy  nurse 
Thy  cradle  also  be. 

Sing  lullaby,  my  little  boy. 

Sing  lullaby,  mine  only  joy! 

I  grieve  that  duty  doth  not  work 
All  that  my  wishing  would, 
Because  I  would  not  be  to  thee 
But  in  the  best  I  should. 

Sing  lullaby,  my  little  bey, 

Sing  lullaby,  mine  only  joy! 

Yet  as  I  am,  and  as  I  may, 
I  must  and  will  be  thine, 
Though  all  too  Httle  for  thy  self 
Vouchsafing  to  be  mine. 

Sing  lullaby,  my  little  boy, 

Sing  lullaby,  mine  only  joy! 

Richard  Rowlands  [fl.  1565-1620'! 

A  CRADLE    HYMN 

Hush  !  my  dear,  lie  still  and  slumber, 

Holy  angels  guard  thy  bed! 
Heavenly  blessings  without  number 

Gently  falling  on  thy  head. 

Sleep,  my  babe;  thy  food  and  raiment, 
House  and  home,  thy  friends  provide; 

All  without  thy  care  or  payment: 
All  thy  wants  are  well  supplied. 

How  much  better  thou  'rt  attended 

Than  the  Son  of  God  could  be, 
When  from  heaven  He  descended 

And  became  a  child  like  thee! 

Soft  and  easy  is  thy  cradle: 

Coarse  and  hard  thy  Saviour  lay, 
When  His  birthplace  was  a  stable 

And  His  softest  bed  was  hay. 


8o  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Blessed  babe!  what  glorious  features — 

Spotless  fair,  divinely  bright! 
Must  He  dwell  with  brutal  creatures? 

How  could  angels  bear  the  sight? 

Was  there  nothing  but  a  manger 

Cursed  sinners  could  afford 
To  receive  the  heavenly  stranger? 

Did  they  thus  affront  their  Lord? 

Soft,  my  child:  I  did  not  chide  thee. 
Though  my  song  might  sound  too  hard; 

'Tis  thy  mother  sits  beside  thee. 
And  her  arms  shall  be  thy  guard. 

Yet  to  read  the  shameful  story 
How  the  Jews  abused  their  King, 

How  they  served  the  Lord  of  Glory, 
Makes  me  angry  while  I  sing. 

See  the  kinder  shepherds  round  Him, 

Telling  wonders  from  the  sky! 
Where  they  sought  Him,  there  they  found  Him,; 

With  His  Virgin  mother  by. 

See  the  lovely  babe  a-dressing; 

Lovely  infant,  how  He  smiled! 
When  He  wept,  the  mother's  blessing 

Soothed  and  hushed  the  holy  child. 

Lo,  He  slumbers  in  His  manger, 

Where  the  horned  oxen  fed; 
Peace,  my  darling;  here's  no  danger, 

Here's  no  ox  anear  thy  bed. 

'Twas  to  save  thee,  child,  from  dying, 
Save  my  dear  from  burning  flame, 

Bitter  groans  and  endless  crying. 
That  thy  blest  Redeemer  came. 


Lullaby  8i 

May  'st  thou  live  to  know  and  fear  Him, 

Trust  and  love  Him  all  thy  days; 
Then  go  dwell  forever  near  Him, 

See  His  face,  and  sing  His  praise! 

Isaac  Watts  [1674- 1748] 


CRADLE   SONG 

Sleep,  sleep,  beauty  bright. 
Dreaming  in  the  joys  of  night; 
Sleep,  sleep;  in  thy  sleep 
Little  sorrows  sit  and  weep. 

Sweet  babe,  in  thy  face 
Soft  desires  I  can  trace, 
Secret  joys  and  secret  smiles, 
Little  pretty  infant  wiles. 

As  thy  softest  limbs  I  feel 
Smiles  as  of  the  morning  steal 
O  'er  thy  cheek,  and  o  'er  thy  breast 
Where  thy  little  heart  doth  rest. 

O  the  cunning  wiles  that  creep 
In  thy  little  heart  asleep ! 
When  thy  little  heart  doth  wake, 
Then  the  dreadful  night  shall  break. 

William  Blake  [i 757-1827] 


LULLABY 

Baloo,  loo,  lammy,  now  baloo,  my  dear, 
Does  wee  lammy  ken  that  its  daddy's  no  here? 
Ye  're  rocking  full  sweetly  on  mammy 's  warm  knee, 
But  daddy's  a-rocking  upon  the  salt  sea. 

Now  hushaby,  Jammy,  now  hushaby,  dear; 

Now  hushaby,  lammy,  for  mother  is  near. 

The  wild  wind  is  raving,  and  mammy's  heart's  sair; 

The  wild  wind  is  raving,  and  ye  dinna  care. 


82  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 

Sing  baloo,  loo,  lammy,  sing  baloo,  my  dear; 
Sing  baloo,  loo,  lammy,  for  mother  is  here. 
My  wee  bairnie  's  dozing,  it 's  dozing  now  fine, 
And  O  may  its  wakening  be  blither  than  mine! 

Carolina  Nairne  [i 766-1 845J 


LULLABY  OF  AN  INFANT  CHIEF 

O,  HUSH  thee,  my  babie,  thy  sire  was  a  knight, 
Thy  mother  a  lady,  both  lovely  and  bright; 
The  woods  and  the  glens,  from  the  tov/ers  which  we  see, 
They  are  aU  belonging,  dear  babie,  to  thee. 
0  ho  ro,  i  ri  ri,  cadul  gu  lo. 

O,  fe'ar  not  the  bugle,  though  loudly  it  blows, 
It  calls  but  the  warders  that  guard  thy  repose; 
Their  bows  would  be  bended,  their  blades  would  be  red. 
Ere  the  step  of  a  foeman  draws  near  to  thy  bed. 
O  ho  ro,  i  ri  ri,  cadul  gu  lo. 

O,  hush  thee,  my  babie,  the  time  soon  will  come. 
When  thy  sleep  shall  be  broken  by  trumpet  and  drum ; 
Then  hush  thee,  my  darling,  take  rest  while  you  may. 
For  strife  comes  with  manhood,  and  waking  with  day. 
O  ho  ro,  i  ri  ri,  cadul  gu  lo. 

Walter  Scott  [i 771-1832] 

GOOD-NIGHT 

Little  baby,  lay  your  head 

On  your  pretty  cradle-bed; 

Shut  your  eye-peeps,  now  the  day 

And  the  light  are  gone  away; 

All  the  clothes  are  tucked  in  tight; 

Little  baby  dear,  good-night. 

Yes,  my  darling,  well  I  know 
How  the  bitter  wind  doth  blow; 
And  the  winter 's  snow  and  rain 
Patter  on  the  window-pane: 
But  they  cannot  come  in  here, 
To  my  Uttle  baby  dear; 


Lullaby     ^  ^rngoH  83'^ 


For  the  window  shuUeth  fast, 
Till  the  stormy  night  is  past; 
And  the  curtains  warm  are  spread 
Round  about  her  cradle  bed: 
So  till  morning  shineth  bright, 
Little  baby  dear,  good-night. 

Jane  Taylor  [1783-1824] 

"  LULLABY,  O  LULLABY  " 

Lullaby!  O  lullaby! 
Baby,  hush  that  little  cry! 

Light  is  dying, 

Bats  are  flying. 
Bees  to-day  with  work  have  done; 
So,  till  comes  the  morrow's  sun, 
Let  sleep  kiss  those  bright  eyes  dry! 

Lullaby!  0  lullaby. 

Lullaby!  O  lullaby! 

Hushed  are  all  things  far  and  nigh; 

Flowers  are  closing. 

Birds  reposing, 
All  sweet  things  with  life  are  done. 
Sweet,  till  dawns  the  morning  sun, 
Sleep,  then  kiss  those  blue  eyes  dry. 

LuUabylO  lullaby! 

William  Cox  Bennett  [i82o-i8g5] 

LULLABY 

From  "  The  Princess  " 

Sweet  and  low,  sweet  and  low, 

Wind  of  the  western  sea. 
Low,  low,  breathe  and  blow, 
'      Wind  of  the  western  sea! 
Over  the  rolling  waters  go. 
Come  from  the  dying  moon,  and  blow, 
Blow  him  again  to  me; 
While  my  little  one,  while  my  pretty  one,  sleeps. 


84  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Sleep  and  rest,  sleep  and  rest, 

Father  will  come  to  thee  soon; 
Rest,  rest,  on  mother's  breast. 

Father  will  come  to  thee  soon; 
Father  will  come  to  his  babe  in  the  nest, 
Silver  sails  all  out  of  the  west 
Under  the  silver  moon: 
Sleep,  my  little  one,  sleep,  my  pretty  one,  sleep. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


THE  COTTAGER  TO  HER  INFANT 

The  days  are  cold,  the  nights  are  long, 
The  north- wind  sings  a  doleful  song; 
Then  hush  again  upon  my  breast; 
All  merry  things  are  now  at  rest, 
Save  thee,  my  pretty  love! 

The  kitten  sleeps  upon  the  hearth; 
The  crickets  long  have  ceased  their  mirth; 
There 's  nothing  stirring  in  the  house 
Save  one  wee,  hungry,  nibbling  mouse; 
Then  why  so  busy  thou? 

Nay!  start  not  at  that  sparkling  light; 
'Tis  but  the  moon  that  shines  so  bright 
On  the  window-pane  bedropped  with  rain: 
There,  little  darling!  sleep  again, 
And  wake  when  it  is  day! 

Dorothy  Wordsworth  [1804- 184  7] 

TROT,  TROT  ! 

Every  evening  Baby  goes 

Trot,  trot,  to  town, 
Across  the  river,  through  the  fields, 

Up  hill  and  down. 

Trot,  trot,  the  Baby  goes. 
Up  hill  and  down, 


Holy  Innocents  8 

To  buy  a  feather  for  her  hat, 
To  buy  a  woolen  gown. 

Trot,  trot,  the  Baby  goes; 

The  birds  fly  down,  alack! 
"You  cannot  have  our  feathers,  dear," 

They  say,  "so  please  trot  back." 

Trot,  trot,  the  Baby  goes; 

The  lambs  come  bleating  near. 
"You  cannot  have  our  wool,"  they  say, 

"But  we  are  sorry,  dear." 

Trot,  trot,  the  Baby  goes, 

Trot,  trot,  to  town;  vi 

She  buys  a  red  rose  for  her  hat, 

She  buys  a  cotton  gown. 

Mary  F.  Butts  [1836- 

HOLY  INNOCENTS 

Sleep,  little  Baby,  sleep; 

The  holy  Angels  love  thee, 
And  guard  thy  bed,  and  keep 

A  blessed  watch  above  thee. 
No  spirit  can  come  near 

Nor  evil  beast  to  harm  theeaf-l  o)riI 
Sleep,  Sweet,  devoid  of  fear 

Where  nothing  need  alarm  thee. 

The  Love  which  doth  not  sleep, 

The  eternal  Arms  surround  thee: 
The  Shepherd  of  the  sheep 

In  perfect  love  hath  found  thee. 
Sleep  through  the  holy  night, 

Christ-kept  from  snare  and  sorrow, 
Until  thou  wake  to  light 

And  love  and  warmth  to-morrow. 

,  Christina  Georgina  RosseUi  [,1830-1894] 


86  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


LULLABY 

From  "  The  Mistress  of  the  Manse  " 

RocKABY,  lullaby,  bees  in  the  clover! 

Crooning  so  drowsily,  crying  so  low, 

Rockaby,  lullaby,  dear  little  rover! 
Down  into  wonderland, 
Down  to  the  under-land  i 

Go,  oh  go! 

Down  into  wonderland  go! 

Rockaby,  lullaby,  rain  on  the  clover! 
(Tears  on  the  eyelids  that  waver  and  weep !) 
Rockaby,  lullaby— bending  it  over! 

Down  on  the  mother- world,      ' 

Down  on  the  other  world, 
Sleep,  oh  sleep! 
Down  on  the  mother- world  sleep! 

Rockaby,  lullaby,  dew  on  the  clover! 
Dew  on  the  eyes  that  will  sparkle  at  dawn! 
Rockaby,  lullaby,  dear  little  rover! 
Into  the  stilly  world. 
Into  the  lily  world, 

Gone !  oh  gone ! 
Into  the  lily  world  gone! 

Josiah  Gilbert  Holland  [i 819-1. 


CRADLE  SONG 

From  '■  Bitter-Sweet " 

What  is  the  little  one  thinking  about? 
Very  wonderful  things,  no  doubt! 

Unwritten  history! 

Unfathomed  mystery! 
Yet  he  laughs  and  cries,  and  eats  and  drinks, 
And  chuckles  and  crows,  and  nods  and  winks, 


Cradle  Song  ^  i 


As  if  his  head  were  as  full  of  kinks 
And  curious  riddles  as  any  sphinx! 
Warped  by  colic,  and  wet  by  tears, 
Punctured  by  pins,  and  tortured  by  fears, 
Our  little  nephew  will  lose  two  years; 
And  he  '11  never  know 
Where  the  summers  go; — 
He  need  not  laugh,  for  he'll  find  it  so! 

Who  can  tell  what  a  baby  thinks? 
Who  can  follow  the  gossamer  links 

By  which  the  mannikin  feels  his  way 
Out  from  the  shore  of  the  great  unknown, 
Blind,  and  wailing,  and  alone, 

Into  the  light  of  day? — 
Out  from  the  shore  of  the  unknown  sea. 
Tossing  in  pitiful  agony; — 
Of  the  unknown  sea  that  reels  and  rolls. 
Specked  w^th  the  barks  of  little  souls, — 
Barks  that  were  launched  on  the  other  side, 
And  slipped  from  Heaven  on  an  ebbing  tide! 

What  does  he  think  of  his  mother's  eyes? 
What  does  he  think  of  his  mother's  hair? 

What  of  the  cradle-roof,  that  flies        _  ' 
Forward  and  backward  through  the  air? 

What  does  he  think  of  his  mother 's  breast, 
Bare  and  beautiful,  smooth  and  white. 
Seeking  it  ever  with  fresh  delight,— 

Cup  of  his  life,  and  couch  of  his  rest? 
What  does  he  think  when  her  quick  embrace 
Presses  his  hand  and  buries  his  face 
Deep  where  the  heart-throbs  sink  and  swell 
With  a  tenderness  she  can  never  tell, 

Though  she  murmur  the  words 

Of  all  the  birds,— 
Words  she  has  learned  to  murmur  well? 

Now  he  thinks  he'll  go  to  sleep! 

I  can  see  the  shadow  creep 

Over  his  eyes,  in  soft  eclipse,  ,^ 

Over  his  brow,  and  over  his  lips. 


Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

Out  to  his  little  finger-tips! 
Softly  sinking,  down  he  goes! 
Down  he  goes!  down  he  goes! 
See!  he  is  hushed  in  sweet  repose! 

Josiah  Gilbert  Holland  [1819-1881] 


AN  IRISH   LULLABY 

I  'vE  found  my  bonny  babe  a  nest 

On  Slumber  Tree, 
I'll  rock  you  there  to  rosy  rest, 

Asthore  Machree! 
Oh,  lulla  lo!  sing  all  the  leaves 

On  Slumber  Tree, 
Till  everything  that  hurts  or  grieves 

Afar  must  flee. 

I  've  put  my  pretty  child  to  float 

Away  from  me. 
Within  the  new  moon's  silver  boat 

On  Slumber  Sea. 
And  when  your  starry  sail  is  o  'er 

From  Slumber  Sea, 
My  precious  one,  you'll  step  to  shore 

On  Mother's  knee. 

Alfred  Perceval  Graves  [1846- 


CRADLE  SONG 


Lord  Gabriel,  wilt  thou  not  rejoice 
When  at  last  a  little  boy's 

Cheek  lies  heavy  as  a  rose, 

And  his  eyelids  close? 

Gabriel,  when  that  hush  may  be, 
This  sweet  hand  all  heed  fully 

I'll  undo,  for  thee  alone, 

From  his  mother's  own. 


^-.r       .Cradle  Song  89 

Then  the  far  blue  highways  paven 
With  the  burning  stars  of  heaven 

He  shall  gladden  with  the  sweet 

Hasting  of  his  feet — 

Feet  so  brightly  bare  and  cool, 
Leaping,  as  from  pool  to  pool;    1 

From  a  little  laughing  boy 

Splashing  rainbow  joy! 

Gabriel,  wilt  thou  understand 
How  to  keep  his  hovering  hand — 

Never  shut,  as  in  a  bond, 

From  the  bright  beyond? — 

Nay,  but  though  it  cling  and  close 
Tightly  as  a  climbing  rose. 

Clasp  it  only  so — aright, 

Lest  his  heart  take  fright. 

(Donni,  dormi,  tu: 

The  dusk  is  hung  with  blue.) 


Lord  Michael,  wilt  not  thou  rejoice 
When  at  last  a  little  boy's 

Heart,  a  shut-in  murmuring  bee, 

Turns  him  unto  thee? 

Wilt  thou  heed  thine  armor  well — 
To  take  his  hand  from  Gabriel, 

So  his  radiant  cup  of  dream 

May  not  spill  a  gleam? 

He  will  take  thy  heart  in  thrall. 
Telling  o'er  thy  breastplate,  all 

Colors,  in  his  bubbling  speech, 

With  his  hand  to  each. 

{Dormi,  dormi,  tu. 
Sapphire  is  the  blue: 
Pearl  and  beryl,  they  are  called, 
Chrysoprase  and  emerald,      , 


90  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Sard  and  amethyst. 
Numbered  so,  and  kissed.) 

Ah,  but  find  some  angel  word 
For  thy  sharp,  subduing  sword! 

Yea,  Lord  Michael,  make  no  doubt 

He  will  find  it  out : 

{Dormi,  dormi,  tu! 

His  eyes  will  look  at  you.) 

Ill 

Last,  a  little  morning  space, 
Lead  him  to  that  leafy  place 

Where  Our  Lady  sits  awake, 

For  all  mothers'  sake. 

Bosomed  with  the  Blessed  One, 
He  shall  mind  her  of  her  Son, 

Once  so  folded  from  all  harms, 

In  her  shrining  arms. 

{In  her  veil  of  blue, 
Dormi,  dormi,  tu.) 

So; — and  fare  thee  well. 

Softly, — Gabriel     .     .     . 
When  the  first  faint  red  shall  come. 
Bid  the  Day-star  lead  him  home, 

For  the  bright  world's  sake —     7 

To  my  heart,  awake. 

Josephine  Preston  Pcabody  [1874- 

MOTHER-SONG  FROM  "PRINCE  LUCIFER" 

White  little  hands!  j^' 

Pink  little  feet! 
Dimpled  all  over, 

Sweet,  sweet,  sweet! 
What  dost  thou  wail  for? 

The  unknown?  the  unseen? 
The  ills  that  arc  coming, 

The  joys  that  have  been? 


Kentucky   Babe  9' 

Cling  to  mc  closer,  ■ '  ''  ■'" 

Closer  and  closer, 
Till  the  pain  that  is  purer 

Hath  banished  the  grosser. 
Drain,  drain  at  the  stream,  love, 

Thy  hunger  is  freeing. 
That  was  born  in  a  dream,  love, 

Along  with  thy  being! 

Little  fingers  that  feel 

For  their  home  on  my  breast, 
Little  lips  that  appeal 

For  their  nurture,  their  rest! 
Why,  why  dost  thou  weep,  dear? 

Nay,  stifle  thy  cries, 
Till  the  dew  of  thy  sleep,  dear, 

Lies  soft  on  thine  eyes. 

Alfred  Auslin  [1835-1013] 

KENTUCKY   BABE 

'Skeeters  am  a  hummin'  on  de  honeysuckle  vine, — 

Sleep,  Kentucky  Babe! 
Sandman  am  a  comin'  to  dis  httle  coon  of  mine, — 

Sleep,  Kentucky  Babe! 
Silv'ry  moon  am  shinin '  in  de  heabens  up  above, 
Bobolink  am  pinin'  fo'  his  little  lady  love: 

Yo'  is  mighty  lucky, 

Babe  of  old  Kentucky, — 

Close  yo '  eyes  in  sleep. 

Fly  away,  ,^,^ 

Fly  away,  Kentucky  Babe,  fly  away  to  rest, 

Fly  away, 
Lay  yo'  kinky,  woolly  head  on  yo'  mammy's  breast, — 

Um—Um — , 
Close  yo '  eyes  in  sleep. 

Daddy's  in  de  cane-brake  wid  his  little  dog  and  gun, — 

Sleep,  Kentucky  Babe! 
'Possum  fo'  yo'  breakfast  when  yo'  sleepin'  time  is  done, — 

Sleep,  Kentucky  Babe! 


9^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Bogie  man '11  catch  yo'  sure  unless  yo'  close  yo'  eyes, 
Waitin'  jes  outside  de  doo'  to  take  yo'  by  surprise: 

Bes'  be  keepin'  shady, 

Little  colored  lady, — 

Close  yo^  eyes  in  sleep. 

Richard  Henry  Buck  [1869- 

MINNIE  AND  WINNIE 

Minnie  and  Winnie  slept  in  a  shell. 
Sleep,  Httle  ladies!     And  they  slept  well. 

Pink  was  the  shell  within,  silver  without; 
Sounds  of  the  great  sea  wandered  about. 

Sleep,  little  ladies!     Wake  not  soon! 
Echo  on  echo  dies  to  the  moon. 

Two  bright  stars  peeped  into  the  shell. 
"What  are  they  dreaming  of?     Who  can  tell?" 

Started  a  green  linnet  out  of  the  croft; 
Wake,  little  ladies!     The  sun  is  aloft. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 

BED-TIME  SONG 

Sleep,  my  baby,  while  I  sing 
Bed-time  news  of  everything. 
Chickens  run  to  mother  hen; 
Piggy  curls  up  in  the  pen. 
In  the  field,  all  tired  with  play, 
Quiet  now  the  lambkins  stay. 
Kittens  cuddle  in  a  heap — 
Baby,  too,  must  go  to  sleep! 

Sleep,  my  baby,  while  I  sing 
Bed-time  news  of  everything. 
Now  the  cows  from  pasture  come; 
Bees  fly  home  with  drowsy  hum. 
Little  birds  are  in  the  nest, 
Under  mother-bird's  soft  breast. 
Over  all  soft  shadows  creep — 
Baby  now  must  go  to  sleep. 


iiiiodod. 


^^ Tucking  the   Baby   In  93 

Sleep,  my  baby,  while  I  sing 
Bed-time  news  of  everything. 
Sleepy  flowers  seem  to  nod, 
Drooping  toward  the  dewy  sod; 
While  the  big  sun's  fading  light 
Bids  my  baby  dear  good-night. 
Mother  loving  watch  will  keep; 
Baby  now  must  go  to  sleep. 

EmiUc  Poulsson  [1S53- 

TUCKING  THE  BABY  IN 

The  dark-fringed  eyelids  slowly  close 

On  eyes  serene  and  deep; 
Upon  my  breast  my  own  sweet  child 

Has  gently  dropped  to  sleep; 
I  kiss  his  soft  and  dimpled  cheek, 

I  kiss  his  rounded  chin. 
Then  lay  him  on  his  little  bed, 

And  tuck  my  baby  in. 

How  fair  and  innocent  he  lies; 

Like  some  small  angel  strayed. 
His  face  still  warmed  by  God's  own  smile. 

That  slumbers  unafraid; 
Or  like  some  new  embodied  soul. 

Still  pure  from  taint  of  sin — 
My  thoughts  are  reverent  as  I  stoop 

To  tuck  my  baby  in. 
\Vhat  toil  must  stain  these  tiny  hands 

That  now  lie  still  and  white? 
What  shadows  creep  across  the  face 

That  shines  with  morning  light? 
These  wee  pink  shoeless  feet — how  far 

Shall  go  their  lengthening  tread, 
When  they  no  longer  cuddled  close 

!May  rest  upon  this  bed? 

O  what  am  I  that  I  should  train 

An  angel  for  the  skies; 
Or  mix  the  potent  draught  that  feeds 

The  soul  within  these  eyes? 


94  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

I  reach  him  up  to  the  sinless  Hands 
Before  his  cares  begin, — 

Great  Father,  with  Thy  folds  of  love, 
O  tuck  my  baby  in. 

Curtis  May  [i8 


''JENNY  WI'  THE  AIRN  TEETH" 

What  a  plague  is  this-  o'  mine, 

Winna  steek  an  e'e; 
Though  I  hap  him  o'er  the  held. 

As  cosy  as  can  be.  .^±i  L 

Sleep  an'  let  me  to  my  wark-^       ^ 

A'  thae  claes  to  airn — ■  ■ 

Jenny  wi'  the  airn  teeth. 

Come  an'  tak'  the  bairn! 

Tak'  him  to  your  ain  den, 

Whaur  the  bogie  bides, 
But  first  put  baith  your  big  teeth 

In  his  wee  plump  sides; 
Gie  your  auld  gray  pow  a  shake. 

Rive  him  frae  my  grup, 
Tak'  him  whaur  nae  kiss  is  gaun 

When  he  waukens  up. 

Whatna  noise  is  that  I  hear 

Coomin'  doon  the  street?    ..'77 

Weel  I  ken  the  dump,  dump,  JjsriT 

O' her  beetle  feet ; 
Mercy  me!  she's  at  the  door! 

Hear  her  lift  the  sneck;  ..  •  i' 

Wheesht,  an'  cuddle  mammy  noo. 

Closer  roun'  the  neck.  // 

-  cJiid 
Jenny  wi'  the  airn  teeth,  ,,,r.„  ^ 

The  bairn  has  aff  his  claes; 
Sieepin'  safe  an'  soun',  I  think — 

Dinna  touch  his  taes. 


^'^^^^   '  Cuddle   Doon    .  95 

Sleepin'  bairns  are  no  for  you, 

Ye  may  turn  aboot, 
An'  tak'  awa'  wee  Tarn  next  door— 

I  hear  him  screichin'  oot. 

Dump,  dump,  awa'  she  gangs 

Back  the  road  she  cam', 
I  hear  her  at  the  ither  door, 

Speirin'  after  Tam; 
He's  a  crabbit,  greetin'  thing— 

The  warst  in  a'  the  toon. 
Little  Hke  my  ain  wee  wean — 

Losh,  he's  sleepin'  soun'! 

Mithers  hae  an  awfu'  wark 

Wi'  their  bairus  at  nicht, 
Chappin'  on  the  chair  wi'  tangs. 

To  gie  the  rogues  a  fricht; 
Aulder  bairns  are  fleyed  wi'  less, 

Weel  eneuch  we  ken, 
Bigger  bogies,  bigger  Jennies, 

Frichten  muckle  men. 

Alexander  Anderson  [1S45-1909I 


CUDDLE  DOON 

The  bairnies  cuddle  doon  at  nicht 

Wi'  muckle  faucht  an'  din; 
"O,  try  an'  sleep,  ye  waukrife  rogues. 

Your  father's  comin'  in." 
They  never  heed  a  word  I  speak ; 

1  try  to  gie  a  froon, 
But  aye  I  hap  them  up,  an'  cry,,,^  juil 

"O  bairnies,  cuddle  doon.'',     '17/ 
4li  ot  Iliv/-  Jj;ifv/  -jni 
Wee  Jamie  wi'  the  curly  held— 

He  aye  sleeps  next  the  wa' — 
Bangs  up  an'  cries,  "I  want  a  piece;" 

The  rascal  starts  them  a'. 


96  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

I  rin  an'  fetch  them  pieces,  drinks, 

They  stop  awee  the  soun'; 
Then  draw  the  blankets  up  an'  cry, 

"Noo,  weanics,  cuddle  doon." 

But  ere  five  minutes  gang,  wee  Rab 

Cries  oot,  frae  'neath  the  claes, 
"Mither,  mak'  Tam  gie  ower  at  once — ■ 

He's  kittlin'  wi'  his  taes. " 
The  mischief's  in  that  Tam  for  tricks, 

He'd  bother  half  the  toon; 
But  aye  I  hap  them  up  an'  cry, 

"O  bairnies,  cuddle  doon." 

At  length  they  hear  their  father's  fit. 

An',  as  he  steeks  the  door. 
They  turn  their  faces  to  the  wa', 

While  Tam  pretends  to  snore. 
"Hae  a'  the  weans  been  gude?"  he  asks,  -, 

As  he  pits  aff  his  shoon; 
"The  bairnies,  John,  are  in  their  beds, 

An'  lang  since  cuddled  doon." 

An'  just  afore  we  bed  oorsel's, 

We  look  at  oor  wee  lambs; 
Tam  has  his  airm  roun'  wee  Rab's  neck, 

An'  Rab  his  airm  roun'  Tam's. 
I  lift  wee  Jamie  up  the  bed, 

An'  as  I  straik  each  croon, 
I  whisper,  till  my  heart  fills  up, 

"0  bairnies,  cuddle  doon." 

The  bairnies  cuddle  doon  at  nicht 

Wi'  mirth  that's  dear  to  me; 
But  sune  the  big  warl's  cark  an'  care 

Will  quaten  doon  their  glee. 
Yet,  come  what  will  to  ilka  ane. 

May  He  who  sits  aboon 
Aye  whisper,  though  their  pows  be  bauld, 

"O  bairnies,  cuddle  doon." 

Alexander  Anderson  [1845-1909] 


Bedtime  97 


BEDTIME 

'Tis  bedtime;  say  your  hymn,  and  bid  "  Good-night; 
God  bless  Mamma,  Papa,  and  dear  ones  all." 
Your  half-shut  eyes  beneath  your  eyelids  fall, 
Another  minute,  you  will  shut  them  quite. 
Yes,  I  will  carry  you,  put  out  the  light, 
And  tuck  you  up,  although  you  are  so  tall! 
What  will  you  give  me,  sleepy  one,  and  call 
My  wages,  if  I  settle  you  all  right? 

I  laid  her  golden  curls  upon  my  arm, 

I  drew  her  little  feet  within  my  hand. 

Her  rosy  palms  were  joined  in  trustful  bliss, 

Her  heart  next  mine  beat  gently,  soft  and  warm 

She  nestled  to  me,  and,  by  Love's  command, 

Paid  me   my  precious  wages — "Baby's  Kiss." 

Francis  Robert  St.  Clair  Erskine  [183 3- 1890] 


.^H 


.  .   ,,)i.vi(f2iT 

THE  DUTY  OF  CHILDRENoY 

■n/.. 

HAPPY  THOUGHT  'f 

-  i  /. 
The  world  is  so  full  of  a  number  of  things,  .// 
I'm  sure  we  should  all  be  as  happy  as  kings. 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1894] 

jfi  bifil  1 

WHOLE  DUTY  OF   CHILDREIsf '"'-^''^  ^ 

.'jicn  79H 

1       A  CHILD  should  always  say  what's  tri^§ff  y:,}i 

And  speak  when  he  is  spoken  to,  -,  .^^-y^ 

And  behave  mannerly  at  table;  if/i 

At  least  as  far  as  he  is  able. 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850- 1894] 


POLITENESS 

Good  little  boys  should  never  say 

"I  will,"  and  "Give  me  these"; 
O,  no!  that  never  is  the  way, 

But  "Mother,  if  you  please." 

And  "If  you  please,"  to  Sister  Ann 

Good  boys  to  say  are  ready ; 
And,  "Yes,  sir,"  to  a  Gentleman, 

And,  "Yes,  ma'am,"  to  a  Lady. 

Elizabeth  Turner  {    ?    -1846] 


RULES  OF  BEHAVIOR 

Hearts,  like  doors,  will  ope  with  ease 
To  very,  very  httle  keys. 
And  don't  forget  that  two  of  these 
Are  "I  thank  you"  and  "If  you  please.' 


The   Lovable  Child  99 

Come  when  you're  called, 

Do  what  you're  bid, 
Close  the  door  after  you. 

Never  be  chid. 

Seldom  "can't,"  ^ 

Seldom  "don't;" 
Never  "shan't," 

Never  "won't." 

LITTLE  FRED 

When  little  Fred 

Was  called  to  bed, 
He  always  acted  right; 

He  kissed  Mama, 

And  then  Papa, 
And  wished  them  all  good-night. 

He  made  no  noise,  :  k 

Like  naughty  boys,  ,il 

But  gently  up  the  stairs  yqqett 
Directly  went,  '       ^y^ 

When  he  was  sent,  ,.-t' 

And  always  said  his  prayers. 

THE  LOVABLE  CHILD 

Frisky  as  a  lambkin. 

Busy  as  a  bee — 
That's  the  kind  of  httle  girl        . 

People  Hke  to  see.  .[* 

Modest  as  a  violet. 

As  a  rosebud  sweet^ — 
That's  the  kind  of  little  girl 

People  like  to  meet. 

Bright  as  is  a  diamond, 

Pure  as  any  pearl — 
Everyone  rejoices  in 

Such  a  little  girl.     ,_> .  j  . 


lOO  Poems  of  Youth   and  Age 

Happy  as  a  robin, 

Gentle  as  a  dove — 
That's  the  kind  of  little  girl 

Everyone  will  love. 

Fly  away  and  seek  her, 

Little  song  of  mine, 
For  I- choose  that  very  girl 

As  my  Valentine. 

Emilie  Poulsson  [1853- 

GOOD  AND  BAD  CHILDREN 

Children,  you  are  very  little, 
And  your  bones  are  very  brittle; 
If  you  would  grow  great  and  stately. 
You  must  try  to  walk  sedately. 

You  must  still  be  bright  and  quiet, 
And  content  with  simple  diet; 
And  remain,  through  all  bewild'ring. 
Innocent  and  honest  children. 

Happy  hearts  and  happy  faces,     " 
Happy  play  in  grassy  places^ 
That  was  how,  in  ancient  ages. 
Children  grew  to  kings  and  sages. 

But  the  unkind  and  the  unruly, 
And  the  sort  who  eat  unduly. 
They  must  never  hope  for  glory — 
Theirs  is  quite  a  different  story! 

Cruel  children,  crying  babies, 
All  grow  up  as  geese  and  gabies. 
Hated,  as  their  age  increases, 
By  their  nephews  and  their  nieces. 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1894] 

REBECCA'S  AFTER-THOUGHT 

Yesterday,  Rebecca  Mason, 

In  the  parlor  by  herself. 
Broke  a  handsome  china  basin. 

Placed  upon  the  mantel-shelf. 


A   Rule   for   Birds'   Nesters  loi 

Quite  alarmed,  she  thought  of  going 

Very  quietly  away, 
Not  a  single  person  knowing. 

Of  her  being  there  that  day. 

But  Rebecca  recollected 

She  was  taught  deceit  to  shun; 
And  the  moment  she  reflected, 

Told  her  mother  what  was  done; 

Who  commended  her  behavior. 
Loved  her  better,  and  forgave  her. 

Flizabelh  Turner  [    ?    -1846] 


KINDNESS   TO  ANIMALS 

Little  children,  never  give 
Pain  to  things  that  feel  and  live; 
Let  the  gentle  robm  come 
For  the  crumbs  you  save  at  home, — 
As  his  meat  you  throw  along 
He'll  repay  you  with  a  song; 
Never  hurt  the  timid  hare 
Peeping  from  her  green  grass  lair, 
Let  her  come  and  sport  and  play 
On  the  lawn  at  close  of  day; 
The  little  lark  goes  soaring  high 
To  the  bright  windows  of  the  sky. 
Singing  as  if  'twere  always  spring, 
And  fluttering  on  an  untired  wing, — 
Oh!  let  him  sing  his  happy  song. 
Nor  do  these  gentle  creatures  wrong. 


A  RULE   FOR   BIRDS'   NESTERS 

The  robin  and  the  red-breast, 
The  sparrow  and  the  wren; 

If  ye  take  out  o'  their  nest, 
Ye'il  never  thrive  again! 


I02  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  robin  and  the  red-breast, 
The  martin  and  the  swallow; 

If  ye  touch  one  o'  their  eggs, 
Bad  luck  will  surely  follow! 


"SING   ON,   BLITHE   BIRD" 

I've  plucked  the  berry  from  the  bush,  the  brown  nut  from 

the   tree. 
But  heart  of  happy  little  bird  ne'er  broken  was  by  me. 
I  saw  them  in  their  curious  nests,  close  couching,  slyly  peer 
With  their  wild  eyes,  like  glittering  beads,  to  note  if  harm 

were  near; 
I  passed  them  by,  and  blessed  them  all;  I  felt  that  it  was 

good 
To  leave  unmoved  the  creatures  small  whose  home  was  in 

the  wood. 

And  here,  even  now,  above  my  head,  a  lusty  rogue  doth 

sing; 
He  pecks  his  swelling  breast  and  neck,  and  trims  his  little 

wing. 
He  will  not  fly;  he  knows  full  well,  while  chirping  on  that 

spray, 
I  would  not  harm  him  for  the  world,  or  interrupt  his  lay. 
Sing  on,  sing  on,  blithe  bird!  and  fill  my  heart  with  summer 

gladness ; 
It  has  been  aching  many  a  day  with  measures  full  of  sadness! 

William  Motherwell  [1797- 183 5] 

"I  LIKE  LITTLE  PUSSY" 

I  LIKE  little  Pussy,  her  coat  is  so  warm; 
And  if  I  don't  hurt  her  she'll  do  me  no  harm. 
So  I'll  not  pull  her  tail,  nor  drive  her  away, 
But  Pussy  and  I  very  gently  will  play. 

She  shall  sit  by  my  side,  and  I'll  give  her  some  food; 
And  she'll  love  me  because  I  am  gentle  and  good. 
I'll  pat  little  Pussy  and  then  she  will  purr. 
And  thus  show  her  thanks  for  my  kindness  to  her. 


The   Little   Gentleman  103 

I'll  not  pinch  her  ears,  nor  tread  on  her  paw, 
Lest  I  should  provoke  her  to  use  her  sharp  claw; 
I  never  will  vex  her,  nor  make  her  displeased, 
For  Pussy  can't  bear  to  be  worried  or  teased. 

Jane  Taylor  [17S3-1824] 

LITTLE  THINGS 

Little  drops  of  water, 

Little  grains  of  sand, 
Make  the  mighty  ocean 

And  the  pleasant  land. 

So  the  httle  moments, 

Humble  though  they  be, 
Make  the  mighty  ages 

Of  eternity. 

So  our  httle  errors 

Lead  the  soul  away 
From  the  path  of  virtue. 

Far  in  sin  to  stray. 

Little  deeds  of  kindness. 

Little  words  of  love, 

Help  to  make  earth  happy 

Like  the  heaven  above. 

Julia  Fletcher  Carney  [1S23-1908] 

THE  LITTLE  GENTLEMAN 

From  "  Little  Derwent's  Breakfast  " 

Take  your  meals,  my  little  man. 
Always  like  a  gentleman; 
Wash  your  face  and  hands  with  care, 
Change  your  shoes,  and  brush  your  hair;. 
Then  so  fresh,  and  clean,  and  neat. 
Come  and  take  your  proper  seat; 
Do  not  loiter  and  be  late. 
Making  other  people  wait; 


I04  Jr'oems  ot    Youth  and  Age 

Do  not  rudely  point  or  touch:  ,  j|i 

Do  not  eat  and  drink  too  much:  .  j 

Finish  what  you  have,  before 

You  even  ask,  or  send  for  more: 

Never  crumble  or  destroy 

Food  that  others  might  enjoy; 

They  who  idly  crumbs  will  waste 

Often  want  a  loaf  to  taste! 

Never  spill  your  milk  or  tea. 

Never  rude  or  noisy  be; 

Never  choose  the  daintiest  food, 

5e  content  with  what  is  good: 

Seek  in  all  things  that  you  can 

To  be  a  little  gentleman. 


THE   CRUST  OF  BREAD 

I  MUST  not  throw  upon  the  floor 

The  crust  I  cannot  eat; 
For  many  little  hungry  ones 

Would  think  it  quite  a  treat. 

My  parents  labor  very  hard 
To  get  me  wholesome  food; 

Then  I  must  never  waste  a  bit 
That  would  do  others  good. 

For  wilful  waste  makes  woeful  want, 

And  I  may  live  to  say, 
Oh !  how  I  wish  I  had  the  bread 

That  once  I  threw  away! 


^'HOW   DOTH   THE   LITTLE   BUSY   BEE 

How  doth  the  little  busy  bee 
Improve  each  shining  hour. 

And  gather  honey  all  the  day 
From  every  opening  flower! 


The   Brown  Thrush  105 

How  skilfully  she  builds  her  cell! 

How  neat  she  spreads  the  wax! 
And  labors  hard  to  store  it  well 

With  the  sweet  food  she  makes. 

In  works  of  labor  or  of  skill, 

I  would  be  busy  too; 
For  Satan  finds  some  mischief  still 

For  idle  hands  to  do. 

In  books,  or  work,  or  healthful  play, 

Let  my  first  years  be  passed. 
That  I  may  give  for  every  day 

Some  good  account  at  last. 

Isaac  Watts  [1674-1748] 

THE  BROWN  THRUSH 

There's  a  merry  brown  thrush  sitting  up  in  the  tree. 
"He's  singing  to  me!     He's  singing  to  me!" 
And  what  does  he  say,  little  girl,  little  boy? 
"Oh,  the  world's  running  over  with  joy! 
Don't  you  hear?     Don't  you  see? 
Hush!     Look!     In  my  tree, 
I'm  as  happy  as  happy  can  be!" 

And  the  brown  thrush  keeps  singing,  "A  nest  do  you  see. 
And  five  eggs,  hid  by  me  in  the  juniper-tree? 
Don't  meddle!     Don't  touch!  little  girl,  little  boy, 
Or  the  world  will  lose  some  of  its  joy! 
Now  I'm  glad!    Now  I'm  free! 
And  I  always  shall  be. 
If  you  never  bring  sorrow  to  me." 

So  the  merry  brown  thrush  sings  away  in  the  tree, 
To  you  and  to  me,  to  you  and  to  me; 

And  he  sings  all  the  day,  little  girl,  little  boy, 
"Oh,  the  world's  running  over  with  joy! 
But  long  it  won't  be, 
Don't  you  know?     Don't  you  see? 
Unless  we're  as  good  as  can  be." 

Lucy  Larcom  [i 824-1 893] 


io6  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


THE   SLUGGARD 

'Tis  the  voice  of  a  sluggard;  I  heard  him  complain, 
"You  have  waked  me  too  soon;  I  must  slumber  again"; 
As  the  door  on  its  hinges,  so  he  on  his  bed 
Turns  his  sides,  and  his  shoulders,  and  his  heavy  head. 

"A  little  more  sleep,  and  a  Uttle  more  slumber"; 

Thus  he  wastes  half  his  days,  and  his  hours  without  number; 

And  when  he  gets  up,  he  sits  folding  his  hands 

Or  walks  about  saunt'ring,  or  trifling  he  stands. 

I  passed  by  his  garden,  and  saw  the  wild  brier 
The  thorn  and  the  thistle  grow  broader  and  higher; 
The  clothes  that  hang  on  him  are  turning  to  rags; 
And  his  money  still  wastes  till  he  starves  or  he  begs. 

I  made  him  a  visit,  still  hoping  to  find 
That  he  took  better  care  for  improving  his  mind; 
He  told  me  his  dreams,  talked  of  eating  and  drinking. 
But  he  scarce  reads  his  Bible,  and  never  loves  thinking. 

Said  I  then  to  my  heart,  "Here's  a  lesson  for  me; 
That  man's  but  a  picture  of  what  I  might  be; 
But  thanks  to  my  friends  for  their  care  in  my  breeding, 
Who  taught  me  betimes  to  love  working  and  reading." 

Isaac  Watts  [i  674-1 748] 


THE  VIOLET 

Down  in  a  green  and  shady  bed 

A  modest  violet  grew; 
Its  stalk  was  bent,  it  hung  its  head, 

As  if  to  hide  from  view. 

And  yet  it  was  a  lovely  flower. 

Its  colors  bright  and  fair; 
It  might  have  graced  a  rosy  bower, 

Instead  of  hiding  there. 


Dirty  Jim  107 

Yet  there  it  was  content  to  bloom, 

In  modest  tints  arrayed; 
And  there  diffused  a  sweet  perfume, 

Within  the  silent  shade. 

Then  let  me  to  the  valley  go, 

This  pretty  flower  to  see; 
That  I  may  also  learn  to  grow 

In  sweet  humility. 

Jane  Taylor  [i 783-1824] 

DIRTY  JIM 

There  was  one  little  Jim, 
'Tis  reported  of  him, 

And  must  be  to  his  lasting  disgrace, 
That  he  never  was  seen 
With  hands  at  all  clean, 

Nor  yet  ever  clean  was  his  face. 

His  friends  were  much  hurt 
To  see  so  much  dirt, 

And  often  they  made  him  quite  clean; 
But  all  was  in  vain. 
He  got  dirty  again, 

And  not  at  all  fit  to  be  seen. 

It  gave  him  no  pain 
To  hear  them  complain, 

Nor  his  own  dirty  clothes  to  survey; 
His  indolent  mind 
No  pleasure  could  find 

In  tidy  and  wholesome  array. 

The  idle  and  bad, 
Like  this  little  lad, 

May  love  dirty  ways,  to  be  sure; 
But  good  boys  are  seen, 
To  be  decent  and  clean, 

Although  they  are  ever  so  poor. 

Jane  Taylor  [1783- 1824] 


io8  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


THE  PIN 

"Dear  me!  what  signifies  a  pin, 

Wedged  in  a  rotten  board? 
I'm  certain  that  I  won't  begin, 

At  ten  years  old,  to  hoard; 
I  never  will  be  called  a  miser, 
That  I'm  determined,"  said  Eliza. 

So  onward  tripped  the  little  maid, 

And  left  the  pin  behind, 
Which  very  snug  and  quiet  lay. 

To  its  hard  fate  resigned; 
Nor  did  she  think  (a  careless  chit) 
'Twas  worth  her  while  to  stoop  for  it. 

Next  day  a  party  was  to  ride, 

To  see  an  air  balloon; 
And  all  the  company  beside 

Were  dressed  and  ready  soon; 
But  she  a  woeful  case  was  in, 
For  want  of  just  a  single  pin. 

In  vain  her  eager  eyes  she  brings, 

To  every  darksome  crack; 
There  was  not  one,  and  yet  her  things 

Were  dropping  off  her  back. 
She  cut  her  pincushion  in  two, 
But  no,  not  one  had  fallen  through. 

At  last,  as  hunting  on  the  floor, 

Over  a  crack  she  lay, 
The  carriage  rattled  to  the  door, 

Then  rattled  fast  away; 
But  poor  Eliza  was  not  in, 
For  want  of  just — a  single  pin! 

There's  hardly  anything  so  small, 

So  trifling  or  so  mean, 
That  we  may  never  want  at  all. 

For  service  unforeseen; 


Jane   and   Eliza     (.  .  109 

And  wilful  waste,  depend  upon't, 
Brings,  almost  always,  woeful  want! 

Ann  Taylor  [17S2-1866] 


JANE  AND   ELIZA 

There  were  two  little  girls,  neither  handsome  nor  plain, 
One's  name  was  Eliza,  the  other's  was  Jane; 
They  were  both  of  one  height,  as  I've  heard  people  say, 
And  both  of  one  age,  I  believe,  to  a  day. 

'Twas  fancied  by  some,  who  but  slightly  had  seen  them, 
There  was  not  a  pin  to  be  chosen  between  them ; 
But  no  one  for  long  in  this  notion  persisted. 
So  great  a  distinction  there  really  existed. 

Eliza  knew  well  that  she  could  not  be  pleasing. 
While  fretting  and  fuming,  while  sulking  or  teasing; 
And  therefore  in  company  artfully  tried, 
Not  to  break  her  bad  habits,  but  only  to  hide. 

So,  when  she  was  out,  with  much  labor  and  pain, 
She  contrived  to  look  almost  as  pleasant  as  Jane; 
But  then  you  might  see  that,  in  forcing  a  smile,  , 
Her  mouth  was  uneasy,  and  ached  all  the  while.  " 

And  in  spite  of  her  care  it  would  sometimes  befall 
That  some  cross  event  happened  to  ruin  it  all; 
And  because  it  might  chance  that  her  share  was  the  worst 
Her  temper  broke  loose,  and  her  dimples  dispersed. 

But  Jane,  who  had  nothing  she  wanted  to  hide, 

And  therefore  these  troublesome  arts  never  tried, 

Had  none  of  the  care  and  fatigue  of  concealing. 

But  her  face  always  showed  what  her  bosom  was  feeling. 

At  home  or  abroad  there  was  peace  in  her  smile, 
A  cheerful  good  nature  that  needed  no  guile. 
And  Eliza  worked  hard,  but  could  never  obtain 
The  affection  that  freely  was  given  to  Jane. 

Ann  Taylor  [i 782-1866] 


no  Poems  of  Youth  aijd  Age 


'^fT.  MEDDLESOME  MATT¥jnH: 

One  ugly  trick  has  often  spoiled 

The  sweetest  and  the  best; 
Matilda,  though  a  pleasant  child, 
„j.|,^  ..  One  ugly  trick  possessed,  ^       ..^,^,,^  3a3HT 

Which,  like  a  cloud  before  the  skies,  ^  g'onO 

Hid  all  her  better  qualities.  ,  ^^  yarlT 

Sometimes  she'd  hft  the  tea-pot  lid, '  ^^  ^^*^^  ^'^^- 
,        To  peep  at  what  was  in  it;  ■  r   •       i     _>ti. 

Or  tilt  the  kettle,  if  you  did  ,_ 

But  turn  your  back  a  minute.  ^    „ 

In  vain  you  told  her  not  to  touch. 
Her  trick  of  meddling  grew  so  much. 


J 


!'J  J     JilO 


Her  grandmamma  went  out  one  day, 
'°^''  And  by  rnistake  she  laid 
Her  spectacles  and  snuff-box  gay 

Too  near  the  little  maid ; 
"Ah!  well,"  thought  she,  "I'll  try  them  on; 
As  soon  as  grandmamma  is  gone." 

Forthwith  she  placed  upon  her  nose  '^^^  ^^°^ 

The  glasses  large  and  wide;  '  ^'J"Of^  i^H 

And  looking  round,  as  I  suppose. 
The  snuff-box  too  she  spied: 

"Oh!  what  a  pretty  box  is  that; 

I'll  open  it,"  said  Httle  Matt. 

"I  know  that  grandmamma  would  say, 

'Don't  meddle  with  it,  dear'; 
But  then,  she's  far  enough  away. 

And  no  one  else  is  near: 
Besides,  what  can  there  be  amiss 
In  opening  such  a  box  as  this?"  ,  / 

So  thumb  and  finger  went  to  work     '§  IwTJ'sn^  t" 

To  move  the  stubborn  lid, 
And  presently  a  mighty  jerk 

The  mighty  mischief  did; 


ion  bjiH 


Contented  John       /|  iii 


For  all  at  once,  ah!  woeful  case, 
The  snuff  came  puffing  in  her  face. 

Poor  eyes,  and  nose,  and  mouth,  beside, 

A  dismal  sight  presented; 
In  vain,  as  bitterly  she  cried, 

Her  folly  she  repented. 
In  vain  she  ran  about  for  ease; 

She  could  do  nothing  now  but  sneeze. 

-  ■// 

She  dashed  the  spectacles  away, 

To  wipe  her  tingling  ej'es, 
And  as  in  twenty  bits  they  lay,  

Her  grandmamma  she  spies.  -'>zvn  I  briA 

"Heydey!  and  what's  the  matter  now?'ft>o  bluoW 
Cried  grandmamma,  with  lifted  brow. 

Matilda,  smarting  with  the  pain, 

And  tingling  still,  and  sore, 
Made  many  a  promise  to  refrain 

From  meddling  evermore. 
And  'tis  a  fact,  as  I  have  heard, 
She  ever  since  has  kept  her  word. 

Ann  Taylor  [1782-1866J 


CONTENTED  JOHN 

One  honest  John  Tomkins,  a  hcdger  and  ditcher. 
Although  he  was  poor,  did  not  want  to  be  richer; 
For  all  such  vain  wishes  in  him  were  prevented 
By  a  fortunate  habit  of  being  contented. 

Though  cold  were  the  weather,  or  dear  were  the  food, 
John  never  was  found  in  a  murmuring  mood; 
For  this  he  was  constantly  heard  to  declare, — 
What  he  could  not  prevent  he  would  cheerfully  bear. 

"For  why  should  I  grumble  and  murmur?"  he  said; 
"If  I  cannot  get  meat,  I'll  be  thankful  for  bread; 
And,  though  fretting  may  make  my  calamities  deeper, 
It  can  never  cause  bread  and  cheese  to  be  cheaper." 


112  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

If  John  was  afflicted  with  sickness  or  pain, 
He  wished  himself  better,  but  did  not  complain, 
Nor  lie  down  to  fret  in  despondence  and  sorrow, 
But  said  that  he  hoped  to  be  better  to-morrow. 

If  any  one  wronged  him  or  treated  him  ill, 

Why,  John  was  good-natured  and  sociable  still; 

For  he  said  that  revenging  the  injury  done 

Would  be  making  two  rogues  when  there  need  be  but  one. 

And  thus  honest  John,  though  his  station  was  humble. 
Passed  through  this  sad  world  without  even  a  grumble; 
And  I  wish  that  some  folks,  who  are  greater  and  richer, 
Would  copy  John  Tomkins,  the  hedger  and  ditcher. 

Jane  Taylor  [i 783-1 824] 


FRIENDS 

How  good  to  lie  a  little  while 
And  look  up  through  the  tree! 

The  Sky  is  like  a  kind  big  smile 
Bent  sweetly  over  me. 

The  Sunshine  flickers  through  the  lace 

Of  leaves  above  my  head. 
And  kisses  me  upon  the  face 

Like  Mother,  before  bed. 

The  Wind  comes  stealing  o'er  the  grass 

To  whisper  pretty  things; 
And  though  I  cannot  see  him  pass, 

I  feel  his  careful  wings. 

So  many  gentle  Friends  are  near 

Whom  one  can  scarcely  see, 
A  child  should  never  feel  a  fear, 

Wherever  he  may  be. 

Abbic  Farwell  Brawn  [18 


There   Was  a   Little   Girl"  113 


ANGER  '  ' 

Anger  in  its  time  and  place 
May  assume  a  kind  of  grace. 
It  must  have  some  reason  in  it, 
And  not  last  beyond  a  minute. 
If  to  further  lengths  it  go, 
It  does  into  malice  grow. 
'Tis  the  difference  that  we  see 
'Twixt  the  serpent  and  the  bee. 
If  the  latter  you  provoke, 
It  inflicts  a  hasty  stroke. 
Puts  you  to  some  little  pain. 
But  it  never  stings  again. 
Close  in  tufted  bush  or  brake 
Lurks  the  poison-swelled  snake 
Nursing  up  his  cherished  wrath; 
In  the  purlieus  of  his  path, 
In  the  cold,  or  in  the  warm, 
Mean  him  good,  or  mean  him  harm. 
Wheresoever  fate  may  bring  you, 
The  vile  snake  will  always  sting  you. 

Charles  and  Mary  Lamb 

"THERE  WAS  A  LITTLE   GIRL" 

There  was  a  little  girl,  who  had  a  little  curl 

Right  in  the  middle  of  her  forehead, 
And  when  she  was  good,  she  was  very,  very  good, 

But  when  she  was  bad  she  was  horrid. 

She  stood  on  her  head,  on  her  little  trundle-bed. 

With  nobody  by  for  to  hinder; 
She  screamed  and  she  squalled,  she  yelled  and  she  bawled, 

And  drummed  her  little  heels  against  the  winder. 

Her  mother  heard  the  noise,  and  thought  it  was  the  boys 

Playing  in  the  empty  attic, 
She  rushed  upstairs,  and  caught  her  unawares. 

And  spanked  her,  most  emphatic. 

Unknown 


I'izj.  Poems   of  Youth   and   Age 


THE  REFORMATION  OF  GODFREY  GORE 

Godfrey  Gordon  Gustavus  Gore — 

No  doubt  you  have  heard  the  name  before —  , 

Was  a  boy  who  never  would  shut  a  door! 

The  wind  might  whistle,  the  wind  might  roar, 
And  teeth  be  aching  and  throats  be  sore, 
But  still  he  never  would  shut  the  door. 

His  father  would  beg,  his  mother  implore, 

"Godfrey  Gordon  Gustavus  Gore, 

We  really  do  wish  you  would  shut  the  door!" 

Their  hands  they  wrung,  their  hair  they  tore; 
But  Godfrey  Gordon  Gustavus  Gore 
Was  deaf  as  the  buoy  out  at  the  Nore. 

When  he  walked  forth  the  folks  would  roar, 
"Godfrey  Gordon  Gustavus  Gore, 
Why  don't  you  think  to  shut  the  door?  " 

They  rigged  out  a  Shutter  with  sail  and  oar, 
And  threatened  to  pack  off  Gustavus  Gore 
On  a  voyage  of  penance  to  Singapore. 

But  he  begged  for  mercy,  and  said,  "No  more! 

Pray  do  not  send  me  to  Singapore 

On  a  Shutter,  and  then  I  will  shut  the  door!" 

"You  will?"  said  his  parents;  "then  keep  on  shore! 
But  mind  you  do!     For  the  plague  is  sore         n-id-rr  bv 
Of  a  fellow  that  never  will  shut  the  door,        .:,rfv/  JuO 
Godfrey  Gordon  Gustavus  Gore!"  ,        , 

William  Brighly  RanSs  [i^23-i§i8'2]' 

.-,  THE  BEST  FIRM  .nb  briA     i 

sy(>      A  PRETTY  good  firm  is  "Watch  &  Waite,"  ,f{jQfjj  ^y 
And  another  is  "Attit,  Early  &  Layte;"  ,f>^[q 

And  still  another  is  "Doo  &  Dairet;"  ,-[  g^fg 

But  the  best  is  probably  "Grinn  &  Barrett."     ■  ,^p^ 
:  ..  ,  ,,    ,  Walter  G.  Doty  [1876- 


How  the   Little   Kite    Learned   to   Fly     115 

A  LITTLE  PAGE'S  SONG,  ^ 

T  HHT 
(ijlh  Century) 

God's  lark  at  morning  I  would  be! 
I'd  set  my  heart  within  a  tree 
Close  to  His  bed  and  sing  to  Him 

Right  merrily 

A  sunrise  hymn. 

At  night  I'd  be  God's  troubadour! 
Beneath  His  starry  walls  I'd  pour 
Across  the  moat  such  roundelays 

He'd  love  me  sure— 

And  maybe  praise! 

William  Alexander  Percy  [1885- 

HOW  THE  LITTLE  KITE  LEARNED  TO  FLY 

"I  NEVER  can  do  it,"  the  little  kite  said, 
As  he  looked  at  the  others  high  over  his  head; 
"I  know  I  should  fall  if  I  tried  to  fly." 
"Try,"  said  the  big  kite;  "only  try!   ,:ucl  zhT 
Or  I  fear  you  never  will  learn  at  all."  'lorl  idVL 
But  the  little  kite  said,  "I'm  afraid  I'll  fall".' 

The  big  kite  nodded:  "Ah  well,  goodby; 
I'm  off;"  and  he  rose  toward  the  tranquil  sky. 
Then  the  little  kite's  paper  stirred  at  the  sight, 
And  trembling  he  shook  himself  free  for  flight. 
First  whirling  and  frightened,  then  braver  grown, 
Up,  up  he  rose  through  the  air  alone,  tQ/a  A 
Till  the  big  kite  looking  down  could  see-i ,  r^fj/^ 
The  little  one  rising  steadily.  yj^~ 

Then  how  the  little  kite  thrilled  with  pride, - 
As  he  sailed  with  the  big  kite  side  by  side! 
While  far  below  he  could  see  the  ground. 
And  the  boys  like  small  spots  moving  round. 
They  rested  high  in  the  quiet  air, 
And  only  the  birds  and  the  clouds  were  there. 
"Oh,  how  happy  I  am!"  the  little  kite  tried, 
"And  all  because  I  was  brave,  and  tried." 

Unknown 


ii6  Poems  of  Youth   and   Age 


THE  BUTTERFLY  AND  THE  BEE 

Methought  I  heard  a  butterfly 

Say  to  a  laboring  bee: 
"Thou  hast  no  colors  of  the  sky 

On  painted  wings  like  me." 

"Poor  child  of  vanity!  those  dyes, 

And  colors  bright  and  rare," 
With  mild  reproof,  the  bee  replies, 
"Are  all  beneath  my  care. 

"  Content  I  toil  from  morn  till  eve. 

And,  scorning  idleness, 
To  tribes  of  gaudy  sloth  I  leave 

The  vanity  of  dress." 

William  Lisle  Bowles  [1762-1850] 


THE  BUTTERFLY 

The  butterfly,  an  idle  thing. 

Nor  honey  makes,  nor  yet  can  sing,  (  lO 

As  do  the  bee  and  bird; 
Nor  does  it,  like  the  prudent  ant. 
Lay  up  the  grain  for  times  of  want, 

A  wise  and  cautious  hoard. 

My  youth  is  but  a  summer's  day: 

Then  like  the  bee  and  ant  I'll  lay 

A  store  of  learning  by; 

And  though  from  flower  to  flower  I  rove. 

My  stock  of  wisdom  I'll  improve, 

Nor  be  a  butterfly. 

Adelaide  O'Keefe  [lyyG-iSss] 

MORNING 

The  lark  is  up  to  meet  the  sun, 

The  bee  is  on  the  wing, 
The  ant  her  labor  has  begun. 

The  woods  with  music  ring. 


Buttercups  and   Daisies  117 

Shall  birds  and  bees  and  ants  be  wise, 

While  I  my  moments  waste? 
Oh,  let  me  with  the  morning  rise, 

And  to  my  duties  haste. 

Why  should  I  sleep  till  beams  of  morn 

Their  light  and  glory  shed? 
Immortal  beings  were  not  born 

To  waste  their  time  in  bed. 

Jane  Taylor  [1783-1824] 


BUTTERCUPS  AND   DAISIES 

Buttercups  and  daisies, 

Oh,  the  pretty  liowers; 
Coming  ere  the  spring  time. 

To  tell  of  sunny  hours,  ) 

While  the  trees  are  leafless,  ,  /I 

While  the  fields  are  bare, 
Buttercups  and  daisies 

Spring  up  here  and  there. 

Ere  the  snow-drop  peepeth, 

Ere  the  crocus  bold. 
Ere  the  early  primrose 

Opes  its  paly  gold, — 
Somewhere  on  the  sunny  bank 

Buttercups  are  bright; 
Somewhere  midst  the  frozen  grass 

Peeps  the  daisy  while. 

Little  hardy  flowers. 

Like  to  children  poor, 
Playing  in  their  sturdy  health 

By  their  mother's  door. 
Purple  with  the  north-wind, 

Yet  alert  and  bold; 
Fearing  not,  and  caring  not. 

Though  they  be  a-cold! 


\ia8  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

What  to  them  is  winter! 

What  are  stormy  showersl,,..;  ■/ 
Buttercups  and  daisies         ;i  i;)f  .dO 

Are  these  human  flowers! 
He  who  gave  them  hardships 

And  a  hfe  of  care,     I  ^iuorfg  ^HW 
Gave  them  likewise  hardy  strbn^Ti 

And  patient  hearts  to  bear. 

Mary  Howitl  [1709-1888] 

THE  ANT  AND  THE   CRICKET 

A  SILLY  young  cricket,  accustomed  to  sing 

Through  the  warm,  sunny  months  of  gay  summer  and  spring, 

Began  to  complain,  when  he  found  that  at  home 

His  cupboard  was  empty  and  winter  was  come. 

Not  a  crumb  to  be  found 

On  the  snow-covered  ground; 

Not  a  flower  could  he  see, 

Not  a  leaf  on  a  tree: 
"Oh,  what  will  become,"  says  the  cricket,  "  of  me?" 

At  last  by  starvation  and  famine  made  bold, 

All  dripping  with  wet  and  all  trembling  with  cold. 

Away  he  set  off  to  a  miserly  ant, 

To  see  if,  to  keep  him  alive,  he  would  grant 

Him  shelter  from  rain: 

A  mouthful  of  grain 

He  wished  only  to  borrow. 

He  'd  repay  it  to-morrow : 
If  not,  he  must  die  of  starvation  and  sorrow. 

Says  the  ant  to  the  cricket,  "I'm  your  servant  and  friend, 

But  we  ants  never  borrow,  we  ants  never  lend; 

But  tell  me,  dear  sir,  did  you  lay  nothing  by 

When  the  weather  was  warm?"  Said  the  cricket,  "Not  I. 

My  heart  was  so  light 

That  I  sang  day  and  night. 

For  all  nature  looked  gay." 

"You  sang,  sir,  you  say? 
Go  then,"  said  the  ant,  "and  dance  winter  away." 


Deeds  of  Kindness  119 

Thus  ending,  he  hastily  lifted  the  wicket 
And  out  of  the  door  turned  the  poor  little  cricket. 
Though  this  is  a  fable,  the  moral  is  good: 
If  you  live  without  work,  you  must  live  without  food. 

Unknown 

AFTER  WINGS 

This  was  your  butterfly,  you  see, — 

His  fine  wings  made  him  vain: 
The  caterpillars  crawl,  but  he 

Passed  them  in  rich  disdain. — 
My  pretty  boy  says,  "Let  him  be 

Only  a  worm  again!" 

O  child,  when  things  have  learned  to  wear 
Wings  once,  they  must  be  fain      •  ' 

To  keep  them  always  high  and  fairf  .''^'^H 
Think  of  the  creeping  pain 

Which  even  a  butterfly  must  bear 
To  be  a  worm  again! 

Sarah  M.  B.  Piatt  [1836- 

DEEDS   OF  KINDNESS  , 

Suppose  the  little  Cowslip 

Should  hang  its  golden  cup 
And  say,  "I'm  such  a  little  flower 

I'd  better  not  grow  up!" 
How  many  a  weary  traveller 

Would  miss  its  fragrant  smell. 
How  many  a  little  child  would  grieve 

To  lose  it  from  the  dell ! 

Suppose  the  glistening  Dewdrop 

Upon  the  grass  should  say, 
"What  can  a  little  dewdrop  do? 

I'd  better  roll  away!" 
The  blade  on  which  it  rested, 

Before  the  day  was  done, 
Without  a  drop  to  moisten  it, 

Would  wither  in  the  sun.  , 


I20  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Suppose  the  little  Breezes,  '  '■ 

Upon  a  summer's  day, 
Should  think  themselves  too  small  to  cool 

The  traveller  on  his  way:  ■     '  '" '  C 

Who  would  not  miss  the  smallest 

And  softest  ones  that  blow. 
And  think  they  made  a  great  mistake 

Jj  they  were  acting  so? 

How  many  deed  of  kindness 

A  little  child  can  do. 
Although  it  has  but  little  strength 

And  little  wisdom  too! 
It  wants  a  loving  spirit 

Much  more  than  strength,  to  prove 
How  many  things  a  child  may  do 

For  others  by  its  love. 

Epes  Sargent  [1S13-1S 


THE  LION  AND   THE   MOUSE 

A  LION  with  the  heat  oppressed. 

One  day  composed  himself  to  rest: 

But  while  he  dozed  as  he  intended, 

A  mouse,  his  royal  back  ascended; 

Nor  thought  of  harm,  as  ^Esop  tells. 

Mistaking  him  for  someone  else; 

And  travelled  over  him,  and  round  him. 

And  might  have  left  him  as  she  found  him 

Had  she  not — tremble  when  you  hear — 

Tried  to  explore  the  monarch 's  ear ! 

Who  straightway  woke,  with  wrath  immense, 

And  shook  his  head  to  cast  her  thence. 

"You  rascal,  what  are  you  about?" 

Said  he,  when  he  had  turned  her  out, 

"I'll  teach  you  soon,"  the  lion  said, 

"To  make  a  mouse-hole  in  my  head!" 

So  saying,  he  prepared  his  foot 

To  crush  the  trembling  tiny  brute; 


The   Boy  and  the  Wolf  I2i 

But  she  (the  mouse)  with  tearful  eye, 
Implored  the  lion 's  clemency,    . 
Who  thought  it  best  at  last  to  give 
His  little  prisoner  a  reprieve. 

'Twas  nearly  twelve  months  after  this, 

The  lion  chanced  his  way  to  miss; 

When  pressing  forward,  heedless  yet, 

He  got  entangled  in  a  net. 

With  dreadful  rage,  he  stamped  and  tore, 

And  straight  commenced  a  lordly  roar; 

When  the  poor  mouse,  who  heard  the  noise, 

Attended,  for  she  knew  his  voice. 

Then  what  the  Hon's  utmost  strength 

Could  not  effect,  she  did  at  length; 

With  patient  labor  she  applied 

Her  teeth,  the  network  to  divide;  '  ;  ■ 

And  so  at  last  forth  issued  he, 

A  lion,  by  a  mouse  set  free. 

Few  are  so  small  or  weak,  I  guess, 
But  may  assist  us  in  distress, 
Nor  shall  we  ever,  if  we  're  wise. 
The  meanest,  or  the  least  despise. 

Jeffreys  Taylor  [1792-1853] 

THE  BOY  AND   THE  WOLF 

A  LITTLE  Boy  was  set  to  keep 

A  little  flock  of  goats  or  sheep; 

He  thought  the  task  too  solitary, 

And  took  a  strange  perverse  vagary: 

To  call  the  people  out  of  fun. 

To  see  them  leave  their  work  and  run. 

He  cried  and  screamed  with  all  his  might, — • 

"Wolf!  wolf!"  in  a  pretended  fright. 

Some  people,  working  at  a  distance. 

Came  running  in  to  his  assistance. 

They  searched  the  fields  and  bushes  round. 

The  Wolf  was  nowhere  to  be  found. 


122  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  Boy,  delighted  with  his  game, 

A  few  days  g.fter  did  the  same, 

And  once  again  the  people  came. 

The  trick  was  many  times  repeated, 

At  last  they  found  that  they  were  cheated. 

One  day  the  Wolf  appeared  in  sight, 

The  Boy  was  in  a  real  fright. 

He  cried,  "Wolf!  wolf!" — the  neighbors  heard, 

But  not  a  single  creature  stirred. 

"We  need  not  go  from  our  employ, — 

'Tis  nothing  but  that  idle  boy." 

The  httle  Boy  cried  out  again, 

"Help,  help!  the  Wolf!"  he  cried  in  vain. 

At  last  his  master  came  to  beat  him. 

He  came  too  late,  the  Wolf  had  eat  him. 

This  shows  the  bad  efifect  of  lying. 

And  likewise  of  continual  crying. 

If  I  had  heard  you  scream  and  roar, 

For  nothing,  twenty  times  before, 

Although  you  might  have  broke  your  arm,     • 

Or  met  with  any  serious  harm, 

Your  cries  could  give  me  no  alarm; 

They  would  not  make  me  move  the  faster, 

Nor  apprehend  the  least  disaster; 

I  should  be  sorry  when  I  came. 

But  you  yourself  would  be  to  blame. 

John  Hookliam  Frere  [1769- 1846] 


THE  STORY   OF   AUGUSTUS,  WHO  WOULD   NOT 
HAVE   ANY   SOUP 

Augustus  was  a  chubby  lad; 
Fat,  ruddy  cheeks  Augustus  had; 
And  everybody  saw  with  joy 
The  plump  and  hearty,  healthy  boy. 
He  ate  and  drank  as  he  was  told, 
And  never  let  his  soup  get  cold. 


The   Story  of  Little  Suck-a-thumb     123 

But  one  day,  one  cold  winter's  day, 

He  screamed  out—  "Take  the  soup  away! 

0  take  the  nasty  soup  away! 

1  won 't  have  any  soup  to-day." 

Next  day  begins  his  tale  of  woes; 
Quite  lank  and  lean  Augustus  grows. 
Yet,  though  he  feels  so  weak  and  ill, 
The  naughty  fellow  cries  out  still — 
"Not  any  soup  for  me,  I  say: 

0  take  the  nasty  soup  away! 

1  won't  have  any  soup  to-day." 

The  third  day  comes;  O  what  a  sin! 
To  make  himself  so  pale  and  thin. 
Yet,  when  the  soup  is  put  on  table. 
He  screams,  as  loud  as  he  is  able, — 
"Not  any  soup  for  me,  I  say: 

0  take  the  nasty  soup  away! 

1  won't  have  any  soup  to-day." 

Look  at  him,  now  the  fourth  day's  come! 
He  scarcely  weighs  a  sugar-plum; 
He's  like  a  little  bit  of  thread. 
And  on  the  fifth  day,  he  was — dead! 
From  the  German  of  Heinrich  Ho_ffman  [i 798-1 874) 


THE   STORY  OF  LITTLE   SUCK-A-THUMB 

One  day,  mamma  said:  "Conrad  dear, 
I  must  go  out  and  leave  you  here. 
But  mind  now,  Conrad,  what  I  say, 
Don 't  suck  your  thumb  while  I  'm  away. 
The  great  tall  tailor  always  comes 
To  little  boys  that  suck  their  thumbs; 
And  ere  they  dream  what  he's  about, 
He  takes  his  great  sharp  scissors  out 
And  cuts  their  thumbs  clean  off, — and  then. 
You  know,  they  never  grow  again." 


124  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Mamma  had  scarcely  turned  her  back, 
The  thumb  was  in,  alack!  alack! 
The  door  flew  open,  in  he  ran, 
The  great,  long,  red-legged  scissors-man. 
Oh,  children,  see!  the  tailor's  come 
And  caught  our  little  Suck-a-Thumb. 
Snip!  snap!  snip!  the  scissors  go; 
And  Conrad  cries  out —  "Oh!  oh!  oh!" 

Snip!  snap!  snip!    They  go  so  fast, 
That  both  his  thumbs  are  off  at  last. 
Mamma  comes  home;  there  Conrad  stands, 
And  looks  quite  sad,  and  shows  his  hands; — 
"Ah!"  said  mamma,  "I  knew  he'd  come 
To  naughty  little  Suck-a-Thumb." 

From  the  German  of  Heinrich  Hoffman  [i  798-1 S74] 

WRITTEN  IN  A  LITTLE  LADY'S  LITTLE  ALBUM 

Hearts  good  and  true 

Have  wishes  few 
In  narrow  circles  bounded, 

And  hope  that  lives 

On  what  God  gives 
Is  Christian  hope  well  founded. 

Small  things  are  best; 

Grief  and  unrest 
To  rank  and  wealth  are  given; 

But  httle  things 

On  little  wings 
Bear  little  souls  to  heaven. 

Frederick  William  Faher  [i 814-1863] 

MY  LADY  WIND  '" 

My  Lady  Wind,  my  Lady  Wind, 
Went  round  about  the  house  to  find 

A  chink  to  set  her  foot  in ; 
She  tried  the  keyhole  in  the  door, 
She  tried  the  crevice  in  the  floor, 

And  drove  the  chimney  soot  in. 


A  Farewell  125 

And  then  one  night  when  it  was  dark 
She  blew  up  such  a  tiny  spark 

That  all  the  town  was  bothered; 
From  it  she  raised  such  flame  and  smoke 
That  many  in  great  terror  woke, 

And  many  more  were  smothered. 

And  thus  when  once,  my  little  dears, 
A  whisper  reaches  itching  ears — 

The  same  will  come,  you  '11  find : 
Take  my  advice,  restrain  the  tongue, 
Remember  what  old  nurse  has  sung 

Of  busy  Lady  Wind. 

Unknown 

TO  A  CHILD 

Small  service  is  true  service  while  it  lasts: 

Of  humblest  friends,  bright  creature!  scorn  not  one: 

The  daisy,  by  the  shadow  that  it  casts. 

Protects  the  lingering  dewdrop  from  the  sun. 

William  Wordsworth  [1770- 1850] 

A   FAREWELL 

My  fairest  child,  I  have  no  song  to  give  you; 

No  lark  could  pipe  to  skies  so  dull  and  gray: 
Yet,  if  you  will,  one  quiet  hint  I  '11  leave  you 
For  every  day. 

I  '11  tell  you  how  to  sing  a  clearer  carol 

Than  lark  who  hails  the  dawn  on  breezy  down; 
To  earn  yourself  a  purer  poet 's  laurel 
Than  Shakespeare's  crown. 

Be  good,  sweet  maid,  and  let  who  will  be  clever; 
Do  noble  things,  not  dream  them,  all  day  long: 
And  so  make  Life,  and  Death,  and  that  For  Ever 
One  grand  sweet  song. 

Charles  Kingshy  [18 19- 187 5] 


l^ 


iijffl  bnA 
I  7fAd  £iri8 


RHYMES  OF  CHILDHOOD 

REEDS  OF  INNOCENCE 

Piping  down  the  valleys  wild, 
Piping  songs  of  pleasant  glee, 

On  a  cloud  I  saw  a  child, 
And  he  laughing  said  to  me: 

"Pipe  a  song  about  a  lamb!" 
So  I  piped  with  merry  cheer. 

"Piper,  pipe  that  song  again;" 
So  I  piped:  he  wept  to  hear. 

"Drop  thy  pipe,  thy  happy  pipe;     ^ 

Sing  thy  songs  of  happy  cheerj'^j  ,,^,^^q 

So  I  sang  the  same  again, 

While  he  wept  with  joy  to  hear. 


"Piper,  sit  thee  down  and  write 
In  a  book  that  all  may  read." 

So  he  vanished  from  my  sight; 
And  I  plucked  a  hollow  reed, 


.V 


And  I  made  a  rural  pen. 

And  I  stained  the  water  clear,  .  .  , 

And  I  wrote  my  happy  songs 

Every  child  may  joy  to  hear. 

William  Blake  [1757-1827] 

.liC  uiiii  1 

THE  WONDERFUL  WORLri'*'^^  ,^^ 

Great,  wide,  beautiful,  wonderful  World,'riA 
With  the  wonderful  water  round  you  curled, 
And  the  wonderful  grass  upon  your  breast, 
World,  you  are  beautifully  dressed. 
126 


The  World's  Music  127 

The  wonderful  air  is  over  me, 

And  the  wonderful  wind  is  shaking  the  tree — 

It  walks  on  the  water,  and  whirls  the  mills,  -. 

And  talks  to  itself  on  the  tops  of  the  hills. 

You  friendly  Earth,  how  far  do  you  go,  '- 

With  the  wheat-fields  that  nod  and  the  rivers  that  flow, 
With  cities  and  gardens,  and  cliffs  and  isles, 
And  people  upon  you  for  thousands  of  miles? 

Ah!  you  are  so  great,  and  I  am  so  small, 

I  tremble  to  think  of  you.  World,  at  all; 

And  yet,  when  I  said  my  prayers  to-day, 

A  whisper  inside  me  seemed  to  say, 

"  You  are  more  than  the  Earth,  though  you  are  such  a  dot : 

You  can  love  and  think,  and  the  Earth  cannot!" 

William  Brighly  Rands  [1823-1882] 


THE  WORLD'S  MUSIC 

The  world 's  a  very  happy  place, 

Where  every  child  should  dance  and  sing, 

And  always  have  a  smiling  face, 
And  never  sulk  for  anything. 

I  waken  when  the  morning 's  com_e, 

And  feel  the  air  and  light  alive 
With  strange  sweet  music  like  the  hum 

Of  bees  about  their  busy  hive. 

The  hnnets  play  among  the  leaves  .17/ 

At  hide-and-seek,  and  chirp  and  sing;ff7/ 

While,  flashing  to  and  from  the  eaves. 
The  swallows  twitter  on  the  wing. 

The  twigs  that  shake,  and  boughs  that  sway; 

And  tall  old  trees  you  could  not  climb; 
And  winds  that  come,  but  cannot  stay. 

Are  gaily  singing  all  the  time. 


128  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

From  dawn  to  dark  the  old  mill-wheel  ,,7/  ^HX 

Makes  music,  going  round  and  round;  f]  jj^/^ 

And  dusty- white  with  flour  and  meal,  f 
The  miller  whistles  to  its  sound. 

And  if  you  listen  to  the  rain 

if,,.;    When  leaves  and  birds  and  bees  are  dumb,    j,.,,^, 

'      -,      ,         .  .  ,  nJxW 

You  hear  it  pattermg  on  the  pane  Kt'W 

Like  Andrew  beating  on  his  drum.  ,     . 

The  coals  beneath  the  kettle  croon. 

And  clap  their  hands  and  dance  in  glee;         '  ■' 
And  even  the  kettle  hums  a  tune  '  -"^""^"'^ 

To  tell  you  when  it 's  time  for  tea. 

The  world  is  such  a  happy  place, 
That  children,  whether  big  or  small. 

Should  always  have  a  smiling  face. 
And  never,  never  sulk  at  all. 

Gabriel  Setoiin  [1861- 


A   BOY'S   SONG 

Where  the  pools  are  bright  and  deep, 
Where  the  gray  trout  lies  asleep, 
Up  the  river  and  over  the  lea. 
That 's  the  way  for  Billy  and  me. 

Where  the  blackbird  sings  the  latest, 
Where  the  hawthorn  blooms  the  sweetest, 
Where  the  nestlings  chirp  and  flee, 
That 's  the  way  for  Billy  and  me. 

Where  the  mowers  mow  the  cleanest, 
Where  the  hay  lies  thick  and  greenest. 
There  to  track  the  homeward  bee. 
That 's  the  way  for  Billy  and  me. 

Where  the  hazel  bank  is  steepest. 
Where  the  shadow  falls  the  deepest, 
Where  the  clustering  nuts  fall  free, 
That 's  the  way  for  Billy  and  me. 


Going   Down    Hill   on   a   Bicycle       129 

Why  the  boys  should  drive  away 
Little  sweet  maidens  from  the  play, 
Or  love  to  banter  and  fight  so  well, 
That's  the  thing  I  never  could  tell. 

But  this  I  know,  I  love  to  play 
Through  the  meadow,  among  the  hay; 
Up  the  water  and  over  the  lea, 
That's  the  way  for  Billy  and  me. 

James  Hogg  [i 770-1835] 


GOING  DOWN  HILL  ON  A  BICYCLE 

A    boy's     song 

With  hfted  feet,  hands  still, 
I  am  poised,  and  down  the  hill 
Dart,  with  heedful  mind; 
The  air  goes  by  in  a  wind. 

Swifter  and  yet  more  swift, 
Till  the  heart  with  a  mighty  lift 
Makes  the  lungs  laugh,  the  throat  cry:— 
"O  bird,  see;  see,  bird,  I  fly. 

"Is  this,  is  this  your  joy? 
O  bird,  then  I,  though  a  boy. 
For  a  golden  moment  share 
Your  feathery  life  in  air!" 

Say,  heart,  is  there  aught  like  this 
In  a  world  that  is  fuU  of  bliss? 
'Tis  more  than  skating,  bound 
Steel-shod  to  the  level  ground. 


[■# 


Speed  slackens  now,  I  float 
Awhile  in  my  airy  boat; 
Till,  when  the  wheels  scarce  crawl, 
My  feet  to  the  treadles  fall. 


130  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Alas,  that  the  longest  hill 
Must  end  in  a  vale;  but  still, 
Who  climbs  with  toil,  wheresoe  'er, 
Shall  find  wings  waiting  there. 

Henry  Charles  Beech i  11  g  [1859- 


PLAYGROUNDS 

In  summer  I  am  very  glad 

We  children  are  so  small, 
For  we  can  see  a  thousand  things 

That  men  can't  see  at  all. 

They  don't  know  much  about  the  moss 
And  all  the  stones  they  pass: 

They  never  lie  and  play  among 

The  forests  in  the  grass:  '  ^ufH 

They  walk  about  a  long  way  off; 

And,  when  we're  at  the  sea,  ; 

Let  father  stoop  as  best  he  can 

He  can't  find  things  like  me. 

But,  when  the  snow  is  on  the  ground 

And  all  the  puddles  freeze, 
I  wish  that  I  were  very  tall. 

High  up  above  the  trees. 

Laurence  Alma-Tadema  [i'8 


"WHO  HAS   SEEN  THE  WIND?"- 

Who  has  seen  the  wind? 

Neither  I  nor  you : 
But  when  the  leaves  hang  trembling, 

The  wind  is  passing  through. 

Who  has  seen  the  wind? 

Neither  you  nor  I: 
But  when  the  trees  bow  down  their  heads. 

The  wind  is  passing  by. 

Christina  Georgina  Rossetti  [1830-1S94] 


The  Wind's  Songf^^«i^  131 


THE  WIND'S   SONG 

0  WINDS  that  blow  across  the  sea, 
What  is  the  story  that  you  bring? 

Leaves  clap  their  hands  on  every  tree  " 
And  birds  about  their  branches  sing. 

You  sing  to  flowers  and  trees  and  birds 
Your  sea-songs  over  all  the  land.     :'\  ■,    ■ 

Could  you  not  stay  and  whisper  words 
A  little  child  might  understand?  .     .[W 

The  roses  nod  to  hear  you  sing; 

But  though  I  listen  all  the  day, 
You  never  tell  me  anything 

Of  father's  ship  so  far  away.  tjjil 

Its  masts  are  taller  than  the  treesi     '      , 

Its  sails  are  silver  in  the  sun; 
There's  not  a  ship  upon  the  seas 

So  beautiful  as  father's  one. 

With  wings  spread  out  it  flies  so  fast 
It  leaves  the  waves  all  white  with  foam. 

Just  whisper  to  me,  blowing  past,        j'>\  !>- 
If  you  have  seen  it  sailing  home.      "^ 

1  feel  your  breath  upon  my  cheek,       ^fi/. 
And  in  my  hair,  and  on  my  brow.    ' 

Dear  winds,  if  you  could  only  speak,    rff 
I  know  that  you  would  tell  me  nowl 

INIy  father 's  coming  home,  you  'd  say. 
With  precious  presents,  one,  two,  three; 

A  shawl  for  mother,  beads  for  May, 
And  eggs  and  shells  for  Rob  and  me. 

The  winds  sing  songs  where'er  they  roam; 

The  leaves  all  clap  their  Httle  hands; 
For  father's  ship  is  coming  home 

With  wondrous  things  from  foreign  lands. 
Gabriel  Setoim  [1861- 


132  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

THE  PIPER  ON  THE  HILL 

A  CHILD  'S  SONG 

There  sits  a  piper  on  the  hill 

Who  pipes  the  Uvelong  day, 
And  when  he  pipes  both  loud  and  shrill, 

The  frightened  people  say: 
"The  wind,  the  wind  is  blowing  up 

'Tis  rising  to  a  gale." 
The  women  hurry  to  the  shore 

To  watch  some  distant  sail. 
The  wind,  the  wind,  the  wind,  the  wind, 

Is  blowing  to  a  gale. 

But  when  he  pipes  all  sweet  and  low, 

The  piper  on  the  hill, 
I  hear  the  merry  women  go 

With  laughter,  loud  and  shrill: 
"The  wind,  the  wind  is  coming  south 

'Twill  blow  a  gentle  day." 
They  gather  on  the  meadow-land 

To  toss  the  yellow  hay. 
The  wind,  the  wind,  the  wind,  the  wind,   ^j 

Is  blowing  south  to-day. 

And  in  the  morn,  when  winter  comes, 

To  keep  the  piper  warm, 
The  little  Angels  shake  their  wings 

To  make  a  feather  storm: 
"The  snow,  the  snow  has  come  at  last!'' 

The  happy  children  call,  '"' 

And  "ring  around"  they  dance  in  glee, 

And  watch  the  snowflakes  fall. 
The  wind,  the  wind,  the  wind,  the  wind, 

Has  spread  a  snowy  pall. 

But  when  at  night  the  piper  plays, 

I  have  not  any  fear. 
Because  God 's  windows  open  wide 

The  pretty  tune  to  hear; 


The  Wind   and  the   Moon  133 

And  when  each  crowding  spirit  looks, 

From  its  star  window-pane, 
A  watching  mother  may  behold 

Her  little  child  again. 
The  wind,  the  wind,  (he  wind,  the  wind, 

May  blow  her  home  again. 

Dora  Sigerson  Shorter  [  1 8     - 


THE  WIND   AND   THE   MOON 

Said  the  Wind  to  the  Moon,  "I  will  blow  you  out; 

You  stare 

In  the  air 

Like  a  ghost  in  a  chair, 
Always  looking  what  I  am  about — 
I  hate  to  be  watched;  I'll  blow  you  out." 

The  Wind  blew  hard,  and  out  went  the  Moon. 

So,  deep 

On  a  heap 

Of  clouds  to  sleep, 
Down  lay  the  Wind,  and  slumbered  soon. 
Muttering  low,  "I've  done  for  that  Moon." 

He  turned  in  his  bed;  she  was  there  again! 

On  high 

In  the  sky. 

With  her  one  ghost  eye, 
The  Moon  shone  white  and  alive  and  plain. 
Said  the  Wind,  "I  will  blow  you  out  again." 

The  Wind  blew  hard,  and  the  Moon  grew  dim. 

"With  my  sledge. 

And  my  wedge, 

I  have  knocked  off  her  edge! 
If  only  I  blow  right  fierce  and  grim. 
The  creature  Mill  soon  be  dimmer  than  dim." 


134  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age' 

He  blew  and  he  blew,  and  she  thinned  to  a  thread„ 

"One  puff 

More  's  enough 

To  blow  her  to  snuff! 
One  good  puff  more  where  the  last  was  bred, 
And  glimmer,  glimmer,  glum  will  go  the  thread." 

He  blew  a  great  blast,  and  the  thread  was  gone. 

In  the  air 

Nowhere 

Was  a  moonbeam  bare;  ,  j^. 

Far  off  and  harmless  the  shy  stars  shone — 

Sure  and  certain  the  IVIoon  was  gone!    ..,,     ,.  _  ^ 

ill//  9ff}  aiAc 

The  Wind  he  took  to  his  revels  once  more; 

On  down, 

In  town, 

Like  a  merry-mad  clown. 
He  leaped  and  halloed  with  whistle  and  roar — "^ 
"What's  that?"    The  glimmering  thread  once  more! 

He  flew  in  a  rage — he  danced  and  blew; 
But  in  vain  .;'  ' 

Was  the  pain  '   ) 

Of  his  bursting  brain;  r;[  nwoQ 

For  still  the  broader  the  Moon-scrap  grew;  '•■.!) t; I ^I 
The  broader  he  swelled  his  big  cheeks  and  blew. 

Slowly  she  grew — till  she  filled  the  night, 

And  shone 

On  her  throne 

In  the  sky  alone,  ,  ,     ,_ 

A  matchless,  wonderful  silvery  light,  ,, .  o 

Radiant  and  lovely,  the  queen  of  the  night. 

Said  the  Wind:  "What  a  marvel  of  power  am  I! 

With  my  breath. 

Good  faith! 

I  blew  her  to  death — 
First  blew  her  away  right  out  of  the  sky — :  '0'''>  !• 
Then  blew  her  in;  what  strength  have  l\"..n'>  adT 


Baby   Seed  Song  13 5 

But  the  Moon  she  knew  nothing  about  the  affair; 

For  high 

In  the  sky, 

With  her  one  white  eye, 
Motionless,  miles  above  the  air, 
She  had  never  heard  the  great  Wind  blare. 

George  Macdonald  [1824-1905] 

CHILD'S  SONG  IN  SPRING 

The  silver  birch  is  a  dainty  lady, 

She  wears  a  satin  gown; 
The  elm  tree  makes  the  old  churchyard  shady, 

She  will  not  live  in  town. 

The  English  oak  is  a  sturdy  fellow. 

He  gets  his  green  coat  late; 
The  willow  is  smart  in  a  suit  of  yellow, 

While  brown  the  beech  trees  wait. 

Such  a  gay  green  gown  God  gives  the  larches — 

As  green  as  He  is  good ! 
The  hazels  hold  up  their  arms  for  arches 

When  Spring  rides  through  the  wood. 

The  chestnut's  proud,  and  the  lilac's  pretty, 

The  poplar's  gentle  and  tall, 
But  the  plane  tree's  kind  to  the  poor  dull  city— 

I  love  him  best  of  all ! 

Edith  Nesbit  [1S5S- 

BABY  SEED   SONG 

Little  brown  brother,  oh!  little  brown  brother, 

Are  you  awake  in  the  dark? 
Here  we  lie  cosily,  close  to  each  other: 

Hark  to  the  song  of  the  lark — 
"Waken!"  the  lark  says,  "waken  and  dress  you; 

Put  on  your  green  coats  and  gay. 
Blue  sky  will  shine  on  you,  sunshine  caress  you — 

Waken!  'tis  morning — 'tis  May!" 


136  Poems  ot  Youth  and  Age 

Little  brown  brother,  oh!  httle  brown  brother, 

What  kind  of  llower  will  you  be? 
I'll  be  a  poppy — all  white,  like  my  mother; 

Do  be  a  poppy  like  me. 
What!  you're  a  sun-flov/er?    How  I  shall  miss  you 

When  you're  grown  golden  and  high!  .../ 

But  I  shall  send  all  the  bees  up  to  kiss  you; 

Little  brown  brother,  good-bye. 

Ediih  Nesbil  [185S- 

LITTLE   DANDELION 

Gay  little  Dandelion 

Lights  up  the  meads, 
Swings  on  her  slender  foot, 

Telleth  her  beads, 
Lists  to  the  robin 's  note 

Poured  from  above; 
Wise  little  Dandelion 

Asks  not  for  love. 

Cold  lie  the  daisy  banks 

Clothed  but  in  green, 
Where,  in  the  days  agone, 

Bright  hues  were  seen. 
Wild  pinks  are  slumbering, 

Violets  delay; 
True  little  Dandelion 

Greeteth  the  May. 

Brave  little  Dandelion! 

Fast  falls  the  snow. 
Bending  the  dafTodil's 

Haughty  head.  low. 
Under  that  fleecy  tent, 

Careless  of  cold. 
Blithe  little  Dandelion 

Counteth  her  gold. 

Meek  Httle  Dandelion 

Groweth  more  fair, 
Till  dies  the  amber  devtr 

Out  from  her  hair. 


Little  White   Lily  137 

High  rides  the  thirsty  sun, 

Fiercely  and  high ; 
Faint  httle  Dandchon  )/j^ 

Closeth  her  eye.  ■   > 

»        Pale  little  Dandelion, 

In  her  white  shroud,  '^dl 

Heareth  the  angel-breeze  '   "'^ 

Call  from  the  cloud; 
Tiny  plumes  fluttering 

Make  no  delay; 
Little  winged  Dandelion 
Soareth  away. 

Helen  Barron  Boslwick  [1826- 

LITTLE   WHITE   LILY 

From  "  Within  and  Without  " 

Little  White  Lily  sat  by  a  stone, 
Drooping  and  waiting  till  the  sun  shone. 
Little  White  Lily  sunshine  has  fed; 
Little  White  Lily  is  lifting  her  head. 

Little  White  Lily  said:  "It  is  good. 
Little  White  Lily's  clothing  and  food." 
Little  White  Lily  dressed  like  a  bride ! 
Shining  with  whiteness,  and  crowned  beside! 

Little  White  Lily  drooping  with  pain, 
Waiting  and  waiting  for  the  wet  rain, 
Little  White  Lily  holdeth  her  cup; 
Rain  is  fast  falling  and  filling  it  up. 

Little  White  Lily  said:  "Good  again. 
When  I  am  thirsty  to  have  the  nice  rain. 
Now  I  am  stronger,  now  I  am  cool; 
Heat  cannot  burn  me,  my  veins  are  so  full." 

Little  White  Lily  smells  very  sweet; 
On  her  head  sunshine,  rain  at  her  feet. 
Thanks  to  the  sunshine,  thanks  to  the  rain, 
Little  White  Lily  is  happy  again. 

George  Macdonald  [1824-igos] 


138  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

WISHING 

Ring-ting!    I  wish  I  were  a  Primrose, 
A  bright  yellow  Primrose,  blowing  in  the  Spring! 

The  stooping  bough  above  me, 

The  wandering  bee  to  love  me. 
The  fern  and  moss  to  creep  across, 
And  the  Elm -tree  for  our  King! 

Nay, — stay!    I  wish  I  were  an  Elm-tree, 
A  great  lofty  Elm- tree,  with  green  leaves  gay! 
The  winds  would  set  them  dancing, 
The  sun  and  moonshine  glance  in. 
The  Birds  would  house  among  the  boughs, 
And  sweetly  sing! 

O — no !    I  wish  I  were  a  Robin, 
A  Robin  or  a  little  Wren,  everywhere  to  go;_ 
Through  forest,  field,  or  garden,  ' '  -^-I^tiJ 
And  ask  no  leave  or  pardon,  "    "'' 

Till  Winter  comes  with  icy  thumbs  '  * 

To  ruffle  up  our  wing. 

Well— tell!    Where  should  I  fly  to. 
Where  go  to  sleep  in  the  dark  wood  or  dell? 
Before  a  day  was  over, 
Home  comes  the  rover. 
For  Mother's  kiss, — sweeter  this 
Than  any  other  thing! 

William  Allingham  [i824-i88( 

IN  THE  GARDEN 

I  SPIED  beside  the  garden  bed 

A  tiny  lass  of  ours, 
Who  stopped  and  bent  her  sunny  head 

Above  the  red  June  flowers. 

Pushing  the  leaves  and  thorns  apart, 

She  singled  out  a  rose. 
And  in  its  inmost  crimson  heart, 
[eoqi -.         Enraptured,  plunged  her  nose. 


Glad   Day  139 

"O  dear,  dear  rose,  come,  tell  rne  true — 

Come,  tell  me  true,"  said  shell 
"If  I  smell  just  as  sweet  to  you/oZ 

As  you  smell  sweet  to  me!"    'J 

Ernest  Crosby  [1S56-1007I 


THE  GLADNESS  OF  NATtl|lE 

Is  this  a  time  to  be  cloudy  and  sad,      '^ 
When  our  mother  Nature  laughs  around; 

When  even  the  deep  blue  heavens  look  glad, 

And  gladness  breathes  from  the  blossoming  ground? 

There  are  notes  of  joy  from  the  hang-bird  and  wren, 
And  the  gossip  of  swallows  through  all  the  sky; 

The  ground-squirrel  gaily  chirps  by  his  den. 
And  the  wilding  bee  hums  merrily  by. 

The  clouds  are  at  play  in  the  azure  space 

And  their  shadows  at  play  on  the  bright-green  vale. 

And  here  they  stretch  to  the  frolic  chase,  j 
And  there  they  roll  on  the  easy  gale.  7 

There's  a  dance  of  leaves  in  that  aspen  bower. 
There's  a  titter  of  winds  in  that  beechen  tree. 

There's  a  smile  on  the  fruit,  and  a  smile  on  the  flower, 
And  a  laugh  from  the  brook  that  runs  to  the  sea. 

And  look  at  the  broad-faced  sun,  how  he  smiles 
On  the  dewy  earth  that  smiles  in  his  ray. 

On  the  leaping  waters  and  gay  young  isles; 
Ay,  look,  and  he'll  smile  thy  gloom  away. 

William  Cullen  Bryant  [i  794-1878] 


GLAD  DAY 

Here's  another  day,  dear. 
Here's  the  sun  again 
Peeping  in  his  pleasant  w-ay 
Through  the  window  pane. 


140  Poems  of  Youth   and  Age 

— ''      Rise  and  let  him  in,  dear,  '" 

Hail  him  "hip  hurray!" 
Now  the  fun  will  all  begin. 
Here's  another  day! 

Down  the  coppice  path,  dear, 
Through  the  dewy  glade, 
(When  the  Morning  took  her  bath 
What  a  splash  she  made!)  .  ^  „-^j  ^j 

Up  the  wet  wood-way,  dear,  ■■^; 

Under  dripping  green  ^   .j  ^^y 

^briL  Run  to  meet  another  day,  ,/ 

Brightest  ever  seen. 

r"^  973rIT 

Mushrooms  in  the  field,  dear,  :/. 

Show  their  silver  gleam .  , .  f  • 

What  a  dainty  crop  they  yield 

Firm  as  clouted  cream, 

Cool  as  balls  of  snow,  dear,  '   '' 

Sweet  and  fresh  and  round!  ^■ 

Ere  the  early  dew  can  go  -'"'^^i 

We  must  clear  the  ground.         iJ  t>nA 

Such  a  lot  to  do,  dear, 

Such  a  lot  to  see! 
How  we  ever  can  get  through 

Fairly  puzzles  me. 

Hurry  up  and  out,  dear, 

Then — away!  away! 
In  and  out  and  round  about. 

Here's  another  day! 

W.  Graham  Robertson  [1867- 


THE  TIGER 

Tiger!  Tiger!  burning  bright. 
In  the  forests  of  the  night, 
What  immortal  hand  or  eye 
Could  frame  thy  fearful  symmetry? 


Answer  to  a    Child's   Question         I41 

In  what  distant  deeps  or  skies 
Burnt  the  tire  of  thine  eyes? 
On  what  wings  dare  he  aspire? 
What  the  hand  dare  seize  the  fire? 

And  what  shoulder,  and  what  art, 
Could-  twist  the  sinews  of  thy  heart? 
And  when  thy  heart  began  to  beat, 
AVhat  dread  hand  and  what  dread  feet? 

What  the  hammer?  what  the  chain? 
In  what  furnace  was  thy  brain? 
What  the  anvil?  what  dread  grasp 
Dare  its  deadly  terrors  clasp? 

When  the  stars  threw  down  their  spears, 
And  watered  heaven  with  their  tears, 
Did  He  smile  His  w^ork  to  see? 
Did  He  who  made  the  Lamb,  make  thee? 

Tiger!  Tiger!  burning  bright, 
In  the  forests  of  the  night, 
Wliat  immortal  hand  or  eye 
Dare  frame  thy  fearful  symmetry? 

William  Blake  [1757-1827] 


ANSWER  TO  A   CHILD'S   QUESTION 

Do  you  ask  what  the  birds  say?    The  Sparrow,  the  Dove, 
The  Linnet  and  Thrush  say,  "I  love  and  I  love!" 
In  the  winter  they're  silent — the  wind  is  so  strong; 
What  it  says,  I  don't  know,  but  it  sings  a  loud  song. 
But  green  leaves,  and  blossoms,  and  sunny  warm  weather, 
And  singing,  and  loving — all  come  back  together.     . 
But  the  Lark  is  so  brimful  of  gladness  and  love,    ' 
The  green  fields  below  him,  the  blue  sky  above, 
That  he  sings,  and  he  sings,  and  for  ever  sings  he — 
"I  love  my  Love,  and  my  Love  loves  me!" 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [177 2-1834] 


iij.1  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

HOW  THE  LEAVES  CAME  DOWN 

I'll  tell  you  how  the  leaves  came  down. 

The  great  Tree  to  his  children  said: 
"You're  getting  sleepy,  Yellow  and  Brown, 

Yes,  very  sleepy,  little  Red. 

It  is  quite  time  to  go  to  bed." 

"Ah!"  begged  each  silly,  pouting  leaf, 

"Let  us  a  little  longer  stay; 
Dear  Father  Tree,  behold  our  grief! 

'Tis  such  a  very  pleasant  day, 

We  do  not  want  to  go  away." 

So,  just  for  one  more  merry  day 
To  the  great  Tree  the  leaflets  clung. 

Frolicked  and  danced,  and  had  their  way, 
Upon  the  autumn  breezes  swung. 
Whispering  all  their  sports  among — 

"Perhaps  the  great  Tree  will  forget, 

And  let  us  stay  until  the  spring. 
If  we  all  beg,  and  coax,  and  fret." 

But  the  great  Tree  did  no  such  thing; 

He  smiled  to  hear  them  whispering. 

"Come,  children,  all  to  bed,"  he  cried; 
And  ere  the  leaves  could  urge  their  prayer, 

He  shook  his  head,  and  far  and  wide. 
Fluttering  and  rustling  everywhere, 
Down  sped  the  leaflets  through  the  air. 

I  saw  them;  on  the  ground  they  lay. 
Golden  and  red,  a  huddled  swarm. 

Waiting  till  one  from  far  away. 
White  bedclothes  heaped  upon  her  arm. 
Should  come  to  wrap  them  safe  and  warm. 

The  great  bare  Tree  looked  down  and  smiled. 

"Goodnight  dear  little  leaves,"  he  said. 
And  from  below  each  sleepy  child 

RepHed,  "Goodnight,"  and  murmured, 

"It  is  so  nice  to  go  to  bed!" 

Susan  Coolidge  [1845- igos] 


A   Legend  of  the   Northland  143 


A  LEGEND  OF  THE  NORTHLAND 

Away,  away  in  the  Northland, 

Where  the  hours  of  the  day  arc  few. 

And  the  nights  are  so  long  in  winter 
That  they  cannot  sleep  them  through; 

Where  they  harness  the  swift  reindeer 
To  the  sledges,  when  it  snows; 

And  the  children  look  hke  bear's  cubs 
In  their  funny,  furry  clothes: 

They  tell  them  a  curious  story — 

I  don't  believe  'tis  true; 
And  yet  you  may  learn  a  lesson 

If  I  tell  the  tale  to  you. 

Once,  when  the  good  Saint  Peter 

Lived  in  the  world  below. 
And  walked  about  it,  preaching. 

Just  as  he  did,  you  know. 

He  came  to  the  door  of  a  cottage, 
In  traveling  round  the  earth, 

Where  a  little  woman  was  making  cakes, 
And  baking  them  on  the  hearth; 

And  being  faint  with  fasting. 
For  the  day  was  almost  done. 

He  asked  her,  from  her  store  of  cakes, 
To  give  him  a  single  one. 

So  she  made  a  very  little  cake, 

But  as  it  baking  lay, 
She  looked  at  it,  and  thought  it  seemed 

Too  large  to  give  away. 

Therefore  she  kneaded  another. 

And  still  a. smaller  one; 
But  it  looked,  when  she  turned  it  over. 

As  large  as  the  first  had  done. 


144  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Then  she  took  a  tiny  scrap  of  dough, 

And  rolled  and  rolled  it  flat ; 
And  baked  it  thin  as  a  wafer — 

But  she  couldn't  part  with  that. 

For  she  said,  "My  cakes  that  seem  too  small 

When  I  cat  of  them  myself, 
Are  yet  too  large  to  give  away." 

So  she  put  them  on  the  shelf. 

Then  good  Saint  Peter  grew  angry, 

For  he  was  hungry  and  faint; 
And  surely  such  a  woman 

Was  enough  to  provoke  a  saint. 

And  he  said,  "You  are  far  too  selfish 

To  dwell  in  a  human  form, 
To  have  both  food  and  shelter. 

And  fire  to  keep  you  warm. 

"Now,  you  shall  build  as  the  birds  do, 
And  shall  get  your  scanty  food 

By  boring,  and  boring,  and  boring, 
All  day  in  the  hard,  dry  wood." 

Then  up  she  went  through  the  chimney, 

Never  speaking  a  word. 
And  out  of  the  top  flew  a  woodpecker, 

For  she  was  changed  to  a  bird. 

She  had  a  scarlet  cap  on  her  head, 

And  that  was  left  the  same. 
But  all  the  rest  of  her  clothes  were  burned 

Black  as  a  coal  in  the  flame. 

And  every  country  school-boy 

Has  seen  her  in  the  wood, 
Where  she  lives  in  the  trees  till  this  very  day, 

Boring  and  boring  for  food. 

And  this  is  the  lesson  she  teaches: 

Live  not  for  yourself  alone, 
Lest  the  needs  you  will  not  pity 

Shall  one  day  be  your  own. 


The   Cricket's   Story      j  145 

Give  plenty  of  what  is  given  to  you, 

Listen  to  pity's  call; 
Don't  think  the  little  you  give  is  great, 

And  the  much  you  get  is  small. 

Now,  my  little  boy,  remember  that, 

And  try  to  be  kind  and  good, 
When  you  see  the  woodpecker's  sooty  dress. 

And  see  her  scarlet  hood. 

You  mayn't  be  changed  to  a  bird  though  you  live 

As  selfishly  as  you  can; 
But  you  will  be  changed  to  a  smaller  thing — 

A  mean  and  selfish  man. 

Pl!a:he  Cary  [1824-1871] 


THE   CRICKET'S   STORY 

The  high  and  mighty  lord  of  Glendare, 
The  owner  of  acres  both  broad  and  fair. 
Searched,  once  on  a  time,  his  vast  domains. 
His  deep,  green  forest,  and  yellow  plains, 
For  some  rare  singer,  to  make  complete 
The  studied  charms  of  his  country-seat; 
But  found,  for  all  his  pains  and  labors, 
No  sweeter  songster  than  had  his  neighbors. 

xAh,  what  shall  my  lord  of  the  manor  do? 

He  pondered  the  day  and  the  whole  night  through. 

He  called  on  the  gentry  of  hill-top  and  dale; 

And  at  last  on  Madame  the  Nightingale, — • 

Inviting,  in  his  majestical  way, 

Her  pupils  to  sing,  at  his  grand  soiree, 

That  perchance  among  them  my  lord  might  find 

Some  singer  to  whom  his  heart  inclined. 

What  wonder,  then,  Avhen  the  evening  came. 

And  the  castle  gardens  were  all  aflame 

With  the  many  curious  lights  that  hung 

O'er  the  ivied  porches,  and  flared  among 

The  grand  old  trees  and  the  banners  proud. 

That  many  a  heart  beat  high  and  loud. 


146  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

While  the  famous  choir  of  Glendare  Bog, 
EstabHshed  and  led  by  the  Brothers  Frog, 
Sat  thrumming  as  hoarsely  as  they  were  able, 
In  front  of  the  manager's  mushroom  table! 

The  overture  closed  with  a  crash — then,  hark! 

Across  the  stage  comes  the  sweet-voiced  Lark. 

She  da;intily  sways,  with  an  airy  grace, 

And  flutters  a  bit  of  gossamer  lace, 

While  the  leafy  alcove  echoes  and  thrills 

With  her  liquid  runs  and  lingering  trills. 

Miss  Goldfinch  came  next,  in  her  satin  gown, 

And  shaking  her  feathery  flounces  down. 

With  much  expression  and  feeling  sung 

Some  "Oh's"  and  "/Vh's"  in  a  foreign  tongue; 

While  to  give  the  affair  a  classic  tone, 

Miss  Katydid  rendered  a  song  of  her  own. 

In  which  each  line  closed  as  it  had  begun, 

With  some  wonderful  deed  which  she  had  done. 

Then  the  Misses  Sparrow,  so  prim  and  set. 

Twittered  and  chirped  through  a  long  duet; 

And  poor  little  Wren,  who  tried  with  a  will, 

But  who  couldn't  tell  "Heber"  from  "Ortonville," 

Unconscious  of  sarcasm,  piped  away 

And  courtesied  low  o'er  a  huge  bouquet 

Of  crimson  clover-heads,  culled  by  the  dozen, 

By  some  brown-coated,  plebeian  cousin. 

But  you  should  have  heard  the  red  Robin  sing 
His  English  ballad,  "Come,  beautiful  Spring!" 
And  Master  Owlet's  melodious  tune, 
"O,  meet  me  under  the  silvery  moon!" 
Then,  as  flighty  Miss  Humming-bird  didn't  care 
To  sing  for  the  high  and  mighty  Glendare, 
The  close  of  the  evening's  performance  fell 
To  the  fair  young  Nightingale,  Mademoiselle. 
Ah!  the  wealth  of  each  wonderful  note 
That  came  from  the  depths  of  her  tiny  throat! 
She  carolled,  she  trilled,  and  she  held  her  breath, 
Till  she  seemed  to  hang  at  the  point  of  death; 


The   Singing-lesson  14-7 

She  ran  the  chromatics  through  every  key, 

And  ended  triumphant  on  upper  C; 

Airing  the  graces  her  mother  had  taught  her 

In  a  manner  quite  worthy  of  Madame's  daughter. 

But  his  lordship  glared  down  the  leafy  aisle 

With  never  so  much  as  a  nod  or  smile, 

Till,  out  in  the  shade  of  a  blackberry  thicket. 

He  all  of  a  sudden  spied  little  Miss  Cricket; 

And,  roused  from  his  gloom,  like  an  angry  bat, 

He  sternly  demanded,  "Who  is  that?" 

"Miss  Cricket,  my  lord,  may  it  please  you  so, 

A  charity  scholar— ahem! — ^you  know — 

Quite  worthy,  of  course,  but  we  couldn't  bring" — 

Thundered  His  Mightiness,  "Let  her  sing!" 

The  Nightingale  opened  her  little  eyes 

Extremely  wide  in  her  blank  surprise; 

But  catching  a  glimpse  of  his  lordship's  rage, 

Led  little  Miss  Cricket  upon  the  stage, 

Where  she  modestly  sang,  in  her  simple  measures. 

Of  "Home,  sweet  Home,"  and  its  humble  pleasures. 

And  the  lord  of  Glendare  cried  out  in  his  glee, 

"This  little  Miss  Cricket  shall  sing  for  me!" 

Of  course,  of  comment  there  was  no  need; 
But  the  world  said,  "Really!"  and  "Ah,  indeed!" 
Yet,  notwithstanding,  we  find  it  true 
As  his  lordship  does  will  the  neighbors  do; 
So  this  is  the  way,  as  the  legends  tell. 
In  the  very  beginning  it  befell 
That  the  Crickets  came,  in  the  evening's  gloom. 
To  sing  at  our  hearths  of  "Home,  sweet  Home." 
Emma  Hunlington  Nason  [1845- 


THE   SINGING-LESSON" - 

A  NIGHTINGALE  made  a  mistake; 

She  sang  a  few  notes  out  of  tune; 
Her  heart  was  ready  to  break, 

And  she  hid  away  from  the  moon. 


148  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

She  wrung  her  claws,  poor  thing! 

But  was  far  too  proud  to  weep; 
She  tucked  her  head  under  her  wing. 

And  pretended  to  be  asleep. 

A  lark,  arm  in  arm  with  a  thrush, 

Came  sauntering  up  to  the  place; 
The  nightingale  felt  herself  blush, 

Though  feathers  hid  her  face. 
She  knew  they  had  heard  her  song, 

She  felt  them  snicker  and  sneer; 
She  thought  that  life  was  too  long. 

And  wished  she  could  skip  a  year. 

"Oh,  Nightingale,"  cooed  a  dove — 

"Oh,  Nightingale,  what's  the  use? 
You  bird  of  beauty  and  love, 

Why  behave  like  a  goose? 
Don't  skulk  away  from  our  sight. 

Like  a  common,  contemptible  fowl: 
You  bird  of  joy  and  delight, 

Why  behave  like  an  owl? 

"Only  think  of  all  you  have  done, 

Only  think  of  all  you  can  do; 
A  false  note  is  really  fun 

From  such  a  bird  as  you ! 
Lift  up  your  proud  little  crest. 

Open  your  musical  beak; 
Other  birds  have  to  do  their  best- 

You  need  only  to  speak." 

The  nightingale  shyly  took 

Her  head  from  under  her  wing, 
And,  giving  the  dove  a  look, 

Straightway  began  to  sing. 
There  was  never  a  bird  could  pass; 

The  night  was  divinely  calm, 
And  the  people  stood  on  the  grass 

To  hear  that  wonderful  psalm. 


Chanticleer  149 

The  nightingale  did  not  care; 

She  only  sang  to  the  skies; 
Her  song  ascended  there, 

And  there  she  fixed  her  eyes. 
The  people  that  stood  below 

She  knew  but  little  about; 
And  this  tale  has  a  moral,  I  know, 

If  you'll  try  to  find  it  out. 

Jean  Ingelow  [1820-1897] 


CHANTICLEER 

Of  all  the  birds  from  East  to  West 

That  tuneful  are  and  dear, 
I  love  that  farmyard  bird  the  best, 

They  call  him  Chanticleer. 

Gold  plume  and  copper  plume, 

Comb  of  scarlet  gay; 
'Tis  he  that  scatters  night  and  gloom, 

And  whistles  hack  the  day! 

He  is  the  sun's  brave  herald 
That,  ringing  his  blithe  horn, 

Calls  round  a  world  dew-pearled 
The  heavenly  airs  of  morn. 

O  clear  gold,  shrill  and  bold! 

He  calls  through  creeping  mist 
The  mountains  from  the  night  and  cold 

To  rose  and  amethyst. 

He  sets  the  birds  to  singing, 
And  calls  the  flowers  to  rise; 

The  morning  cometh,  bringing 
Sweet  sleep  to  heavy  eyes. 

Gold  plume  and  silver  plume, 

Comb  of  coral  gay; 
'Tis  he  packs  off  the  night  and  gloom. 

And  summons  ho?ne  the  day! 


150  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Black  fear  he  sends  it  flying, 
Black  care  he  drives  afar; 

And  creeping  shadows  sighing 
Before  the  morning  star. 

The  birds  of  all  the  forest 

Have  dear  and  pleasant  cheer, 

But  yet  I  hold  the  rarest 
The  farmyard  Chanticleer. 

Red  cock  or  black  cock, 

Gold  cock  or  white, 
The  flower  of  all  the  feathered  flock, 

He  whistles  hack  the  light! 

Katharine  Tynan  [1S61- 


"WHAT   DOES   LITTLE   BIRDIE    SAY?" 

From  "  Sea  Dreams  " 

What  does  little  birdie  say 
In  her  nest  at  peep  of  day? 
Let  me  fly,  says  little  birdie, 
Mother,  let  me  fly  away. 
Birdie,  rest  a  little  longer, 
Till  the  little  wings  are  stronger. 
So  she  rests  a  little  longer,  , 
Then  she  flies  away. 

What  does  little  baby  say. 
In  her  bed  at  peep  of  day? 
Baby  says,  like  little  birdie, 
Let  me  rise  and  fly  away. 
Baby,  sleep  a  little  longer, 
Till  the  little  limbs  are  stronger, 
If  she  sleeps  a  little  longer. 
Baby  too  shall  fly  away. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809- 189 2] 


Jack   Frost  151 


NURSE'S  SONG 

When  the  voices  of  children  are  heard  on  the  green 

And  laughing  is  heard  on  the  hill, 
My  heart  is  at  rest  within  my  breast, 

And  everything  else  is  still. 

"Then  come  home,  my  children,  the  sun  is  gone  down, 

And  the  dews  of  the  night  arise; 
Come,  com.e,  leave  off  play,  and  let  us  away 

Till  the  morning  appears  in  the  skies." 

"  No,  no,  let  us  play,  for  it  is  yet  day, 

And  we  cannot  go  to  sleep; 
Besides  in  the  sky  the  little  birds  fly. 

And  the  hills  are  all  covered  with  sheep." 

"Well,  well,  go  and  play  till  the  light  fades  away. 

And  then  go  home  to  bed." 
The  little  ones  leaped  and  shouted  and  laughed; 

And  all  the  hills  echoed. 

William  Blake    [1757-1827] 


JACK   FROST 

The  door  was  shut,  as  doors  should  be. 
Before  you  went  to  bed  last  night; 

Yet  Jack  Frost  has  got  in,  you  see. 
And  left  your  window  silver  white. 

He  must  have  waited  till  you  slept; 

And  not  a  single  word  he  spoke. 
But  pencilled  o'er  the  panes  and  crept 

Away  again  before  you  woke. 

And  now  you  cannot  see  the  hills 

Nor  fields  that  stretch  beyond  the  lane; 

But  there  are  fairer  things  than  these 
His  fingers  traced  on  every  pane. 


152  Poems  of  Youth   and  Age 

Rocks  and  castles  towering  high; 

Hills  and  dales,  and  streams  and  fields; 
And  knights  in  armor  riding  by, 

With  nodding  plumes  and  shining  shields. 

And  here  are  little  boats,  and  there 

Big  ships  with  sails  spread  to  the  breeze; 

And  yonder,  palm  trees  waving  fair 
On  islands  set  in  silver  seas. 

And  butterflies  with  gauzy  wings; 

And  herds  of  cows  and  flocks  of  sheep; 
And  fruit  and  flowers  and  all  the  things 

You  see  when  you  are  sound  asleep. 

For  creeping  softly  underneath 

The  door  when  all  the  lights  are  out, 

Jack  Frost  takes  every  breath  you  breathe, 
And  knows  the  things  you  think  about. 

He  paints  them  on  the  window  pane 
In  fairy  lines  with  frozen  steam; 

And  when  you  wake  you  see  again 
The  lovely  things  you  saw  in  dream. 

Gabriel  Seloim  [1861- 


OCTOBER'S   PARTY 

October  gave  a  party; 

The  leaves  by  hundreds  came — 
The  Chestnuts,  Oaks,  and  Maples, 

And  leaves  of  every  name. 
The  Sunshine  spread  a  carpet. 

And  everything  was  grand. 
Miss  Weather  led  the  dancing, 

Professor  Wind  the  band. 

The  Chestnuts  came  in  yellow, 
The  Oaks  in  crimson  dressed; 

The  lovely  Misses  Maple 
In  scarlet  looked  their  best; 


Nikolina  1 53 

All  balanced  to  their  partners, 

And  gaily  fluttered  by; 
The  sight  was  like  a  rainbow 

New  fallen  from  the  sky. 

Then,  in  the  rustic  hollow, 

At  hide-and-seek  they  played, 
The  party  closed  at  sundown. 

And  everybody  stayed. 
Professor  Wind  played  louder; 

They  flew  along  the  ground; 
And  then  the  party  ended 

In  jolly  "hands  around." 

George  Cooper  [1840- 

THE   SHEPHERD 

How  sweet  is  the  Shepherd's  sweet  lot! 
From  the  morn  to  the  evening  he  strays; 
He  shall  follow  his  sheep  all  the  day. 
And  his  tongue  shall  be  filled  with  praise. 
For  he  hears  the  lamb's  innocent  call, 
And  he  hears  the  ewe's  tender  reply; 
Fie  is  watchful,  while  they  are  in  peace. 
For  they  know  when  their  Shepherd  is  nigh. 

William  Blake  [175 7- 182 7] 

NIKOLINA 

O  TELL  me,  little  children,  have  you  seen  her — 
The  tiny  maid  from  Norway,  Nikolina? 
0,  her  eyes  are  blue  as  cornflowers,  mid  the  corn. 
And  her  cheeks  are  rosy  red  as  skies  of  morn! 

Nikolina!  swift  she  turns  if  any  call  her, 

As  she  stands  among  the  poppies,  hardly  taller, 

Breaking  off  their  scarlet  cups  for  you. 

With  spikes  of  slender  larkspur,  burning  blue. 

In  her  little  garden  many  a  flower  is  growing — 
Red,  gold,  and  purple  in  the  soft  wind  blowing, 
But  the  child  that  stands  amid  the  blossoms  gay 
Is  sweeter,  quainter,  brighter  e'en  than  they. 

Cclid  Thaxter  [1835-1894] 


154  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 


LITTLE   GUSTAVA 

Little  Gustava  sits  in  the  sun, 
Safe  in  the  porch,  and  the  little  drops  run 
From  the  icicles  under  the  eaves  so  fast, 
For  the  bright  spring  sun  shines  warm  at  last, 
And  glad  is  little  Gustava. 

She  wears  a  quaint  little  scarlet  cap, 
And  a  little  green  bowl  she  holds  in  her  lap, 
Filled  with  bread  and  milk  to  the  brim, 
And  a  wreath  of  marigolds  round  the  rim: 
"Ha!  ha!"  laughs  little  Gustava. 

Up  comes  her  little  gray  coaxing  cat 

With  her  Httle  pink  nose,  and  she  mews,  "What's  that?" 
Gustava  feeds  her, — she  begs  for  more; 
And  a  little  brov/n  hen  walks  in  at  the  door: 
"Good  day!"  cries  little  Gustava. 

She  scatters  crumbs  for  the  little  brown  hen. 
There  comes  a  rush  and  a  flutter,  and  then 
Down  fly  her  little  white  doves  so  sweet, 
With  their  snowy  wings  and  crimson  feet: 
"Welcome!"  cries  little  Gustava. 

So  dainty  and  eager  they  pick  up  the  crumbs. 
But  who  is  this  through  the  doorway  comes? 
Little  Scotch  terrier,  little  dog  Rags, 
Looks  in  her  face,  and  his  funny  tail  wags: 
'"Ha!  ha!"  laughs  httle  Gustava. 

"You  want  some  breakfast  too?"  and  down 
She  sets  her  bowl  on  the  brick  floor  brown; 
And  little  dog  Rags  drinks  up  her  milk, 
While  she  strokes  his  shaggy  locks  like  silk: 
"Dear  Rags!"  says  little  Gustava. 

Waiting  without  stood  sparrow  and  crow. 
Cooling  their  feet  in  the  melting  snow: 
"Won't  you  come  in,  good  folk?"  she  cried. 
But  they  were  too  bashful,  and  stood  outside 
Though  "Pray  come  in!"  cried  Gustava. 


Prince  Tatters  155 

So  the  last  she  threw  them,  and  knelt  on  the  mat 
With  doves  and  biddy  and  dog  and  cat. 
And  her  mother  came  to  the  open  house-door: 
"Dear  little  daughter,  I  bring  you  some  more. 
My  merry  little  Gustava!" 

Kitty  and  terrier,  biddy  and  doves, 
x\ll  things  harmless  Gustava  loves. 
The  shy,  kind  creatures  'tis  joy  to  feed, 
And  oh,  her  breakfast  is  sweet  indeed 
To  happj^  little  Gustava! 

Celia  Thaxter  [1835-1804] 

PRINCE  TATTERS 

Little  Prince  Tatters  has  lost  his  cap! 

Over  the  hedge  he  threw  it; 
Into  the  river  it  fell  "kerslap!" 

Stupid  old  thing  to  do  it! 
Now  Mother  may  sigh  and  Nurse  may  fume 
For  the  gay  little  cap  with  its  eagle  plume. 
"One  cannot  be  thinking  all  day  of  such  matters! 
Trifles  are  trifles!"  says  little  Prince  Tatters. 

Little  Prince  Tatters  has  lost  his  coat! 

Playing,  he  did  not  need  it ; 
"Left  it  right  there,  by  the  nanny-goat, 

And  nobody  never  seed  it!" 
Now  Mother  and  Nurse  may  search  till  night 
For  the  little  new  coat  with  its  buttons  bright; 
But — "Coat-sleeves  or  shirt-sleeves,  how  little  it  matters! 
Trifles  are  trifles!"  says  little  Prince  Tatters. 

Little  Prince  Tatters  has  LOST  HIS  BALL! 

Rolled  away  down  the  street! 
Somebody'U  have  to  find  it,  that's  all, 

Before  he  can  sleep  or  eat. 
Now  raise  the  neighborhood,  quickly,  do! 
And  send  for  the  crier  and  constable  too! 
"Trifles  are  trifles;  but  serious  matters. 
They  must  l)e  seen  to,'"  says  little  Prince  Tatters. 

Laura  E.  Richards  [1850- 


156  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


THE  LITTLE  BLACK  BOY 

My  mother  bore  me  in  the  southern  wild, 
And  I  am  black,  but  oh,  my  soul  is  white! 

White  as  an  angel  is  the  English  child, 
But  I  am  black,  as  if  bereaved  of  light. 

My  mother  taught  me  underneath  a  tree, 
And,  sitting  down  before  the  heat  of  day, 

She  took  me  on  her  lap  and  kissed  me. 
And,  pointing  to  the  East,  began  to  say: 

"Look  on  the  rising  sun, — there  God  does  live. 
And  gives  His  light,  and  gives  His  heat  away; 

And  flowers  and  trees  and  beasts  and  men  receive 
Comfort  in  morning,  joy  in  the  noonday. 

"And  we  are  put  on  earth  a  little  space. 
That  we  may  learn  to  bear  the  beams  of  love; 

And  these  black  bodies  and  this  sunburnt  face 
Are  but  a  cloud,  and  like  a  shady  grove. 

"For,  when  our  souls  have  learned  the  heat  to  bear, 
The  cloud  will  vanish,  we  shall  hear  His  voice, 

Saying:  'Come  out  from  the  grove.  My  love  and  care, 
And  round  My  golden  tent  Kke  lambs  rejoice.'" 

Thus  did  my  mother  say,  and  kissed  me; 

And  thus  I  say  to  little  English  boy. 
When  I  from  black,  and  he  from  white  cloud  free, 

And  round  the  tent  of  God  like  lambs  we  joy, 

I'll  shade  him  from  the  heat,  till  he  can  bear 

To  lean  in  joy  upon  our  Father's  knee; 
And  then  I'll  stand  and  stroke  his  silver  hair, 

And  be  like  him,  and  he  will  then  love  me. 

William  Blake  [i 757-1827] 


The  Witch   in   the   Glass 


157 


THE  BLIND   BOY 

0  SAY  what  is  that  thing  called  Light, 
Which  I  must  ne'er  enjoy; 

What  are  the  blessings  of  the  sight, 
O  tell  your  poor  blind  boy! 

You  talk  of  wondrous  things  you  see, 
You  say  the  sun  shines  bright; 

1  feel  him  warm,  but  how  can  he, 
Or  make  it  day  or  night? 

My  day  or  night  myself  I  make 

Whene'er  I  sleep  or  play; 
And  could  I  ever  keep  awake 

With  me  'twere  always  day. 

With  heavy  sighs  I  often  hear 

You  mourn  my  hapless  woe; 
But  sure  with  patience  I  can  bear 

A  loss  I  ne'er  can  know. 

Then  let  not  what  I  cannot  have 

My  cheer  of  mind  destroy: 
Whilst  thus  I  sing,  I  am  a  king, 

Although  a  poor  blind  boy. 

Col  ley  Cibhcr  [1671-1757] 


THE  WITCH  IN  THE   GLASS 

"My  mother  says  I  must  not  pass 

Too  near  that  glass; 
She  is  afraid  that  I  will  see 
A  little  witch  that  looks  like  me, 
With  a  red,  red  mouth,  to  whisper  low 
The  very  thing  I  should  not  know!" 


158  Poems   of  Youth   and   Age 

Alack  for  all  your  mother's  care! 

A  bird  of  the  air, 
A  wistful  wind,  or  (I  suppose 
Sent  by  some  hapless  boy)  a  rose, 
With  breath  too  sweet,  will  whisper  low 
The  very  thing  you  should  not  know! 

Sarah  M.  B.  Piatt  [1836- 


MY   SHADOW 

I  HAVE  a  little  shadow  that  goes  in  and  out  with  me, 
And  what  can  be  the  use  of  him  is  more  than  I  can  see. 
He  is  very,  very  like  me  from  the  heels  up  to  the  head; 
And  I  see  him  jump  before  me,  when  I  jump  into  my  bed. 

The  funniest  thing  about  him  is  the  way  he  likes  to  grow — 
Not  at  all  like  proper  children,  which  is  always  very  slow; 
For  he  sometimes  shoots  up  taller  like  an  India-rubber  ball, 
And  he  sometimes  gets  so  little  that  there's  none  of  him 
at  all. 

He  hasn't  got  a  notion  of  how  children  ought  to  play, 
And  can  only  make  a  fool  of  me  in  every  sort  of  way. 
He  stays  so  close  beside  me,  he's  a  coward  you  can  see; 
I'd  think  shame  to  stick  to  nursie  as  that  shadow  sticks  to 
me! 

One  morning,  very  early,  before  the  sun  was  up, 
I  rose  and  found  the  shining  dew  on  every  buttercup; 
But  my  lazy  little  shadow,  like  an  arrant  sleepy-head, 
Had  stayed  at  home  behind  me  and  was  fast  asleep  in  bed. 
Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1804] 


THE  LAND   OF   COUNTERPANE 

When  I  was  sick  and  lay  a-bed, 
I  had  two  pillows  at  my  head, 
And  all  my  toys  beside  me  lay 
To  keep  me  happy  all  the  day. 


The   Land   of  Story-books  159 

And  sometimes  for  an  hour  or  so 

I  watched  my  leaden  soldiers  go, 

With  different  uniforms  and  drills, 

Among  the  bed-clothes,  through  the  hills; 

And  sometimes  sent  my  ships  in  fleets 
All  up  and  down  among  the  sheets; 
Or  brought  my  trees  and  houses  out, 
And  planted  cities  all  about. 

I  was  the  giant  great  and  still 
That  sits  upon  the  pillow-hill. 
And  sees  before  him,  dale  and  plain, 
The  pleasant  land  of  counterpane. 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850- 1894] 


THE  LAND   OF   STORY-BOOKS 

At  evening  when  the  lamp  is  lit,  ' 

Around  the  fire  my  parents  sit ; 
They  sit  at  home  and  talk  and  sing. 
And  do  not  play  at  anything. 

Now,  with  my  little  gun,  I  crawl 
AH  in  the  dark  along  the  wall. 
And  follow  round  the  forest  track 
Away  behind  the  sofa  back. 

There,  in  the  night,  where  none  can  spy. 
All  in  my  hunter's  camp  I  lie. 
And  play  at  books  that  I  have  read 
Till  it  is  time  to  go  to  bed. 

These  are  the  hills,  these  are  the  woods. 
These  are  my  starry  solitudes; 
And  there  the  river  by  whose  brink 
The  roaring  lions  come  to  drink. 

I  see  the  others  far  away 
As  if  in  firelit  camp  they  lay. 
And  I,  like  to  an  Indian  scout. 
Around  their  party  prowled  about. 


i6o  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

So,  when  my  nurse  comes  in  for  me, 
Home  I  return  across  the  sea, 
And  go  to  bed  with  backward  looks 
At  my  dear  land  of  Story-books. 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1894] 

THE   GARDENER 

The  gardener  does  not  love  to  talk, 

He  makes  me  keep  the  gravel  walk; 

And  when  he  puts  his  tools  away, 

He  locks  the  door  and  takes  the  key. 

Away  behind  the  currant  row 

Where  no  one  else  but  cook  may  go, 

Far  in  the  plots,  I  see  him  dig, 

Old  and  serious,  brown  and  big. 

He  digs  the  flowers,  green,  red,  and  blue, 

Nor  wishes  to  be  spoken  to. 

He  digs  the  flowers  and  cuts  the  hay, 

And  never  seems  to  want  to  play. 

Silly  gardener!  summer  goes, 

And  winter  comes  with  pinching  toes. 

When  in  the  garden  bare  and  brown 

You  must  lay  your  barrow  down. 

Well  now,  and  while  the  summer  stays. 

To  profit  by  these  garden  days 

O  how  much  wiser  you  would  be 

To  play  at  Indian  wars  with  me! 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1804] 

FOREIGN  LANDS 

Up  into  the  cherry  tree 

Who  should  climb  but  little  me? 

I  held  the  trunk  with  both  my  hands 

And  looked  abroad  on  foreign  lands. 

I  saw  the  next  door  garden  lie, 
Adorned  with  flowers,  before  my  eye, 
And  many  pleasant  places  more 
That  I  had  never  seen  before. 


The    Peddler's   Caravan  i6i. 

I  saw  the  dimpling  river  [)ass 
And  be  the  sky's  blue  looking-glass; 
The  dusty  roads  go  up  and  down 
With  people  tramping  in  to  town. 

If  I  could  find  a  higher  tree, 
Farther  and  farther  I  should  see, 
To  where  the  grown-up  river  slips 
Into  the  sea  among  the  ships; 

To  where  the  roads  on  either  hand 
Lead  onward  into  fairy  land, 
Where  all  the  children  dine  at  five. 
And  all  the  playthings  come  alive. 

Robert  Loitis  Slrvciison  [i  850-1 894] 

MY  BED  IS  A  BOAT 

My  bed  is  like  a  little  boat; 

Nurse  helps  me  in  v/hen  I  embark ; 
She  girds  me  in  my  sailor's  coat 

And  starts  me  in  the  dark. 

At  night,  I  go  on  board  and  say 

Good  night  to  all  my  friends  on  shore; 

I  shut  my  eyes  and  sail  away 
And  see  and  hear  no  more. 

And  sometimes  things  to  bed  I  take, 

As  prudent  sailors  have  to  do; 
Perhaps  a  slice  of  wedding-cake, 

Perhaps  a  toy  or  two. 

All  night  across  the  dark  we  steer; 

But  when  the  day  returns  at  last, 
Safe  in  my  room,  beside  the  pier, 
•  "  I  find  my  vessel  fast. 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [185D-1894] 

THE  PEDDLER'S   CARAVAN 
I  WISH  I  lived  in  a  caravan. 
With  a  horse  to  drive,  like  a  peddler-man! 
Where  he  comes  from  nobody  knows. 
Or  where  he  goes  to,  but  on  he  goes! 


1 62  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

His  caravan  has  windows  two, 

And  a  chimney  of  tin,  that  the  smoke  comes  through; 

He  has  a  wife,  with  a  baby  brown, 

And  they  go  riding  from  town  to  town. 

Chairs  to  mend,  and  delf  to  sell! 
He  clashes  the  basins  like  a  bell; 
Tea-trays,  baskets  ranged  in  order, 
Plates,  with  alphabets  round  the  border! 

The  roads  are  brown,  and  the  sea  is  green, 
But  his  house  is  hke  a  bathing-machine; 
The  world  is  round,  and  he  can  ride. 
Rumble  and  slash,  to  the  other  side! 

With  the  peddler-man  I  should  like  to  roam. 
And  write  a  book  when  I  came  home; 
All  the  people  would  read  my  book, 
Tust  like  the  Travels  of  Captain  Cook! 

William  Brighty  Rands  [1823-1882] 

MR.  COGGS 

A  WATCH  will  tell  the  time  of  day, 
Or  tell  it  nearly,  any  way, 
Excepting  when  it's  overwound, 
Or  when  you  drop  it  on  the  ground. 

If  any  of  our  watches  stop. 
We  haste  to  Mr.  Coggs's  shop; 
For  though  to  scold  us  he  pretends. 
He's  quite  among  our  special  friends. 

He  fits  a  dice-box  in  his  eye. 

And  takes  a  long  and  thoughtful  spy, 

And  prods  the  wheels,  and  says,  "Dear,  dear! 

More  carelessness,  I  greatly  fear." 

And  then  he  lays  the  dice-box  down 
And  frowns  a  most  prodigious  frown; 
But  if  we  ask  him  what's  the  time, 
He'll  make  his  gold  repeater  chime. 

Edward  Verrall  Lucas  [1868- 


"There  Was  a  Jolly   Miller"         163 


THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  NEST 

They'll  come  again  to  the  apple  tree — 

Robin  and  all  the  rest — 
When  the  orchard  branches  are  fair  to  see, 

In  the  snow  of  the  blossoms  dressed; 
And  the  prettiest  thing  in  the  world  will  be 
■  The  building  of  the  nest. 

Weaving  it  well,  so  round  and  trim. 

Hollowing  it  with  care, — 
Nothing  too  far  away  for  him, 

Nothing  for  her  too  fair,^ — 
Hanging  it  safe  on  the  topmost  limb, 

Their  castle  in  the  air. 

Ah!  mother  bird,  you'll  have  weary  days 
When  the  eggs  are  under  your  breast. 

And  shadow  may  darken  the  dancing  rays 
When  the  wee  ones  leave  the  nest; 

But  they'll  find  their  wings  in  a  glad  amaze, 
And  God  will  see  to  the  rest. 

So  come  to  the  trees  with  all  your  train 

When  the  apple  blossoms  blow; 
Through  the  April  shimmer  of  sun  and  rain, 

Go  flying  to  and  fro; 
And  sing  to  our  hearts  as  we  watch  again 

Your  fairy  building  grow. 

Margaret  Sangslcr  [1838-1912] 


"THERE  WAS   A  JOLLY   MILLER" 

From  "  Lcve  in  a  Village  " 

There  was  a  jolly  miller  once  lived  on  the  river  Dec; 

He  danced  and  sang  from  morn  till  night,  no  lark  so  blithe 

as  he; 
And  this  the  burden  of  his  song  forever  used  to  be: — 
"I  care  for  nobody,  no  not  I,  if  nobody  cares  for  me. 


164  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 

"I  live  by  my  mill,  God  bless  her!  she's  kindred,  child,  and 

wife; 
I  would  not  change  my  station  for  any  other  in  life; 
No  lawyer,  surgeon,  or  doctor  e'er  had  a  groat  from  me; 
I  care  for  nobody,  no  not  I,  if  nobody  cares  for  me." 

When  spring  begins  his  merry  career,  oh,  how  his  heart 

grows  gay; 
No  summer's  drought  alarms  his  fear,  nor  winter's  cold 

decay; 
No  foresight  mars  the  miller's  joy,  who's  wont  to  sing  and 

say, 
"Let  others  toil  from  year  to  year,  I  live  from  day  to  day." 

Thus,  hke  the  miller,  bold  and  free,  let  us  rejoice  and  sing; 
The  days  of  youth  are  made  for  glee,  and  time  is  on  the  wing; 
This  song  shall  pass  from  me  to  thee,  along  the  jovial  ring; 
Let  heart  and  voice  and  all  agree  to  say,  "Long  live  the  king." 

Isaac  Bicker staf  [   ?   -1812?] 


ONE  AND   ONE 

Two  Httle  girls  are  better  than  one, 

Two  little  boys  can  double  the  fun. 

Two  little  birds  can  build  a  fine  nest, 

Two  little  arms  can  love  mother  best. 

Two  Httle  ponies  must  go  to  a  span; 

Two  little  pockets  has  my  little  man; 

Two  little  eyes  to  open  and  close, 

Two  little  ears  and  one  little  nose, 

Two  little  elbows,  dimpled  and  sweet, 

Two  httle  shoes  on  two  little  feet, 

Two  little  Hps  and  one  httle  chin. 

Two  little  cheeks  with  a  rose  shut  in; 

Two  Httle  shoulders,  chubby  and  strong. 

Two  little  legs  running  all  day  long.  1  ; 

Two  little  prayers  does  my  darling  say,  •   oH 

Twice  does  he  kneel  by  my  side  each  day. 

Two  little  folded  hands,  soft  and  brown, 

Two  little  eyelids  cast  meekly  down. 


A   Nursery  Song  i^^ 

And  two  little  angels  guard  him  in  bed, 
"One  at  the  foot,  and  one  at  the  head." 

Mary  Ma  pes  Dodge  [183  8- 1905] 


A  NURSERY  SONG 

Oh,  Peterkin  Pout  and  Gregory  Grout 

Are  two  little  goblins  black. 
Full  oft  from  my  house  I've  driven  them  out, 

But  somehow  they  still  come  back. 

They  clamber  up  to  the  baby's  mouth, 

And  pull  the  corners  down; 
They  perch  aloft  on  the  baby's  brow, 
^r    And  twist  it  into  a  frown. 

Chorus : 

And  one  says  "Must!"  and  t'other  says  "Can't!" 
And  one  says   "Shall!"  and  t'other  says   "Shan't!" 
Oh,  Peterkin  Pout  and  Gregory  Grout, 
I  pray  you  now  from  my  house  keep  out! 

But  Samuel  Smile  and  Lemuel  Laugh 

Are  two  little  fairies  bright; 
They're  always  ready  for  fun  and  chaff, 

And  sunshine  is  their  delight. 

And  when  they  creep  into  Baby's  eyes. 

Why,  there  the  sunbeams  are; 
And  when  they  peep  through  her  rosy  lips, 

Her  laughter  rings  near  and  far. 

Chorus: 

And    one    says    "Please!"    and    t'other    says    "Do!" 
And  both  together  say  "T  love  you!" 
So,  Lemuel  Laugh  and  Samuel  Smile, 
Come  in,  my  dears,  and  tarry  awhile! 

Laura  E.  Richards    [1850- 


1 66  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


A  MORTIFYING   MISTAKE 

I  STUDIED  my  tables  over  and  over,  and  backward  and 

forward,  too; 
But  I  couldn't  remember  six  times  nine,  and  I  didn't  know 

what  to  do, 
Till  sister  told  me  to  play  with  my  doll,  and  not  to  bother 

my  head. 
"If  you  caU  her  'Fifty-four'  for  a  while,  you'll  learn  it  by 

heart,"  she  said. 

So  I  took  my  favorite,  Mary  Ann  (though  I  thought  'twas 

a  dreadful  shame 
To  give  such  a  perfectly  lovely  child  such  a  perfectly  horrid 

name). 
And  I  called  her  my  dear  little  "Fifty-four"  a  hundred 

times,  till  I  knew 
The  answer  of  six  times  nine  as  well  as  the  answer  of  two 

times  two. 

Next  day    Elizabeth    Wigglesworth,    who  always  acts   so 

proud, 
Said,  "Six  times  nine  is   fifty-two,"  and   I   nearly  laughed 

aloud ! 
But  I  wished  I  hadn't  when  teacher  said,  "Now,  Dorothy, 

tell  if  you  can." 
For  I  thought  of  my  doll  and — sakes  alive! — I  answered, 

"Mary  Ann!" 

Anna  Maria  Pratt  [i8    - 


THE  RAGGEDY  IMAN 

O  THE  Raggedy  Man!    He  works  fer  Pa; 

An'  he's  the  goodest  man  ever  you  saw! 

He  comes  to  our  house  every  day,  ■      ,  .     . 

An'  waters  the  horses,  an'  feeds  'em  hay*.,    ,      ,;, 

An'  he  opens  the  shed — an'  we  all  ist  laugh 

When  he  drives  out  our  little  old  wobble-ly  calf; 


The   Raggedy   Man  167 

An'  nen — ef  our  hired  girl  says  he  can — 
He  milks  the  cow  fer  'Lizabuth  Ann. — 
Ain't  he  a'  awful  good  Raggedy  Man? 
Raggedy!  Raggedy!  Raggedy  Man! 

W'y,  the  Raggedy  Man —  he's  ist  so  good 
He  splits  the  kindlin'  an'  chops  the  wood; 
An'  nen  he  spades  in  our  garden,  too, 
An'  does  most  things  'at  boys  can 't  do. — 
He  clumbed  clean  up  in  our  big  tree 
An'  shooked  a'  apple  down  fer  me — 
An'  nother'n',  too,  fer  'Lizabuth  Ann — 
An'  nother'n',  too,  fer  the  Raggedy  Man. — 
Ain't  he  a'  av/ful  kind  Raggedy  Man? 
Raggedy!  Raggedy!  Raggedy  Man! 

An'  the  Raggedy  Man,  he  knows  most  rhymes 
An'  tells  'em,  ef  I  be  good,  sometimes: 
Knows  ^bout  Giunts,  an'  Griffuns,  an'  Elves, 
An'  the  Squidgicum-Squees  'at  swallers  therselvesl 
An',  wite  by  the  pump  in  our  pasture-lot, 
He  showed  me  the  hole  'at  the  Wunks  is  got, 
'At  lives  'way  deep  in  the  ground,  an'  can 
Turn  into  me,  er  'Lizabuth  Ann! 
Er  Ma,  er  Pa,  er  the  Raggedy  Man! 
Ain't  he  a  funny  old  Raggedy  IMan? 
Raggedy!  Raggedy!  Raggedy  Man! 

The  Raggedy  ]Man — one  time  when  he 
Was  makin'  a  little  bow-n'-orry  fer  me, 
Says,  "When  you! re  big  like  your  Pa  is, 
Air  you  go'  to  keep  a  fine  store  like  his — 
An'  be  a  rich  merchunt — an'  wear  fine  clothes? — 
Er  what  air  you  go'  to  be,  goodness  knows?" 
An'  nen  he  laughed  at  'Lizabuth  Ann, 
An'  I  says  "  'JM  go'  to  be  a  Raggedy  Man! — 
I'm  ist  go'  to  be  a  nice  Raggedy  IMan!" 
Raggedy!  Raggedy!  Raggedy  Man! 

James  Whilcomb  Riley  [1852-1916] 


1 68  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


THE  MAN  IN  THE  MOON 

Said  the  Raggedy  Man,  on  a  hot  afternoon, 
"My! 
Sakes ! 
What  a  lot  o'  mistakes 
Some  httle  folks  makes  on  The  Man  in  the  Moon  i 
But  people  that's  b'en  up  to  see  him,  like  mc, 
And  calls  on  him  frequent  and  intimutly. 
Might  drop  a  few  facts  that  would  interest  you 
Clean! 

Through! — 

If  you  wanted  'em  to — 
Some  actual  facts  that  might  interest  you! 

"O  The  Man  in  the  Moon  has  a  crick  in  his  back; 
Whee! 
Whimm! 

Ain't  you  sorry  for  him? 
And  a  mole  on  his  nose  that  is  purple  and  black; 
And  his  eyes  are  so  weak  that  they  water  and  run 
If  he  dares  to  dream  even  he  looks  at  the  sun,— 
So  he  jes'  dreams  of  stars,  as  the  doctors  advise — 
My! 
Eyes! 

But  isn't  he  wise — 
To  jes'  ch-eam  of  stars,  as  the  doctors  advise? 

"And  The  Man  in  the  Moon  has  a  boil  on  his  car^- 
Whee! 
Whing! 

What  a  singular  thing! 
I  know!  but  these  facts  are  authentic,  my  dear, — 
There's  a  boil  on  his  ear;  and  a  corn  on  his  chin, — 
He  calls  it  a  dimple — but  dimples  stick  in — 
Yet  it  might  be  a  dimple  turned  over,  you  know! 
Whang! 
Ho! 

Why,  certainly  so! — 
It  might  be  a  dimple  turned  over,  you  know! 


Little   Orphant  Annie  169 

"And  The  Man  in  the  Moon  has  a  rheumatic  knee, — 
Gee! 
Whizz! 

What  a  pity  that  is! 
And   his   toes  have  worked  round  where   his  heels  ought 

to  be. 
So  whenever  he  wants  to  go  North  he  goes  South, 
And    comes    back    with    porridge    crumbs    all    round    his 

mouth, 
And  he  brushes  them  off  with  a  Japanese  fan. 
Whing! 
Whann ! 

What  a  marvelous  man! 
What  a  very  remarkably  marvelous  man! 

"And  The  Man  in  the  IMoon,"  sighed  the  Raggedy  Man, 
"Gits! 
So! 

Sullonesome,  you  know, — 
Up  there  by  hisse'f  sence  creation  began! — 
That  when  I  call  on  him  and  then  come  away, 
He  grabs  me  and  holds  me  and  begs  me  to  stay, — 
Till — Well!  if  it  wasn't  fer  J immy-cum-Jim, 
Dadd! 
Limb! 

I'd  go  pardners  with  him — 
Jes'  jump  my  job  here  and  be  parrlncrs  with  him!" 

James  Wliilcomb  Riley  [1S52-1916]  "■  ^ 


LITTLE   ORPHANT   ANNIE 

Little  Orphant  Annie's  come  to  our  house  to  stay, 

An'  wash  the  cups  an'  saucers  up,  an'  brush  the  crumbs 

away. 
An'  shoo  the  chickens  off  the  porch,  an'  dust  the  hearth, 

an'  sweep. 
An'  make  the  fire,  an'  bake  the  bread,  an'  earn  her  board 

an'-keep; 


1 70  Poems  of  Y  outh  and   Age 

An'  all  us  other  children,  when  the  supper  things  is  done, 
We  set  around  the  kitchen  fire  an'  has  the  mostest  fun 
A-list'nin'  to  the  witch-tales  'at  Annie  tells  about, 
An '  the  Gobble-uns  'at  gits  you 
Ef  you 
Don't 
Watch 
Out! 

Onc't  they  was  a  little  boy  wouldn't  say  his  prayers — 

An'  when  he  went  to  bed  at  night,  away  up  stairs, 

His  Mammy  heered  him  holler,  an'  his  Daddy  heered  him 

bawl, 
An'  when  they  turn't  the  kivvers  down,  he  wasn't  there  at 

all! 
An'  they  seeked  him  in  the  rafter- room,  an'  cubby-hole, 

an'  press, 
An'  seeked  him  up  the  chimbly-flue,  an'  ever'wheres,  I  guess; 
But  all  they  ever  found  was  thist  his  pants  an'  roundabout : 
An'  the  Gobble-uns  '11  git  you 
Ef  you 
Don't 
Watch 
Out! 

An'  one  time  a  little  girl  'ud  alius  laugh  an'  grin, 

An'  make  fun  of  ever'  one,  an'  all  her  blood-an'-kin; 

An'  onc't  when  they  was   "company,"  an'  ole  folks  was 

there. 
She  mocked  'em  an'  shocked  'em,  an'  said  she  didn't  care! 
An'  thist  as  she  kicked  her  heels,  an'  turn't  to  run  an'  hide. 
They  was  two  great  big  Black  Things  a-standin'  by  her 

side. 
An'  they  snatched  her  through  the  ceilin'  'fore  she  knowed 

what  she's  about! 
An'  the  Gobble-uns  '11  git  you 
Ef  you 
Don't 
Watch 
Out! 


The   Night  Bird  171 

An'  little  Orphant  Annie  says,  when  the  blaze  is  blue, 
An'  the  lamp-wick  sputters,  an'  the  wind  goes  woo-00! 
An'  you  hear  the  crickets  quit,  an'  the  moon  is  gray, 
An '  the  lightnin'-bugs  in  dew  is  all  squenched  away, — 
You  better  mind  yer  parents,  an'  yer  teachers  fond  and 

dear, 
An'  churish  them  'at  loves  you,  an'  dry  the  orphant's  tear, 
An'  he'p  the  pore  an'  needy  ones  'at  clusters  all  about, 
Er  the  Gobble-uns  '11  git  you 
Ef  you 
Don't 
Watch 
Out! 

James  Whilcomb  Riley  [1852-1916] 

OUR  HIRED  GIRL 

Our  hired  girl,  she's  'Lizabuth  Ann; 

An'  she  can  cook  best  things  to  eat! 
She  ist  puts  dough  in  our  pie-pan, 

An'  pours  in  somepin'  'at's  good  an'  sweet; 
An'  nen  she  salts  it  all  on  top 
With  cinnamon;  an'  nen  she'll  stop 

An'  stoop  an'  slide  it,  ist  as  slow, 
In  th'  old  cook -stove,  so's  'twon't  slop 

An'  git  all  spilled;  nen  bakes  it,  so 

It's  custard-pie,  first  thing  you  know! 
An'  nen  she'll  say, 
"Clear  out  o'  my  way! 

They's  time  fer  work,  an'  time  fer  play! 
Take  yer  dough,  an'  run,  child,  run! 

Er  I  cain't  git  no  cookin'  done!" 

When  our  hired  girl  'tends  like  she's  mad, 
An'  says  folks  got  to  walk  the  chalk 

When  she's  around,  er  wisht  they  had! 
I  play  out  on  our  porch  an'  talk 

To  Th'  Raggedy  Man  'at  mows  our  lawn; 

An'  he  says,  "  Whew! "  an'  nen  leans  on 
His  old  crook-scythe,  and  blinks  his  eyes. 

An'  sniffs  all  'round  an'  says,  "I  swawn! 


172  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Ef  my  old  nose  don't  tell  me  lies, 
It  'pears  like  I  smell  custard-pies!" 

An'  nen  heHl  say, 

"Clear  out  o'  my  way! 
They's  time  fer  work,  an'  time  fer  play! 
Take  yer  dough,  an'  run,  child,  run! 
Er  she  cain't  git  no  cookin'  done!" 

Wunst  our  hired  girl,  when  she 

Got  the  supper,  an'  we  all  et, 
An'  it  wuz  night,  an'  Ma  an'  me 

An'  Pa  went  wher'  the  "Social"  met, — 
An'  nen  when  we  come  home,  an'  see 
A  light  in  the  kitchen  door,  an'  we 

Heerd  a  maccordeun,  Pa  says,  "Lan'- 
O'-Gracious,  who  can  her  beau  be?" 

An'  I  marched  in,  an'  'Lizabuth  Ann 

Wuz  parchin'  corn  fer  The  Raggedy  Man! 
Better  say, 

"Clear  out  o'  the  way! 
They's  time  fer  work,  an'  time  fer  play! 

Take  the  hint,  an'  run,  child,  run! 

Er  we  cain't  git  no  courtin'  done!" 

James  Whilcomb  Riley  [1852-1916] 

SEEIN'  THINGS 

I  ain't  afeard  uv  snakes,  or  toads,  or  bugs,  or  worms,  or 

mice. 
An'  things  'at  girls  are  skeered  uv  I  think  are  awful  nice! 
I'm  pretty  brave,  I  guess;  an'  yet  I  hate  to  go  to  bed. 
For,  when  I'm   tucked  up  warm  an'  snug  an'  when  my 

prayers  are  said. 
Mother  tells  me  "  Happy  Dreams! "  an'  takes  away  the  light, 
An'  leaves  me  lyin'  all  alone  an'  seein'  things  at  night! 

Sometimes  they're  in  the  corner,  sometimes  they're  by  the 

door, 
Sometimes  they're  all  a-standin'  in  the  middle  uv  the  floor; 
Sometimes    they    are    a-sittin'    down,    sometimes    they're 

walkin'  round 
So  softly  and  so  creepylike  they  never  make  a  sound! 


The   Duel  •'^i  1 73 

Sometimes  they  are  as  black  as  ink,  an'  other  times  they're 

white — 
But  the  color  ain't  no  difference  when  you  see  things  at 

night! 

Once,  when  I  hcked  a  feller  'at  had  just  moved  on  our  street, 

An'  father  sent  me  up  to  bed  without  a  bite  to  eat, 

I  woke  up  in  the  dark  an'  saw  things  standin'  in  a  row, 

A-Iookin'  at  me  cross-eyed  an'  p'intin'  at  me — so! 

Oh,  my!  I  wuz  so  skeercd  that  time  I  never  slep'  a  mite — 

It's  almost  alluz  when  I'm  bad  I  see  things  at  night! 

Lucky  thing  I  ain't  a  girl,  or  I'd  be  skeered  to  death! 
Bein'  I'm  a  boy,  I  duck  my  head  an'  hold  my  breath; 
An'  I  am,  oh,  so  sorry  I'm  a  naughty  boy,  an'  then 
I  promise  to  be  better  an'  I  say  my  prayers  again! 
Gran'ma  tells  me  that's  the  only  way  to  make  it  right 
When  a  feller  has  been  wicked  an'  sees  things  at  night ! 

An'  so,  when  other  naughty  boys  would  coax  me  into  sin, 
I  try  to  skwush  the  Tempter's  voice  'at  urges  me  within; 
An'  when  they's  pie  for  supper,  or  cakes  'at's  big  an'  nice, 
I  want  to — but  I  do  not  pass  my  plate  f'r  them  things 

twice! 
No,  ruther  let  Starvation  wipe  me  slowly  out  o'  sight 
Than  I  should  keep  a-livin'  on  an'  seein'  things  at  night! 

Eugene  Field  [1850-1895] 

THE  DUEL 

The  gingham  dog  and  the  calico  cat 

Side  by  side  on  the  table  sat; 

'Twas  half  past  twelve,  and  (what  do  you  think!) 

Nor  one  nor  t'other  had  slept  a  wink! 

The  old  Dutch  clock  and  the  Chinese  plate 
Appeared  to  know  as  sure  as  fate 
There  was  going  to  be  a  terrible  spat. 
(/  wasn^t  there:  I  simply  slate 
What  was  told  to  me  by  the  Chinese  plate!) 

The  gingham  dog  went,  "Bow-wow-wow!" 
And  the  calico  cat  replied,  "Mee-ow!" 
The  air  was  littered,  an  hour  or  so, 


174  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

With  bits  of  gingham  and  calico, 

While  the  old  Dutch  clock  in  the  chimney-place 

Up  with  its  hands  before  its  face, 

For  it  always  dreaded  a  family  row! 
{Now  mind;  I'm  only  telling  you 
What  the  old  Dutch  clock  declares  is  true!) 

The  Chinese  plate  looked  very  blue, 
And  wailed,  "Oh,  dear!  what  shall  we  do!" 
But  the  gingham  dog  and  the  calico  cat  .i..    ■  ' 

Wallowed  this  way  and  tumbled  that,  rnk  a'Jl 

Employing  every  tooth  and  claw 
In  the  awfullest  way  you  ever  saw — 
And,  oh!  how  the  gingham  and  calico  flew! 
{Don't  jancy  I  exaggerate — 
/  got  my  news  from  the  Chinese  plate!)  '. , 

Next  morning,  where  the  two  had  sat  !  // 

They  found  no  trace  of  dog  or  cat : 
And  some  folks  think  unto  this  day 
That  burglars  stole  that  pair  away! 
But  the  truth  about  the  cat  and  pup 
Is  this:  they  ate  each  other  up! 
Now  what  do  you  really  think  of  that! 
{The  old  Dutch  clock  it  told  me  so, 
And  that  is  how  I  came  to  know.) 

Eugene  Field  [1850-1895] 

HOLY  THURSDAY 

'TwAS  on  a  Holy  Thursday,  their  innocent  faces  clean, 
Came  children  walking  two  and  two,  in  red,  and  blue,  and 

.     green; 
Gray-headed  beadles  walked  before,  with  wands  as  white  as 

snow. 
Till  into  the  high  dome  of  Paul 's  they  like  Thames  waters 
flow. 

Oh  what  a  multitude  they  seemed,  these  flowers  of  London 

town! 
Seated  in  companies  they  sit,  with  radiance  all  their  own. 


A   Story   for  a   Child  175 

The  hum  of  multitudes  was  there,  but  multitudes  of  lambs, 
Thousands  of  little  boys  and  girls  raising  their  innocent 
hands. 

Now  hke  a  mighty  wind  they  raise  to  heaven  the  voice  of 

song, 
Or  like  harmonious  thunderings  the  seats  of  heaven  among: 
Beneath  them  sit  the  aged  men,  wise  guardians  of  the  poor. 
Then  cherish  pity,  lest  you  drive  an  angel  from  your  door. 

William  Blake  [i 757-1827] 


A  STORY  FOR  A  CHILD 

Little  one,  come  to  my  knee! 

Hark,  how  the  rain  is  pouring 
Over  the  roof,  in  the  pitch-black  night. 

And  the  wind  in  the  woods  a-roaring! 

Hush,  my  darling,  and  listen. 

Then  pay  for  the  story  with  kisses; 

Father  was  lost  in  the  pitch-black  night, 
In  just  such  a  storm  as  this  is! 

High  up  on  the  lonely  mountains, 

Where  the  wild  men  watched  and  waited; 

Wolves  in  the  forest,  and  bears  in  the  bush, 
And  I  on  my  path  belated. 

The  rain  and  the  night  together 

Came  down,  and  the  wind  came  after, 

Bending  the  props  of  the  pine-tree  roof, 
And  snapping  many  a  rafter. 

I  crept  along  in  the  darkness, 

Stunned,  and  bruised,  and  blinded, — 

Crept  to  a  fir  with  thick-set  boughs, 
And  a  sheltering  rock  behind  it. 

There,  from  the  blowing  and  raining, 
Crouching,  I  sought  to  hide  me: 

Something  rustled,  two  green  eyes  shone, 
And  a  wolf  lay  down  beside  me. 


176  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Little  one,  be  not  frightened; 

I  and  the  wolf  together, 
Side  by  side,  through  the  long,  long  night, 

Hid  from  the  awful  weather. 

His  wet  fur  pressed  against  me; 

Each  of  us  warmed  the  other; 
Each  of  us  felt,  in  the  stormy  dark. 

That  beast  and  man  was  brother. 

And  when  the  falling  forest 

No  longer  crashed  in  warning. 
Each  of  us  went  from  our  hiding-place 

Forth  in  the  wild,  wet  morning. 

Darling,  kiss  me  payment! 

Hark,  how  the  wind  is  roaring; 
Father's  house  is  a  better  place 

When  the  stormy  rain  is  pouring! 

Bayard  Taylor  [1825-1S7S] 

THE   SPIDER  AND   THE   FLY 

"Will  vou  walk  into  my  parlor?"  said  the  Spider  to  the 

Fly'. 
"  'Tis  the  prettiest  little  parlor  that  ever  you  did  spy; 
The  way  into  my  parlor  is  up  a  winding  stair, 
And  I  have  many  curious  things  to  show  when  you  are 

there." 
"Oh  no,  no,"  said  the  httle  Fly,  "to  ask  me  is  in  vain; 
For  who  goes  up  your  winding  stair  can  ne  'cr  come  down 

again." 

"I'm  sure  you  must  be  weary,  dear,  with  soaring  up  so  high; 
Will  you  rest  upon  my  Httle  bed?"  said  the  Spider  to  the 

Fly. 
"There  are  pretty  curtains  drawn  around,  the  sheets  are 

fine  and  thin; 
And  if  you  like  to  rest  a  while,  I'll  snugly  tuck  you  in!" 
"Oh  no,  no,"  said  the  little  Fly,  "for  I've  often  heard  it  said, 
They  never,  never  wake  again,  who  sleep  upon  your  bed!" 


The   Spider  and   the   Fly  177 

Said  the  cunning  Spider  to  the  Fly,  "Dear  friend,  what  can 

I  do 
To  prove  the  warm  afTection  I've  always  felt  for  you? 
I  have,  within  my  pantry,  good  store  of  all  that's  nice; 
I'm  sure  you're  very  welcome — will   you   please  to  take   a 

slice?" 
"Oh  no,  no,"  said  the  little  Fly,  "kind  sir,  that  cannot  be, 
I've  heard  what's  in  your  pantry,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  see!" 

"Sweet  creature,"  said  the  Spider,  "you're  witty  and 
you're  wise; 

How  handsome  are  your  gauzy  wings,  how  brilliant  are 
your  eyes! 

I  have  a  little  looking-glass  upon  my  parlor  shelf; 

If  you'll  step  in  one  moment,  dear,  you  shall  behold  your- 
self." 

"I  thank  you,  gentle  sir,"  she  said,  "for  what  you're 
pleased  to  say, 

And  bidding  you  good  morning  now,  I'll  call  another  day." 

The  Spider  turned  him  round  about,  and  went  into  his  den. 

For  well  he  knew  the  silly  Fly  would  soon  be  back  again; 

So  he  wove  a  subtle  web  in  a  little  corner  sly, 

And  set  his  table  ready  to  dine  upon  the  Fly. 

Then  he  came  out  to  his  door  again,  and  merrily  did  sing, — 

"Come  hither,  hither,  pretty  Fly,  with  the  pearl  and  silver 

wing; 
Your  robes  are  green  and  purple,  there's  a  crest  upon  your 

head ; 
Your  eyes  are  like  the  diamond  bright,  but  mine  are  dull  as 

lead." 

Alas,  alas!  how  very  soon  this  silly  little  Fly, 

Hearing  his  wily,  flattering  words,  came  slowly  flitting  by: 

With  buzzing  wings  she  hung  aloft,  then  near  and  nearer 

drew, — 
Thinking  only  of  her  brilliant  eyes,   and   green  and  purple 

hue; 
Thinking  only  of  her  crested  head — poor  foolish  thing!    At 

last. 
Up  jumped  the  cunning  Spider,  and  fiercely  held  her  fast. 


178  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 

He  dragged  her  up  his  winding  stair,  into  his  dismal  den 
Within  his  Httle  parlor — but  she  ne'er  came  out  again! 

And  now,  dear  little  children,  who  may  this  story  read, 
To  idle,  silly,  flattering  words,  I  pray  you  ne'er  give  heed; 
Unto  an  evil  counsellor  close  heart,  and  ear,  and  eye, 
And  take  a  lesson  from  this  tale  of  the  Spider  and  the  Fly. 

Mary  Howitl  [1709-1888] 


THE   CAPTAIN'S   DAUGHTER 
We  were  crowded  in  the  cabin,  *■ 


Not  a  soul  would  dare  to  sleep, — 
It  was  midnight  on  the  waters, 
And  a  storm  was  on  the  deep. 

'Tis  a  fearful  thing  in  winter  '^    1 

To  be  shattered  by  the  blast, 
And  to  hear  the  rattling  trumpet 

Thunder,  "Cut  away  the  mast!" 

So  we  shuddered  there  in  silence, — 

For  the  stoutest  held  his  breath. 
While  the  hungry  sea  was  roaring 

And  the  breakers  talked  with  death. 

As  thus  we  sat  in  darkness. 

Each  one  busy  with  his  prayers, 
"Wc  are  lost!"  the  captain  shouted, 

As  he  staggered  down  the  stairs. 

But  his  little  daughter  whispered, 

As  she  took  his  icy  hand, 
"Isn't  God  upon  the  ocean. 

Just  the  same  as  on  the  land?" 

Then  we  kissed  the  little  maiden. 

And  we  spake  in  better  cheer. 
And  we  anchored  safe  in  harbor 

When  the  morn  was  shining  clear. 

Jatnes  Thomas  Fields  [1816-1881] 


r 


The   Nightingale  and  Glow-worm      179 


THE  NIGHTINGALE  AND   GLOW-WORM 

A  NIGHTINGALE,  that  all  (Jay  long 
Had  cheered  the  village  with  his  song, 
Nor  yet  at  eve  his  note  suspended, 
Nor  yet  when  eventide  was  ended, 
Began  to  feel,  as  well  he  might. 
The  keen  demands  of  appetite; 
When,  looking  eagerly  around, 
He  spied  far  off,  upon  the  ground, 
A  something  shining  in  the  dark, 
And  knew  the  glow-worm  by  his  spark; 
So,  stooping  down  from  hawthorn  top, 
He  thought  to  put  him  in  his  crop. 
The  worm,  aware  of  his  intent, 
Harangued  him  thus,  right  eloquent: 
"Did  you  admire  my  lamp,"  quoth  he, 
"As  much  as  I  your  minstrelsy. 
You  would  abhor  to  do  me  wrong, 
As  much  as  I  to  spoil  your  song; 
For  'twas  the  self-same  Power  Divine 
Taught  you  to  sing,  and  me  to  shine: 
That  you  with  music,  I  with  light. 
Might  beautify  and  cheer  the  night." 
The  songster  heard  his  short  oration. 
And  warbling  out  his  approbation. 
Released  him,  as  my  story  tells. 
And  found  a  supper  somewhere  else. 

Hence  jarring  sectaries  may  learn 
Their  real  interest  to  discern; 
That  brother  should  not  war  with  brother. 
And  worry  and  devour  each  other; 
But  sing  and  shine  by  sweet  consent. 
Till  life's  poor  transient  night  is  spent. 
Respecting  in  each  other's  case 
The  gifts  of  nature  and  of  grace. 

Those  Christians  best  deserve  the  name 
Who  studiously  make  peace  their  aim; 


i8o  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Peace  both  the  duty  and  the  prize 
Of  him  that  creeps  and  him  that  tlies. 

William  Cowper  [1731-1800I 

SIR  LARK  AND   KING   SUN:   A   PARABLE 

From  "  Adela  Cat  heart  " 

"Good  morrow,  my  lord!"  in  the  sky  alone, 
Sang  the  lark,  as  the  sun  ascended  his  throne. 
"Shine  on  me,  my  lord;  I  only  am  come, 
Of  all  your  servants,  to  welcome  you  home. 
I  have  flown  right  up,  a  whole  hour,  I  swear. 
To  catch  the  first  shine  of  your  golden  hair." 

"Must  I  thank  you,  then,"  said  the  king,  "Sir  Lark, 

For  flying  so  high  and  hating  the  dark? 

You  ask  a  full  cup  for  half  a  thirst: 

Half  was  love  of  me,  and  half  love  to  be  first. 

There's  many  a  bird  makes  no  such  haste, 

But  waits  till  I  come:  that's  as  much  to  my  taste." 

And  King  Sun  hid  his  head  in  a  turban  of  cloud, 

And  Sir  Lark  stopped  singing,  quite  vexed  and  cowed; 

But  he  flew  up  higher,  and  thought,  "Anon 

The  wrath  of  the  king  will  be  over  and  gone; 

And  his  crown,  shining  out  of  its  cloudy  fold, 

WiU  change  my  brown  feathers  to  a  glory  of  gold." 

So  he  flew — with  the  strength  of  a  lark  he  flew; 
But,  as  he  rose,  the  cloud  rose  too; 
And  not  one  gleam  of  the  golden  hair 
Came  through  the  depths  of  the  misty  air; 
Till,  weary  with  flying,  with  sighing  sore, 
The  strong  sun-seeker  could  do  no  more. 

His  wings  had  had  no  chrism  of  gold : 

And  his  feathers  felt  withered  and  worn  and  old; 

He  faltered,  and  sank,  and  dropped  hke  a  stone. 

And  there  on  her  nest,  where  he  left  her,  alone 

Sat  his  little  wife  on  her  little  eggs, 

Keeping  them  warm  with  wings  and  legs. 


Courtship,  Cock  Robin  and  Jenny  Wren     i8i 

Did  I  say  alone?    All,  no  such  thing! 
Full  in  her  face  was  shining  the  king. 
"Welcome,  Sir  Lark!  You  look  tired,"  said  he; 
"  Up  is  not  always  the  best  way  to  mc. 
While  you  have  been  singing  so  high  and  away, 
I've  been  shining  to  your  little  wife  all  day." 

He  had  set  his  crown  all  about  the  nest. 

And  out  of  the  midst  shone  her  little  brown  breast; 

And  so  glorious  was  she  in  russet  gold, 

That  for  wonder  and  awe  Sir  Lark  grew  cold. 

He  popped  his  head  under  her  wing,  and  lay 

As  still  as  a  stone,  till  King  Sun  was  away. 

George  Macdonald  [i 824-1905] 

THE  COURTSHIP,  MERRY  MARRIAGE,  AND  PIC- 
NIC DINNER  OF  COCK  ROBIN  AND  JENNY 
WREN 

It  was  a  merry  time 

When  Jenny  Wren  was  young, 
So  neatly  as  she  danced. 

And  so  sweetly  as  she  sung, 
Robin  Redbreast  lost  his  heart: 

He  was  a  gallant  bird; 
He  doffed  his  hat  to  Jenny, 

And  thus  to  her  he  said: — 

"My  dearest  Jenny  Wren, 

If  you  will  but  be  mine. 
You  shall  dine  on  cherry  pie, 

And  drink  nice  currant  wine. 
I'll  dress  you  like  a  Goldfinch, 

Or  like  a  Peacock  gay; 
So  if  you'll  have  me,  Jenny, 

Let  us  appoint  the  day." 

Jenny  blushed  behind  her  fan, 

And  thus  declared  her  mind: 
"Then  let  it  be  to-morrow.  Bob, 

I  take  your  offer  kind — 


1 82  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Cherry  pie  is  very  good!  ,■  • 

So  is  currant  wine! 
But  I  will  wear  my  brown  gown, 

And  never  dress  too  fine." 

Robin  rose  up  early 

At  the  break  of  day; 
He  flew  to  Jenny  Wren's  house, 

To  sing  a  roundelay. 
He  met  the  Cock  and  Hen,  ■'''■ 

And  bid  the  Cock  declare,  ' 

This  was  his  wedding-day 

With  Jenny  Wren,  the  fair. 

The  Cock  then  blew  his  horn, 

To  let  the  neighbors  know,  }  {'j; 

This  was  Robin 's  wedding-day, 

And  they  might  see  the  show.  >|7/ 

And  first  came  Parson  Rook, 

With  his  spectacles  and  band. 
And  one  of  Mother  Hubbard 's  books 

He  held  within  his  hand. 

Then  followed  him  the  Lark, 

For  he  could  sweetly  sing, 
And  he  was  to  be  clerk 

At  Cock  Robin's  wedding. 
He  sang  of  Robin 's  love 

For  little  Jenny  Wren; 
And  when  he  came  unto  the  end, 

Then  he  began  again. 

Then  came  the  bride  and  bridegroom; 

Quite  plainly  wfl,s  she  dressed, 
And  blushed  so  much,  her  cheeks  were 

As  red  as  Robin's  breast. 
But  Robin  cheered  her  up; 

"My  pretty  Jen,"  said  he, 
"We're  going  to  be  married 

And  happy  we  shall  be." 


{ 


Courtship,  Cock  Robin  and  Jenny  Wren    183 

The  Goldfinch  came  on  next, 

To  give  away  the  bride; 
The  Linnet,  being  bride 's  maid, 

Walked  by  Jenny's  side; 
And,  as  she  was  a- walking. 

She  said,  "Upon  my  word, 
I  think  that  your  Cock  Robin 

Is  a  very  pretty  bird." 

The  Bulfinch  walked  by  Robin, 

And  thus  to  him  did  say, 
"Pray,  mark,  friend  Robin  Redbreast, 

That  Goldfinch,  dressed  so  gay; 
What  though  her  gay  apparel 

Becomes  her  very  well, 
Yet  Jenny 's  modest  dress  and  look 

Must  bear  away  the  bell." 

The  Blackbird  and  the  Thrush, 

And  charming  Nightingale, 
Whose  sweet  jug  sweetly  echoes 

Through  every  grove  and  dale; 
The  Sparrow  and  Tom  Tit, 

And  many  more,  were  there: 
All  came  to  see  the  wedding 

Of  Jenny  Wren,  the  fair. 

"O  then,"  says  Parson  Rook, 

"Who  gives  this  maid  away?" 
"I  do,"  says  the  Goldfinch, 

"And  her  fortune  I  will  pay: 
Here 's  a  bag  of  grain  of  many  sorts, 

And  other  things  beside;  dl' 

Now  happy  be  the  bridegroom. 

And  happy  be  the  bride!" 

"And  will  your  have  her,  Robin, 

To  be  your  wedded  wife?" 
"Yes,  I  will,"  says  Robin, 

"And  love  her  all  my  hfe." 


184  Poems  of  Youth   and  AgeP-'^^^iij 

"And  will  you  have  him,  Jenny, 

Your  husband  now  to  be?" 
"Yes,  I  will,"  says  Jenny, 

"And  love  him  heartily." 

Then  on  her  finger  fair 

Cock  Robin  put  the  ring; 
"You're  married  now,"  says  Parson  Rook, 

While  the  Lark  aloud  did  sing: 
"Happy  be  the  bridegroom. 

And  happy  be  the  bride! 
And  may  not  man,  nor  bird,  nor  beast, 

This  happy  pair  divide." 

The  birds  were  asked  to  dine; 

Not  Jenny's  friends  alone, 
But  every  pretty  songster 

That  had  Cock  Robin  known. 
They  had  a  cherry  pie. 

Beside  some  currant  wine. 
And  every  guest  brought  something, 

That  sumptuous  they  might  dine. 

Now  they  all  sat  or  stood 

To  eat  and  to  drink; 
And  every  one  said  what 

He  happened  to  think: 
They  each  took  a  bumper, 

And  drank  to  the  pair: 
Cock  Robin,  the  bridegroom, 

And  Jenny  Wren,  the  fair. 

The  dinner-things  removed, 

They  all  began  to  sing; 
And  soon  they  made  the  place 

Near  a  mile  round  to  ring. 
The  concert  it  was  fine; 

And  every  bird  tried 
Who  best  could  sing  for  Robin 

And  Jenny  Wren,  the  bride. 


The   Babes  in   the   Wood  185 

Then  in  came  the  Cuckoo  and  made  a  great  rout; 
He  caught  hold  of  Jenny  and  pulled  her  about. 
Cock  Robin  was  angry,  and  so  was  the  Sparrow, 
Who  fetched  in  a  hurry  his  bow  and  his  arrow. 

His  aim  then  he  took,  but  he  took  it  not  right; 
His  skill  was  not  good,  or  he  shot  in  a  fright; 
For  the  Cuckoo  he  missed,  but  Cock  Robin  killed! — 
And  all  the  birds  mourned  that  his  blood  was  so  spilled. 

•  Unknown 


THE  BABES  IN  THE  WOOD 

Now  ponder  well,  you  parents  dear, 

These  words,  which  I  shall  write; 
A  doleful  story  you  shall  hear, 

In  time  brought  forth  to  light. 
A  gentleman  of  good  account 

In  Norfolk  dwelt  of  late. 
Who  did  in  honor  far  surmount 

Most  men  of  his  estate. 

Sore  sick  was  he,  and  like  to  die. 

No  help  his  life  could  save; 
His  wife  by  him  as  sick  did  lie, 

And  both  possessed  one  grave. 
No  love  between  these  two  was  lost, ' 

Each  was  to  other  kind; 
In  love  they  lived,  in  loved  they  died, 

And  left  two  babes  behind: 

The  one  a  line  and  pretty  boy, 

Not  passing  three  years  old ; 
The  other  a  girl  more  young  than  he. 

And  framed  in  beauty's  mold. 
The  father  left  his  little  son, 

As  plainly  does  appear. 
When  he  to  perfect  age  should  come, 

Three  hundred  pounds  a  year. 


1 86  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

Arid  to  his  little  daughter  Jane 

Five  hundred  pounds  in  gold, 
To  be  paid  down  on  marriage-day, 

Which  might  not  be  controlled: 
But  if  the  children  chance  to  die, 

Ere  they  to  age  should  come, 
Their  uncle  should  possess  their  wealth; 

For  so  the  will  did  run. 

"Now,  brother,"  said  the  dying  man, 

"Look  to  my  children  dear;- 
Be  good  unto  my  boy  and  girl. 

No  friends  else  have  they  here: 
To  God  and  you  I  recommend 

My  children  dear  this  day; 
But  little  while  be  sure  we  have 

Within  this  world  to  stay. 

"You  must  be  father  and  mother  both. 

And  uncle  all  in  one; 
God  knows  what  will  become  of  them. 

When  I  am  dead  and  gone." 
With  that  bespake  their  mother  dear, 

"O  brother  kind,"  quoth  she, 
"You  are  the  man  must  bring  our  babes 

To  wealth  or  misery. 

"And  if  you  keep  them  carefully 

Then  God  will  you  reward; 
But  if  you  otherwise  should  deal, 

God  will  your  deeds  regard." 
With  lips  as  cold  as  any  stone, 

They  kissed  their  children  small : 
"God  bless  you  both,  my  children  dear;" 

With  that  the  tears  did  fall. 

These  speeches  then  their  brother  spake 

To  this  sick  couple  there, 
"The  keeping  of  3'our  little  ones. 

Sweet  sister,  do  not  fear; 


The   Babes  in  the  Wood  187 

God  never  prosper  me  nor  mine, 

Nor  aught  else  that  I  have, 
If  I  do  wrong  your  children  dear, 

When  you  are  laid  in  grave." 

The  parents  being  dead  and  gone,       ' 

The  children  home  he  takes,  ' ' 

And  brings  them  straight  into  his  house, 

Where  much  of  them  he  makes. 
He  had  not  kept  these  pretty  babes 

A  twelvemonth  and  a  day, 
But,  for  their  wealth,  he  did  devise 

To  make  them  both  away. 

He  bargained  with  two  ruffians  strong, 

Which  were  of  furious  mood. 
That  they  should  take  these  children  young, 

And  slay  them  in  a  wood. 
He  told  his  wife  an  artful  tale. 

He  would  the  children  send 
To  be  brought  up  in  fair  London, 

With  one  that  was  his  friend. 

Away  then  went  these  pretty  babes. 

Rejoicing  at  that  tide, 
Rejoicing  with  a  merry  mind, 

They  should  on  cock-horse  ride. 
They  prate  and  prattle  pleasantly. 

As  they  rode  on  the  way, 
To  those  that  should  their  butchers  be, 

And  work  their  lives'  decay: 

So  that  the  pretty  speech  they  had. 

Made  Murder's  heart  relent; 
And  they  that  undertook  the  deed. 

Full  sore  did  now  repent. 
Yet  one  of  them  more  hard  of  heart. 

Did  vow  to  do  his  charge, 
Because  the  wretch  that  hired  him, 

Had  paid  him  very  large. 


I  88  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  other  won't  agree  thereto, 

So  here  they  fall  to  strife; 
With  one  another  they  did  fight, 

About  the  children 's  life : 
And  he  that  was  of  mildest  mood, 

Did  slay  the  other  there, 
Within  an  unfrequented  wood; 

The  babes  did  quake  for  fear! 

He  took  the  children  by  the  hand„cr1   .!{ 

Tears  standing  in  their  eye, 
And  bade  them  straightway  follow  him, 

And  look  they  did  not  cry: 
And  two  long  miles  he  led  them  on, 

While  they  for  food  complain :  ,  ( i 

"Stay  here,"  quoth  he,  "I'll  bring  you  bread. 

When  I  come  back  again." 

These  pretty  babes,  with  hand  in  hand, 

Went  wandering  up  and  down, 
But  never  more  could  see  the  man 

Approaching  from  the  town; 
Their  pretty  lips  with  black-berries 

Were  all  besmeared  and  dyed, 
And,  when  they  saw  the  darksome  night, 

They  sat  them  down  and  cried. 

Thus  wandered  these  poor  innocents. 

Till  death  did  end  their  grief; 
In  one  another's  arms  they  died, 

As  wanting  due  relief: 
No  burial  this  pretty  pair 

Of  any  man  receives. 
Till  Robin-red-breast  piously 

Did  cover  them  with  leaves. 

And  now  the  heavy  wrath  of  God  ( 

Upon  their  uncle  fell;  i 

Yea,  fearful  fiends  did  haunt  his  house, 
His  conscience  felt  an  hell: 


God's  Judgment  on   a  Wicked   Bishop     189 

His  barns  were  fired,  his  goods  consumed, 

His  lands  were  barren  made, 
His  cattle  died  within  the  field, 

And  nothing  with  him  stayed. 

And  in  a  voyage  to  Portugal 

Two  of  his  sons  did  die; 
And,  to  conclude,  himself  was  brought 

To  want  and  misery: 
He  pawned  and  mortgaged  all  his  land 

Ere  seven  years  came  about. 
And  now  at  length  his  wicked  act 

Did  by  this  means  come"  out : 

The  fellow,  that  did  take  in  hand 

These  children  for  to  kill, 
Was  for  a  robbery  judged  to  die, 

Such  was  God's  blessed  will: 
Who  did  confess  the  very  truth 

As  here  hath  been  displayed: 
Their  uncle  having  died  in  jail, 

Where  he  for  debt  was  laid. 

You  that  executors  be  made. 

And  overseers  eke 
Of  children  that  be  fatherless, 

And  infants  mild  and  meek; 
Take  you  example  by  this  thing. 

And  yield  to -each  his  right. 
Lest  God  with  such  like  misery 

Your  wicked  minds  requite. 

Unknown 


GOD'S  JUDGMENT  ON   A  WICKED   BISHOP 

The  summer  and  autumn  had  been  so  wet. 
That  in  winter  the  corn  was  growing  yet: 
'Twas  a  piteous  sight  to  see,  all  around. 
The  grain  lie  rotting  on  the  ground. 


190  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age         ijoiy 

Every  day  the  starving  poor  « 

Crowded  around  Bishop  Hatto's  door;  » 

For  he  had  a  plentiful  last-year's  store,  | 

And  all  the  neighborhood  could  tell  I 

His  granaries  were  furnished  well.  I 

I 

At  last  Bishop  Hatto  appointed  a  day  jj 

To  quiet  the  poor  without  delay; 

He  bade  them  to  his  great  barn  repair, 

And  they  should  have  food  for  the  winter  there. 

Rejoiced  such  tidings  good  to  hear, 
The  poor  folk  flocked  from  far  and  near; 
The  great  barn  was  full  as  it  could  hold 
Of  women  and  children,  and  young  and  old. 

Then,  when  he  saw  it  could  hold  no  more, 
Bishop  Hatto  he  made  fast  the  door; 
And,  while  for  mercy  on  Christ  they  call, 
He  set  fire  to  the  barn,  and  burnt  them  all. 

"I'  faith,  'tis  an  excellent  bonfire!"  quoth  he; 
"And  the  country  is  greatly  obliged  to  me 
For  ridding  it,  in  these  times  forlorn, 
Of  rats  that  only  consume  the  corn." 

So  then  to  his  palace  returned  he. 

And  he  sat  down  to  supper  merrily. 

And  he  slept  that  night  like  an  innocent  man; 

But  Bishop  Hatto  never  slept  again. 

In  the  morning,  as  he  entered  the  hall, 
Where  his  picture  hung  against  the  wall, 
A  sweat  like  death  all  over  him  came. 
For  the  rats  had  eaten  it  out  of  the  frame. 

As  he  looked,  there  came  a  man  from  his  farm, — 
He  had  a  countenance  white  with  alarm: 
"My  Lord,  I  opened  your  granaries  this  morn. 
And  the  rats  had  eaten  all  your  corn." 


God's  Judgment  on  a   Wicked   Bishop     191 

Another  came  running  presently, 
And  he  was  pale  as  pale  could  be. 
"Fly!  my  Lord  Bishop,  fly!"  quoth  he, 
"Ten  thousand  rats  are  coming  this  way, — 
The  Lord  forgive  you  for  yesterday!" 

"I'll  go  to  my  tower  in  the  Rhine,"  replied  he; 
"'Tis  the  safest  place  in  Germany, — 
The  walls  are  high,  and  the  shores  are  steep, 
And  the  tide  is  strong,  and  the  water  deep." 

Bishop  Hatto  fearfully  hastened  away. 
And  he  crossed  the  Rhine  without  delay, 
And  reached  his  tower,  and  barred  with  care 
All  the  windows,  and  doors,  and  loop-holes  there. 

He  laid  him  down  and  closed  his  eyes, 

But  soon  a  scream  made  him  arise; 

He  started,  and  saw  two  eyes  of  flame 

On  his  pillow,  from  whence  the  screaming  came. 

He  listened  and  looked, — it  was  only  the  cat; 
But  the  Bishop  he  grew  more  fearful  for  that, 
For  she  sat  screaming,  mad  with  fear. 
At  the  army  of  rats  that  were  drawing  near. 

For  they  have  swum  over  the  river  so  deep, 
And  they  have  climbed  the  shores  so  steep. 
And  now  by  thousands  up  they  crawl 
To  the  holes  and  the  windows  in  the  wall. 

Down  on  his  knees  the  Bishop  fell. 

And  faster  and  faster  his  beads  did  he  tell, 

As  louder  and  louder,  drawing  near, 

The  saw  of  their  teeth  without  he  could  hear. 

And  in  at  the  windows,  and  in  at  the  door. 
And  through  the  walls  by  thousands  they  pour; 
And  down  from  the  ceiling  and  up  through  the  floor, 
From  the  right  and  the  left,  from  behind  and  before. 
From  within  and  without,  from  above  and  below, — 
And  all  at  once  to  the  Bishop  they  go. 


192  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age  ■ ;    .- jjou       J 

They  have  whetted  their  teeth  against  the  stones, 
And  now  they  pick  the  Bishop's  bones; 
They  gnawed  the  flesh  from  every  Hmb,  1  " 

For  they  were  sent  to  do  judgment  on  him! 

Robert  SuiUhey  [1774-1843] 

THE   PIED   PIPER  OF  HAMELIN 
A  child's  story 


Hamelin  Town's  in  Brunswick,  ,/ 

By  famous  Hanover  city;  ;  / 

The  river  Weser,  deep  and  wide, 

Washes  its  wall  on  the  southern  side; 

A  pleasanter  spot  you  never  spied;  ^1 

But,  when  begins  my  ditty, 

Almost  five  hundred  years  ago, 

To  see  the  townsfolk  suffer  so 
From  vermin  was  a  pity. 

II 

Rats! 
They  fought  the  dogs  and  killed  the  cats. 

And  bit  the  babies  in  the  cradles, 
And  ate  the  cheeses  out  of  the  vats, 

And  licked  the  soup  from  the  cooks'  own  ladles. 
Split  open  the  kegs  of  salted  sprats, 
Made  nests  inside  men's  Sunday  hats, 
And  even  spoiled  the  -women's  chats 

By  drowning  their  speaking 

With  shrieking  and  squeaking  A 

In  fifty  different  sharps  and  flats.  '' 

III 

At  last  the  people  in  a  body 

To  the  Town  Hall  came  flocking: 
"'Tis  clear,"  cried  they,  "our  Mayor's  a  noddy; 

And  as  for  our  Corporation, — shocking 


The  Pied   Piper  of  Hamelin  193 

To  think  we  buy  gowns  lined  with  ermine 

For  dolts  that  can't  or  won't  determine 

What's  best  to  rid  us  of  our  vermin! 

You  hope,  because  you're  old  and  obese, 

To  find  in  the  furry  civic  robe  ease? 

Rouse  up,  sirs!  Give  your  brains  a  racking, 

To  find  the  remedy  we're  lacking, 

Or,  sure  as  fate,  we'll  send  you  packingl^nJifiiy 

At  this  the  Mayor  and  Corporation 

Quaked  with  a  mighty  consternation. 

IV 

An  hour  they  sat  in  council, — 

At  length  the  Mayor  broke  silence: 
"For  a  guilder  I'd  my  ermine  gown  sell; 

I  wish  I  were  a  mile  hence!  '^'^ 

It's  easy  to  bid  one  rack  one's  brain, — 
I'm  sure  my  poor  head  aches  again, 
I've  scratched  it  so,  and  all  in  vain.  ■' ' 

Oh  for  a  trap,  a  trap,  a  trap!"  ''' 

Just  as  he  said  this,  what  should  hap 
At  the  chamber-door  but  a  gentle  tap? 
"Bless  us,"  cried  the  Mayor,  "what's  that?"' 
(With  the  Corporation  as  he  sat, 
Looking  little  though  wondrous  fat ; 
Nor  brighter  was  his  eye,  nor  moister 
Than  a  too-long-opened  oyster. 
Save  when  at  noon  his  paunch  grew  mutinous 
For  a  plate  of  turtle  green  and  glutinous) 
"Only  a  scraping  of  shoes  on  the  mat? 
Anything  like  the  sound  of  a  rat 
Makes  my  heart  go  pit-a-pat!" 


"Come  in!"  the  Mayor  cried,  looking  bigger: 

And  in  did  come  the  strangest  figure! 

His  queer  long  coat  from  heel  to  head  •  tl 

Was  half  of  yellow  and  half  of  red,  '^f 

And  he  himself  was  tall  and  thin, 

With  sharp  blue  eyes,  each  like  a  pin, 


194  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  light  loose  hair,  yet  swarthy  skin, 

No  tuft  on  cheek  nor  beard  on  chin, 

But  lips  where  smiles  went  out  and  in; 

There  was  no  guessing  his  kith  and  kin: 

And  nobody  could  enough  admire 

The  tall  man  and  his  quaint  attire.  i 

Quoth  one:  "It's  as  my  great-grandsire,  f' 

Starting  up  at  the  Trump  of  Doom's  tone, 

Had  walked  tliis  way  from  his  painted  tombstone!" 


VI 

He  advanced  to  the  council-table: 
And,  "Please  your  honors,"  said  he,  "  I'm  able, 
By  means  of  a  secret  charm,  to  draw 
All  creatures  living  beneath  the  sun, 
That  creep  or  swim  or  fly  or  run. 
After  me  so  as  you  never  saw! 
And  I  chiefly  use  my  charm 
On  creatures  that  do  people  harm. 
The  mole  and  toad  and  newt  and  viper;  ,  ^ 

And  people  call  me  the  Pied  Piper."  / 

(And  here  they  noticed  round  his  neck 
A  scarf  of  red  and  yellow  stripe, 
^  To  match  with  his  coat  of  the  self-same  check. 
And  at  the  scarf's  end  hung  a  pipe; 
And  his  fingers,  they  noticed,  were  ever  straying 
As  if  impatient  to  be  playing 
Upon  this  pipe,  as  low  it  dangled 
Over  his  vesture  so  old-fangled.) 
"Yet,"  said  he,  "poor  piper  as  I  am, 
In  Tartary  I  freed  the  Cham, 
Last  June,  from  his  huge  swarms  of  gnats; 
I  eased  in  Asia  the  Nizam 
Of  a  monstrous  brood  of  vampire-bats; 
And  as  for  what  your  brain  bewilders, — 
If  I  can  rid  your  town  of  rats. 
Will  you  give  me  a  thousand  guilders?  " 
"One?  fifty  thousand!"  was  the  exclamation 
Of  the  astonished  Mayor  and  Corporation. 


The   Pied  Piper  of  Hamelin  195 


vn 

Into  the  street  the  Piper  stepped, 

Smihng  first  a  httle  smile, 
As  if  he  knew  what  magic  slept 

In  his  quiet  pipe  the  while;  ^ 

Then,  like  a  musical  adept,  ,]/ 

To  blow  the  pipe  his  lips  he  wrinkled, 
And  green  and  blue  his  sharp  eyes  twinkled, 
Like  a  candle-flame  where  salt  is  sprinkled; 
And  ere  three  shrill  notes  the  pipe  uttered. 
You  heard  as  if  an  army  muttered ; 
And  the  muttering  grew  to  a  grumbling; 
And  the  grumbling  grew  to  a  mighty  rumbling; 
And  out  of  the  houses  the  rats  came  tumbling. 
Great  rats,  small  rats,  lean  rats,  brawny  rats, 
Brown  rats,  black  rats,  gray  rats,  tawny  rats, 
Grave  old  plodders,  gay  young  friskers, 

Fathers,  mothers,  uncles,  cousins. 
Cocking  tails  and  pricking  whiskers; 

Families  by  tens   and  dozens, 
Brothers,  sisters,  husbands,  wives, — 
Followed  the  Piper  for  their  lives. 
From  street  to  street  he  piped  advancing, 
And  step  for  step  they  followed  dancing. 
Until  they  came  to  the  river  Weser, 
Wherein  all  plunged  and  perished ! 
— Save  one  who,  stout  as  Julius  Caesar, 
Swam  across  and  lived  to  carry 
(As  he,  the  manuscript  he  cherished) 
To  Rat-land  home  his  commentary,  ; 

Which  was:  "At  the  first  shrill  notes  of  the  pipe,  f/ 
I  heard  a  sound  as  of  scraping  tripe, 
And  putting  apples,  wondrous  ripe, 
Into  a  cider-press's  gripe, — 
And  a  moving  away  of  pickle-tub-boards. 
And  a  leaving  ajar  of  conserve-cupboards. 
And  a  draAving  the  corks  of  train-oil-flasks. 
And  a  breaking  the  hoops  of  butter-casks; 


196  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  it  seemed  as  if  a  voice 

(Sweeter  far  than  by  harp  or  by  psaltery 

Is  breathed)  called  out,  'Oh  rats,  rejoice! 

The  world  is  grown  to  one  vast  drysaltery ! 

So  munch  on,  crunch  on,  take  your  nuncheon, 

Breakfast,  supper,  dinner,  luncheon!' 

And  just  as  a  bulky  sugar-puncheon. 

Already  staved,  like  a  great  sun  shone 

Glorious  scarce  an  inch  before  me, 

Just  as  methought  it  said,  'Come,  bore  me!' — 

I  found  the  Weser  rolUng  o'er  me." 

VIII 

You  should  have  hea"rd  the  Hamelin  people  .  / 

Ringing  the  bells  till  they  rocked  the  steeple; 

"Go,"  cried  the  Mayor,  "and  get  long  poles! 

Poke  out  the  nests  and  block  up  the  holes! 

Consult  with  carpenters  and  builders, 

And  leave  in  our  town  not  even  a  trace 

Of  the  rats!" — when  suddenly,  up  the  face 

Of  the  Piper  perked  in  the  market-place. 

With  a  "First,  if  you  please,  my  thousand  guilders! 

IX 

A  thousand  guilders!  the  Mayor  looked  blue; 

So  did  the  Corporation  too. 

For  council-dinners  made  rare  havoc 

With  Claret,  Moselle,  Vin-de-Grave,  Hock; 

And  half  the  money  would  replenish 

Their  cellar's  biggest  butt  with  Rhenish. 

To  pay  this  sum  to  a  wandering  fellow 

With  a  gypsy  coat  of  red  and  yellow!  ''^'  ■! 

"Beside,"  quoth  the  Mayor,  with  a  knowing  wiiik', 

"Our  business  was  done  at  the  river's  brink; 

We  saw  with  our  eyes  the  vermin  sink. 

And  what's  dead  can't  come  to  life,  I  think. 

So,  friend,  we're  not  the  folks  to  shrink 

From  the  duty  of  giving  you  something  to  drink, 

And  a  matter  of  money  to  put  in  your  poke; 


The  Pied  Piper  of  Hamelin  197 

But  as  for  ihe  guilders,  what  we  spoke 
Of  them,  as  you  very  well  know,  was  m  joke. 
Beside,  our  losses  have  made  us  thrifty; 
A  thousand  guilders!  Come,  take  fifty!" 


The  Piper 's  face  fell,  and  he  cried, 

"No  trifling!  I  can't  wait!  beside, 

I  've  promised  to  visit  by  dinner  time 

Bagdat,  and  accept  the  prime 

Of  the  Head  Cook's  pottage,  all  he's  rich  in, 

For  having  left,  in  the  Caliph's  kitchen. 

Of  a  nest  of  scorpions  no  survivor: 

With  him  I  proved  no  bargain-driver; 

With  you,  don't  think  I'll  bate  a  stiver! 

And  folks  who  put  me  in  a  passion 

May  find  me  pipe  after  another  fashion. " 

XI 

"How?"  cried  the  Mayor,  "d'ye  think  I  brook 

Being  worse  treated  than  a  Cook? 

Insulted  by  a  lazy  ribald 

With  idle  pipe  and  vesture  piebald? 

You  threaten  us,  fellow?     Do  your  worst, 

Blow  your  pipe  there  till  you  burst!" 


Once  more  he  stepped  into  the  street; 

And  to  his  lips  again 
Laid  his  long  pipe  of  smooth  straight  cane; 

And  ere  he  blew  three  notes  (such  sweet 
Soft  notes  as  yet  musician 's  cunning 
Never  gave  the  enraptured  air) 
There  was  a  rustling  that  seemed  like  a  bustling 
Of  merry  crowds  justling  at  pitching  and  hustling;     • 
Small  feet  were  pattering,  wooden  shoes  clattering. 
Little  hands  clapping,  and  little  tongues  chattering; 
And,  like  fowls  in  a  farm-yard  when  barley  is  scattering, 
Out  came  the  children  running: 


198  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

All  the  little  boys  and  girls, 

With  rosy  cheeks  and  flaxen  curls, 

And  sparkling  eyes  and  teeth  like  pearls, 

Tripping  and  skipping,  ran  merrily  after 

The  wonderful  music  with  shouting  and  laughter, 


XIII 

The  Mayor  was  dumb,  and  the  Council  stood 

As  if  they  were  changed  into  blocks  of  wood, 

Unable  to  move  a  step,  or  cry 

To  the  children  merrily  skipping  by, — 

And  could  only  follow  with  the  eye 

That  joyous  crowd  at  the  Piper's  back. 

But  how  the  Mayor  was  on  the  rack, 

And  the  wretched  Council 's  bosoms  beat, 

As  the  Piper  turned  from  the  High  Street 

To  where  the  Weser  rolled  its  waters 

Right  in  the  way  of  their  sons  and  daughters! 

However,  he  turned  from  south  to  west, 

And  to  Koppelberg  Hill  his  steps  addressed. 

And  after  him  the  children  pressed; 

Great  was  the  joy  in  every  breast. 

"He  never  can  cross  that  mighty  top! 

He's  forced  to  let  the  piping  drop. 

And  we  shall  see  our  children  stop!" 

When,  lo,  as  they  reached  the  mountain-side, 

A  wondrous  portal  opened  wide. 

As  if  a  cavern  was  suddenly  hollowed ; 

And  the  Piper  advanced  and  the  children  followed; 

And  when  all  were  in,  to  the  very  last. 

The  door  in  the  mountain-side  shut  fast. 

Did  I  say,  all?     No!     One  was  lame, 

And  could  not  dance  the  whole  of  the  way; 

And  in  after  years,  if  you  would  blame 

His  sadness,  he  was  used  to  say, — • 

"It's  dull  in  our  town  since  my  playmates  left! 

I  can 't  forget  that  I  'm  bereft 

Of  a.11  the  pleasant  sights  they  see. 

Which  the  Piper  also  promised  me; 


The   Pied    Piper  of  Hamelin  199 

For  he  led  us,  he  said,  to  a  joyous  land, 

Joining  the  town  and  just  at  hand, 

Where  waters  gushed,  and  fruit-trees  grew, 

And  flowers  put  forth  a  fairer  hue. 

And  everything  was  strange  and  new; 

The  sparrows  were  brighter  than  peacocks  here, 

And  their  dogs  outran  our  fallow  deer, 

And  honey-bees  had  lost  their  stings. 

And  horses  were  born  with  eagles'  wings; 

And  just  as  I  became  assured 

My  lame  foot  would  be  speedily  cured, 

The  music  stopped  and  I  stood  still, 

And  found  myself  outside  the  hill, 

Left  alone  against  my  will. 

To  go  now  limping  as  before, 

And  never  hear  of  that  country  more!" 


xiY 

Alas,  alas  for  Hamelin! 

There  came  into  many  a  burgher 's  pate 

A  text  which  says  that  heaven's  gate 

Opes  to  the  rich  at  as  easy  rate 
As  the  needle's  eye  takes  a  camel  in! 
The  Mayor  sent  East,  West,  North  and  South, 
To  offer  the  Piper,  by  word  of  mouth. 

Wherever  it  was  men 's  lot  to  find  him. 
Silver  and  gold  to  his  heart's  content. 
If  he'd  only  return  the  way  he  went, 

And  bring  the  children  behind  him. 
But  when  they  saw  'twas  a  lost  endeavor. 
And  piper  and  dancers  were  gone  forever, 
They  made  a  decree  that  lawyers  never 

Should  think  their  records  dated  duly 
If,  after  the  day  of  the  month  and  year, 
These  words  did  not  as  well  appear, 
"And  so  long  after  what  happened  here 

On  the  Twenty-second  of  July, 
Thirteen  hundred  and  seventy-six:" 
And  the  better  in  memory  to  fix 


200  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  place  of  the  children's  last  retreat, 
They  called  it,  the  Pied  Piper's  Street — 
Where  any  one  playing  on  pipe  or  tabor 
Was  sure  for  the  future  to  lose  his  labor. 
Nor  suffered  they  hostlery  or  tavern 

To  shock  with  mirth  a  street  so  solemn; 
But  opposite  the  place  of  the  cavern 

They  wrote  the  story  on  a  column, 
And  on  the  great  church-window  painted 
The  same,  to  make  the  world  accjuainted 
How  their  children  were  stolen  away, 
And  there  it  stands  to  this  very  day. 
And  I  must  not  omit  to  say 
That  in  Transylvania  there 's  a  tribe 
Of  alien  people  who  ascribe 
The  outlandish  ways  and  dress 
On  which  their  neighbors  lay  such  stress. 
To  their  fathers  and  mothers  having  risen 
Out  of  some  subterraneous  prison 
Into  which  they  were  trepanned 
Long  time  ago  in  a  mighty  band 
Out  of  Hamelin  town  in  Brunswick  land. 
But  how  or  why,  they  don't  understand. 


So,  Willy,  let  me  and  you  be  wipers 
Of  scores  out  with  all  men — especially  pipers! 
And,  whether  they  pipe  us  free  from  rats  or  from  mice, 
If  we've  promised  them  aught,  let  us  keep  our  promise! 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1S89] 


THE  GLAD  EVANGEL 

A   CAROL 

He  came  all  so  still 

Where  His  mother  was, 

As  dew  in  April 

That  falleth  on  the  grass. 

He  came  all  so  still 
Where  His  mother  lay, 

As  dew  in  April 

That  falleth  on  the  spray. 

He  came  all  so  still 

To  His  mother's  bower, 

As  dew  in  April 

That  falleth  on  the  flower. 

Mother  and  maiden 
Was  never  none  but -she! 

Well  might  such  a  lady 
God's  mother  be. 


Unknown 


'GOD   REST  YOU,   MERRY   GENTLEMEN" 

God  rest  you,  merry  gentlemen. 

Let  nothing  you  dismay. 
For  Jesus  Christ,  our  Saviour, 

Was  born  upon  this  day. 
To  save  us  all  from  Satan's  power 
When  we  were  gone  astray. 
O  tidings  of  comfort  and  joy! 
For  Jesus  Christ,  our  Saviour, 
Was  born  on  Christmas  Day. 


202  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

In  Bethlehem,  in  Jewry, 
This  blessed  babe  was  born, 

And  laid  within  a  manger. 
Upon  this  blessed  morn; 

The  which  His  mother,  Mary, 
Nothing  did  take  in  scorn. 

From  God  our  Heavenly  Father, 

A  blessed  angel  came; 
And  unto  certain  shepherds 

Brought  tidings  of  the  same: 
How  that  in  Bethlehem  was  born 

The  Son  of  God  by  name. 

"Fear  not,"  then  said  the  angel, 
"Let  nothing  you  affright, 

This  day  is  born  a  Saviour 
Of  virtue,  power,  and  might, 

So  frequently  to  vanquish  all 
The  friends  of  Satan  quite." 

The  shepherds  at  these  tidings 
Rejoiced  much  in  mind, 

And  left  their  flocks  a-feeding 
In  tempest,  storm,  and  wind, 

And  went  to  Bethlehem  straightway, 
This  blessed  babe  to  find. 

But  when  to  Bethlehem  they  came, 
Whereat  this  infant  lay, 

They  found  Him  in  a  manger. 
Where  oxen  feed  on  hay, 

His  mother  Mary  kneeling, 
Unto  the  Lord  did  pray. 

Now  to  the  Lord  sing  praises, 
All  you  within  this  place, 

And  with  true  love  and  brotherhood 
Each  other  now  embrace; 

This  holy  tide  of  Christmas 
All  others  doth  deface. 


"  O   Little  Town  of  Bethleneni  "     2 


03 


O  tidings  of  comfort  and  joy! 
For  Jesus  Christ,  our  Saviour, 
Was  born  in  Christmas  Day. 

Unknown 


"O  LITTLE  TOWN  OF  BETHLEHEM" 

O  LITTLE  town  of  Bethlehem, 

How  still  we  see  thee  lie! 
Above  thy  deep  and  dreamless  sleep 

The  silent  stars  go  by; 
Yet  in  thy  dark  streets  shineth 

The  everlasting  Light; 
The  hopes  and  fears  of  all  the  years 

Are  met  in  thee  to-night. 

For  Christ  is  born  of  Mary, 

And,  gathered  all  above, 
While  mortals  sleep,  the  angels  keep 

Their  watch  of  wondering  love. 
O  morning  stars,  together 

Proclaim  the  holy  birth! 
And  praises  sing  to  God  the  King, 

And  peace  to  men  on  earth. 

How  silently,  how  silently. 

The  wondrous  gift  is  given! 
So  God  imparts  to  human  hearts 

The  blessings  of  His  heaven. 
No  ear  may  hear  His  coming, 

But  in  this  world  of  sin, 
Where  meek  souls  will  receive  Him  still, 

The  dear  Christ  enters  in. 

Oholy  Child  of  Bethlehem! 

Descend  to  us,  we  pray; 
Cast  out  our  sin,  and  enter  in, 

Be  born  in  us  to-day. 


204  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

We  hear  the  Christmas  angels 

The  great  glad  tidings  tell; 
Oh  come  to  us,  abide  with  us, 

Our  Lord  Emmanuel! 

Phillips  Brooks  [1835-1893] 

A   CHRISTMAS  HYMN 

Old  Style:  1837 

It  was  the  calm  and  silent  night! 

Seven  hundred  years  and  fifty-three 
Had  Rome  been  growing  up  to  might, 

And  now  was  Queen  of  land  and  sea. 
No  sound  was  heard  of  clashing  wars; 

Peace  brooded  o'er  the  hushed  domain; 
Apollo,  Pallas,  Jove  and  Mars, 

Held  undisturbed  their  ancient  reign, 

In  the  solemn  midnight 

Centuries  ago. 

'Twas  in  the  calm  and  silent  night! 

The  senator  of  haughty  Rome 
Impatient  urged  his  chariot's  flight, 

From  lordly  revel  rolling  home. 
Triumphal  arches  gleaming  swell 

His  breast  with  thoughts  of  boundless  sway; 
What  recked  the  Roman  what  befell 

A  paltry  province  far  away, 

In  the  solemn  midnight 
Centuries  ago! 

Within  that  province  far  away 

Went  plodding  home  a  weary  boor: 
A  streak  of  light  before  him  lay, 

Fall'n  through  a  half-shut  stable  door 
Across  his  path.    He  passed — for  naught 

Told  what  was  going  on  within; 
How  keen  the  stars!  his  only  thought; 

The  air  how  calm  and  cold  and  thin. 

In  the  solemn  midnight 

Centuries  ago! 


''  Shepherds   Watched  Their   Flocks  "     205 

O  strange  indifference! — low  and  high 

Drowsed  over  common  joys  and  cares: 
The  earth  was  still — but  knew  not  why; 

The  world  was  listening — unawares. 
How  calm  a  moment  may  precede 

One  that  shall  thrill  the  world  for  ever! 
To  that  still  moment  none  would  heed, 

Man's  doom  was  linked,  no  more  to  sever. 
In  the  solemn  midnight 
Centuries  ago. 

It  is  the  calm  and  solemn  night! 

A  thousand  bells  ring  out,  and  throw 
Their  joyous  peals  abroad,  and  smite 

The  darkness,  charmed  and  holy  now. 
The  night  that  erst  no  name  had  worn, 

To  it  a  happy  name  is  given; 
For  in  that  stable  lay  new-born 
•  The  peaceful  Prince  of  Earth  and  Heaven, 
In  the  solemn  midnight 
Centuries  ago. 

Alfred  Domett  [1811-1887] 


■WHILE  SHEPHERDS  WATCHED  THEIR  FLOCKS 
BY  NIGHT" 

While  shepherds  watched  their  Hocks  by  night, 

AH  seated  on  the  ground, 
The  angel  of  the  Lord  came  down, 

And  glory  shone  around. 

"Fear  not,"  said  he,  for  mighty  dread 

Had  seized  their  troubled  mind; 
"Glad  tidings  of  great  joy  I  bring 

To  you  and  all  mankind. 

"To  you,  in  David's  town,  this  day 

Is  born,  of  David's  line. 
The  Saviour,  who  is  Christ  the  Lord, 

And  this  shall  be  the  sign: 


2o6  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 

"The  heavenly  babe  you  there  shall  find 

To  human  view  displayed, 
All  meanly  wrapped  in  swaddling  bands, 

And  in  a  manger  laid." 

Thus  spake  the  seraph ;  and  forthwith 

Appeared  a  shining  throng 
Of  angels,  praising  God,  who  thus 

Addressed  their  joyful  song: 

"All  glory  be  to  God  on  high, 

And  to  the  earth  be  peace; 
Good  will  henceforth  from  Heaven  to  men 

Begin  and  never  cease." 

Nahum  Tate  [165  2-1 7 15] 

CHRISTMAS   CAROLS 

It  came  upon  the  midnight  clear, 

That  glorious  song  of  old. 
From  angels  bending  near  the  earth 

To  touch  their  harps  of  gold : 
"Peace  on  the  earth,  good  will  to  men 

From  heaven's  all-gracious  King" — - 
The  world  in  solemn  stillness  lay 

To  hear  the  angels  sing. 

Still  through  the  cloven  skies  they  come 

With  peaceful  wings  unfurled, 
And  still  their  heavenly  music  floats 

O'er  all  the  weary  world ; 
Above  its  sad  and  lowly  plains 

They  bend  on  hovering  wing, 
And  ever  o'er  its  Babel-sounds 

The  blessed  angels  sing. 

But  with  the  woes  of  sin  and  strife 

The  world  has  suffered  long; 
Beneath  the  angel-strain  have  rolled 

Two  thousand  years  of  wrong; 


The  Angels  207 

And  man,  at  war  with  man,  hears  not-nr 
The  lovx-song  which  they  bring; — 1  bn/;, 

Oh,  hush  the  noise,  ye  men  of  strife, 
And  hear  the  angels  sing! 

And  ye,  beneath  life's  crushing  load, 

Whose  forms  are  bending  low. 
Who  toil  along  the  climbing  way 

With  painful  steps  and  slow. 
Look  now!  for  glad  and  golden  hours 

Come  swiftly  on  the  wing; — 
Oh,  rest  beside  the  weary  road 

And  hear  the  angels  sing! 

For  lo!  the  days  are  hastening  on 

By  prophet  bards  foretold. 
When  with  the  ever  circling  years 

Comes  round  the  age  of  gold ; 
When  Peace  shall  over  all  the  earth 

Its  ancient  splendors  fling, 
And  the  whole  world  give  back  the  song 

Which  now  the  angels  sing. 

Edmund  Hamilton  Scars  [1810-1S76] 


THE  ANGELS 

From  "Flowers  of  Sion" 

Run,  shepherds,  run  where  Bethlehem  blest  appears. 

We  bring  the  best  of  news;  be  not  dismayed: 

A  Saviour  there  is  born  more  old  than  years, 

Amidst  heaven's  rolling  heights  this  "earth  who  stayed. 

In  a  poor  cottage  inned,  a  virgin  maid, 

A  weakling  did  him  bear,  who  all  upbears; 

There  is  he  poorly  swaddled,  in  manger  laid. 

To  whom  too  narrow  swaddlings  are  our  spheres: 

Run,  shepherds,  run,  and  solemnize  his  birth. 

This  is  that  night — no,  day,  grown  great  with  bliss. 

In  which  the  power  of  Satan  broken  is: 

In  heaven  be  glory,  peace  unto  the  earth! 


2o8  Poems  of  Youth   and  Age 

Thus  singing,  through  the  air  the  angels  swarm, 
And  cope  of  stars  re-echoed  the  same. 

William  Dnimmojid  [1585-1649] 


THE   BURNING  BABE 

As  I  in  hoary  winter's  night 

Stood  shivering  in  the  snow, 
Surprised  I  was  with  sudden  heat 

Which  made  my  heart  to  glow; 
And  lifting  up  a  fearful  eye 

To  view  what  fire  was  near, 
A  pretty  babe  all  burning  bright 

Did  in  the  air  appear; 
Who,  scorched  with  excessive  heat. 

Such  floods  of  tears  did  shed, 
As  though  His  floods  should  quench  His  flames, 

Which  with  His  tears  were  bred: 
"Alas!"  quoth  He,  "but  newly  born 

In  fiery  heats  I  fry, 
Yet  none  approach  to  warm  their  hearts 

Or  feel  my  fire  but  I ! 

"My  faultless  breast  the  furnace  is; 

The  fuel,  wounding  thorns; 
Love  is  the  fire,  and  sighs  the  smoke; 

The  ashes,  shames  and  scorns; 
The  fuel  Justice  layeth  on, 

And  Mercy  blows  the  coals, 
The  metal  in  this  furnace  wrought 

Are  men's  defiled  souls: 
For  which,  as  now  on  fire  I  am 

To  work  them  to  their  good, 
So  will  I  melt  into  a  bath, 

To  wash  them  in  my  blood." 
With  this  He  vanished  out  01  sight 

And  swiftly  shrunk  away. 
And  straight  I  called  unto  mind 

That  it  was  Christmas  Day. 

Robert  Southwell  [i56i?-iS9sl 


Christmas  Carol  209 


TRYSTE  NOEL 

The  Ox  he  openeth  wide  the  Doore, 

And  from  the  Snowe  he  calls  her  inne, 
And  he  hath  seen  her  Smile  therefor, 
Our  Ladye  without  Sinne. 
Now  soone  from  Sleep 
A  Starre  shall  leap, 
And  soone  arrive  both  King  and  Hinde: 

Amen,  Amen: 
But  O,  the  Place  co'd  I  but  finde! 

The  Ox  hath  hushed  his  voyce  and  bent 

Trewe  eyes  of  Pitty  ore  the  Mow, 
And  on  his  lovelie  Neck,  forspent, 
The  Blessed  layes  her  Browe. 
Around  her  feet 
Full  Warme  and  Sweete 
His  bowerie  Breath  doth  meeklie  dwell: 

Amen,  Amen: 
But  sore  am  I  with  Vaine  Travel! 

The  Ox  is  host  in  Judah  stall 

And  Host  of  more  than  onelie  one, 
For  close  she  gathereth  withal 
Our  Lorde  her  littel  Sonne. 
Glad  Hinde  and  King 
Their  Gyfte  may  bring. 
But  wo'd  to-night  my  Teares  were  there, 

Amen,  Amen: 
Between  her  Bosom  and  His  hayre! 

Louise  Imogen  Guiney  [1861- 


CHRISTMAS   CAROL 

As  Joseph  was  a-waukin', 

He  heard  an  angel  sing, 
"This  night  shall  be  the  birthnight 

Of  Christ  our  heavenly  King. 


2 TO  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

"His  birth-bed  shall  be  neither 
In  housen  nor  in  hall, 

Nor  in  the  place  of  paradise, 
But  in  the  oxen's  stall. 

"He  neither  shall  be  rocked 
'  In  silver  nor  in  gold, 

.3ut  in  the  wooden  manger 
That  lieth  in  the  mould. 

"He  neither  shall  be  washen 
With  white  wine  nor  with  red, 

But  with  the  fair  spring  water 
That  on  you  shall  be  shed. 

"He  neither  shall  be  clothed 
In  purple  nor  in  pall, 

But  in  the  fair,  white  linen 
That  usen  babies  aU." 

As  Joseph  was  a-waukin'. 
Thus  did  the  angel  sing. 

And  Mary's  son  at  midnight 
Was  born  to  be  our  King. 

Then  be  you  glad,  good  people. 
At  this  time  of  the  year; 

And  light  you  up  your  candles. 
For  His  star  it  shinetb  clear. 


Unknown 


"BRIGHTEST  AND  BEST  OF  THE  SONS  OF  THE 
MORNING" 

Brightest  and  best  of  the  Sons  of  the  morning! 

Dawn  on  our  darkness  and  lend  us  thine  aid! 
Star  of  the  East,  the  horizon  adorning. 

Guide  where  our  Infant  Redeemer  is  laid! 

Cold  on  His  cradle  the  dewdrops  are  shining, 
Low  hes  His  head  with  the  beasts  of  the  stall; 

Angels  adore  Him  in  slumber  reclining. 
Maker  and  Monarch  and  Saviour  of  all! 


Christmas   Bells  211 

Say,  shall  we  yield  Him,  in  costly  devotion, 

Odors  of  Edom  and  offerings  divine? 
Gems  of  the  mountain  and  pearls  of  the  ocean, 
Myrrh  from  the  forest,  or  gold  from  the  mine? 

Vainly  we  offer  each  ample  oblation ; 

Vainly  with  gifts  would  His  favor  secure: 
Richer  by  far  is  the  heart's  adoration; 

Dearer  to  God  are  the  prayers  of  the  poor. 

Brightest  and  best  of  the  Sons  of  the  morning! 

Dawn  on  our  darkness  and  lend  us  thine  aid! 
Star  of  the  East,  the  horizon  adorning, 

Guide  where  our  Infant  Redeemer  is  laid! 

Reginald  Heber  [i 783-1826] 

CHRISTMAS  BELLS 

I  HEARD  the  bells  on  Christmas  Day 
Their  old,,  familiar  carols  play. 

And  wild  and  sweet 

The  W'ords  repeat 
Of  peace  on  earth,  good- will  to  men! 

And  thought  how,  as  the  day  had  come. 
The  belfries  of  all  Christendom 

Had  rolled  along 

The  unbroken  song 
Of  peace  on  earth,  good-will  to  men! 

Till,  ringing,  singing  on  its  way, 

The  world  revolved  from  night  to  day, 

A  voice,  a  chime, 

A  chant  subUme 
Of  peace  on  earth,  good-will  to  men! 

Then  from  each  black,  accursed  mouth 
The  cannon  thundered  in  the  South, 

And  with  the  sound 

The  carols  drowned 
Of  peace  on  earth,  good-will  to  men! 


^12  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

It  was  as  if  an  earthquake  rent 
The  hearth-stones  of  a  continent, 

And  made  forlorn 

The  households  born 
Of  peace  on  earth,  good-will  to  men! 

And  in  despair  I  bowed  my  head; 
"There  is  no  peace  on  earth,"  I  said, 

"For  hate  is  strong, 

And  mocks  the  song 
Of  peace  on  earth,  good-will  to  men!" 

Then  pealed  the  bells  more  loud  and  deep: 
"God  is  not  dead,  nor  doth  He  sleep! 

The  Wrong  shall  fail, 

The  Right  prevail. 
With  peace  on  earth,  good-will  to  men!" 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [i 807-1 882] 


A  CHRISTMAS  CAROL 

The  Christ-child  lay  on  Mary's  lap, 

His  hair  was  like  a  light. 
(O  weary,  weary  were  the  world, 

But  here  is  all  aright.) 

The  Christ-child  lay  on  Mary's  breast. 

His  hair  was  like  a  star. 
(O  stern  and  cunning  are  the  kings, 

But  here  the  true  hearts  are.) 

The  Christ-child  lay  on  Mary's  heart. 

His  hair  was  like  a  fire. 
(O  weary,  weary  is  the  world, 

But  here  the  world's  desire.) 

The  Christ-child  stood  at  Mary's  knee, 

His  hair  was  like  a  crown. 
And  all  the  flowers  looked  up  at  Him, 

And  all  the  stars  looked  down. 

Gilbcrl  Kcllh  Cheslerlon  [18 


The   House  of  Christmas  213 


THE  HOUSE  OF  CHRISTMAS 

There  fared  a  mother  driven  forth 

Out  of  an  inn  to  roam; 

In  the  place  where  she  was  homeless 

•All  men  are  at  home. 

The  crazy  stable  close  at  hand, 

With  shaking  timber  and  shifting  sand, 

Grew  a  stronger,  thing  to  abide  and  stand 

Than  the  square  stones  of  Rome. 

For  men  are  homesick  in  their  homes, 

And  strangers  under  the  sun. 

And  they  lay  their  heads  in  a  foreign  land 

Whenever  the  day  is  done. 

Here  we  have  battle  and  blazing  eyes, 

And  chance  and  honor  and  high  surprise. 

But  our  homes  are  under  miraculous  skies 

Where  the  yule  tale  was  begun. 

A  Child  in  a  foul  stable, 

Where  the  beasts  feed  and  foam, 

Only  where  He  was  homeless 

Are  you  and  I  at  home; 

We  have  hands  that  fashion  and  heads  that  know. 

But  our  hearts  we  lost — how  long  ago! 

In  a  place  no  chart  nor  ship  can  show 

Under  the  sky's  dome. 

This  world  is  wild  as  an  old  wives'  tale, 

And  strange  the  plain  things  are, 

The  earth  is  enough  and  the  air  is  enough 

For  our  wonder  and  our  war; 

But  our  rest  is  as  far  as  the  fire-drake  swings 

And  our  peace  is  put  in  impossible  things 

Where  clashed  and  thundered  unthinkable  wings 

Round  an  incredible  star. 

To  an  open  house  in  the  evening 
Home  shall  men  come, 


±i^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

To  an  older  place  than  Eden 

And  a  taller  town  than  Rome. 

To  the  end  of  the  way  of  the  wandering  star, 

To  the  things  that  cannot  be  and  that  are, 

To  the  place  where  God  was  homeless 

And  all  men  are  at  home. 

Gilbert  Keith  Chesterton  [1874- 


THE  FEAST  OF  THE  SNOW 

There  is  heard  a  hymn  when  the  panes  are  dim, 

And  never  before  or  again. 
When  the  nights  are  strong  with  a  darkness  long. 

And  the  dark  is  alive  with  rain. 

Never  we  know  but  in  sleet  and  snow 
The  place  where  the  great  fires  are, 

That  the  midst  of  earth  is  a  raging  mirth. 
And  the  heart  of  the  earth  a  star. 

And  at  night  we  win  to  the  ancient  inn, 
Where  the  Child  in  the  frost  is  furled, 

We  follow  the  feet  where  all  souls  meet. 
At  the  inn  at  the  end  of  the  world. 

The  gods  lie  dead  where  the  leaves  lie  red, 

For  the  flame  of  the  sun  is  flown; 
The  gods  lie  cold  where  the  leaves  are  gold, 

And  a  Child  comes  forth  alone. 

Gilbert  Keith  Chesterton  [1874- 

MARY'S  BABY  "  i^'o  iO'^' 

Joseph,  mild  and  noble,  bent  above  the  strawi;^,/^ 
A  pale  girl,  a  frail  girl,  suffering  he  saw;  ,-  ;/ 

"O  my  Love,  my  Mary,  my  bride,  I  pity  thee!"  : 
"Nay,  Dear,"  said  Mary,  "all  is  well  with  me!" 

"Baby,  my  baby,  0  my  babe,"  she  sang. 

Suddenly  the  golden  night  all  with  music  rang. 


Gates  and   Doors     '*'  215 

Angels  leading  shepherds,  shepherds  leading  sheep: 
The  silence  of  worship  broke  the  mother's  sleep. 
All  the  meek  and  lowly  of  all  the  world  were  there; 
Smiling,  she  showed  them  that  her  Child  was  fair, 

^^  Baby,  my  baby,"  kissing  Him  she  said. 

Suddenly  a  flaming  star  through  the  heavens  sped. 

Three  old  men  and  weary  knelt  them  side  by  side. 
The  world's  wealth  forswearing,  majesty  and  pride; 
Worldly  might  and  wisdom  before  the  Babe  bent  low: 
Weeping,  maid  Mary  said,  "I  love  Him  so!" 

^'Baby,  jny  baby,"  and  the  Baby  slept. 

Suddenly  on  Calvary  all  the  olives  wept. 

Shaemas  OS  keel  [1886- 


GATES  AND  DOORS 

A   BALLAD   OF  CHRISTMAS   EVE 

There  was  a  gentle  hostler 

(And  blessed  be  his  name!) 
He  opened  up  the  stable 

The  night  Our  Lady  came. 
Our  Lady  and  St.  Joseph, 

He  gave  them  food  and  bed, 
And  Jesus  Christ  has  given  him 

A  glory  round  his  head. 

So  let  the  gate  swing  open 

However  poor  the  yard, 
Lest  weary  people  visit  you 

And  find  their  passage  barred. 
Unlatch  the  door  at  midnight 

And  let  your  lantern's  glow 
Shine  out  to  guide  the  traveler's  feet 

To  you  across  the  snow. 

There  was  a  courteous  hostler 
(He  is  in  Heaven  to-night) 

He  held  Our  Lady's  bridle 
And  helped  her  to  alight. 


21 6  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

He  spread  clean  straw  before  her 

Whereon  she  might  lie  down, 
And  Jesus  Christ  has  given  him 
An  everlasting  crown. 

Unlock  the  door  this  evening 

And  let  your  gate  swing  wide, 
Let  all  who  ask  for  shelter 

Come  speedily  inside. 
What  if  your  yard  be  narrow? 

What  if  your  house  he  small? 
There  is  a  Guest  is  coming 

Will  glorify  it  all. 

There  was  a  joyous  hostler 

Who  knelt  on  Christmas  morn 
Beside  the  radiant  manger 

Wherein  his  Lord  was  born. 
His  heart  was  full  of  laughter, 

His  soul  was  full  of  bliss 
When  Jesus,  on  His  Mother's  lap, 

Gave  him  His  hand  to  kiss. 

Unbar  your  heart  this  evening 

And  keep  no  stranger  out, 
Take  from  your  souVs  great  portal 

The  barrier  gf  doubt. 
To  humble  folk  and  weary 

Give  hearty  welcoming. 
Your  breast  shall  be  to-morrow 

The  cradle  of  a  King. 

Joyce  Kilmer  [1886- 


THE  THREE  KINGS 

Three  Kings  came  riding  from  far  away, 

Melchior  and  Caspar  and  Baltasar; 
Three  Wise  Men  out  of  the  East  were  they. 
And  they  travelled  by  night  and  they  slept  by  day. 
For  their  guide  was  a  beautiful,  wonderful  star. 


I 


The  Three    Kings  217 

The  star  was  so  beautiful,  large  and  clear, 

That  all  the  other  stars  of  the  sky 
Became  a  white  mist  in  the  atmosphere; 
And  by  this  they  knew  that  the  coming  was  near 

Of  the  Prince  foretold  in  the  prophecy. 

Three  caskets  they  bore  on  their  saddle-bows, 

Three  caskets  of  gold  with  golden  keys; 
Their  robes  were  of  crimson  silk,  with  rows 
Of  bells  and  pomegranates  and  furbelows, 

Their  turbans  like  blossoming  almond-trees. 

And  so  the  Three  Kings  rode  into  the  West, 

Through  the  dusk  of  night,  over  hill  and  dell, 
And  sometimes  they  nodded  with  beard  on  breast, 
And  sometimes  talked,  as  they  paused  to  rest, 
With  the  people  they  met  at  some  wayside  well. 

"Of  the  child  that  is  born,"  said  Baltasar, 

"Good  people,  I  pray  you,  tell  us  the  news. 
For  we  in  the  East  have  seen  his  star. 
And  have  ridden  fast,  and  have  ridden  far. 
To  find  and  worship  the  King  of  the  Jews." 

And  the  people  answered,  "You  ask  in  vain; 

We  know  of  no  king  but  Herod  the  Great!" 
They  thought  the  Wise  Men  were  men  insane, 
As  they  spurred  their  horses  across  the  plain 

Like  riders  in  haste,  and  who  cannot  wait. 

And  when  they  came  to  Jerusalem, 

Herod  the  Great,  who  had  heard  this  thing, 

Sent  for  the  Wise  Men  and  questioned  them; 

And  said,  "Go  down  unto  Bethlehem, 
And  bring  me  tidings  of  this  new  king." 

So  they  rode  away,  and  the  star  stood  still, 

The  only  one  in  the  gray  of  morn; 
Yes,  it  stopped, — it  stood  still  of  its  own  free  will, 
Right  over  Bethlehem  on  the  hill. 

The  city  of  David,  where  Christ  was  born. 


21 8  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  the  Three  Kings  rode  through  the  gate  and  the  guard, 
Through  the  silent  street,  till  their  horses  turned 

And  neighed  as  they  entered  the  great  inn-yard ; 

But  the  windows  were  closed,  and  the  doors  were  barred, 
And  only  a  light  in  the  stable  burned. 


)  loidT 
Jot  lioAT 


And  cradled  there  in  the  scented  hay. 

In  the  air  made  sweet  by  the  breath  of  kine, 

The  little  child  in  the  manger  lay, 

The  Child  that  would  be  King  one  day 
Of  a  kingdom  not  human,  but  divine. 

His  mother,  Mary  of  Nazareth, 

Sat  watching  beside  his  place  of  rest, 
Watching  the  even  flow  of  his  breath, 
For  the  joy  of  life  and  the  terror  of  death 

Were  mingled  together  in  her  breast. 

They  laid  their  offerings  at  his  feet : 

The  gold  was  their  tribute  to  a  King; 
The  frankincense,  with  its  odor  sweet. 
Was  for  the  Priest,  the  Paraclete; 

The  myrrh  for  the  body's  burying. 

And  the  mother  wondered  and  bowed  her  head, 

And  sat  as  still  as  a  statue  of  stone; 
Her  heart  was  troubled  yet  comforted, 
Remembering  what  the  Angel  had  said 

Of  an  endless  reign  and  of  David's  throne. 

Then  the  Kings  rode  out  of  the  city  gate. 

With  a  clatter  of  hoofs  in  proud  array; 
But  they  went  not  back  to  Herod  the  Great, 
For  they  knew  his  malice  and  feared  his  hate. 

And  returned  to  their  homes  by  another  way. 

Henry  Wadsivorth  Longfellow  [i  807-1 882 

LULLABY  IN  BETHLEHEM 

There  hath  come  an  host  to  see  Thee, 
iliv,  Baby  dear,  / 

Bearded  men  with  eyes  of  flame 
And  lips  of  fear, 


A   Child's  Song  of  Christmas         219 

For  the  heavens,  they  say,  have  broken 

Into  blinding  gulfs  of  glory. 

And  the  Lord,  they  say,  hath  spoken 

In  a  little  wondrous  story, 

Baby  dear. 

There  have  come  three  kings  to  greet  Thee, 

Baby  dear, 

Crowned  with  gold,  and  clad  in  purple. 

They  draw  near. 

They  have  brought  rare  silks  to  bind  Thee, 

At  Thy  feet,  behold,  they  spread  them, 

From  their  thrones  they  sprang  to  find  Thee, 

And  a  blazing  star  hath  led  them. 

Baby  dear. 

I  have  neither  jade  nor  jasper. 

Baby  dear, 

Thou  art  all  my  hope  and  glory. 

And  my  fear. 

Yet  for  all  the  gems  that  strew  Thee, 

And  the  costly  gowns  that  fold  Thee, 

Yea,  though  all  the  world  should  woo  Thee, 

Thou  art  mine — and  fast  I  hold  Thee, 

Baby  dear. 

Henry  Howarth  Bashford  [1S80- 

A  CHILD'S  SONG  OF  CHRISTMAS 

My  counterpane  is  soft  as  silk. 
My  blankets  white  as  creamy  milk. 

The  hay  was  soft  to  Him,  I  know, 

Our  little  Lord  of  long  ago. 

Above  the  roofs  the  pigeons  fly 
In  silver  wheels  across  the  sky. 

The  stable-doves  they  cooed  to  them, 

Mary  and  Christ  in  Bethlehem. 

Bright  shines  the  sun  across  the  drifts, 
And  bright  upon  my  Christmas  gifts. 

They  brought  Him  incense,  myrrh,  and  gold, 

Our  little  Lord  who  lived  of  old. 


220  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 

Oh,  soft  and  clear  our  mother  sings 
Of  Christmas  joys  and  Christmas  things. 
God's  holy  angels  sang  to  them, 
Mary  and  Christ  in  Bethlehem. 

Our  hearts  they  hold  all  Christmas  dear, 

And  earth  seems  sweet  and  heaven  seems  near, 

Oh,  heaven  was  in  His  sight,  I  know, 

That  little  Child  of  long  ago. 

Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall  [1S83 


JEST  'FORE  CHRISTMAS 

Father  calls  me  William,  sister  calls  me  Will, 

Mother  calls  me  Willie,  but  the  fellers  call  me  Bill! 

Mighty  glad  I  ain't  a  girl — ruther  be  a  boy. 

Without   them  sashes,   curls,   an'   things  that's  worn   by 

Fauntleroy! 
Love  to  chawnk  green  apples  an'  go  swimmin'  in  the  lake — 
Hate  to  take  the  castor-ile  they  give  for  belly-ache! 
'Most  all  the  time,  the  whole  year  round,  there  ain't  no 

flies  on  me, 
But  jest  'fore  Christmas  I'm  as  good  as  I  kin  be! 

Got  a  yeller  dog  named  Sport,  sick  him  on  the  cat; 
First  thing  she  knows  she  doesn't  know  where  she  is  at! 
Got  a  clipper  sled,  an'  when  us  kids  goes  out  to  slide, 
'Long  comes  the  grocery  cart,  an'  we  all  hook  a  ride! 
But  sometimes  when  the  grocery  man  is  worrited  an'  cross, 
He  reaches  at  us  with  his  whip,  an'  larrups  up  his  boss, 
An'  then  I  laff  an'  holler,  "Oh,  ye  never  teched  me!" 
But  jest  'fore  Christmas  I'm  as  good  as  I  kin  be! 

Gran'ma  says  she  hopes  that  when  I  git  to  be  a  man, 
I'll  be  a  missionarer  like  her  oldest  brother,  Dan, 
As  was  et  up  by  the  cannibuls  that  lives  in  Ceylon's  Isle, 
Where  every  prospeck  pleases,  an'  only  man  is  vile! 
But  gran'ma  she  has  never  been  to  see  a  Wild  West  show, 
Nor  read  the  Life  of  Daniel  Bc^ne,  or  else  I  guess  she'd 
know 


A  Visit  from   St.   Nicholas  221 

That  Buff'Io  Bill  and  cow-boys  is  good  enough  for  me! 
Exccp'  jest  'fore  Christmas,  when  I'm  good  as  I  kin  be! 

And  then  old  Sport  he  hangs  around,  so  solemn-like  an'  still, 
His  eyes  they  keep  a-sayin':  "What's  the  matter,  little 

Bill?" 
The  old  cat  sneaks  down  off  her  perch  an'  wonders  what's 

become 
Of  them  two  enemies  of  hern  that  used  to  make  things  hum! 
But  I  am  so  perlite  an'  'tend  so  earnestly  to  biz, 
That  mother  says  to  father:  "How  improved  our  Willie  is!" 
But  father,  havin'  been  a  boy  hisself,  suspicions  me 
When  jest  'fore  Christmas,  I'm  as  good  as  I  kin  be! 

For  Christmas,  with  its  lots  an'  lots  of  candies,  cakes  an' 

toys. 
Was  made,  they  say,  for  proper  kids  an'  not  for  naughty 

boys; 
So  wash  yer  face  an'  bresh  yer  hair,  an'  mind  yer  p's  an'  q's, 
An'  don't  bust  out  yer  pantaloons,  an'  don't  wear  out  yer 

shoes; 
Say  "  Yessum"  to  the  ladies,  an'  "Yessur"  to  the  men. 
An'  when  they's  company,  don't  pass  yer  plate  for  pie 

again; 
But,  thinking  of  the  things  yer'd  like  to  see  upon  that  tree. 
Jest  'fore  Christmas  be  as  good  as  yer  kin  be! 

Eugene  Field  [1850-1895] 

A   VISIT  FROM   ST.   NICHOLAS 

'TwAS  the  night  before   Christmas,  when  all  through  the 

house 
Not  a  creature  was  stirring,  not  even  a  mouse; 
The  stockings  were  hung  by  the  chimney  with  care, 
In  hopes  that  St.  Nicholas  soon  would  be  there; 
The  children  were  nestled  all  snug  in  their  beds. 
While  visions  of  sugar-plums  danced  in  their  heads; 
And  mamma  in  her  'kerchief,  and  I  in  my  cap, 
Had  just  settled  our  brains  for  a  long  winter 's  nap. 
When  out  on  the  lawn  there  arose  such  a  clatter, 
I  sprang  from  the  bed  to  see  what  was  the  matter. 


222  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Away  to  the  window  I  flew  like  a  flash, 
Tore  open  the  shutters  and  threw  up  the  sash. 
The  moon  on  the  breast  of  the  new-fallen  snow 
Gave  the  lustre  of  mid-day  to  objects  below, 
When,  what  to  my  wondering  eyes  should  appear, 
But  a  miniature  sleigh,  and  eight  tiny  reindeer, 
With  a  little  old  driver,  so  hvely  and  quick,  '■  ■ 

I  knew  in  a  moment  it  must  be  St.  Nick. 
More  rapid  than  eagles  his  coursers  they  came. 
And  he  whistled,  and  shouted,  and  called  them  by  name; 
-  "Now,  Dasher!  now.  Dancer!  now,  Prancer  and  Vixen f^ 
On,  Comet  !  on  Cupid]  on,  Donder  and  Blitzen!  ■''' 

To  the  top  of  the  porch!  to  the  top  of  the  wall! 
Now  dash  away!  dash  away!  dash  away  all!" 
As  dry  leaves  that  before  the  wild  hurricane  fly. 
When  they  meet  with  an  obstacle,  mount  to  the  sky, 
So  up  to  the  house-top  the  coursers  they  flew. 
With  the  sleigh  full  of  toys,  and  St.  Nicholas  too. 
And  then,  in  a  twinkling,  I  heard  on  the  roof 
The  prancing  and  pawing  of  each  little  hoof. 
As  I  drew  in  my  head,  and  was  turning  around, 
Down  the  chimney  St.  Nicholas  came  with  a  bound. 
He  was  dressed  all  in  fur,  from  his  head  to  his  foot. 
And  his  clothes  were  all  tarnished  with  ashes  and  soot;  „ 
A  bundle  of  toys  he  had  flung  on  his  back,  ,     , 

And  he  looked  like  a  peddler  just  opening  his  pack. 
His  eyes — how  they  twinkled!  his  dimples  how  merry! 
His  cheeks  were  like  roses,  his  nose  like  a  cherry! 
His  droll  little  mouth  was  drawn  up  like  a  bow. 
And  the  beard  of  his  chin  was  as  white  as  the  snow; 
The  stump  of  a  pipe  he  held  tight  in  his  teeth. 
And  the  smoke  it  encircled  his  head  like  a  wreath; 
He  had  a  broad  face  and  a  little  round  belly, 
That  shook,  when  he  laughed,  like  a  bowlful  of  jelly. 
He  was  chubby  and  plump,  a  right  joUy  old  elf, 
And  I  laughed  when  I  saw  him,  in  spite  of  myself; 
A  wink  of  his  eye  and  a  twist  of  his  head. 
Soon  gave  me  to  know  I  had  nothing  to  dread; 
He  spoke  not  a  word,  but  went  straight  to  his  work. 
And  filled  all  the  stockings;  then  turned  with  a  jerk, 


On   the   Morning  of  Christ's   Nativity     223 

And  laying  his  finger  aside  of  his  nose, 

And  giving  a  nod,  up  the  chimney  he  rose; 

He  sprang  to  his  sleigh,  to  his  team  gave  a  whistle. 

And  away  they  all  flew  like  the  down  of  a  thistle. 

But  I  heard  him  exclaim,  ere  he  drove  out  of  sight, 

"Happy  Christmas  to  all,  and  to  all  a  good-night." 

demerit  Clarke  Moore  [1770-1863] 


CEREMONIES  FOR  CHRISTMAS 

Come,  bring  with  a  noise, 

My  merry,  merry  boys, 
The  Christmas  log  to  the  firing; 

While  my  good  dame,  she 

Bids  ye  all  be  free; 
And  drink  to  your  hearts '  desiring. 

With  the  last  year's  brand 

Light  the  new  block,  and 
For  good  success  in  his  spending, 

On  your  psaltries  pla}-, 

That  sweet  luck  may 
Come  while  the  log  is  a-tending. 

Drink  now  the  strong  beer, 

Cut  the  white  loaf  here. 
The  while  the  meat  is  a-shredding; 

For  the  rare  mince-pie 

And  the  plums  stand  by 
To  fill  the  paste  that 's  a-kneading. 

Robert  Herrick  [1501-1674] 

ON  THE  MORNING  OF  CHRIST'S  NATIVITY' 

This  is  the  month,  and  this  the  happy  morn 
Wherein  the  Son  of  Heaven 's  Eternal  King, 
Of  wedded  maid  and  virgin  mother  born. 
Our  great  redemption  from  above  did  bring; 


224  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

For  so  the  holy  sages  once  did  sing 

That  he  our  deadly  forfeit  should  release, 

And  with  his  Father  work  us  a  perpetual  peace. 

That  glorious  Form,  that  Light  unsufferable, 

And  that  far-beaming  blaze  of  Majesty 

Wherewith  he  wont  at  Heaven 's  high  council-ta 

To  sit  the  midst  of  Trinal  Unity, 

He  laid  aside;  and,  here  with  us  to  be, 

Forsook  the  courts  of  everlasting  day, 

And  chose  with  us  a  darksome  house  of  mortal  clay. 

Say,  Heavenly  Muse,  shall  not  thy  sacred  vein 

Afford  a  present  to  the  Infant  God? 

Hast  thou  no  verse,  no  hymn,  or  solemn  strain 

To  welcome  him  to  this  his  new  abode. 

Now  while  the  heaven,  by  the  sun's  team  untrod, 

Hath  took  no  print  of  the  approaching  light. 

And  all  the  spangled  host  keep  watch  in  squadrons  bright? 

See  how  from  far,  upon  the  eastern  road. 

The  star-led  wizards  haste  with  odors  sweet! 

0  run,  prevent  them  with  thy  humble  ode 

And  lay  it  lowly  at  his  blessed  feet ; 

Have  thou  the  honor  first  thy  Lord  to  greet. 

And  join  thy  voice  unto  the  angel  choir 

From  out  his  secret  altar  touched  with  hallowed  fire. 

THE    HYMN 

It  was  the  winter  wild 

While  the  heaven-born  Child 

All  meanly  wrapped  in  the  rude  manger  lies; 

Nature  in  awe  to  Him 

Had  dofifed  her  gaudy  trim. 

With  her  great  Master  so  to  sympathize: 

It  was  no  season  then  for  her 

To  wanton  with  the  sun,  her  lusty  paramour. 

Only  with  speeches  fair 
She  woos  the  gentle  air 


On  the    Morning  of  Christ's   Nativity     225 

To  hide  her  guilty  front  with  innocent  snow; 

And  on  her  naked  shame, 

Pollute  with  sinful  blame, 

The  saintly  veil  of  maiden  white  to  throw; 

Confounded,  that  her  Maker's  eyes 

Should  look  so  near  upon  her  foul  deformities. 

But  he,  her  fears  to  cease, 

Sent  down  the  meek-eyed  Peace; 

She,  crowned  with  olive  green,  came  softly  sliding 

Down  through  the  turning  sphere, 

His  ready  harbinger, 

With  turtle  wing  and  amorous  clouds  dividing; 

And  waving  wide  her  myrtle  wand. 

She  strikes  a  universal  peace  through  sea  and  land. 

No  war,  or  battle 's  sound 

Was  heard  the  world  around: 

The  idle  spear  and  shield  were  high  uphung; 

The  hooked  chariot  stood 

Unstained  with  hostile  blood; 

The  trumpet  spake  not  to  the  armed  throng; 

And  kings  sat  still  with  awful  eye. 

As  if  they  surely  knew  their  sovereign  Lord  was  by. 

But  peaceful  was  the  night 

Wherein  the  Prince  of  Light 

His  reign  of  peace  upon  the  earth  began: 

The  winds,  with  wonder  whist. 

Smoothly  the  waters  kissed. 

Whispering  new  joys  to  the  mild  ocean — 

Who  now  hath  quite  forgot  to  rave. 

While  birds  of  calm  sit  brooding  on  the  charmed  wave. 

The  stars,  with  deep  amaze. 

Stand  fixed  in  steadfast  gaze. 

Bending  one  way  their  precious  influence; 

And  will  not  take  their  flight 

For  all  the  morning  light, 

Or  Lucifer  that  often  warned  them  thence; 

But  in  their  glimmering  orbs  did  glow 

Until  their  Lord  himself  bespake,  and  bid  them  go. 


226  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  though  the  shady  gloom 

Had  given  day  her  room, 

The  sun  himself  withheld  his  wonted  speed, 

And  hid  his  head  for  shame, 

As  Ills  inferior  flame 

The  new-enhghtened  world  no  more  should  need; 

He  saw  a  greater  Sun  appear 

Than  his  bright  throne,  or  burning  axletree,  could  bear. 

The  shepherds  on  the  lawn 

Or  ere  the  point  of  dawn 

Sat  simply  chatting  in  a  rustic  row; 

Full  little  thought  they  then 

That  the  mighty  Pan 

Was  kindly  come  to  live  with  them  below;      o^iiz  arl^ 

Perhaps  their  loves,  or  else  their  sheep. 

Was  all  that  did  their  siUy  thoughts  so  busy  keep. 

When  such  music  sweet 

Their  hearts  and  ears  did  greet 

As  never  was  by  mortal  finger  strook — 

Divinely-warbled  voice 

Answering  the  stringed  noise. 

As  all  their  souls  in  blissful  rapture  took: 

The  air,  such  pleasure  loth  to  lose. 

With  thousand  echoes  still  prolongs  each  heavenly  close. 

Nature,  that  heard  such  sound 

Beneath  the  hollow  round 

Of  Cynthia 's  seat  the  airy  region  thrilling, 

Now  was  almost  won 

To  think  her  part  was  done. 

And  that  her  reign  had  here  its  last  fulfilling; 

She  knew  such  harmony  alone 

Could  hold  all  heaven  and  earth  in  happier  union. 

At  last  surrounds  their  sight      j  -u  ids  vjv/  ono  grn' 
A  globe  of  circular  light     .-.■•[^jin  -^i-tdt  yAm  jon  fiiw  bfiA 
That  with  long  beams  the  shamefaced  night  arra^^ed;  ■" 
The  helmed  Cherubim 

And  sworded  Seraphim  ; 

"  Are  seen  in  glittering  ranks  with  wings  displayed. 


On  the   Morning  of  Christ's   Nativity    227 

Harping  in  loud  and  solemn  choir 

With  unexprcssive  notes,  to  Heaven's  new-born  Heir. 

iiy-jboT  iaul/l 

Such  music  (as  'tis  said)  "  ''  ■.'; 

Before  was  never  made  i7 

But  when  of  old  the  sons  of  morning  sung,  HT 

While  the  Creator  great  ,  ,-- 

His  constellations  set 

And  the  well-balanced  world  on  hinges  hiihg; 

And  cast  the  dark  foundations  deep, 

And  bid  the  weltering  waves  their  oozy  channel  keep. 

Ring  out,  ye  crystal  spheres! 

Once  biess  our  human  ears. 

If  ye  have  power  to  touch  our  senses  so; 

And  let  your  silver  chime 

Move  in  melodious  time; 

And  let  the  bass  of  Heaven's  deep  organ  blow; 

And  with  your  ninefold  harmony 

Make  up  full  consort  to  the  angelic  symphony. 

For  if  such  holy  song 

Enwrap  our  fancy  long, 

Time  will  run  back,  and  fetch  the  age  of  gold; 

And  speckled  vanity 

Will  sicken  soon  and  die. 

And  leprous  sin  will  melt  from  earthly  mould; 

And  Hell  itself  \vill  pass  away,      .,,      '    / 

And  leave  her  dolorous  mansions  to  the  peering  day. 

Yea,  Truth  and  Justice  then 

Will  down  return  to  men, 

Orbed  in  a  rainbow;  and,  like  glories  wearing, 

Mercy  will  sit  between 

Throned  in  celestial  sheen,  ,„. 

With  radiant  feet  the  tissued  clouds  down  steering;  ,    ,     , 

And  Heaven,  as  at  some  festival. 

Will  open  wide  the  gates  of  her  high  palace  hall. 

But  wisest  Fate  says  No; 

This  must  not  yet  be  so;    '''^'^  •"'  '  il-'^^-^^T  ^n  ' 


•rlT 


22  8  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  Babe  yet  lies  in  smiling  infancy 
That  on  the  bitter  cross 
Must  redeem  our  loss; 
So  both  himself  and  us  to  glorify. 
Yet  first,  to  those  ychained  in  sleep 

The  wakeful  trump  of   doom   must   thunder  through   the 
deep; 

With  such  a  horrid  clang 

As  on  Mount  Sinai  rang 

While  the  red  fire  and  smouldering  clouds  outbrake: 

The  aged  Earth  aghast 

With  terror  of  that  blast 

Shall  from  the  surface  to  the  centre  shake, 

When,  at  the  world's  last  session, 

The  dreadful  Judge  in  middle  air  shall  spread  His  throne. 

And  then  at  last  our  bliss 

Full  and  perfect  is, 

But  now  begins;  for  from  this  happy  day 

The  old  Dragon  under  ground. 

In  straiter  limits  bound, 

Not  half  so  far  casts  his  usurped  sway; 

And,  wroth  to  see  his  kingdom  fail, 

Swinges  the  scaly  horror  of  his  folded  tail. 

The  oracles  are  dumb; 

No  voice  or  hideous  hum 

Runs  through  the  arched  roof  in  words  deceiving. 

Apollo  from  his  shrine 

Can  no  more  divine, 

With  hollow  shriek  the  steep  of  Delphos  leaving: 

No  nightly  trance  or  breathed  spell 

Inspires  the  pale-eyed  priest  from  the  prophetic  ceU. 

The  lonely  mountains  o  'er 

And  the  resounding  shore 

A  voice  of  weeping  heard,  and  loud  lament; 

From  haunted  spring  and  dale 

Edged  with  poplar  pale 

The  parting  Genius  is  with  sighing  sent;    ... 


On   the   Morning  of  Christ's   Nativity     229 

With  flower-inwoven  tresses  torn 

The  Nymphs  in  twilight  shade  of  tangled  thickets  mourn. 

In  consecrated  earth 

And  on  the  holy  hearth 

The  Lars  and  Lemures  moan  with  midnight  plaint; 

In  urns,  and  altars  round 

A  drear  and  dying  sound 

Affrights  the  Flamens  at  their  service  quaint; 

And  the  chill  marble  seems  to  sweat, 

While  each  peculiar  Power  foregoes  his  wonted  seat. 

Peor  and  Baalim 

Forsake  their  temples  dim, 

With  that  twice-battered  god  of  Palestine; 

And  mooned  Ashlaroth 

Heaven's  queen  and  mother  both. 

Now  sits  not  girt  with  tapers'  holy  shine; 

The  Lybic  Hammon  shrinks  his  horn: 

In  vain  the  Tyrian  maids  their  wounded  Thammuz  mourn. 

And  sullen  Moloch,  fled, 

Hath  left  in  shadows  dread 

His  burning  idol  all  of  blackest  hue; 

In  vain  with  cymbals '  ring 

They  call  the  grisly  king, 

In  dismal  dance  about  the  furnace  blue; 

The  brutish  gods  of  Nile  as  fast, 

Isis,  and  Orus,  and  the  dog  Anubis,  haste. 

Nor  is  Osiris  seen 

In  Memphian  grove,  or  green, 

Trampling  the  unshowered  grass  with  lowings  loud: 

Nor  can  he  be  at  rest 

Within  his  sacred  chest; 

Naught  but  profoundest  Hell  can  be  his  shroud; 

In  vain  with  timbrelled  anthems  dark 

The  sable  stoled  sorcerers  bear  his  worshiped  ark. 

He  feels  from  Juda  's  land 
The  dreaded  Infant's  hand; 


230  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  rays  of  Bethlehem  blind  his  dusky  eyen; 

Nor  all  the  gods  beside 

Longer  dare  abide 

Nor  Typhon  huge  ending  in  snaky  twine:  '^nm  nT 

Our  Babe,  to  show  his  Godhead  true, 

Can  in  His  swaddling  bands  control  the  damned  crew. 

So,  when  the  sun  in  bed 

Curtained  with  cloudy  red 

Pillows  his  chin  upon  an  orient  wave, 

The  flocking  shadows  pale 

Troop  to  the  infernal  jail, 

Each  fettered  ghost  slips  to  his  several  grave: 

And  the  yellow-skirted  fays 

Fly  after  the  night-steeds,  leaving  their  moon-loved  maze. 

But  see!  the  Virgin  blest  -^ 

Hath  laid  her  Babe  to  rest; 

Time  is,  our  tedious  song  should  here  have  ending: 

Heaven 's  youngest  teemed  star 

Hath  fixed  her  pohshed  car. 

Her  sleeping  Lord  with  hand-maid  lamp  attending: 

And  all  about  the  courtly  stable 

Bright-harnessed  Angels  sit  in  order  serviceable. 

John  Milton  [1608-1674) 


I 


1 


nl 

vr 


:ii 


FAIRYLAND 

THE   FAIRY  BOOK 

In  summer,  when  the  grass  is  thick,  if  mother  has  the  time, 
She  shows  me  with  her  pencil  how  a  poet  makes  a  rhyme, 
And  often  she  is  sweet  enough  to  choose  a  leafy  nook, 
Where  I  cuddle  up  so  closely  when  she  reads  the  Fairy- 
book. 

In  winter,  when  the  corn's  asleep,  and  birds  are  not  in 

song. 
And  crocuses  and  violets  have  been  away  too  long. 
Dear  mother  puts  her  thimble  by  in  answer  to  my  look, 
And  I  cuddle  up  so  closely   when   she   reads   the   Fairy- 
book. 

And  mother  tells  the  servants  that  of  course  they  must 
contrive 

To  manage  all  the  household  things  from  four  till  half- 
past  five, 

For  we  really  cannot  sufifer  interruption  from  the  cook, 

When   we   cuddle   close   together  with   the  happy   Fairy- 
book. 

Norman  Gale  fi862- 

FAIRY  SONGS 
I 

From  "A  Midsummer-Night's  Dream" 

Over  hill,  over  dale, 

Through  bush,  through  brier, 
Over  park,  over  pale, 

Through  flood,  through  fire, 

21,1 


232  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

I  do  wander  everywhere, 
Swifter  than  the  moone's  sphere; 
And  I  serve  the  fairy  queen, 
To  dew  her  orbs  upon  the  green: 
The  cowsHps  tall  her  pensioners  be; 
In  their  gold  coats  spots  you  see; 
Those  be  rubies,  fairy  favors, 
In  those  freckles  live  their  savors: 
I  must  go  seek  some  dew-drops  here, 
And  hang  a  pearl  in  every  cowslip's  ear. 


II 

From  "A  Midsummer-Night's  Dream" 

You  spotted  snakes  with  double  tongue 

Thorny  hedgehogs,  be  not  seen; 
Newts  and  blind-worms,  do  no  wrong; 
Come  not  near  our  fairy  queen. 

Philomel,  with  melody. 
Sing  in  our  sweet  lullaby; 
LuUa,  luUa,  lullaby;  lulla,  lulla,  lullaby! 

Never  harm. 

Nor  speU  nor  charm. 
Come  our  lovely  lady  nigh; 
So,  good  night,  with  lullaby. 

Weaving  spiders,  come  not  here; 

Hence,  you  long-legged  spinners,  hence! 
Beetles  black,  approach  not  near; 

Worm  nor  snail,  do  no  offence. 

Philomel,  with  melody, 
Sing  in  our  sweet  lullaby; 
Lulla,  lulla,  lullaby;  lulla.  lulla,  lullaby! 

Never  harm. 

Nor  spell  nor  charm. 
Come  our  lovely  lady  nigh;     .    ■ 
So,  good-night,  with  lullaby,  • 


Queen   Mab  233 

in 

From  "The  Tempest" 

Come  unto  these  yellow  sands, 

And  then  take  hands: 
Court 'sied  when  you  have,  and  kissed, — 

The  wild  waves  whist, — 
Foot  it  featly  here  and  there;        » 
And,  sweet  sprites,  the  burthen  bear. 
Hark,  hark! 

Bow,  wow. 
The  watch-dogs  bark: 

Bow,  wow. 
Hark,  hark!     I  hear 
The  strain  of  strutting  chanticleer 
Cry,  Cock-a-diddle-dow! 

IV 

From  "The  Tempest" 

Where  the  bee  sucks,  there  suck  I: 

In  a  cowslip 's  bell  I  lie ; 
There  I  couch  when  owls  do  cr3^ 
On  the  bat 's  back  I  do  fly 
After  summer  merrily : 

Merrily,  merrily,  shall  I  live  now, 
Under  the  blossom  that  hangs  on  the  bough. 
William  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 


QUEEN  MAB 

From  "The  Satyr" 

This  is  Mab,  the  Mistress-Fairy, 
That  doth  nightly  rob  the  dairy 
And  can  hurt  or  help  the  churning, 
As  she  please  without  discerning. 

She  that  pinches  country  wenches 
If  they  rub  not  clean  their  benches, 


234  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 

And  with  sharper  nails  remembers 
When  they  rake  not  up  their  embers: 
But  if  so  they  chance  to  feast  her, 
In  a  shoe  she  drops  a  tester. 

This  is  she  that  empties  cradles, 
Takes  out  children,  puts  in  ladles: 
Trains  forth  old  wives  in  their  slumber 
With  a  sieve  the  holes  to  number; 
And  then  leads  them  from  her  burrows, 
Home  through  ponds  and  water-furrows. 

She  can  start  our  Franklins'  daughter?. 
In  their  sleep,  with  shrieks  and  laughters: 
And  on  sweet  Saint  Anna's  night 
Feed  them  with  a  promised  sight, 
Some  of  husbands,  some  of  lovers. 
Which  an  empty  dream  discovers. 

Ben  Jonsoii  [1573?  -1637] 


THE  ELF  AND  THE  DORMOUSE 

Under  a  toadstool  crept  a  wee  Elf, 
Out  of  the  rain,  to  shelter  himself. 

Under  the  toadstool  sound  asleep, 
Sat  a  big  Dormouse  all  in  a  heap. 

Trembled  the  wee  Elf,  frightened,  and  yet 
Fearing  to  fly  away  lest  he  get  wet. 

To  the  next  shelter — maybe  a  mile! 
Sudden  the  wee  Elf  smiled  a  wee  smile, 

Tugged  till  the  toadstool  toppled  in  two. 
Holding  it  over  him,  gayly  he  flew. 

Soon  he  was  safe  home,  dry  as  could  be. 

Soon  woke  the  Dormouse — "Good  gracious  me! 

"Where  is  my  toadstool?"  loud  he  lamented. 
— And  that's  how  umbrellas  first  were  invented. 

Oliver  Her/ord  [1863- 


. 


'airy   Song  235 


•OH!   WHERE  DO   FAIRIES   HIDE  THEIR 
HEADS?" 

Oh!  where  do  fairies  hide  their  heads, 

When  snow  lies  on  the  hills, 
When  frost  has  spoiled  their  mossy  beds, 

And  crystallized  their  rills? 
Beneath  the  moon  they  cannot  trip 

In  circles  o'er  the  plain; 
And  draughts  of  dew  they  cannot  sip, 

Till  green  leaves  come  again. 

Perhaps,  in  small,  blue  diving-bells 

They  plunge  beneath  the  waves, 
Inhabiting  the  wreathed  shells 

That  lie  in  coral  caves. 
Perhaps,  in  red  Vesuvius 

Carousals  they  maintain; 
And  cheer  their  little  spirits  thus, 

Till  green  leaves  come  again. 

When  they  return,  there  will  be  mirth 

And  music  in  the  air. 
And  fairy  wings  upon  the  earth. 

And  mischief  everywhere. 
The  maids,  to  keep  .the  elves  aloof, 

Will  bar  the  doors  in  vain; 
No  key-hole  will  be  fairy-proof. 

When  green  leaves  come  again. 

Thomas  Haynes  Bayly  [1797-1839] 


FAIRY  SONG 

From  "Amyntas" 

We  the  Fairies,  blithe  and  antic, 
Of  dimensions  not  gigantic, 
Though  the  moonshine  mostly  keep  us, 
Oft  in  orchards  frisk  and  peep  us. 


236  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Stolen  sweets  are  always  sweeter, 
Stolen  kisses  much  completer, 
Stolen  looks  are  nice  in  chapels, 
Stolen,  stolen  be  your  apples. 

When  to  bed  the  world  is  bobbing, 
Then's  the  time  for  orchard-robbing; 
Yet  the  fruit  were  scarce  worth  peeling 
Were  it  not  for  stealing,  stealing. 
Translated  by  Leigh  Runt  from  the  Latin  of  Thomas  Randolph 

[1605-1635] 

DREAM  SONG 

I  COME  from  woods  enchauntetl,' 

Starlit  and  pixey-haunted. 

Where  'twixt  the  bracken  and  the  trees 
The  goblins  lie  and  take  their  case 

By  winter  moods  undaunted. 

There  down  the  golden  gravel 

The  laughing  rivers  travel; 

Elves  wake  at  nights  and  whisper  low 
Between  the  bracken  and  the  snow 

Their  dreamings  to  unravel.  ■  '■' 

Twisted  and  lank  and  hairy, 

With  wanton  eyes  and  wary. 

They  stretch  and  chuckle  in  the  wind, 
For  one  has  found  a  mermaid  kind, 

And  one  has  kissed  a  fairy. 

They  know  no  melancholy, 

But  fashion  crowns  of  holly, 

And  gather  sleep  within  the  brake 
To  deck  a  kingdom  when  they  wake, 

And  bless  the  dreamer's  folly. 

Ah!  would  that  I  might  follow 

The  servants  of  Apollo! 

But  it  is  sweet  to  heap  the  hours 
With  quiet  dreams  and  poppy-flowers, 

Down  in  the  pixies'  hollow. 

Richard  Middleton  [1^82-1911] 


Queen    Mab  237 


FAIRY  SONG 

Shed  no  tear!  O,  shed  no  tear! 

The  flower  will  bloom  another  year. 

Weep  no  more!  O,  weep  no  more! 

Young  buds  sleep  in  the  root 's  white  core. 

Dry  your  eyes!  O,  dry  your  eyes! 

For  I  was  taught  in  Paradise 

To  ease  my  breast  of  melodies, — 

Shed  no  tear. 

Overhead!  look  overhead! 

'Mong  the  blossoms  white  and  red, — 

Look  up,  look  up!  I  flutter  now 

On  this  flush  pomegranate  bough. 

See  mc!  'tis  this  silvery  bill 

Ever  cures  the  good  man 's  ill, — 

Shed  no  tear!  0,  shed  no  tear! 

The  flower  will  bloom  another  year. 

Adieu,  adieu — I  fly — adieu! 

I  vanish  in  the  heaven 's  blue, — 

Adieu,  adieu! 
John  Keats  [1795-1821] 

QUEEN  MAB 

A  LITTLE  fairy  comes  at  night, 

Her  eyes  are  blue,  her  hair  is  brown, 

With  silver  spots  upon  her  wings, 
And  from  the  moon  she  flutters  down. 

She  has  a  little  sflver  wand, 
And  when  a  good  child  goes  to  bed 

She  waves  her  hand  from  right  to  left. 
And  makes  a  circle  round  its  head. 

And  then  it  dreams  of  pleasant  things, 

Of  fountains  filled  with  fairy  fish. 
And  trees  that  bear  deHcious  fruit. 

And  bow  their  branches  at  a  wish: 


238  Poems  of  Youth   and  Age 

Of  arbors  filled  with  dainty  scents 
From  lovely  flowers  that  never  fade; 

Bright  flies  that  glitter  in  the  sun, 
And  glow-worms  shining  in  the  shade: 

And  talking  birds  with  gifted  tongues, 
For  singing  songs  and  telling  tales, 

And  pretty  dwarfs  to  show  the  way 
Through  fairy  hills  and  fairy  dales. 

But  when  a  bad  child  goes  to  bed. 

From  left  to  right  she  weaves  her  rings, 

And  then  it  dreams  all  through  the  night 
Of  only  ugly  horrid  things! 

Then  lions  come  with  glaring  eyes, 
And  tigers  growl,  a  dreadful  noise. 

And  ogres  draw  their  cruel  knives, 
To  shed  the  blood  of  girls  and  boys. 

Then  stormy  waves  rush  on  to  drown. 
Or  raging  flames  come  scorching  round, 

Fierce  dragons  hover  in  the  air. 

And  serpents  crawl  along  the  ground. 

Then  wicked  children  wake  and  weep, 
And  wish  the  long  black  gloom  away; 

But  good  ones  love  the  dark,  and  find 
The  night  as  pleasant  as  the  day. 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 


THE   FAIRIES  OF  THE   CALDON-LOW 

A    MIDSUMMER    LEGEND 

"And  where  have  you  been,  my  Mary, 
And  where  have  you  been  from  me?" 

"I've  been  to  the  top  of  the  Caldon-Low, 
The  midsummer  night  to  see!" 


i 


The   Fairies  of  the  Caldon-Low       239 

"And  what  did  you  see,  my  Mary, 

All  up  on  the  Caldon-Low?  " 
"I  saw  the  glad  sunshine  come  down, 

And  I  saw  the  merry  winds  blow." 

"And  what  did  you  hear,  my  Mary, 

All  up  on  the  Caldon-HiU?  " 
"I  heard  the  drops  of  the  water  made, 

And  the  cars  of  the  green  corn  fill." 

"Oh,  tell  me  all,  my  Mary — 
All — all  that  ever  you  know; 
For  you  must  have  seen  the  fairies 
Last  night  on  the  Caldon-Low!" 

"Then  take  me  on  your  knee,  mother, 
And  listen,  mother  of  mine: 
A  hundred  fairies  danced  last  night. 
And  the  harpers  they  were  nine. 

"And  their  harp-strings  rang  so  merrily 
To  their  dancing  feet  so  small; 
But,  oh!  the  words  of  their  talking 
Were  merrier  far  than  all!" 

"And  what  were  the  words,  my  Mary, 

That  you  did  hear  them  say?  " 
"I'll  tell  you  all,  my  mother, 

But  let  me  have  my  way. 

"Some  of  them  played  with  the  water. 
And  rolled  it  down  the  hill ; 
'And  this,'  they  said,  'shall  speedily  turn 
The  poor  old  miller's  mill. 

"'For  there  has  been  no  water 
Ever  since  the  first  of  May; 
And  a  busy  man  will  the  miller  be 
At  the  dawning  of  the  day! 


240  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

"  'Oh!  the  miller,  how  he  will  laugh, 
When  he  sees  the  mill-dam  rise! 
The  jolly  old  miller,  how  he  will  laugh, 
Till  the  tears  fill  both  his  eyes!' 

"And  some  they  seized  the  little  winds, 
That  sounded  over  the  hill, 
And  each  put  a  horn  into  his  mouth. 
And  blew  both  loud  and  shrill: 

"  'And  there,'  said  they,  'the  merry  winds  go 
Away  from  every  horn; 
And  they  shall  clear  the  mildew  dank 
From  the  blind  old  widow's  corn: 

"  'Oh,  the  poor  bhnd  widow — 

Though  she  has  been  blind  so  long, 
She'll  be  merry  enough  when  the  mildew's  gone. 
And  the  corn  stands  tall  and  strong!' 

"And  some  they  brought  the  brown  linseed 
And  flung  it  down  the  Low: 
'And  this,'  said  they,  '  by  the  sunrise 
In  the  weaver's  croft  shall  grow! 

"  'Oh,  the  poor  lame  weaver! 
How  will  he  laugh  outright 
When  he  sees  his  dwindling  flax-field 
All  fufl  of  flowers  by  night!' 

"And  then  outspoke  a  brownie. 
With  a  long  beard  on  his  chin: 
'I  have  spun  up  all  the  tow,'  said  he, 
'And  I  want  some  more  to  spin. 

"  'I've  spun  a  piece  of  hempen  cloth 
And  I  want  to  spin  another — 
A  httle  sheet  for  Mary's  bed. 
And  an  apron  for  her  mother!' 


The   Fairies  241 

"With  that  I  could  not  help  but  laugh, 
And  I  laughed  out  loud  and  free; 
And  then  on  the  top  of  the  Caldon-Low 
There  was  no  one  left  but  me. 

"And  all  on  the  top  of  the  Caldon-Low 
The  mists  were  cold  and  gray, 
And  nothing  I  saw  but  the  mossy  stones 
That  round  about  me  lay. 

"But,  coming  down  from  the  hill-top, 
I  heard,  afar  below, 
How  busy  the  jolly  miller  was. 
And  how  merry  the  wheel  did  go! 

"And  I  peeped  into  the  widow's  field, 
And,  sure  enough,  was  seen 
The  yellow  ears  of  the  mildewed  corn 
All  standing  stout  and  green. 

"And  down  the  weaver's  croft  I  stole, 
To  see  if  the  flax  were  sprung; 
And  I  met  the  weaver  at  his  gate 
With  the  good  news  on  his  tongue! 

"Now,  this  is  all  I  heard,  mother. 
And  all  that  I  did  see; 
So,  prithee,  make  my  bed,  mother, 
For  I'm  tired  as  I  can  be! " 

Mary  Howilt  [i7g9-i888] 

THE  FAIRIES 

Up  the  airy  mountain, 

Down  the  rushy  glen, 
W^e  daren't  go  a-hunting 

P^or  fear  of  little  men; 
Wee  folk,  good  folk. 

Trooping  all  together; 
Green  jacket,  red  cap. 

And  white  owl's  feather! 


2^2  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Down  along  the  rocky  shore 

Some  make  their  home, 
They  Hve  on  crispy  pancakes 

Of  yellow  tide-foam; 
Some  in  the  reeds 

Of  the  black  mountain  lake, 
With  frogs  for  their  watch-dogs, 

All  night  awake. 

High  on  the  hill-top 

The  old  King  sits; 
He  is  now  so  old  and  gray 

He's  nigh  lost  his  wits. 
With  a  bridge  of  white  mist 

Columbkill  he  crosses. 
On  his  stately  journeys 

From  Slieveleague  to  Rosses; 
Or  going  up  with  music 

On  cold  starry  nights 
To  sup  with  the  Queen 

Of  the  gay  Northern  Lights. 

They  stole  little  Bridget 

For  seven  years  long; 
When  she  came  down  again 

Her  friends  were  all  gone. 
They  took  her  hghtly  back, 

Between  the  night  and  morrow, 
They  thought  that  she  was  fast  asleep, 

But  she  was  dead  with  sorrow. 
They  have  kept  her  ever  since 

Deep  within  the  lake. 
On  a  bed  of  flag-leaves. 

Watching  till  she  wake. 

By  the  craggy  hill-side, 
Through  the  mosses  bare, 

They  have  planted  thorn-trees 
For  pleasure  here  and  there. 


The  Fairy   Thrall  243 

If  any  man  so  daring 

As  dig  them  up  in  spite, 
He  shall  find  their  sharpest  thorns 

In  his  bed  at  night. 

Up  the  airy  mountain, 

Down  the  rushy  glen. 
We  daren't  go  a-hunting 

For  fear  of  little  men; 
Wee  folk,  good  folk. 

Trooping  all  together; 
Green  jacket,  red  cap, 

And  white  owl's  feather! 

William  Allingham  [1824-1889] 


THE   FAIRY  THRALL 

On  gossamer  nights  when  the  moon  is  low. 

And  stars  in  the  mist  are  hiding, 
Over  the  hill  where  the  foxgloves  grow 
You  may  see  the  fairies  riding. 
Kling!  Klang!  Kling! 
Their  stirrups  and  their  bridles  ring, 
And  their  horns  are  loud  and  their  bugles  blow, 
When  the  moon  is  low. 

They  sweep  through  the  night  like  a  whistling  wind, 

They  pass  and  have  left  no  traces; 
But  one  of  them  lingers  far  behind 
The  flight  of  the  fairy  faces. 
She  makes  no  moan, 
She  sorrows  in  the  dark  alone, 
She  wails  for  the  love  of  human  kind, 
Like  a  whistling  wind. 

"Ah!  why  did  I  roam  where  the  elfins  ride, 

Their  glimmering  steps  to  follow? 
They  bore  me  far  from  my  loved  one's  side. 

To  wander  o'er  hill  and  hollow. 


244  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

Kling!  Klang!  Kling! 

Their  stirrups  and  their  bridles  ring, 
But  my  heart  is  cold  in  the  cold  night-tide, 
Where  the  eltins  ride." 

Mary  C.  G.  Byron  [iS6i- 


FAREWELL  TO  THE   FAIRIES 

Farewell,  rewards  and  fairies! 

Good  housewives  now  may  say, 
For  now  foul  sluts  in  dairies 

Do  fare  as  well  as  they. 
And  though  they  sweep  their  hearths  no  less 

Than  maids  were  wont  to  do, 
Yet  who  of  late,  for  cleanliness, 

Finds  sixpence  in  her  shoe? 

Lament,  lament,  old  abbeys. 

The  fairies'  lost  command! 
They  did  but  change  priests'  babies, 

But  some  have  changed  your  land; 
And  all  your  children  sprung  from  thence, 

Are  now  grown  Puritanes; 
Who  live  as  changelings  ever  since, 

For  love  of  your  demains. 

At  morning  and  at  evening  both 

You  merry  were  and  glad; 
So  little  care  of  sleep  or  sloth 

These  pretty  ladies  had; 
When  Tom  came  home  from  labor. 

Or  Ciss  to  milking  rose, 
Then  merrily  merrily  went  their  tabor 

And  nimbly  went  their  toes. 

Witness  those  rings  and  roundelays 

Of  theirs,  which  yet  remain. 
Were  footed  in  Queen  Mary's  days 

On  many  a  grassy  plain; 


1 


The   Fairy   Folk  245 

But  since  of  late,  Elizabeth, 

And  later,  James  came  in. 
They  never  danced  on  any  heath     l' 

As  when  the  time  hath  been. 

By  which  we  note  the  fairies 

Were  of  the  old  profession;         ^,^ 
Their  songs  were  Ave-Maries, 

Their  dances  were  procession. 
But  now,  alas!  they  all  are  dead,     o 

Or  gone  beyond  the  seas; 
Or  farther  for  religion  fled; 

Or  else  they  take  their  ease. 

A  teU-tale  in  their  company 

They  never  could  endure; 
And  whoso  kept  not  secretly 

Their  mirth,  was  punished  sure; 
It  was  a  just  and  Christian  deed     ,\ 

To  pinch  such  black  and  blue: 
Oh,  how  the  Commonwealth  doth  need 

Such  justices  as  you! 

Richard  Corbet  [1582-1635] 

THE  FAIRY  FOLK 

Come  cuddle  close  in  daddy's  coat 

Beside  the  fire  so  bright, 
And  hear  about  the  fairy  folk 

That  wander  in  the  night. 
For  when  the  stars  are  shining  clear 

And  all  the  world  is  still. 
They  float  across  the  silver  moon 

From  hill  to  cloudy  hill. 

Their  caps  of  red,  their  cloaks  of  green, 

Are  hung  with  silver  bells, 
And  when  they're  shaken  with  the  wind 

Their  merry  ringing  swells. 
And  riding  on  the  crimson  moth. 

With  black  spots  on  her  wings, 
They  guide  them  down  the  purple  sky 

With  golden  bridle  rings. 


246  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

They  love  to  visit  girls  and  boys 

To  see  how  sweet  they  sleep, 
To  stand  beside  their  cosy  cots 

And  at  their  faces  peep. 
For  in  the  whole  of  fairy-land 

They  have  no  finer  sight 
Than  little  children  sleeping  sound 

With  faces  rosy  bright. 

On  tip-toe  crowding  round  their  heads, 

When  bright  the  moonlight  beams. 
They  whisper  httle  tender  words 

That  fill  their  minds  with  dreams; 
And  when  they  see  a  sunny  smile, 

With  lightest  finger  tips 
They  lay  a  hundred  kisses  sweet 

Upon  the  ruddy  lips. 

And  then  the  little  spotted  moths 
Spread  out  their  crimson  wings, 

And  bear  away  the  fairy  crowd 
With  shaking  bridle  rings. 

Come,  bairnies,  hide  in  daddy's  coat. 
Beside  the  fire  so  bright — 

Perhaps  the  little  fairy  folk 

Will  visit  you  to-night. 

Robert  Bird  [1867- 


THE  FAIRY  BOOK 

When  Mother  takes  the  Fairy  Book 

And  we  curl  up  to  hear, 
'Tis  "All  aboard  for  Fairyland!" 

Which  seems  to  be  so  near.  ,, 

For  soon  we  reach  the  pleasant  place 

Of  Once  Upon  a  Time, 
Where  birdies  sing  the  hour  of  day, 

And  flowers  talk  in  rhyme; 

, Where  Bobby  is  a  velvet  Prince,      t 
And  where  I  am  a  Queen; 


{ 


The   Visitor  '6-3^1 


Wheie  one  can  talk  with  animals, 
And  walk,  about  unseen; 

Where  Little  People  live  in  nuts, 

And  ride  on  butterflies. 
And  wonders  kindly  come  to  pass 

Before  your  very  eyes; 

Where  candy  grows  on  every  bush, 
And  playthings  on  the  trees, 

And  visitors  pick  basketfuls 
As  often  as  they  please. 

It  is  the  nicest  time  of  day — 
Though  Bedtime  is  so  near, — 

When  JNIother  takes  the  Fairy  Book 
And  we  curl  up  to  hear. 

Ahhie  Farwell  Brown  [i8 

THE  VISITOR 

The  white  goat  Amaryllis, 

She  wandered  at  her  will 
At  time  of  daffodillies 

Afar  and  up  the  hill: 
We  hunted  and  we  hoUoa'd 

And  back  she  came  at  dawn, 
But  what  d'you  think  had  followed?- 

A  little,  pagan  Faun ! 

His  face  was  like  a  berry. 

His  ears  were  high  and  pricked: 
Tip-tap — his  hoofs  came  merry 

As  up  the  path  he  clicked; 
A  junket  for  his  winning 

We  set  in  dairy  delf; 
He  eat  it — peart  and  grinning 

As  Christian  as  yourself! 

He  stayed  about  the  steading 
A  fortnight,  say,  or  more; 

A  blanket  for  his  bedding 
We  spread  beside  the  door; 


248  Poems  of  Youth   and   Age 

And  when  the  cocks  crowed  clearly 
Before  the  dawn  was  ripe, 

He'd  call  the  milkmaids  chcerly 
Upon  a  reedy  pipe! 

That  fortnight  of  his  staying 

The  work  went  smooth  as  silk: 
The  hens  were  all  in  laying, 

The  cows  were  all  in  milk; 
And  then — and  then  one  morning 

The  maids  woke  up  at  day 
Without  his  oaten  warning, — • 

And  found  he'd  gone  away. 

He  left  no  trace  behind  him; 

But  still  the  milkmaids  deem 
That  they,  perhaps,  may  find  him 

With  butter  and  with  cream : 
Beside  the  door  they  set  them 

In  bowl  and  golden  pat, 
But  no  one  comes  to  get  them — 

Unless,  maybe,  the  cat. 

The  white  goat  Amaryllis, 

She  wanders  at  her  will 
At  time  of  daffodillies. 

Away  up  Woolcombe  hill; 
She  stays  until  the  morrow. 

Then  back  she  comes  at  dawn; 
But  never — to  our  sorrow — 

The  little,  pagan  Faun. 

Patrick  R.  Chalmers  [18 


THE  LITTLE  ELF 

I  MET  a  little  Elf-man,  once, 
Down  where  the  lilies  blow. 

I  asked  him  why  he  was  so  small. 
And  why  he  didn't  grow. 


The   Satyrs  and   the    Moon  249 

He  slightly  frowned,  and  with  his  eye 
He  looked  me  through  and  through. 

"I'm  quite  as  big  for  me,"  said  he, 
"As  you  are  big  for  you." 

John  Kendrick  Bangs  [1862- 

THE  SATYRS  AND  THE  MOON 

Within  the  wood  behind  the  hill 

The  moon  got  tangled  in  the  trees. 
Her  splendor  made  the  branches  thrill 

And  thrilled  the  breeze. 

The  satyrs  in  the  grotto  bent 

Their  heads  to  see  the  wondrous  sight.' ^' 
"It  is  a  god  in  banishment 

That  stirs  the  night." 

The  little  satyr  looked  and  guessed: 

"It  is  an  apple  that  one  sees,  / 

Brought  from  that  garden  of  the  West — 
Hesperides." 

"It  is  a  Cyclops'  glaring  eye." 

"A  temple  dome  from  Babylon." 
"A  Titan's  cup  of  ivory." 

"A  little  sun." 

The  tiny  iatyr  jumped  for  joy. 

And  kicked  his  hoofs  in  utmost  glee. 

"It  is  a  wondrous  silver  toy — 
Bring  it  to  me!" 

A  great  wind  whistled  through  the  blue 
And  caught  the  moon  and  tossed  it  high; 

A  bubble  of  pale  fire  it  flew 
Across  the  sky. 

The  satyrs  gasped  and  looked  and  smiled, 
And  wagged  their  heads  from  side  to  side, 

Except  their  shaggy  little  cliild, 
Who  cried  and  cried. 

Herbert  S.  Gorman  [18 


bnn  av/lr."'^.   or' 


-2681]  i^u 

THE  CHILDREN 

THE   CHILDREN 

When  the  lessons  and  tasks  are  all  ended, 
And  the  school  for  the  day  is  dismissed, 

The  little  ones  gather  around  me, 
To  bid  me  good  night  and  be  kissed; 

Oh,  the  little  white  arms  that  encircle 
My  neck  in  their  tender  embrace! 

Oh,  the  smiles  that  are  halos  of  heaven, 

Shedding  sunshine  of  love  on  my  face! 
•Yt-ca  -iltiil  ariT 

And  when  they  are  gone,  I  sit  dreaming 

Of  my  childhood  too  lovely  to  last, — 
Of  joy  that  my  heart  will  remember, 

While  it  wakes  to  the  pulse  of  the  past. 
Ere  the  world  and  its  wickedness  made  me 

A  partner  of  sorrow  and  sin. 
When  the  glory  of  God  was  about  me, 

And  the  glory  of  gladness  within. 

All  my  heart  grows  as  weak  as  a  woman's, 

And  the  fountain  of  feeling  will  flow, 
When  I  think  of  the  paths  steep  and  stony, 

Where  the  feet  of  the  dear  ones  must  go,- 
Of  the  mountains  of  sin  hanging  o'er  them, 

Of  the  tempest  of  fate  blowing  wild ; — 
Oh,  there's  nothing  on  earth  half  so  holy 

As  the  innocent  heart  of  a  child! 
.i  !'a;Joof  b; 

They  are  idols  of  hearts  and  of  households; 

They  are  angels  of  God  in  disguise; 
His  sunlight  still  sleeps  in  their  tresses. 

His  glory  still  shines  in  their  eyes; 
250 


The   Children  251 

Those  truants  from  home  and  from  heaven, — 
They  have  made  me  more  manly  and  mild; 

And  I  know  now  how  Jesus  could  liken 
The  kingdom  of  God  to  a  child. 

I  ask  not  a  life  for  the  dear  ones, 

All  radiant,  as  others  have  done. 
But  that  life  may  have  just  enough  shadow 

To  temper  the  glare  of  the  sun; 
I  would  pray  God  to  guard  them  from  evil, 

But  my  prayer  would  bound  back  to  myself; — 
Ah!  a  seraph  may  pray  for  a  sinner. 

But  a  sinner  must  pray  for  himself.     ;,T%f 

The  twig  is  so  easily  bended, 

I  have  banished  the  rule  and  the  rod 
I  have  taught  them  the  goodness  of  knowledge, 

They  have  taught  me  the  goodness  of  God: 
My  heart  is  the  dungeon  of  darkness 

Where  I  shut  them  for  breaking  a  rule; 
My  frown  is  sufficient  correction; 

IMy  love  is  the  law  of  the  school. 

I  shall  leave  the  old  house  in  the  autumn, 

To  traverse  its  threshold  no  more; 
Ah,  how  I  shall  sigh  for  the  dear  ones 

That  meet  me  each  morn  at  the  door! 
I  shall  miss  the  "good  nights"  and  the  kisses, 

And  the  gush  of  their  innocent  glee. 
The  group  on  the  green,  and  the  flowers' 

That  are  brought  every  morning  for  me. 

I  shall  miss  them  at  morn  and  at  even, 

Their  song  in  the  school  and  the  street; 
I  shall  miss  the  low  hum  of  their  voices, 

And  the  tread  of  their  delicate  feet. 
When  the  lessons  of  life  are  all  ended. 

And  death  says:  "The  school  is  dismissed!" 
May  the  little  ones  gather  around  me, 

To  bid  me  good  night  and  be  kissed! 

Charles  Monroe  Dickinson  [1842- 


2^2  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


THE   CHILDREN'S   HOUR 

Between  the  dark  and  the  dayhght, 
When  the  night  is  beginning  to  lower, 

Comes  a  pause  in  the  day's  occupations, 
That  is  known  as  the  Children's  Hour. 

I  hear  in  the  chamber  above  me 

The  patter  of  little  feet, 
The  sound  of  a  door  that  is  opened, 

And  voices  soft  and  sweet. 

From  my  study  I  see  in  the  lamphght. 
Descending  the  broad  hall  stair, 

Grave  Alice,  and  laughing  Allegra, 
And  Edith  with  golden  hair. 

A  whisper,  and  then  a  silence: 
Yet  I  know  by  their  merry  eyes 

They  are  plotting  and  planning  together 
To  take  me  by  surprise. 

A  sudden  rush  from  the  stairway, 

A  sudden  raid  from  the  hall! 
By  three  doors  left  unguarded 

They  enter  my  castle  wall! 

They  climb  up  into  my  turret 

O'er  the  arms  and  back  of  my  chair; 
If  I  try  to  escape,  they  surround  me; 
.They  seem  to  be  everywhere. 

They  almost  devour  me  with  kisses. 
Their  arms  about  me  entwine. 

Till  I  think  of  the  Bishop  of  Bingen 
In  his  Mouse-Tovifcr  on  the  Rhine! 

Do  you  think,  O  blue-eyed  banditti. 
Because  you  have  scaled  the  wall, 

Such  an  old  mustache  as  I  am 
Is  not  a  match  for  you  aU! 


The  Desire 

I  have  you  fast  in  my  fortress, 

And  will  not  let  you  depart, 
But  put  you  down  into  the  dungeon 

In  the  round-tower  of  my  heart. 

And  there  will  I  keep  you  forever, 

Yes,  forever  and  a  day. 
Till  the  walls  shall  crumble  to  ruin, 

And  moulder  in  dust  away. 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807- 


LAUS  INFANTIUM 

In  praise  of  little  children  I  will  say 

God  first  made  man,  then  found  a  better  way 

For  woman,  but  his  third  way  was  the  best. 

Of  all  created  things,  the  loveliest 

And  most  divine  are  children.    Nothing  here^ 

Can  be  to  us  more  gracious  or  more  dear. 

And  though,  when  God  saw  all  his  works  were  good, 

There  was  no  rosy  flower  of  babyhood, 

'Twas  said  of  children  in  a  later  day 

That  none  could  enter  Heaven  save  such  as  they. 

The  earth,  which  feels  the  flowering  of  a  thorn, 
Was  glad,  O  little  child,  when  you  were  born; 
The  earth,  which  thrills  when  skylarks  scale  the  blue. 
Soared  up  itself  to  God's  own  Heaven  in  you; 
And  Heaven,  which  loves  to  lean  down  and  to  glass 
Its  beauty  in  each  dewdrop  on  the  grass, — 
Heaven  laughed  to  find  your  face  so  pure  and  fair. 
And  left,  O  little  child,  its  reflex  there. 

William  Canton  [1845- 

THE  DESIRE 

Give  me  no  mansions  ivory  white 
Nor  palaces  of  pearl  and  gold; 
Give  me  a  child  for  all  delight. 
Just  four  years  old. 


253 


2  54  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Give  mc  no  wings  of  rosy  shine 
Nor  snowy  raiment,  fold  on  fold, 
Give  me  a  little  boy  all  mine, 
Just  four  years  old. 

Give  me  no  gold  and  starry  crown 
Nor  harps,  nor  palm  branches  unrolled; 
Give  me  a  nestling  head  of  brown, 
Just  four  years  old. 

Give  me  a  cheek  that's  like  the  peach, 
Two  arms  to  clasp  me  from  the  cold; 
And  all  my  heaven's  within  my  reach, 

Just  four  years  old.  ,  ,  ^J^l^^q  ^j 

Jaifl  fioO 
Dear  God,  You  give  me  from  Your  skies,      ,    . 
A  little  paradise  to  hold. 
As  Mary  once  her  Paradise, 
Just  four  years  old. 
J  Katherine  Tynan  [i86i-' 

-ladT 
A   CHILD'S  LAUGHTER 

All  the  bells  of  heaven  may  ring. 
All  the  birds  of  heaven  may  sing,        .  .  i-f-r 
All  the  wells  on  earth  may  spring, 
M,  All  the  winds  on  earth  may  bring,  ,■,,,,  .^,1  i 

Ail  sweet  sounds  together;         .y  baiBO?. 
Sweeter  far  then  all  things  heard,  ,;<jf{  ^f,/. 
Hand  of  harper,  tone  of  bird,       ,  ii;,:„(  ;  tj 
Sound  of  woods  at  sundawn  stirred,  . 
Welling  water's  winsome  word, 

Wind  in  warm,  wan  weather. 

One  thing  yet  there  is,  that  none, 
Hearing  ere  its  chime  be  done. 
Knows  not  well  the  sweetest  one 
Heard  of  man  beneath  the  sun, 

Hoped  in  heaven  liereafter; 
Soft  and  strong  and  loud  and  light, 


^ss 


■  '"       Seven  Years  Old 

Very  sound  of  very  light, 
Heard  from  morning's  rosiest  height, 
When  the  soul  of  all  delight, 
Fills  a  child's  dear  laughter. 

Golden  bells  of  welcome  rolled 
Never  forth  such  note,  nor  told 
Hours  so  blithe  in  tones  so  bold, 
As  the  radiant  mouth  of  gold 

Here  that  rings  forth  heaven. 
If  the  golden-crested  wren 
Were  a  nightingale — why,  then 
Something  seen  and  heard  of  men 
Might  be  half  as  sweet  as  when 

Laughs  a  child  of  seven. 

Algernon  Charles  Sivinhurne  [1837-1009] 

SEVEN  YEARS  OLD 

.  Seven  white  roses  on  one  tree. 
Seven  white  loaves  of  blameless  leaven, 
Seven  white  sails  on  one  soft  sea. 
Seven  white  swans  on  one  lake's  lea. 
Seven  white  fiowerhke  stars  in  Heaven, 
All  are  types  unmeet  to  be 
For  a  birthday's  crown  of  seven. 

Not  the  radiance  of  the  roses. 

Not  the  blessing  of  the  bread. 

Not  the  breeze  that  ere  day  grows  is 

Fresh  for  sails  and  swans,  and  closes 

Wings  above  the  sun's  grave  spread  ' ' 

When  the  starshine  on  the  snows  is   '  ' 

Sweet  as  sleep  on  sorrow  shed. 

Nothing  sweeter,  nothing  best. 

Holds  so  good  and  sweet  a  treasure 

As  the  love  wherewith  once  blest 

Joy  grows  holy,  grief  takes  rest, 

Life,  half  tired  with  hours  to  measure, 

Fills  his  eyes  and  lips  and  breast  ,  > 

With  most  light  and  breath  of  pleasure;    "j 


2f6  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

As  the  rapture  unpolluted, 

As  the  passion  undefiled, 

By  whose  force  all  pains  heart-rooted 

Are  transfigured  and  transmuted, 

Recompensed  and  reconciled, 

Through  the  imperial,  undisputed. 

Present  godhead  of  a  child. 

Brown  bright  eyes  and  fair  bright  head, 
Worth  a  worthier  crown  than  this  is, 
Worth  a  worthier  song  instead. 
Sweet  grave  wise  round  mouth,  full  fed 
With  the  joy  of  love,  whose  bliss  is 
More  than  mortal  wine  and  bread, 
Lips  whose  words  are  sweet  as  kisses. 

Little  hands  so  glad  of  giving, 

Little  heart  so  glad  of  love. 

Little  soul  so  glad  of  living, 

While  the  strong  swift  hours  are  weaving 

Light  with  darkness  woven  above. 

Time  for  mirth  and  time  for  grieving, 

Plume  of  raven  and  plume  of  dove. 

I  can  give  you  but  a  word 

Warm  with  love  therein  for  leaven. 

But  a  song  that  falls  unheard 

Yet  on  ears  of  sense  unstirred 

Yet  by  song  so  far  from  Heaven, 

Whence  you  came  the  brightest  bird. 

Seven  years  since,  of  seven  times  seven. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1009] 


CREEP  AFORE  YE   GANG 

Creep  awa',  my  bairnie,  creep  afore  ye  gang. 
Cock  ye  baith  your  lugs  to  your  auld  Grannie's  sang: 
Gin  ye  gang  as  far  ye  will  think  the  road  lang, 
Creep  awa',  my  bairnie,  creep  afore  ye  gang. 


Castles  in  the  Air 


257 


Creep  awa',  my  bairnie,  ye're  ower  young  to  learn  '  ^ 

To  tot  up  and  down  yet,  mj'  bonnie  wee  bairn;  '••'' 

Better  creepin'  cannie,  than  fa'in'  wi'  a  bang, 
Duntin'  a'  your  w^e  brow, — creep  afore  ye  gang. 

Ye'U  creep,  an'  ye'U  hotch,  an'  ye'll  nod  to  your  mither, 
Watchin'  ilka  step  o'  your  wee  dousy  brither; 

Rest  ye  on  the  floor  till  your  wee  limbs  grow  Strang, 
An'  ye'll  be  a  braw  chiel  yet, — creep  afore  ye  gang. 

The  wee  birdie  fa's  when  it  tries  ower  soon  to  flee, 
Folks  are  sure  to  tumble,  when  they  climb  ower  hie; 
They  wha  canna  v/alk  right  are  sure  to  come  to  wrang, 
Creep  awa',  my  bairnie,  creep  afore  ye  gang. 

James  Ballantine  [1808- 187 7] 


CASTLES  IN  THE  AIR 

The  bonnie,  bonnie  bairn  who  sits  poking  in  the  ase, 
Glowering  in  the  fire  wi'  his  wee  round  face. 
Laughing  at  the  fuflin'  lowe — what  sees  he  there? 
Ha !  the  young  dreamer's  bigging  castles  in  the  air. 

His  wee  chubby  face  and  his  touzie  curh'  pow 
Are  laughing  and  nodding  to  the  dancing  lowe; 
He'll  brown  his  rosy  cheeks,  and  singe  his  sunny  hair, 
Glowering  at  the  imps  wi'  their  castles  in  the  air. 

He  sees  muckle  castles  towering  to  the  moon; 

He  sees  little  sodgers  pu'ing  them  a'  doun; 

Warlds  whommlin'  up  and  doun,  bleezing  wi'  a  flare, — 

See  how  he  loups  as  they  glimmer  in  the  air  I 

For  a'  sae  sage  he  looks,  what  can  the  laddie  ken? 
He's  thinking  upon  naething,  like  mony  mighty  men: 
A  wee  thing  mak's  us  think,  a  sma'  thing  mak's  us  stare. 
There  are  mair  folk  than  him  bigging  castles  in  the  air. 

Sic  a  night  in  winter  may  wccl  mak'  him  cauld: 
His  chin  upon  his  butfy  hand  will  soon  mak'  him  auld; 
His  brow  is  brent  sae  braid— O  pray  that  daddy  Care 
Wad  let  the  wean  alane  wi'  his  castles  in  the  air! 


258  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

He'll  glower  at  the  fire,  and  he'll  keek  at  the  light; 
But  mony  sparkling  stars  are  swallowed  up  by  Night: 
Aulder  e'en  than  his  are  glamored  by  a  glare, — 
Hearts  are  broken,  heads  are  turned,  wi'  castles  in  the  air. 

James  Ballantine  [1808-1877] 


UNDER  MY  WINDOW 

Under  my  window,  under  my  window. 

All  in  the  Midsummer  weather,  .^  _^  ,rp 

Three  little  girls  with  fluttering  curls 
Flit  to  and  fro  together: — 

There's  Bell  with  her  bonnet  of  satin  sheen,      ., 

And  Maud  with  her  mantle  of  silver-green, 
And  Kate  with  her  scarlet  feather. 

Under  my  window,  under  my  window, 

Leaning  stealthily  over,  ,      „ 

,    ,  ,         .  '      ,.  Tod  hhT 

Merry  and  clear,  the  voice  1  hear 

Of  each  glad-hearted  rover. 
Ah!  sly  little  Kate,  she  steals  my  roses;  ' .'. 

And  Maud  and  Bell  twine  wreaths  and  posies, 

As  merry  as  bees  in  clover.  ; ; ; 

Under  my  window,  under  my  windov/,  :  1 

In  the  blue  Midsummer  weather,  1,1 

Stealing  slow,  on  a  hushed  tiptoe, 
I  catch  them  all  together: — 

Bell  with  her  bonnet  of  satin  sheen. 

And  Maud  with  her  mantle  of  silver-green. 
And  Kate  with  her  scarlet  feather. 

Under  my  window,  under  my  window. 

And  off  through  the  orchard  closes ;  ,^  . 

While  Maud  she  flouts,  and  Bell  she  pouts,        _,  ^^^ 

They  scamper  and  drop  their  posies; 
But  dear  little  Kate  takes  naught  amiss, 
And  leaps  in  my  arms  with  a  loving  kiss, 

And  I  give  her  all  my  roses. 

Thomas  Weslwood  [i8i4?-iSS8] 


Little   Bell  .')  259 


LITTLE  BELL 

Ee  praycth  well  who  loveth  well 
Both  man  and  bird  and  beasl. 

The  Ancient  Mariner 

Piped  the  blackbird  on  the  beechwood  spray 
"Pretty  maid,  slow  wandering  this  way, 

What's  your  name?"  quoth  he — 
"What's  your  name?    Oh  stop  and  straight  unfold, 
Pretty  maid  with  showery  curls  of  gold," — 

"Little  Bell,"  said  she. 

Little  Bell  sat  down  beneath  the  rocks — 
Tossed  aside  her  gleaming  golden  locks — 

"Bonny  bird,"  quoth  she, 
"Sing  me  your  best  song  before  I  go." 
"Here's  the  very  finest  song  I  know, 

Little  Bell,"  said  he. 

And  the  blackbird  piped;  you  never  heard 
Half  so  gay  a  song  from  any  bird — 

Full  of  quips  and  wiles, 
Now  so  round  and  rich,  now  soft  and  slow. 
All  for  love  of  that  sweet  face  below. 

Dimpled  o'er  with  smiles. 

And  the  while  the  bonny  bird  did  pour 
His  full  heart  out  freely  o'er  and  o'er 

'Neath  the  morning  skies, 
Li  the  little  childish  heart  below 
All  the  sweetness  seemed  to  grow  and  grow, ' 
And  shine  forth  in  happy  overflow 

From  the  blue,  bright  eyes. 

Down  the  dell  she  tripped  and  through  the  glade, 
Peeped  the  squirrel  from  the  hazel  shade. 

And  from  out  the  tree 
Swung,  and  leaped,  and  frolicked,  void  of  fear, — 
While  bold  blackbird  piped  that  all  might  hear — 

"Little  Bell,"  piped  he.  .-,,,,,- 


26o  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Little  Bell  sat  down  amid  the  fern — 
"Squirrel,  to  your  task  return — 

Bring  me  nuts,"  quoth  she. 
Up,  away  the  frisky  squirrel  hies — 
Golden  wood-lights  glancing  in  his  eyes — 

And  adown  the  tree. 
Great  ripe  nuts,  kissed  brown  by  July  sun, 
In  the  little  lap  dropped  one  by  one — 
Hark,  how  blackbird  pipes  to  see  the  fun! 

"Happy  Bell,"  pipes  he. 

Little  Bell  looked  up  and  down  the  glade — 
"Squirrel,  squirrel,  if  you're  not  afraid, 

Come  and  share, with  me! " 
Down  came  squirrel  eager  for  his  fare- 
Down  came  bonny  blackbird  I  declare; 
Little  Bell  gave  each  his  honest  share — 

Ah  the  merry  three! 
And  the  while  these  frolic  playmates  twain 
Piped  and  frisked  from  bough  to  bough  again, 

'Neath  the  morning  skies. 
In  the  little  childish  heart  below 
All  the  sweetness  seemed  to  grow  and  grow, 
And  shine  out  in  happy  overflow 

From  her  blue,  bright  eyes. 

By  her  snow-white  cot  at  close  of  day. 

Knelt  sweet  Bell,  with  folded  palms  to  pray — 

Very  calm  and  clear 
Rose  the  praying  voice  to  where,  unseen, 
In  blue  heaven,  an  angel  shape  serene 

Paused  awhile  to  hear — 
"What  good  child  is  this,"  the  angel  said, 
"That,  with  happy  heart,  beside  her  bed 

Prays  so  lovingly?  " 
Low  and  soft,  oh!  very  low  and  soft. 
Crooned  the  blackbird  in  the  orchard  croft, 

"Bell,  dear  Bell!"  crooned  he. 

"Whom  God's  creatures  love,"  the  angel  fair 
Murmured,  "God  doth  bless  with  angels'  care; 


The   Barefoot  Boy  261 

Child,  thy  bed  shall  be 
Folded  safe  from  harm — Love  deep  and  kind 
Shall  watch  around  and  leave  good  gifts  behind, 

Little  Bell,  for  thee  I" 

Thomas  Westwood  [1814?-! 8881 


THE  BAREFOOT  BOY 

Blessings  on  thee,  little  man. 
Barefoot  boy,  with  cheek  of  tan ! 
With  thy  turned-up  pantaloons. 
And  thy  merry  whistled  tunes; 
With  thy  red  lip,  redder  still 
Kissed  by  strawberries  on  the  hill; 
With  the  sunshine  on  thy  face. 
Through  thy  torn  brim's  jaunty  grace; 
From  my  heart  I  give  thee  joy, — 
I  was  once  a  barefoot  boy! 
Prince  thou  art, — the  grown-up  man 
Only  is  republican. 
Let  the  million-dollared  ride! 
Barefoot,  trudging  at  his  side. 
Thou  hast  more  than  he  can  buy 
In  the  reach  of  ear  and  eye, — 
Outward  sunshine,  inward  joy: 
Blessings  on  thee,  barefoot  boy! 

Oh  for  boyhood's  painless  play. 
Sleep  that  wakes  in  laughing  day, 
Health  that  mocks  the  doctor's  rules, 
Knowledge  never  learned  of  schools. 
Of  the  wild  bee's  morning  chase. 
Of  the  wild  flower's  time  and  place, 
Flight  of  fowl  and  habitude 
Of  the  tenants  of  the  wood ; 
How  the  tortoise  bears  his  shell, 
How  the  woodchuck  digs  his  cell, 
And  the  ground-mole  sinks  his  well; 
How  the  robin  feeds  her  young, 
How  the  oriole's  nest  is  hung; 


262  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Where  the  whitest  hlies  blow, 
Where  the  freshest  berries  grow, 
Where  the  ground-nut  trails  its  vine, 
Where  the  wood-grape's  dusters  shine; 
Of  the  black  wasp's  cunning  way. 
Mason  of  his  walls  of  clay, 
And  the  architectural  plans 
Of  gray  hornet  artisans! 
For,  eschewing  books  and  tasks, 
Nature  answers  all  he  asks; 
Hand  in  hand  with  her  he  walks, 
Face  to  face  with  her  he  talks. 
Part  and  parcel  of  her  joy, — 
Blessings  on  the  barefoot  boy! 

Oh  for  boyhood's  time  of  June, 
Crowding  years  in  one  brief  moon, 
When  all  things  I  heard  or  saw. 
Me,  their  master,  waited  for. 
I  was  rich  in  flowers  and  trees, 
Humming-birds  and  honey-bees; 
For  my  sport  the  squirrel  played, 
Plied  the  snouted  mole  his  spade; 
For  my  taste  the  blackberry  cone 
Purpled  over  hedge  and  stone; 
Laughed  the  brook  for  my  delight 
Through  the  day  and  through  the  night,- 
Whispering  at  the  garden  wall, 
Talked  with  me  from  fall  to  fall; 
Mine  the  sand-rimmed  pickerel  pond 
Mine  the  walnut  slopes  beyond. 
Mine,  on  bending  orchard  trees. 
Apples  of  Hesperides! 
Still  as  my  horizon  grew, 
Larger  grew  my  riches  too; 
All  the  world  I  saw  or  knew 
Seemed  a  complex  Chinese  toy, 
Fashioned  for  a  barefoot  boy! 

Oh  for  festal  dainties  spread, 
Like  my  bowl  of  milk  and  bread; 


The   Heritage  263 

Pewter  spoon  and  bowl  of  wood, 
On  the  door-stone,  gray  and  rude! 
O'er  me,  like  a  regal  tent, 
Cloudy-ribbed,  the  sunset  bent. 
Purple-curtained,  fringed  with  gold. 
Looped  in  many  a  wind-swung  fold; 
While  for  music  came  the  play 
Of  the  pied  frogs'  orchestra; 
And,  to  light  the  noisy  choir, 
Lit  the  fly  his  lamp  of  fire. 
I  was  monarch:  pomp  and  joy 
Waited  on  the  barefoot  boy! 

Cheerily,  then,  my  little  man, 
Live  and  laugh,  as  boyhood  can ! 
Though  the  flinty  slopes  be  hard, 
Stubble-speared  the  new-mown  sward, 
Every  morn  shall  lead  thee  through 
Fresh  baptisms  of  the  dew; 
Every  evening  from  thy  feet 
Shall  the  cool  wind  kiss  the  heat: 
All  too  soon  these  feet  must  hide 
In  the  prison  cells  of  pride, 
Lose  the  freedom  of  the  sod. 
Like  a  colt's  for  work  be  shod, 
Made  to  tread  the  mills  of  toil, 
Up  and  down  in  ceaseless  moil: 
Happy  if  their  track  be  found 
Never  on  forbidden  ground; 
Happy  if  th^y  sink  not  in 
Quick  and  treacherous  sands  of  sin. 
Ah!  that  thou  couldst  know  thy  joy. 
Ere  it  passes,  barefoot  boy! 

John  Greenleaf  Whittier  [1807- 189 2] 


THE  HERITAGE 

The  rich  man 's  son  inherits  lands. 

And  piles  of  brick  and  stone,  and  gold, 
And  he  inherits  soft  white  hands, 


264  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  tender  flesh  that  fears  the  cold, 
Nor  dares  to  wear  a  garment  old; 
A  heritage,  it  seems  to  me, 
One  scarce  would  wish  to  hold  in  fee. 

The  rich  man's  son  inherits  cares; 

The  bank  may  break,  the  factory  burn, 

A  breath  may  burst  his  bubble  shares, 
And  soft  white  hands  could  hardly  earn 
A  living  that  would  serve  his  turn; 

A  heritage,  it  seems  to  me. 

One  scarce  would  wish  to  hold  in  fee. 

The  rich  man 's  son  inherits  wants. 
His  stomach  craves  for  dainty  fare; 

With  sated  heart,  he  hears  the  pants 
Of  toiling  hinds  with  brown  arms  bare, 
And  wearies  in  his  easy -chair; 

A  heritage,  it  seems  to  me, 

One  scarce  would  wish  to  hold  in  fee. 

What  doth  the  poor  man's  son  inherit? 
Stout  muscles  and  a  sinewy  heart, 

A  hardy  frame,  a  hardier  spirit, 

King  of  two  hands,  he  does  his  part 
In  every  useful  toil  and  art; 

A  heritage,  it  seems  to  me, 

A  king  might  wish  to  hold  in  fee. 

What  doth  the  poor  man^s  son  inherit? 
Wishes  o  'erjoyed  with  humble  things, 

A  rank  adjudged  by  toibwon  merit. 

Content  that  from  employment  springs, 
A  heart  that  in  his  labor  sings; 

A  heritage,  it  seems  to  me, 

A  king  might  wish  to  hold  in  fee. 

What  doth  the  poor  man 's  son  inherit? 

A  patience  learned  of  being  poor, 
Courage,  if  sorrow  come,  to  bear  it, 


Letty's   Globe  265 

A  fellow-feeling  that  is  sure 

To  make  the  outcast  bless  his  door; 

A  heritage,  it  seems  to  me, 

A  king  might  wish  to  hold  in  fee. 

O  rich  man 's  son !  there  is  a  toil  , 

That  with  all  others  level  stands; 

Large  charity  doth  never  soil, 

But  only  whiten,  soft  white  hands; 
This  is  the  best  crop  from  thy  lands, 

A  heritage,  it  seems  to  me, 

Worth  being  rich  to  hold  in  fee. 

O  poor  man's  son!  scorn  not  thy  state; 
There  is  worse  weariness  than  thine, 

In  merely  being  rich  and  great; 
Toil  only  gives  the  soul  to  shine, 
And  makes  rest  fragrant  and  benign; 

A  heritage,  it  seems  to  me. 

Worth  being  poor  to  hold  in  fee. 

Both,  heirs  to  some  six  feet  of  sod. 

Are  equal  in  the  earth  at  last; 
Both,  children  of  the  same  dear  God, 

Prove  title  to  your  heirship  vast 

By  record  of  a  weU-tillcd  past; 
A  heritage,  it  seems  to  me. 
Well  worth  a  life  to  hold  in  fee. 

James  Russell  Lowell  [iSig-iSgi] 

LETTY'S  GLOBE 

OR  SOME  IRREGULARITIES  IN  A  FIRST   LESSON  IN  GEOGRAPHY 

When  Letty  had  scarce  passed  her  third  glad  year, 

And  her  young  artless  words  began  to  flow. 

One  day  we  gave  the  child  a  colored  sphere 

Of  the  wide  Earth,  that  she  might  mark  and  know. 

By  tint  and  outline,  all  its  sea  and  land. 

She  patted  all  the  world;  old  Empires  peeped 

Between  her  baby  fingers;  her  soft  hand 

Was  welcome  at  all  frontiers.    How  she  leaped, 


266  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  laughed  and  prattled  in  her  world-wide  bliss! 
But  when  we  turned  her  sweet  unlearned  eye 
On  our  own  Isle,  she  raised  a  joyous  cry, — 
"O  yes!  I  see  it,  Letty's  home  is  there!" 
And  while  she  hid  all  England  with  a  kiss, 
Bright  over  Europe  fell  her  golden  hair. 

Charles  Tennyson  Turner  [1808-1S79] 


DOVE'S  NEST 

"Sylvia,  hush!"  I  said,  "come  here, 

Come  see  a  fairy-tale,  my  dear! 

Tales  told  are' good,  tales  seen  are  best!" 

The  dove  was  brooding  on  the  nest 

In  the  lowest  crotch  of  the  apple  tree. 

I  hfted  her  up  so  quietly, 

That  when  she  could  have  touched  the  bird 

The  soft  gray  creature  had  not  stirred. 

It  looked  at  us  with  a  wild  dark  eye. 

But,  "Birdie,  fly!"  was  Sylvia's  cry, 

Impatient  Sylvia,  "Birdie,  fly." 

Ah,  well:  but  when  I  touched  the  nest, 

The  child  recoiled  upon  my  breast. 

Was  ever  such  a  startling  thing? 

Sudden  silver  and  purple  wing. 

The  dove  was  out,  away,  across, 

Struggling  heart-break  on  the  grass. 

And  there  in  the  cup  within  the  tree 

Two  milk-white  eggs  were  ours  to  see. 

Was  ever  thing  so  pretty?  Alack, 

"Birdie!"  Sylvia  cried,  "come  back!" 

Joseph  Russell  Taylor  [i868- 


THE  ORACLE 

I  LAY  upon  the  summer  grass. 

A  gold-haired,  sunny  child  came  by, 
And  looked  at  me,  as  loath  to  pass. 

With  questions  in  her  lingering  eye. 


To  a   Little  Girl  267 

She  stopped  and  wavered,  then  drew  near, 
(Ah!  the  pale  gold  around  her  head!) 

And  o'er  my  shoulder  stopped  to  peer. 
"  Why  do  you  read?  "  she  said. 

"I  read  a  poet  of  old  time, 

Who  sang  through  all  his  living  hours — 
Beauty  of  earth — the  streams,  the  flowers — 

And  stars,  more  lovely  than  his  rhyme. 

"And  now  I  read  him,  since  men  go. 

Forgetful  of  these  sweetest  things; 
Since  he  and  I  love  brooks  that  flow. 

And  dawns,  and  bees,  and  flash  of  wings!" 

She  stared  at  me  with  laughing  look. 
Then  clasped  her  hands  upon  my  knees: 

"How  strange  to  read  it  in  a  book! 
I  could  have  told  you  all  of  these! " 

Arthur  Davison  Fickc  [1883- 


TO  A  LITTLE  GIRL 

You  taught  me  ways  of  gracefulness  and  fashions  of  address. 
The  mode  of  plucking  pansies  and  the  art  of  sowing  cress. 
And  how  to  handle  puppies,  with  propitiatory  pats 
For  mother  dogs,  and  httle  acts  of  courtesy  to  cats. 

O  connoisseur  of  pebbles,  colored  leaves  and  trickling  rills, 
Whom  seasons  fit  as  do  the  sheaths  that  wrap  the  daffodils, 
Whose  eyes'  divine  expectancy  foretells  some  starry  goal. 
You  taught  me  here  docility — and  how  to  save  my  soul. 

Helen  Parry  Eden  [18 


TO  A  LITTLE   GIRL 

Her  eyes  are  like  forget-me-nots, 
So  loving,  kind  and  true; 

Her  lips  are  like  a  pink  sea -shell 
Just  as  the  sun  shines  through; 


268  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Her  hair  is  like  the  waving  grain 
In  summer's  golden  hght; 

And,  best  of  all,  her  little  soul 
Is,  hke  a  lily,  white. 

Ciistav  Kobbe  [1857 

A  PARENTAL  ODE  TO   MY   SON 

AGED   THREE   YEARS   AND   FIVE   MONTHS 

Thou  happy,  happy  elf! 
(But  stop, — first  let  me  kiss  away  that  tear!) 

Thou  tiny  image  of  myself! 
(My  love,  he's  poking  peas  into  his  ear!) 
Thou  merry,  laughing  sprite. 
With  spirits  feather-light, 
Untouched  by  sorrow,  and  unsoiled  by  sin, — 
(My  dear,  the  child  is  swallowing  a  pin!) 

Thou  little  tricksy  Puck! 

With  antic  toys  so  funnily  bestuck, 

Light  as  the  singing  bird  that  wings  the  air, — 

(The  door!  the  door!  he'll  tumble  down  the  stair!) 

Thou  darling  of  thy  sire! 

(Why,  Jane,  he'll  set  his  pinafore  afire!) 

Thou  imp  of  mirth  and  joy! 
In  Love's  dear  chain  so  strong  and  bright  a  link, 

Thou  idol  of  thy  parents, —  (Drat  the  boy! 
There  goes  my  ink!) 

Thou  cherub, — but  of  earth; 
Fit  playfellow  for  Fays,  by  moonlight  pale. 

In  harmless  sport  and  mirth, 
(That  dog  will  bite  him,  if  he  pulls  its  tail!) 

Thou  human  humming-bee,  extracting  honey 
From  every  blossom  in  the  world  that  blows, 

Singing  in  youth's  Elysium  ever  sunny. — 
(Another  tumble!    That's  his  precious  nose!) 

Thy  father's  pride  and  hope! 

(Hell  break  the  mirror  with  that  skipping-rope!) 


;,       A  New   Poet  269 

With  pure  heart  newly  stamped  from  nature's  mint, 
(Where  did  he  learn  that  squint?) 
Thou  young  domestic  dove! 
(He'll  have  that  jug  off  with  another  shove!) 
Dear  nurshng  of  the  hymeneal  nest! 
(Are  these  torn  clothes  his  best?) 
Little  epitome  of  man! 
(He'll  climb  upon  the  table,  that's  his  plan!) 
Touched  with  the  beauteous  tints  of  dawning  life, — 
(He's  got  a  knife!) 

Thou  enviable  being! 

No  storms,  no  clouds,  in  thy  blue  sky  foreseeing. 

Play  on,  play  on, 

My  elfin  John! 
Toss  the  light  ball,  bestride  the  stick, — 
(I  knew  so  many  cakes  would  make  him  sick!) 

With  fancies,  buoyant  as  the  thistle-down, 
Prompting  the  face  grotesque,  and  antic  brisk. 
With  many  a  lamb-hke  frisk! 

(He's  got  the  scissors,  snipping  at  your  gown!) 

Thou  pretty  opening  rose! 

(Go  to  your  mother,  child,  and  wipe  your  nose!) 

Balmy  and  breathing  music  like  the  South, — • 

(He  really  brings  my  heart  into  my  mouth!) 

Fresh  as  the  morn,  and  brilliant  as  its  star, — 

(I  wish  that  window  had  an  iron  bar!) 

Bold  as  the  hawk,  yet  gentle  as  the  dove; — • 

(I'll  tell  you  what,  my  love, 

I  cannot  write  unless  he's  sent  above.) 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845! 


A  NEW  POET 

I  WRITE.    He  sits  beside  my  chair, 
And  scribbles,  too,  in  hushed  delight. 

He  dips  his  pen  in  charmed  air: 
What  is  it  he  pretends  to  write? 


syo  Poems  of  Yoath  and  Age 

He  toils  and  toils;  the  paper  gives 

No  clue  to  aught  he  thinks.    What  then? 

His  little  heart  is  glad;  he  lives 
The  poems  that  he  cannot  pen. 

Strange  fancies  throng  that  baby  brain. 

What  grave,  sweet  looks!    What  earnest  eyesi 
He  stops — reflects — and  now  again 

His  unrecording  pen  he  plies. 

It  seems  a  satire  on  myself, — 

These  dreamy  nothings  scrawled  in  air, 

This  thought,  this  work!    Oh  tricksy  elf, 
Wouldst  drive  thy  father  to  despair? 

Despair!    Ah,  no;  the  heart,  the  mind 
Persists  in  hoping, — schemes  and  strives 

That  there  may  linger  with  our  kind 
Some  memory  of  our  little  lives. 

Beneath  his  rock  in  the  early  world 

Smiling  the  naked  hunter  lay, 
And  sketched  on  horn  the  spear  he  hurled, 

The  urus  which  he  made  his  prey. 

Like  him  I  strive  in  hope  my  rhymes 
May  keep  my  name  a  little  while, — 

O  child,  who  knows  how  many  times 
We  two  have  made  the  angels  smile! 

William  Canton  [1S45- 


TO  LAURA  W ,   TWO   YEARS   OLD 

Bright  be  the  skies  that  cover  thee, 

Child  of  the  sunny  brow, — 
Bright  as  the  dream  flung  over  thee 

By  all  that  meets  thee  now, — 
Thy  heart  is  beating  joyously, 

Thy  voice  is  like  a  bird's, 
And  sweetly  breaks  the  melody 

Of  thv  imperfect  words. 


lo   Laura   W ,   Two   Years   Old     271 

I  know  no  fount  that  gushes  out 
As  gladly  as  thy  tiny  shout. 

I  would  that  thou  might'st  ever  be 

As  beautiful  as  now, 
That  time  might  ever  leave  as  free 

Thy  yet  unwritten  brow. 
I  would  life  were  all  poetry 

To  gentle  measure  set, 
That  naught  but  chastened  melody 

JNIight  stain  thine  eye  of  jet. 
Nor  one  discordant  note  be  spoken, 
Till  God  the  cunning  harp  hath  brokeno 

I  would — but  deeper  things  than  these 

With  woman's  lot  are  wove: 
Wrought  of  intensest  sympathies, 

And  nerved  by  purest  love; 
By  the  strong  spirit's  discipline, 

By  the  fierce  wrong  forgiven. 
By  all  that  wrings  the  heart  of  sin, 

Is  woman  won  to  heaven. 
"Her  lot  is  on  thee,"  lovely  child — 
God  keep  thy  spirit  undefiled! 

I  fear  thy  gentle  loveliness, 

Thy  witching  tone  and  air, 
Thine  eye 's  beseeching  earnestness 

May  be  to  thee  a  snare. 
The  silver  stars  may  purely  shine, 

The  waters  taintless  flow: 
But  they  who  kneel  at  woman 's  shrine 

Breathe  on  it  as  they  bow. 
Peace  may  fling  back  the  gift  again, 
But  the  crushed  flower  will  leave  a  stain. 

What  shall  preserve  thee,  beautiful  child? 

Keep  thee  as  thou  art  now? 
Bring  thee,  a  spirit  undefiled, 

At  God 's  pure  throne  to  bow.^ 


'■'1^1  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

The  world  is  but  a  broken  reed, 

And  life  grows  early  dim — 
Who  shall  be  near  thee  in  thy  need, 

To  lead  thee  up  to  Him? 
He  who  himself  was  "undefiled?" 
With  Him  we  trust  thee,  beautiful  child! 

Nathaniel  Parker  Willis  [1S06-1867J 


TO  ROSE 

Rose,  when  I  remember  you, 
Little  lady,  scarcely  two, 
I  am  suddenly  aware 
Of  the  angels  in  the  air. 
All  your  softly  gracious  ways 
Make  an  island  in  my  days 
Where  my  thoughts  fly  back  to  be 
Sheltered  from  too  strong  a  sea. 
All  your  luminous  delight 
Shines  before  me  in  the  night 
When  I  grope  for  sleep  and  find 
Only  shadows  in  my  mind. 

Rose,  when  I  remember  you. 
White  and  glowing,  pink  and  new, 
With  so  swift  a  sense  of  fun 
Although  life  has  just  begun; 
With  so  sure  a  pride  of  place. 
In  your  very  infant  face, 
I  should  like  to  make  a  prayer 
To  the  angels  in  the  air: 
"If  an  angel  ever  brings 
Me  a  baby  in  her  wings. 
Please  be  certain  that  it  grows 
Very,  very  much  like  Rose." 

Sara  Tcasdale  [1884- 


The   Picture  of  Little  T.   C. 


TO   CHARLOITE   PULTENEY 


273 


Timely  blossom,  Infant  fair. 
Fondling  of  a  happy  pair, 
Every  morn  and  every  night 
Their  solicitous  delight. 
Sleeping,  waking,  still  at  ease, 
Pleasing,  without  skill  to  please; 
Little  gossip,  blithe  and  hale, 
Tattling  many  a  broken  tale, 
Singing  many  a  tuneless  song, 
Lavish  of  a  heedless  tongue; 
Simple  maiden,  void  of  art, 
Babbling  out  the  very  heart, 
Yet  abandoned  to  thy  will, 
Yet  imagining  no  ill, 
Yet  too  innocent  to  blush; 
Like  the  linnet  in  the  bush 
To  the  mother-linnet's  note 
Moduling  her  slender  throat; 
Chirping  forth  thy  pretty  joys, 
Wanton  in  the  change  of  toys, 
Like  the  linnet  green,  in  May 
Flitting  to  each  bloomy  spray; 
Wearied  then  and  glad  of  rest, 
Like  the  linnet  in  the  nest: — 
This  thy  present  happy  lot. 
This,  in  time  will  be  forgot: 
Other  pleasures,  other  cares, 
Ever-busy  Time  prepares; 
And  thou  shalt  in  thy  daughter  see. 
This  picture,  once,  resembled  thee. 

Ambrose  Philips  [167 5?- 1740] 

THE  PICTURE  OF  LITTLE  T.   C.   IN  A 
PROSPECT  OF   FLOWERS 

See  with  what  simplicity 
This  nymph  begins  her  golden  days! 
In  the  green  grass  she  loves  to  lie, 
And  there  with  her  fair  aspect  tames 


2  74  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  wilder  flowers,  and  gives  them  names; 
But  only  with  the  roses  plays, 

And  them  does  tell 
What  color  best  becomes  them,  and  what  smell. 

Who  can  foretell  for  what  high  cause 
This  darling  of  the  gods  was  born? 
Yet  this  is  she  whose  chaster  laws 
The  wanton  Love  shall  one  day  fear, 
And,  under  her  command  Severe, 
See  his  bow  broke,  and  ensigns  torn. 

Happy  who  can 
Appease  this  virtuous  enemy  of  man! 

O  then  let  me  in  time  compound 
And  parley  with  those  conquering  eyes. 
Ere  they  have  tried  their  force  to  wound. 
Ere  with  their  glancing  wheels  they  drive 
In  triumph  over  hearts  that  strive, 
And  them  that  yield  but  more  despise: 

Let  me  be  laid 
Where  I  may  see  the  glories  from  some  shade. 

Meantime,  whilst  every  verdant  thing 
Itself  does  at  thy  beauty  charm, 
Reform  the  errors  of  the  Spring; 
Make  that  the  tulips  may  have  share 
Of  sweetness,  seeing  they  are  fair, 
And  roses  of  their  thorns  disarm; 

But  most  procure 
That  violets  may  a  longer  age  endure. 

But  O  young  beauty  of  the  woods, 

WTiom  Nature  courts  with  fruits  and  flowers, 

Gather  the  flowers,  but  spare  the  buds; 

Lest  Flora,  angry  at  thy  crime 

To  kill  her  infants  in  their  prime. 

Do  quickly  make  the  example  yours; 

And,  ere  we  see, 
Nip,  in  the  blossom,  all  our  hopes  and  thee. 

Andmv  Marvell  [i 621-1678] 


To   Hartley   Coleridge  275 


TO  HARTLEY   COLERIDGE 

SIX    YEARS    OLD 

O  thou!  whose  fancies  from  afar  are  brought: 

Who  of  thy  words  dost  make  a  mock  apparel, 

And  fittest  to  unutterable  thought 

The  breeze-like  motion  and  the  self-born  carol; 

Thou  fairy  voyager!  that  dost  float 

In  such  clear  water,  that  thy  boat 

May  rather  seem 

To  brood  on  air  than  on  an  earthly  stream; 

Suspended  in  a  stream  as  clear  as  sky. 

Where  earth  and  heaven  do  make  one  imagery: 

0  blessed  vision !  happy  child ! 
Thou  art  so  exquisitely  wild, 

1  think  of  thee  with  many  fears 

For  what  may  be  thy  lot  in  future  years. 

I  thought  of  times  when  Pain  might  be  thy  guest, 

Lord  of  thy  house  and  hospitality; 

And  Grief,  uneasy  lover!  never  rest 

But  when  she  sate  within  the  touch  of  thee. 

O  too  industrious  folty! 

O  vain'  and  causeless  melancholy ! 

Nature  will  either  end  thee  quite; 

Or,  lengthening  out  thy  season  of  delight, 

Preserve  for  thee,  by  individual  right, 

A  young  lamb 's  heart  among  the  full-grown  flocks. 

What  hast  thou  to  do  with  sorrow. 

Or  the  injuries  of  to-morrow? 

Thou  art  a  dew-drop,  which  the  morn  brings  forth, 

Ill-fitted  to  sustain  unkindly  shocks. 

Or  to  be  trailed  along  the  soiling  earth; 

A  gem  that  ghtters  while  it  lives. 

And  no  forewarning  gives; 

But,  at  the  touch  of  wrong,  without  a  strife, 

Slips  in  a  moment  out  of  life. 

William  Wordsworth  [1770  1850] 


276  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

TO  A   CHILD   OF  QUALITY 

FIVE  YEARS  OLD,  1704,  THE  AUTHOR  THEN  FORTY 

Lords,  knightS,  and  squires,  the  numerous  band 
That  wear  the  fair  Miss  Mary's  fetters, 

Were  summoned  by  her  high  command 
To  show  their  passions  by  their  letters. 

My  pen  amongst  the  rest  I  took, 
Lest  those  bright  eyes,  that  cannot  read, 

Should  dart  their  kindling  fires,  and  look 
The  power  they  have  to  be  obeyed. 

Nor  quality,  nor  reputation. 

Forbids  me  yet  my  flame  to  tell; 
Dear  Five-years-old  befriends  my  passion, 

And  I  may  write  till  she  can  spell. 

For,  while  she  makes  her  silkworms'  beds 

With  all  the  tender  things  I  swear; 
Whilst  all  the  house  my  passion  reads. 

In  papers  round  her  baby's  hair; 

She  may  receive  and  own  my  flame; 
•  For,  though  the  strictest  prudes  should  know  it, 
She'll  pass  for  a  most  virtuous  dame, 
And  I  for  an  unhappy  poet. 

Then  too,  alas!  when  she  shall  tear 
The  rhymes  some  younger  rival  sends, 

She'll  give  me  leave  to  write,  I  fear. 
And  we  shall  still  continue  friends. 

j\ ' 
For,  as  our  different  ages  move,  ,=_j  j\ 

'Tis  so  ordained  (would  Fate  but  mend  it!), 
That  I  shall  be  past  making  love 
When  she  begins  to  comprehend  it. 

Matthew  Prior  [1664-1721] 


Ex  Ore   Infantium  277 

EX  ORE  INFANTIUM 

Little  Jesus,  wast  Thou  shy 
Once,  and  just  so  small  as  I? 
And  what  did  it  feel  like  to  be 
Out  of  Heaven,  and  just  like  me? 
Didst  Thou  sometimes  think  of  there, 
And  ask  where  all  the  angels  were? 
I  should  think  that  I  would  cry 
For  my  house  all  made  of  sky; 
I  would  look  about  the  air, 
And  wonder  where  my  angels  were; 
And  at  waking  'twould  distress  me — 
Not  an  angel  there  to  dress  me! 

Hadst  Thou  ever  any  toys, 

Like  us  little  girls  and  boys? 

And  didst  Thou  play  in  Heaven  with  all 

The  angels,  that  were  not  too  tall, 

With  stars  for  marbles?     Did  the  things 

Play  Can  you  see  me?  through  their  wings? 

Didst  Thou  kneel  at  night  to  pray. 
And  didst  Thou  join  Thy  hands,  this  way? 
And  did  they  tire  sometimes,  being  young, 
And  make  the  prayer  seem  very  long? 
And  dost  Thou  like  it  best,  that  we 
Should  join  our  hands  to  pray  to  Thee? 
I  used  to  think,  before  I  knew. 
The  prayer  not  said  unless  we  do. 
And  did  Thy  Mother  at  the  night 
Kiss  Thee,  and  fold  the  clothes  in  right? 
And  didst  Thou  feel  quite  good  in  bed, 
Kissed,  and  sweet,  and  Thy  prayers  said? 

Thou  canst  not  have  forgotten  all 

That  it  feels  like  to  be  small: 

And  Thou  know'st  I  cannot  pray 

To  Thee  in  my  father's  way — 

When  Thou  wast  so  little,  say, 

Could 'st  Thou  talk  Thy  Father's  way? — 

So,  a  little  Child,  come  down 

And  hear  a  child's  tongue  like  Thy  own; 


278  Poems  of  Youth   and  Age 

Take  me  by  the  hand  aiivd  walk, 

And  listen  to  my  baby-talk. 

To  Thy  Father  show  my  prayer  ■, 

(He  will  look,  Thou  art  so  fair), 

And  say:  "O  Father,  I,  Thy  Son, 

Bring  the  prayer  of  a  little  one."  ,  ^ 

And  He  will  smile,  that  children's  tongue 
Has  not  changed  since  Thou  wast  yoimg! 

Francis  Thompson  [1850-1907] 

OBITUARY 

Finding  Francesca  full  of  tears,  I  said, 

"Tell  me  thy  trouble."     "Oh,  my  dog  is  dead! 

Murdered  by  poison! — no  one  knows  for  what!-:^ 

Was  ever  dog  born  capable  of  that?" 

"Child," — I  began  to  say,  but  checked  my  thought, — 

"A  better  dog  can  easily  be  bought." 

For  no — what  animal  could  him  replace? 

Those  loving  eyes!     That  fond,  confiding  face! 

Those  dear,  dumb  touches!     Therefore  I  was  dumb. 

From  word  of  mine  could  any  comfort  come? 

A  bitter  sorrow  'tis  to  lose  a  brute 

Friend,  dog  or  horse,  for  grief  must  then  be  mute, — 

So  many  smile  to  see  the  rivers  shed 

Of  tears  for  one  poor,  speechless  creature  dead. 

When  parents  die  there's  many  a  word  to  say — 

Kind  words,  consoHng — one  can  always  pray; 

When  children  die  'tis  natural  to  tell 

Their  mother,  "Certainly,  with  them  'tis  well!"  . 

But  for  a  dog,  'twas  all  the  hfe  he  had,  T 

Since  death  is  end  of  dogs,  or  good  or  bad. 

This  was  his  world;  he  was  contented  here; 

Imagined  nothing  better,  naught  more  dear. 

Than  his  young  mistress;  sought  no  brighter  sphere; 

Having  no  sin,  asked  not  to  be  forgiven; 

Ne'er  guessed  at  God  nor  ever  dreamed  of  heaven. 

Now  he  has  passed  away,  so  much  of  love 

Goes  from  our  life,  without  one  hope  above! 

When  a  dog  dies  there's  nothing  to  be  said 

But — kiss  me,  darling! — dear  old  Smiler's  dead. 

Thomas  William  Parsons  [1819-1892J 


The  Child's   Heritage  279 


THE   CHILD'S  HERITAGE 

Oh,  there  are  those,  a  sordid  clan. 
With  pride  in  gaud  and  faith  in  gold, 

Who  prize  the  sacred  soul  of  man 
For  what  his  hands  have  sold.      •■ 

And  these  shall  deem  thee  humbly  bred: 
They  shall  not  hear,  they  shall  not  see 

The  kings  among  the  lordly  dead 
Who  walk  and  talk  with  thee! 

A  tattered  cloak  may  be  thy  dole, 
And  thine  the  roof  that  Jesus  had: 

The  broidered  garment  of  the  soul 
Shall  keep  thee  purple-clad! 

The  blood  of  men  hath  dyed  its  brede, 
And  it  was  wrought  by  holy  seers 

With  sombre  dream  and  golden  deed, 
And  pearled  with  women's  tears. 

With  Eld  thy  chain  of  days  is  one: 

The  seas  are  still  Homeric  seas; 
Thy  skies  shall  glow  with  Pindar's  sun, 

The  stars  of  Socrates! 

Unaged  the  ancient  tide  shall  surge, 
The  old  Spring  burn  along  the  bough: 

For  thee,  the  new  and  old  converge 
In  one  eternal  Now! 

I  give  thy  feet  the  hopeful  sod. 

Thy  mouth,  the  priceless  boon  of  breath; 
The  glory  of  the  search  for  God 

Be  thine  in  life  and  death! 

Unto  thy  flesh,  the  soothing  dust; 

Thy  soul,  the  gift  of  being  free: 
The  torch  my  fathers  gave  in  trust, 

Thy  father  gives  to  thee! 

John  G.  Neihardt  (iSSi- 


2  8o  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


A   GIRL  OF  POMPEII 

A  PUBLIC  haunt  they  found  her  in: 

She  lay  asleep,  a  lovely  child; 

The  only  thing  left  undeliled 
Where  ^11  things  else  bore  taint  of  sin. 

Her  supple  outhnes  fixed  in  clay 

The  universal  law  suspend. 

And  turn  Time's  chariot  back,  and  blend 
A  thousand  years  with  yesterday. 

A  sinless  touch,  austere  yet  warm, 
Around  her  girlish  figure  pressed, 
Caught  the  sweet  imprint  of  her  breast. 

And  held  her,  surely  clasped,  from  harm. 

Truer  than  work  of  sculptor 's  art 
Comes  this  dear  maid  of  long  ago, 
Sheltered  from  woeful  chance,  to  show 

A  spirit's  lovely  counterpart. 

And  bid  mistrustful  men  be  sure 
That  form  shall  fate  of  flesh  escape. 
And,  quit  of  earth's  corruptions,  shape 

Itself,  imperishably  pure. 

Edward  Sandford  Martin  [1856- 

ON  THE  PICTURE  OF  A  "CHILD  TIRED 
OF   PLAY" 

Tired  of  play !    Tired  of  play ! 

What  hast  thou  done  this  live-long  day! 

The  bird  is  silent  and  so  is  the  bee. 

The  shadow  is  creeping  up  steeple  and  tree; 

The  doves  have  flown  to  the  sheltering  eaves. 

And  the  nests  are  dark  with  the  drooping  leaves; 

Twilight  gathers,  and  day  is  done, — 

How  hast  thou  spent  it,  restless  one? 

Playing!    And  what  hast  thou  done  beside 
To  tell  thy  mother  at  eventide? 


The   Reverie  of  Poor  Susan  281 

What  promise  of  morn  is  left  unbroken? 
What  kind  word  to  thy  playmate  spoken? 
Whom  hast  thou  pitied,  and  whom  forgiven? 
How  with  thy  faults  has  duty  striven? 
What  hast  thou  learned  by  field  and  hill, 
By  greenwood  path  and  by  singing  rill? 

There  will  come  an  eve  to  a  longer  day 
That  will  find  thee  tired, — but  not  with  play! 
And  thou  wilt  learn,  as  thou  learnest  now. 
With  wearied  limbs  and  aching  brow, 
And  wish  the  shadows  would  faster  creep 
And  long  to  go  to  thy  quiet  sleep. 

Well  will  it  be  for  thee  then  if  thou 
Art  as  free  from  sin  and  shame  as  now! 
Well  for  thee  if  thy  tongue  can  tell 
A  tale  Hke  this,  of  a  day  spent  well  I 
If  thine  open  hand  hath  relieved  distress, 
And  thy  pity  hath  sprung  to  wretchedness — 
If  thou  hast  forgiven  the  sore  offence 
And  humbled  thy  heart  with  penitence; 

If  Nature 's  voices  have  spoken  to  thee 

W^ith  her  holy  meanings,  eloquently— 

If  every  creature  hath  won  thy  love. 

From  the  creeping  worm  to  the  brooding  dove — 

If  never  a  sad,  low-spoken  word 

Hath  plead  with  thy  human  heart  unheard — 

Then,  when  the  night  steals  on,  as  now 

It  will  bring  relief  to  thine  aching  brow. 

And,  with  joy  and  peace  at  the  thought  of  rest. 

Thou  wilt  sink  to  sleep  on  thy  mother 's  breast. 

Nathaniel  Parker  Willis  [1806-1867J 


THE  REVERIE  OF  POOR   SUSAN 

At  the  corner  of  Wood  Street,  when  dayhght  appears. 
Hangs  a  Thrush  that  sings  loud,  it  has  sung  for  three  years: 
Poor  Susan  has  passed  by  the  spot,  and  has  heard 
In  the  silence  of  morning  the  song  of  the  Bird. 


282  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

'Tis  a  note  of  enchantment ;  what  ails  her?    She  sees 
A  mountain  ascending,  a  vision  of  trees; 
Bright  volumes  of  vapor  through  Lothbury  glide, 
And  a  river  flows  on  through  the  vale  of  Cheapside. 

Green  pastures  she  views  in  the  midst  of  the  dale, 
Down  which  she  so  often  has  tripped  with  her  pail; 
And  a  single  small  cottage,  a  nest  like  a  dove's. 
The  one  only  dwelling  on  earth  that  she  loves. 

She  looks,  and  her  heart  is  in  heaven:  but  they  fade. 
The  mist  and  the  river,  the  hill  and  the  shade: 
The  stream  will  not  flow,  and  the  hill  will  not  rise. 
And  the  colors  have  all  passed  away  from  her  eyes! 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 

CHILDREN'S  SONG 

Sometimes  wind  and  sometimes  rain, 
Then  the  sun  comes  back  again; 
Sometimes  rain  and  sometimes  snow, 
Goodness,  how  we'd  like  to  know 
Why  the  weather  alters  so. 

When  the  weather's  really  good 
We  go  nutting  in  the  wood; 
When  it  rains  we  stay  at  home, 
And  then  sometimes  other  some 
Of  the  neighbors'  children  come. 

Sometimes  we  have  jam  and  meat, 
All  the  things  we  hke  to  eat; 
Sometimes  we  make  do  with  bread 
And  potatoes  boiled  instead. 
Once  when  we  were  put  to  bed 
We  had  nowt  and  mother  cried. 
But  that  was  after  father  died. 

So,  sometimes  wind  and  sometimes  rain, 
Then  the  sun  comes  back  again; 
Sometimes  rain  and  sometimes  snow, 
Goodness,  how  we'd  like  to  know 
If  things  will  always  alter  so. 

Ford  Madox  Huejffer  [1873- 


J 


The  Cry  of  the  Children  283 


THE   MITHERLESS   BAIRN 

When  a '  other  bairnies  are  hushed  to  their  hame 
By  aunty,  or  cousin,  or  frecky  grand-dame, 
Wha  stands  last  and  lanely,  an'  naebody  carin'? 
'Tis  the  puir  doited  loonic, — the  mitherless  bairn! 

The  mitherless  bairn  gangs  to  his  lane  bed; 
Nane  covers  his  cauld  back,  or  haps  his  bare  head; 
His  wee  hackit  heelies  are  hard  as  the  airn, 
An'  htheless  the  lair  o'  the  mitherless  bairn. 

Aneath  his  cauld  brow  siccan  dreams  hover  there, 
O'  hands  that  wont  kindly  to  kame  his  dark  hair; 
But  mornin'  brings  clutches,  a'  reckless  an'  stern, 
That  lo'e  na  the  locks  o'  the  mitherless  bairn! 

Yon  sister  that  sang  o'er  his  saftly  rocked  bed 
Now  rests  in  the  mools  where  her  mammie  is  laid; 
The  father  toils  sair  their  wee  bannock  to  earn. 
An'  kens  na  the  wrangs  o'  his  mitherless  bairn. 

Her  spirit,  that  passed  in  yon  hour  o'  his  birth. 
Still  watches  his  wearisome  wanderings  on  earth; 
Recording  in  heaven  the  blessings  they  earn 
Wha  couthilie  deal  wi'  the  mitherless  bairn! 

O,  speak  him  na  harshly, — he  trembles  the  while. 
He  bends  to  your  bidding,  and  blesses  your  smile; 
In  their  dark  hour  o '  anguish  the  heartless  shall  learn 
That  God  deals  the  blow,  for  the  mitherless  bairn ! 

William  Thorn  [1798?- 1848] 


THE   CRY  OF  THE   CHILDREN 

Do  ye  hear  the  children  weeping,  O  my  brothers, 

Ere  the  sorrow  comes  with  years? 
They  are  leaning  their  young  heads  against  their  mothers, 

And  that  cannot  stop  their  tears. 


■284  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  young  lambs  are  bleating  in  the  meadows, 

The  young  birds  are  chirping  in  the  nest, 
The  young  faw.ns  are  playing  with  the  shadows. 

The  young  flowers  are  blowing  toward  the  west — 
But  the  young,  young  children,  O  my  brothers, 

They  are  weeping  bitterly! 
They  are  weeping  in  the  playtime  of  the  others, 
In  the  country  of  the  free. 

Do  you  question  the  young  children  in  the  sorrow, 

Why  their  tears  are  falling  so? 
The  old  man  may  weep  for  his  to-morrow 

Which  is  lost  in  Long  Ago; 
The  old  tree  is  leafless  in  the  forest. 

The  old  year  is  ending  in  the  frost, 
The  old  wound,  if  stricken,  is  the  sorest. 

The  old  hope  is  hardest  to  be  lost: 
But  the  young,  young  children,  O  my  brothers. 

Do  you  ask  them  why  they  stand 
Weeping  sore  before  the  bosoms  of  their  mothers. 

In  our  happy  Fatherland? 

They  look  up  with  their  pale  and  sunken  faces, 

And  their  looks  are  sad  to  see, 
For  the  man 's  hoary  anguish  draws  and  presses  j 

Down  the  cheeks  of  infancy;  ^ 

"Your  old  earth,"  they  say,  "is  very  dreary; 
Our  young  feet,"  they  say,  "are  very  weak; 
Few  paces  have  we  taken,  yet  are  weary —  I 

Our  grave-rest  is  very  far  to  seek: 
Ask  the  aged  why  they  weep,  and  not  the  children 

For  the  outside  earth  is  cold. 
And  we  young  ones  stand  without,  in  our  bewildering. 

And  the  graves  are  for  the  old. 

"True,"  say  the  children,  "it  may  happen 

That  we  die  before  our  time: 
Little  Alice  died  last  year — her  grave  is  shapen 

Like  a  snowbaU,  in  the  rime. 
We  looked  into  the  pit  prepared  to  take  her: 
Was  no  room  for  any  work  in  the  close  clay! 


The  Cry  of  the  Children  285 

From  the  sleep  wherein  she  heth  none  will  wake  her, 

Crying,  'Get  up,  Uttle  Alice!  it  is  day.' 
If  you  hsten  by  that  grave,  in  sun  and  shower. 

With  your  ear  down,  little  AHce  never  cries; 
Could  we  see  her  face,  be  sure  we  should  not  know  her^ 

For  the  smile  has  time  for  growing  in  her  eyes: 
And  merry  go  her  moments,  lulled  and  stilled  in 

The  shroud  by  the  kirk-chime. 
It  is  good  when  it  happens,"  say  the  children, 
"That  we  die  before  our  time." 

Alas,  alas,  the  children!  they  are  seeking 

Death  in  hfe,  as  best  to  have! 
They  are  binding  up  their  hearts  away  from  breaking, 

With  a  cerement  from  the  grave. 
Go  out,  children,  from  the  mine  and  from  the  city, 

Sing  out,  children,  as  the  little  thrushes  do; 
Pluck  your  handfuls  of  the  meadow  cowslips  pretty; 

Laugh  aloud,  to  fed  your  lingers  let  them  through! 
But  they  answer,  "Are  your  cowslips  of  the  meadows 

Like  our  weeds  anear  the  mine? 
Leave  us  quiet  in  the  dark  of  the  coal-shadows. 
From  your  pleasures  fair  and  fine! 

"For  oh,"  say  the  children,  "we  are  weary, 

And  we  cannot  run  or  leap; 
If  we  cared  for  any  meadows,  it  were  merely 

To  drop  down  in  them  and  sleep. 
Our  knees  tremble  soreh/  in  the  stooping, 

We  fall  upon  our  faces,  trying  to  go; 
And,  underneath  our  heavy  eyelids  drooping, 

The  reddest  flower  would  look  as  pale  as  snow. 
For,  all  day,  we  drag  our  burden  tiring, 

Through  the  coal-dark,  underground; 
Or,  all  day,  we  drive  the  wheels  of  iron 

In  the  factories,  round  and  round. 

"For,  aU  day,  the  wheels  are  droning,  turning; 

Their  wind  comes  in  our  faces, 
Till  our  hearts  turn,  our  heads,  with  pulses  burning. 

And  the  walls  turn  in  their  places: 


286  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Turns  the  sky  in  the  high  window  blank  and  reeling, 

Turns  the  long  light  that  drops  adown  the  wall, 
Turn  the  black  flies  that  crawl  along  the  ceiling: 

All  are  turning,  all  the  day,  and  we  with  all. 
And  all  day,  the  iron  wheels  are  droning; 

And  sometimes  we  could  pray, 
'O  ye  wheels,  (breaking  out  in  a  mad  moaning) 
'Stop!  be  silent  for  to-day!'  " 

Ay,  be  silent!     Let  them  hear  each  other  breathing 

For  a  moment,  mouth  to  mouth! 
Let  them  touch  each  other's  hands',  in  a  fresh  wreathing 

Of  their  tender  human  youth! 
Let  them  feel  that  this  cold  metallic  motion 
Is  not  all  the  life  God  fashions  or  reveals: 
Let  them  prove  their  living  souls  against  the  notion 

That  they  live  in  you,  or  under  you,  O  wheels! 
Still,  all  day,  the  iron  wheels  go  onward. 

Grinding  life  down  from  its  mark; 
And  the  children's  souls,  which  God  is  calling  sunward. 

Spin  on  blindly  in  the  dark. 

Now  tell  the  poor  young  children,  O  my  brothers. 

To  look  up  to  Him  and  pray; 
So  the  blessed  One,  who  blesseth  all  the  others, 

Will  bless  them  another  day. 
They  answer,  "  Who  is  God  that  He  should  hear  us, 

Wliile  the  rushing  of  the  iron  wheels  is  stirred? 
When  we  sob  aloud,  the  human  creatures  near  us 

Pass  by,  hearing  not,  or  answer  not  a  word! 
And  we  hear  not  (for  the  wheels  in  their  resounding) 

Strangers  speaking  at  the  door: 
Is  it  likely  God,  with  angels  singing  round  Him, 

Hears  our  weeping  any  more? 

"Two  words,  indeed,  of  praying  we  remember, 

And  at  midnight 's  hour  of  harm, 
'Our  Father,'  looking  upward  in  the  chamber. 

We  say  softly  for  a  charm. 
We  know  no  other  words  except  'Our  Father,' 
And  we  think  that,  in  some  pause  of  angels'  song. 


The  Cry  of  the  Children  287 

God  may  pluck,  them  with  the  silence  sweet  to  gather, 

And  hold  both  within  his  right  hand  which  is  strong. 
'Our  Father!'  If  He  heard  us,  He  would  surely 

(For  they  call  Him  good  and  mild) 
Answer,  smiling  down  the  steep  world  very  purely, 

'Come  and  rest  with  me,  my  child.' 

"But  no!"  say  the  children,  weeping  faster, 

"He  is  speecliless  as  a  stone; 
And  they  tell  us,  of  His  image  is  the  master 

Who  commands  us  to  work  on. 
Go  to!"  say  the  children, — "Up  in  Heaven, 

Dark,  wheel-like,  turning  clouds  are  all  we  find. 
Do  not  mock  us;  grief  has  made  us  unbelieving: 

We  look  up  for  God,  but  tears  have  made  us  blind." 
Do  you  hear  the  children  weeping  and  disproving, 

O  my  brothers,  what  ye  preach? 
For  God's  possible  is  taught  by  His  world's  loving, 

And  the  children  doubt  of  each. 

And  well  may  the  children  weep  before  you! 

They  are  weary  ere  they  run; 
They  have  never  seen  the  sunshine,  nor  the  glory 

Which  is  brighter  than  the  sun. 
They  know  the  grief  of  man,  without  its  wisdom; 

They  sink  in  man's  despair,  without  its  calm; 
Are  slaves,  Vv'ithout  the  liberty  in  Christdom, 

Are  martyrs,  by  the  pang  without  the  palm: 
Are  worn  as  if  with  age,  yet  unretrievingly 

The  harvest  of  its  memories  cannot  reap, — 
Are  orphans  of  the  eartlily  love  and  heavenly. 

Let  them  weep!  let  them  weep! 

They  look  up,  with  their  pale  and  sunken  faces, 

And  their  look  is  dread  to  see. 
For  they  mind  you  of  their  angels  in  high  places, 

With  eyes  turned  on  Deity.  ^^^ 

"How  long,"  they  say,  "how  long,  O  cruel  nation, 

Will  you  stand,  to  move  the  world,  on  a  child's  heart, — 
Stifle  down  with  a  mailed  heel  its  palpitation. 
And  tread  onward  to  your  throne  amid  the  mart? 


288  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Our  blood  splashes  upward,  O  gold-heaper, 
And  your  purple  shows  your  path; 

But  the  child's  sob  in  the  silence  curses  deeper 
Than  the  strong  man  in  his  wrath!" 

Elizabeth  Barrell  Browning  [i8o6-i85i] 

THE  SHADOW-CHILD 

Why  do  the  wheels  go  whirnng  round, 

Mother,  mother? 
Oh,  mother,  are  they  giants  bound, 

And  will  they  growl  forever? 
Yes,  fiery  giants  underground, 

Daughter,  little  daughter. 
Forever  turn  the  wheels  around, 

And  rumble-grumble  ever. 

Why  do  I  pick  the  threads  all  day, 

Mother,  mother? 
While  sunshine  children  are  at  play? 

And  must  I  work  forever? 
Yes,  shadow-child;  the  live-long  day. 

Daughter,  little  daughter, 
Your  hands  must  pick  the  threads  away, 

And  feel  the  sunshine  never. 

Why  do  the  birds  sing  in  the  sun. 

Mother,  mother? 
If  all  day  long  I  run  and  run, 

Run  with  the  wheels  forever? 
The  birds  may  sing  till  day  is  done, 

Daughter,  little  daughter. 
But  with  the  wheels  your  feet  must  run — 

Run  with  the  wheels  forever. 

Why  do  I  feel  so  tired  each  night. 

Mother,  mother? 
The  wheels  are  always  buzzing  bright; 

Do  they  grow  sleepy  never? 
Oh,  baby  thing,  so  soft  and  white. 

Daughter,  little  daughter. 
The  big  wheels  grind  us  in  their  might, 

And  they  will  grind  forever. 


i 


Mother  Wept  289 

And  is  Ike  white  thread  never  spun, 

Mother,  mother? 
And  is  the  while  cloth  never  done. 

For  you  and  me  done  never? 
Oh,  yes,  our  thread  will  all  be  spun,  :  '.■ 

Daughter,  little  daughter, 
When  we  lie  down  out  in  the  sun, 

And  work  no  more  forever. 

And  when  will  come  that  happy  day, 

Mother,  mother? 
Oh,  shall  we  laugh  and  sing  and  play 

Out  in  the  sun  forever? 
Nay,  shadow-child,  we'll  rest  all  day. 

Daughter,  little  daughter, 
Where  green  grass  grows  and  roses  gay. 

There  in  the  sun  forever. 

Harriet  Monroe  fiS6o- 


MOTHER  WEPT 

Mother  wept,  and  father  sighed; 

With  delight  aglow 
Cried  the  lad,  "To-morrow,"  cried, 

"To  the  pit  I  go." 

Up  and  down  the  place  he  sped, — 

Greeted  old  and  young; 
Far  and  wide  the  tidings  spread; 

Clapt  his  hands  and  sung. 

Came  his  cronies;  some  to  gaze 

Wrapped  in  wonder;  some 
Free  with  counsel;  some  with  praise: 

Some  with  envy  dumb. 

"May  he,"  many  a  gossip  cried, 

"Be  from  peril  kept." 
Father  hid  his  face  and  sighed, 

Mother  turned  and  wept. 

Joscpli  Skipsey  [1802-1903] 


290  Poems  of  Youth,  and  Age 

DUTY 

So  nigh  is  grandeur  to  our  dust, 

So  near  is  God  to  man, 
When  Duty  whispers  low,  "Thou  must," 

The  youth  repHes,  "I  can." 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-1882] 

LUCY   GRAY 

OR  SOLITUDE 

Oft  I  had  heard  of  Lucy  Gray: 
And,  when  I  crossed  the  wild, 

I  chanced  to  see,  at  break  of  day, 
The  solitary  child. 

No  mate,  no  comrade  Lucy  knew; 

She  dwelt  on  a  wide  moor. 
The  sweetest  thing  that  ever  grew 

Beside  a  human  door! 

You  yet  may  spy  the  fawn  at  play. 

The  hare  upon  the  green; 
But  the  sweet  face  of  Lucy  Gray 

Will  never  more  be  seen. 

"To-night  will  be  a  stormy  night,— 

You  to  the  town  must  go; 
And  take  a  lantern.  Child,  to  light 

Your  mother  through  the  snow." 

"That,  Father,  will  I  gladly  do: 

'Tis  scarcely  afternoon, — 
The  minster-clock  has  just  struck  two, 

And  yonder  is  the  moon!" 

At  this  the  Father  raised  his  hook, 

And  snapped  a  fagot-brand. 
He  plied  his  work ;  — and  Lucy  took 

The  lantern  in  her  hand. 


Lucy   Gray  291 

Not  blither  is  the  mountain  roe: 

With  many  a  wanton  stroke 
Her  feet  disperse  the  powdery  snow, 

That  rises  up  like  smoke. 

The  storm  came  on  before  its  time: 

She  wandered  up  and  down: 
And  many  a  hill  did  Lucy  climb: 

But  never  reached  the  town. 

The  wretched  parents  all  that  night 

Went  shouting  far  and  wide; 
But  there  was  neither  sound  nor  sight 

To  serve  them  for  a  guide. 

At  daybreak  on  the  hill  they  stood 

That  overlooked  the  moor; 
And  thence  they  saw  the  bridge  of  wood, 

A  furlong  from  their  door. 

They  wept, — and,  turning  homeward,  cried, 

"In  heaven  we  all  shall  meet;  " 
When  in  the  snow  the  mother  spied 

The  print  of  Lucy 's  feet. 

Then  downwards  from  the  steep  hill's  edge 

They  tracked  the  footmarks  small: 
And  through  the  broken  hawthorn-hedge, 

And  by  the  low  stone-wall; 

And  then  an  open  field  they  crossed — 

The  marks  were  still  the  same — 
They  tracked  them  on,  nor  ever  lost; 

And  to  the  bridge  they  came. 

iirrt.:;  odt  bsic  . 

They  followed  from  the  snowy  bank 

Those  footmarks,  one  by  one. 
Into  the  middle  of  the  plank; 

And  further  there  were  none! 


292  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 

— Yet  some  maintain  that  to  this  day 

She  is  a  Hving  child; 
That  you  may  see  sweet  Lucy  Gray 

Upon  the  lonesome  wild. 

O'er  rough  and  smooth  she  trips  along, 

And  never  looks  behind; 
And  sings  a  solitary  song 

That  whistles  in  the  wind. 

Williiim  Wordsworth  [1770-1850J 

IN  THE   CHILDREN'S  HOSPITAL 

EMMIE 

Our  doctor  had  called  in  another,  I  never  had  seen  him 

before. 
But  he  sent  a  chill  to  my  heart  when  I  saw  him  come  in  at 

the  door, 
Fresh  from   the   surgery-schools  of   France  and  of  other 

lands — 
Harsh  red  hair,  big  voice,  big  chest,  big  merciless  hands! 
Wonderful  cures  he  had  done,  O  yes,  but  they  said  too  of  him 
He  was  happier  using  the  knife  than  in  trying  to  save  the 

hmb, 
And  that  I  can  well  believe,  for  he  looked  so  coarse  and  so 

red, 
I  could  think  he  was  one  of  those  who  would  break  their 

jests  on  the  dead, 
And  mangle  the  living  dog  that  had  loved  him  and  fawned 

at  his  knee — 
Drenched  with  the  hellish  oorali — that  ever  such  things 

should  be! 

Here  was  a  boy — I  am  sure  that  some  of  our  children  would 

die 
But  for  the  voice  of  love,  and  the  smile,  and  the  comforting 

eye — 
Here  was  a  boy  in  the  ward,  every  bone  seemed  out  of  its 

place — 
Caught  in  a  mill  and  crushed — it  was  all  but  a  hopeless  case: 


In  the  Children's   Hospital  293 

And  he  handled  him  genlly  enough;  but  his  voice  and  his 

face  were  not  kind. 
And  it  was  but  a  hopeless  case,  he  had  seen  it  and  made  up 

his  mind. 
And  he  said  to  me  roughly  "The  lad  will  need  httle  more  of 

your  care." 
•  f-All  the  more  need,"  I  told  him,  "to  seek  the  Lord  Jesus 

in  prayer; 
They  are  all  Plis  children  here,  and  I  pray  for  them  all  as 

my  own:" 
But  he  turned  to  me,  "i\y,  good  woman,  can  prayer  set  a 

broken  bone?" 
Then  he  muttered  half  to  himself,  but  I  know  that  I  heard 

him  say, 
"All  very  well — but  the  good  Lord  Jesus  has  had  his  day."  ' 

Had?  has  it  come?    It  has  only  dawned.     It  will  come  by 

and  by. 
O,  how  could  I  serve  in  the  wards  if  the  hope  of  the  world 

were  a  lie? 
How  could  I  bear  with  the  sights  and  the  loathsome  smells 

of  disease 
But  that  He  said  "Ye  do  it  to  me,  when  ye  do  it  to  these"? 

So  he  went.    And  we  passed  to  this  ward  where  the  younger 

children  are  laid: 
Here  is  the  cot  of  our  orphan,  our  darling,  our  meek  little 

maid; 
Empty  you  see  just  now!    We  have  lost  her  who  loved  her 

so  much — 
Patient  of  pain  though  as  quick  as  a  sensitive  plant  to  the 

touch; 
Hers   was    the   prettiest    prattle,    it   often   moved   me   to 

tears. 
Hers  was  the  gratefullest  heart  I  have  found  in  a  child  of 

her  years — 
Nay  you  remember  our  Emmie;  you  used  to  send  her  the 

flowers; 
How  she  would  smile  at  'em,  play  with  'em,  talk  to  'em 

hours  after  hours! 


294  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

They  that  can  wander  at  will  where  the  works  of  the  Lord 

are  revealed 
Little  guess  what  joy  can  be  got  from  a  cowslip  out  of  the 

field; 
Flowers  to  these  "spirits  in  prison"  are  all  they  can  know  of 

the  spring, 
They  freshen  and  sweeten  the  wards  like  the  waft  of  an 

angel's  wing; 
And  she  lay  with  a  flower  in  one  hand  and  her  thin  hands 

crossed  on  her  breast — 
Wan,  but  as  pretty  as  heart  can  desire,  and  we  thought  her 

at  rest, 
Quietly  sleeping — so  quiet,   our  doctor  said,   "Poor  little 

dear. 
Nurse,  I  must  do  it  to-morrow:  she'll  never  live  through  it, 

I  fear." 

I  walked  with  our  kindly  old  doctor  as  far  as  the  head  of  the 

stair. 
Then  I  returned  to  the  ward;  the  child  didn't  see  I  was  there. 

Never  since  I  was  nurse,  had  I  been  so  grieved  and  so  vexed! 
Emmie  had  heard  him.     Softly  she  called  from  her  cot  to 

the  next, 
"He  says  I  shall  never  live  through  it;  O  Annie,  what  shall 

I  do?" 
Annie  considered.    "If  I,"  said  the  wise  little  Annie,  "was 

you, 
I  should  cry  to  the  dear  Lord  Jesus  to  help  me,  for,  Emmie, 

you  see. 
It's  all  in  the  picture  there:  'Little  children  should  come  to 

Me.'  "— 
(Meaning  the  print  that  you  gave  us,  I  find  that  it  always 

can  please 
Our  children,  the  dear  Lord  Jesus  with  children  about  His 

knees.) 
"Yes,  and  I  will,"  said  Emmie,  "but  then  if  I  call  to  the 

Lord, 
How  should  He  know  that  it's  me?  such  a  lot  of  beds  in  the 

ward?" 


In  the   Children's   Hospital  295 

That  was  a  puzzle  for  Annie.  Again  she  considered  and 
said : 

"Emmie,  you  put  out  your  arms,  and  you  leave  'em  outside 
on  the  bed — 

The  Lord  has  so  much  to  see  to!  but,  Emmie,  you  tell  it  Him 
plain, 

It's  the  httle  girl  with  her  arms  lying  out  on  the  counter- 
pane." 

I  had  sat  three  nights  by  the  child — I  could  not  watch  her 

for  four — 
My   brain   had   begun   to   reel — I    felt  I  could  do  it  no 

more. 
That  was  my  sleeping-night,  but  I  thought  that  it  never 

would  pass. 
There  was  a  thunderclap  once,  and  a  clatter  of  hail  on  the 

glass, 
And  there  was  a  phantom  cry  that  I  heard  as  I  tossed 

about. 
The  motherless  bleat  of  a  lamb  in  the  storm  and  the  dark- 
ness without; 
]\Iy  sleep  was  broken  besides  with  dreams  of  the  dreadful 

knife 
And  fears  for  our  delicate  Emmie  who  scarce  would  escape 

with  her  life; 
Then  in  the  gray  of  the  morning  it  seemed  she  stood  by  me 

and  smiled, 
And  the  doctor  came  at  his  hour,  and  we  went  to  see  the 

child. 

He  had  brought  his  ghastly  tools:  we  believed  her  asleep 
again — 

Her  dear,  long,  lean,  Httle  arms  lying  out  on  the  counter- 
pane ; — 

Say  that  His  day  is  done!  Ah,  why  should  we  care  what  they 
say? 

The  Lord  of  the  children  had  heard  her,  and  Emmie  had 
passed  away. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


296  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


"IF  I  WERE   DEAD" 

"If  I  were  dead,  you'd  sometimes  say.  Poor  Child!  " 

The  dear  hps  quivered  as  they  spake, 

And  the  tears  brake 

From  eyes  which,  not  to  grieve  me,  brightly  smiled. 

Poor  Child,  poor  Child! 

I  seem  to  hear  your  laugh,  your  talk,  your  song. 

It  is  not  true  that  Love  will  do  no  wrong. 

Poor  Child! 

And  did  you  think,  when  you  so  cried  and  smiled, 

How  I,  in  lonely  nights,  should  lie  awake, 

And  of  those  words  your  full  avengers  make? 

Poor  Child,  poor  Child! 

And  now,  unless  it  be 

That  sweet  amends  thrice  told  are  come  to  thee, 

O  God,  have  Thou  no  mercy  upon  me! 

Poor  Child! 

Coventry  Patmore  [ii2i-i2>g6\ 


THE  TOYS 

My  little  Son,  who  looked  from  thoughtful  eyes 

And  moved  and  spoke  in  quiet  grown-up  wise, 

Having  my  law  the  seventh  time  disobeyed, 

I  struck  him,  and  dismissed 

With  hard  words  and  unkissed, 

— His  Mother,  who  was  patient,  being  dead. 

Then,  fearing  lest  his  grief  should  hinder  sleep, 

I  visited  his  bed, 

But  found  him  slumbering  deep. 

With  darkened  eyelids,  and  their  lashes  yet 

From  his  late  sobbing  wet. 

And  I,  with  moan, 

Kissing  away  his  tears,  left  others  of  my  own; 

For,  on  a  table  drawn  beside  his  head. 

He  had  put,  within  his  reach, 

A  box  of  counters  and  a  red-veined  stone, 

A  piece  of  glass  abraded  by  the  beach. 


A  Song  of  Twilight    *  297 

And  six  or  seven  shells, 

A  bottle  with  bluebells. 

And  two  French  copper  coins,  ranged  there  with  careful  art, 

To  comfort  his  sad  heart. 

So  when  that  night  I  prayed 

To  God,  I  wept,  and  said: 

Ah,  when  at  last  we  lie  with  tranced  breath, 

Not  vexing  Thee  in  death. 

And  Thou  rememberest  of  what  toys    • 

We  made  our  joys. 

How  weakly  understood 

Thy  great  commanded  good. 

Then,  fatherly  not  less 

Than  I  whom  Thou  hast  moulded  from  the  clay, 

Thou 'It  leave  Thy  wrath,  and  say, 

"I  will  be  sorry  for  their  childishness." 

Coventry  Patmorc  [1823-1806] 

A  SONG   OF  TWILIGHT 

Oh,  to  come  home  once  more,  when  the  dusk  is  falling. 
To  see  the  nursery  lighted  and  the  children's  table  spread; 

"Mother,  mother,  mother!"  the  eager  voices  calling, 
"The  baby  was  so  sleep)^  that  he  had  to  go  to  bed!" 

Oh,  to  come  home  once  more,  and  see  the  smiling  faces. 
Dark  head,  bright  head,  clustered  at  the  pane; 

Aluch  the  years  have  taken,  when  the  heart  its  path  retraces, 
But  until  time  is  not  for  me,  the  image  will  remain. 

Men  and  women  now  they  are,  standing  straight  and  steady, 
Grave  heart,  gay  heart,  fit  for  life's  emprise; 

Shoulder  set  to  shoulder,  how  should  they  be  but  ready! 
The  future  shines  before  them  with  the  light  of  their  own 
eyes. 

Still  each  answers  to  my  call;  no  good  has  been  denied  me. 
My  burdens  have  been  fitted  to  the  httle  strength  that's 
mine. 

Beauty,  pride  and  peace  have  walked  by  day  beside  me, 
The  evening  closes  gently  in,  and  how  can  I  repine? 


298  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

But  oh,  to  see  once  more,  when  the  early  dusk  is  falling, 
The  nursery  windows  glowing  and  the  children^  table  spread; 

"Mother,  mother,  mother!"  the  high  child-voices  calling, 
"He  couldn't  stay  awake  for  you,  he  had  to  go  to  bed! " 

Unknown 

LITTLE  BOY  BLUE 

The  little  toy  dog  is  covered  with  dust, 

But  sturdy  and  stanch  he  stands; 
And  the  little  toy  soldier  is  red  with  rust, 

And  his  musket  moulds  in  his  hands. 
Time  was  when  the  little  toy  dog  was  new, 

And  the  soldier  was  passing  fair; 
And  that  was  the  time  when  our  Little  Boy  Blue 

Kissed  them  and  put  them  there. 

'  "Now,  don't  you  go  till  I  come,"  he  said, 

"And  don't  you  make  any  noise!" 
So,  toddling  off  to  his  trundle-bed, 

He  dreamt  of  the  pretty  toys; 
And,,  as  he  was  dreaming,  an  angel  song 

Awakened  our  Little  Boy  Blue — 
Oh !  the  years  are  many,  the  years  are  long, 

But  the  little  toy  friends  are  true! 


\ 


Ay,  faithful  to  Little  Boy  Blue  they  stand, 

Each  in  the  same  old  place. 
Awaiting  the  touch  of  a  little  hand,  f^u 

The  smile  of  a  httle  face; 
And  they  wonder,  as  waiting  the  long  years  through 

In  the  dust  of  that  little  chair, 
What  has  become  of  our  Little  Boy  Blue, 

Since  he  kissed  them  and  put  them  there.    '  ■^^bluorld^ 

Eugene  Field  [i8^cAig^'[] 

THE  DISCOVERER 

I  HAVE  a  little  kinsman 

Whose  earthly  summers  are  but  three. 

And  yet  a  voyager  is  he 

Greater  then  Drake  or  Frobisher, 


\ 


299 


The   Discoverer 

Than  all  their  peers  together! 
He  is  a  lirave  discoverer, 
And,  far  beyond  the  tether 
Of  them  who  seek  the  frozen  Pole, 
Has  sailed  where  the  noiseless  surges  roll. 
Ay,  he  has  travelled  whither 
A  winged  pilot  steered  his  bark 
Through  the  portals  of  the  dark, 
Past  hoary  Mimir's  well  and  tree, 
Across  the  unknown  sea. 


Suddenly,  in  his  fair  young  hour, 

Came  one  who  bore  a  flower,      is  JedJ  egnirlT 

And  laid  it  in  his  dimpled  hand 

With  this  command: 
"Henceforth  thou  art  a  rover! 
Thou  must  make  a  voyage  far, 
Sail  beneath  the  evening  star, 
And  a  wondrous  land  discover." 
— With  his  sweet  smile  innocent 

Our  little  kinsman  went. 

Since  that  time  no  word 

From  the  absent  has  been  heard. 

Who  can  tell 
How  he  fares,  or  answer  well 
What  the  little  one  has  found 
Since  he  left  us,  outward  bound? 
Would  that  he  might  return ! 
Then  should  we  learn 
From  the  pricking  of  his  chart 
How  the  skyey  roadways  part. 
Hush!  does  not  the  baby  this  way  bring. 
To  lay  beside  this  severed  curl, 

Some  starry  offering 
Of  chrysolite  or  pearl? 

Ah,  noi  not  so! 
We  may  follow  on  his  track, 
But  he  comes  not  back. 


300  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  yet  I  dare  aver 
He  is  a  brave  discoverer 
Of  climes  his  elders  do  not  know. 
He  has  more  learning  than  appears 
On  the  scroll  of  twice  three  thousand  years, 
More  than  in  the  groves  is  taught,/ 
Or  from  furthest  Indies  brought ; 
He  knows,  perchance,  how  spirits  fare, — 
What  shapes  the  angels  wear, 
What  is  their  guise  and  speech 
In  those  lands  beyond  our  reach, — 

And  his  eyes  behold 
Things  that  shall  never,  never  be  to  mortal  hearers  told. 
Edmund  Claraice  Stcdnian  [1833-1908] 


A   CHRYSALIS 

My  little  Madchen  found  one  day 

A  curious  something  in  her  play. 

That  was  not  fruit,  nor  flower,  nor  seed; 

It  w^as  not  anything  that  grew, 

Or  crept,  or  chmbed,  or  swam,  or  flew; 

Had  neither  legs  nor  wings,  indeed; 

And  yet  she  was  not  sure,  she  said, 

Whether  it  was  alive  or  dead. 

She  brought  in  her  tiny  hand 
To  see  if  I  would  understand. 
And  wondered  when  I  made  reply, 
"You've  found  a  baby  butterfly." 
"A  butterfly  is  not  like  this," 
With  doubtful  look  she  answered  me. 
So  then  I  told  her  what  would  be 
Some  day  within  the  chrysalis; 
How,  slowly,  in  the  dull  brown  thing 
Now  still  as  death,  a  spotted  wing, 
And  then  another,  would  unfold, 
Till  from  the  empty  sheU  would  fly 
A  pretty  creature,  by  and  by, 
AH  radiant  in  blue  and  gold. 


30I 


Mater  Dolorosa 

"And  will  il,  truly?"  questioned  she — 
Her  laughing  lips  and  eager  eyes 
All  in  a  sparkle  of  surprise — 
"And  shall  your  little  Madchen  see?" 
"She  shall ! "  I  said.    How  could  I  tell 
That  ere  the  worm  within  its  shell 
Its  gauzy,  splendid  wings  had  spread, 
My  little  Madchen  would  be  dead? 


To-day  the  butterfl)^  has  flown, — 
She  was  not  here  to  see  it  fly, — 
And  sorrowing  I  wonder  why 
The  empty  shell  is  mine  alone. 
Perhaps  the  secret  lies  in  this: 
I  too  had  found  a  chrysalis, 
And  Death  that  robbed  me  of  delight 
Was  but  the  radiant  creature's  flight! 

Mary  Emily  Bradley  [1835-1898] 


MATER  DOLOROSA 

I'd  a  dream  to-night 

As  I  fell  asleep, 
O!  the  touching  sight 

Makes  me  still  to  weep: 
Of  my  little  lad, 
Gone  to  leave  me  sad. 
Ay,  the  child  I  had, 

But  was  not  to  keep. 

As  in  heaven  high, 
I  my  child  did  seek. 

There  in  train  came  by 
Children  fair  and  meek, 

Each  in  lily  white. 

With  a  lamp  alight; 

Each  was  clear  to  sight, 
But  they  did  not  speak. 


30;2  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

Then,  a  little  sad, 

Came  my  child  in  turn, 
But  the  lamp  he  had, 

O  it  did  not  burn! 

He,  to  clear  my  doubt, 

Said,  half-turned  about, 

"Your  tears  put  it  out; 

Mother,  never  mourn." 

Williatn  Barnes  [iSoi 


THE  LITTLE   GHOST 

The  stars  began  to  peep 

Gone  was  the  bitter  day. 
She  heard  the  milky  ewes 

Bleat  to  their  lambs  astray. 
Her  heart  cried  for  her  lamb 

Lapped  cold  in  the  churchyard  sod. 
She  could  not  think  on  the  happy  children 

At  play  with  the  Lamb  of  God. 

She  heard  the  calling  ewes 

And  the  lambs'  answer,  alas! 
She  heard  her  heart's  blood  drip  in  the  night 

As  the  ewes'  milk  on  the  grass. 
Her  tears  that  burnt  like  fire 

So  bitter  and  slow  ran  down 
She  could  not  think  on  the  new-washed  children 

Playing  by  Mary's  gown. 

Oh  who  is  this  comes  in 

Over  her  threshold  stone? 
And  why  is  the  old  dog  wild  with  joy 

Who  all  day  long  made  moan? 
This  fair  little  radiant  ghost. 

Her  one  little  son  of  seven, 
New  'scaped  from  the  band  of  merry  children 

In  the  nurseries  of  Heaven. 


Motherhood  303 

He  was  all  clad  in  white 

Without  a  speck  or  stain; 
His  curls  had  a  ring  of  light 

That  rose  and  fell  again. 
"Now  come  with  me,  my  own  mother, 

And  you  shall  have  great  ease, 
For  you  shall  see  the  lost  children 

Gathered  to  Mary's  knees." 

Oh,  lightly  sprang  she  up 

Nor  waked  her  sleeping  man, 
And  hand  in  hand  with  the  little  ghost 

Through  the  dark  night  she  ran. 
She  is  gone  swift  as  a  fawn. 

As  a  bird  homes  to  its  nest, 
She  has  seen  them  lie,  the  sleepy  children 

Twixt  Mary's  arm  and  breast. 

At  morning  she  came  back ; 

Her  eyes  were  strange  to  see. 
She  will  not  fear  the  long  journey. 

However  long  it  be. 
As  she  goes  in  and  out 

She  sings  unto  hersel'; 
For  she  has  seen  the  mothers'  children 

And  knows  that  it  is  well. 

Katharine  Tynan  [1861- 

MOTHERHOOD 

The  night  throbs  on;  O,  let  me  pray,  dear  lad! 
Crush  off  his  name  a  moment  from  my  mouth. 
To  Thee  my  eyes  would  turn,  but  they  go  back, 
Back  to  my  arm  beside  me,  where  he  lay — 
So  little.  Lord,  so  little  and  so  warm! 

I  cannot  think  that  Thou  hadst  need  of  him! 
He  was  so  little,  Lord,  he  cannot  sing, 
He  cannot  praise  Thee;  all  his  hfe  had  learned 
Was  to  hold  fast  my  kisses  in  the  night. 


304  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Give  him  to  me — he  is  not  happy  there! 
He  had  not  felt  this  Ufe;  his  lovely  eyes 
Just  knew  me  for  his  mother,  and  he  died. 

Hast  Thou  an  angel  there  to  mother  him? 
I  say  he  loves  me  best — if  he  forgets, 
If  Thou  allow  it  that  my  child  forgets 
And  runs  not  out  to  meet  me  when  I  come — 

What  are  my  curses  to  Thee?    Thou  hast  heard 
The  curse  of  Abel's  mother,  and  since  then 
We  have  not  ceased  to  threaten  at  Thy  throne, 
To  threat  and  pray  Thee  that  Thou  hold  them  still 
In  memory  of  us. 

See  Thou  tend  him  well. 
Thou  God  of  all  the  mothers.    If  he  lack 
One  of  his  kisses — ah,  my  heart,  my  heart, 
Do  angels  kiss  in  heaven?    Give  him  back! 

Forgive  me,  Lord,  but  I  am  sick  with  grief. 
And  tired  of  tears,  and  cold  to  comforting. 
Thou  art  wise,  I  know,  and  tender,  aye,  and  good, 
Thou  hast  my  child,  and  he  is  safe  in  Thee, 
And  I  believe — 

Ah,  God,  my  child  shall  go 
Orphaned  among  the  angels!    All  alone. 
So  little  and  alone!    He  knows  not  Thee, 
He  only  knows  his  mother — give  him  back. 

JoscpJdnc  Daskam  Bacon  [1876- 


THE   MOTHER'S   PRAYER 

The  good  Lord  gave,  the  Lord  has  taken  from  me, 
Blessed  be  His  name,  His  holy  will  be  done. 

The  mourners  all  have  gone,  all  save  I,  his  mother, 
The  little  grave  lies  lonely  in  the  sun. 


The   Mother's   Prayer  305 

Nay!  I  would  not  follow,  though  they  did  beseech  me, 
For  the  angels  come  now  waiting  for  my  dead. 

Heaven's  door  is  open,  so  my  whispers  soar  there, 
While  the  gentle  angels  lift  him  from  his  bed. 

Oh  Lord,  when  Thou  gavest  he  was  weak  and  helpless. 
Could  not  rise  nor  wander  from  my  shielding  arm; 

Lovely  is  he  now  and  strong  with  four  sweet  summers, 
Laughing,  running,  tumbling,  hard  to  keep  from  harm. 

If  some  tender  mother,  whose  babe  on  earth  is  living, 
Takes  his  little  hand  to  guide  his  stranger  feet 

'Mid  the  countless  hosts  that  cross  the  floor  of  heaven. 
Thou  wilt  not  reprove  her  for  Thy  pity  sweet. 

If  upon  her  breast  she  holds  his  baby  beauty. 
All  his  golden  hair  will  fall  about  her  hand, 

Laughing  let  her  fingers  pull  it  into  ringlets — 
Long  and  lovely  ringlets.    She  will  understand. 

Wilful  are  his  ways  and  full  of  merry  mischief; 

If  he  prove  unruly,  lay  the  blame  on  me. 
Never  did  I  chide  him  for  his  noise  or  riot, 

Smiled  upon  his  folly,  glad  his  joy  to  see. 

Each  eve  shall  I  come  beside  his  bed  so  lowly; 

"Hush-a-by,  my  baby,"  softly  shall  I  sing. 
So,  if  he  be  frightened,  full  of  sleep  and  anger. 

The  song  he  loved  shall  reach  him  and  sure  comfort  bring. 

Lord,  if  in  my  praying.  Thou  shouldst  hear  me  weeping. 

Ever  was  I  wayward,  alwa3's  full  of  tears. 
Take  no  heed  of  this  grief.    Sweet  the  gift  Thou  gavest 

All  the  cherished  treasure  of  those  golden  years. 

Do  not,  therefore,  hold  me  to  Thy  will  ungrateful: 
Soon  I  shall  stand  upright,  smiHng,  strong,  and  brave, 

With  a  son  in  heaven  the  sad  earth  forgetting. 
But  'tis  lonely  yet.  Lord,  by  the  little  grave. 
Oh,  'tis  lonely,  lonely,  by  the  little  grave! 

Dora  Sigerson  Shorter  [i8     - 


3o6  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

DA  LEETLA  BOY 

Da  spreeng  ees  com';  but  oh,  da  joy 

Eet  ees  too  late! 
He  was  so  cold,  my  leetla  boy. 

He  no  could  wait. 

I  no  can  count  how  m.anny  week, 
How  manny  day,  dat  he  ees  seeck; 
How  manny  night  I  seet  an'  hold 
Da  leetla  hand  dat  was  so  cold. 
He  was  so  patience,  oh,  so  sweet! 
Eet  hurts  my  throat  for  theenk  of  eet; 
An'  all  he  evra  ask  ees  w'en 
Ees  gona  com'  da  spreeng  agen. 
Wan  day,  wan  brighta  sunny  day, 
He  see,  across  da  alleyway, 
Da  leetla  girl  dat's  livin'  dere 
Ees  raise  her  window  for  da  air. 
An'  put  outside  a  leetla  pot 
Of — w'at-you-caU? — forgat-me-not. 
So  smaUa  flower,  so  leetla  theeng! 
But  steeU  eet  mak'  hees  hearta  seeng: 
"Oh,  now,  at  las',  ees  com'  da  spreeng! 
Da  leetla  plant  ees  glad  for  know 
Da  sun  ees  com'  for  mak'  eet  grow. 
So,  too,  I  am  grow  warm  and  strong." 
So  lika  dat  he  seeng  hees  song. 
But,  ah!  da  night  com'  down  an'  den 
Da  weenter  ees  sneak  back  agen. 
An'  een  da  alley  all  da  night 
Ees  fall  da  snow,  so  cold,  so  white, 
An'  cover  up  da  leetla  pot 
Of — w'at-you-caU?— forgat-me-not. 
All  night  da  leetla  hand  I  hold 
Ees  grow  so  cold,  so  cold,  so  cold! 

Da  spreeng  ees  com';  but,  oh,  da  joy 

Eet  ees  too  late! 
He  was  so  cold,  my  leetla  boy, 

He  no  could  wait. 

Thomas  AuguAin  Daly  [1871- 


•Epitaph  of  Dionysia  307 

ON  THE  MOOR 


I  MET  a  child  upon  the  moor 
A-wading  down  the  heather; 

She  put  her  hand  into  my  own, 
We  crossed  the  fields  together. 

I  led  her  to  her  father's  door — 

A  cottage  midst  the  clover. 
I  left  her — and  the  world  grew  poor 

To  me,  a  childless  rover. 

II 

I  met  a  maid  upon  the  moor, 
The  morrow  was  her  wedding. 

Love  Ht  her  eyes  with  lovelier  hues 
Than  the  eve-star  was  shedding. 

She  looked  a  sweet  good-bye  to  me. 
And  o'er  the  stile  went  singing. 

Down  all  the  lonely  night  I  heard 
But  bridal  bells  a-ringing. 

Ill 

I  met  a  mother  on  the  moor, 

By  a  new  grave  a-praying. 
The  happy  swallows  in  the  blue 

Upon  the  winds  were  playing. 

"Would  I  were  in  his  grave,"  I  said, 
"And  he  beside  her  standing!" 

There  was  no  heart  to  break  if  death 
For  me  had  made  demanding. 

Cale  Young  Rice  [1872- 

EPITAPH  OF  DIONYSIA 

Here  doth  Dionysia  lie: 
She  whose  httle  wanton  foot, 
Tripping  (ah,  too  carelessly!) 
Touched  this  tomb,  and  fell  into  't. 


3o8  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Trip  no  more  shall  she,  nor  fall. 
And  her  trippings  were  so  few! 
Summers  only  eight  in  all 
Had  the  sweet  child  wandered  through. 

But,  already,  life's  few  suns 
Love's  strong  seeds  had  ripened  warm. 
All  her  ways  were  winning  ones ; 
All  her  cunning  was  to  charm. 

And  the  fancy,  in  the  flower, 
While  the  flesh  was  in  the  bud, 
Childhood's  dawning  sex  did  dower 
With  warm  gusts  of  womanhood. 

Oh  what  joys  by  hope  begun, 
Oh  what  kisses  kissed  by  thought, 
What  love-deeds  by  fancy  done, 
Death  to  endless  dust  hath  wrought! 

Had  the  fates  been  kind  as  thou. 
Who,  till  now,  was  never  cold. 
Once  Love's  aptest  scholar,  now 
Thou  hadst  been  his  teacher  bold; 

But,  if  buried  seeds  upthrow 

Fruits  and  flowers;  if  flower  and  fruit 

By  their  nature  fitly  show 

What  the  seeds  are,  whence  they  shoot, 

Dionysia,  o'er  this  tomb, 
Where  thy  buried  beauties  be, 
From  their  dust  shaU  spring  and  bloom 
Loves  and  graces  like  to  thee. 

Unknown 

FOR   CHARLIE'S   SAKE 

The  night  is  late,  the  house  is  still; 
The  angels  of  the  hour  fulfil 
Their  tender  ministries,  and  move 
From  couch  to  couch  in  cares  of  love. 


For  Charlie's  Sake  309 

They  drop  into  thy  dreams,  sweet  wife, 

The  happiest  smile  of  Charhe's  hfe, 

And  lay  on  baby's  lips  a  kiss, 

Fresh  from  his  angel-brother's  bliss; 

And,  as  they  pass,  they  seem  to  make 

A  strange,  dim  hymn,  "For  Charlie's  sake." 

My  listening  heart  takes  up  the  strain, 
And  gives  it  to  the  night  again. 
Fitted  with  words  of  lowly  praise, 
And  patience  learned  of  mournful  days, 
And  memories  of  the  dead  child's  ways. 
His  will  be  done,  His  will  be  done! 
Who  gave  and  took  away  my  son, 
In  "the  far  land"  to  shine  and  sing 
Before  the  Beautiful,  the  King, 
Who  every  day  doth  Christmas  make, '  ' 
All  starred  and  belled  for  Charlie's  sake. 

For  Charlie's  sake  I  will  arise; 
I  will  anoint  me  where  he  lies. 
And  change  my  raiment,  and  go  in 
To  the  Lord's  house,  and  leave  my  sin 
Without,  and  seat  me  at  his  board, 
Eat,  and  be  glad,  and  praise  the  Lord. 
For  wherefore  should  I  fast  and  weep. 
And  sullen  moods  of  mourning  keep? 
I  cannot  bring  him  back,  nor  he, 
For  any  calling,  come  to  me. 
The  bond  the  angel  Death  did  sign, 
God  sealed — for  Charlie's  sake,  and  mine. 

I'm  very  poor — this  slender  stone 

Marks  all  the  narrow  field  I  own; 

Yet,  patient  husbandman,  I  till 

With  faith  and  prayers,  that  precious  hill, 

Sow  it  with  penitential  pains, 

And,  hopeful,  wait  the  latter  rains; 

Content  if,  after  all,  the  spot 

Yield  barely  one  forget-me-not— 

Whether  or  figs  or  thistles  make 

My  crop,  content  for  Charlie's  sake. 


3io  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

I  have  no  houses,  builded  well — 

Only  that  httle  lonesome  cell, 

Where  never  romping  playmates  come, 

Nor  bashful  sweethearts,  cunning-dumb — 

An  April  burst  of  girls  and  boys. 

Their  rainbowed  cloud  of  glooms  and  joys 

Born  with  their  songs,  gone  with  their  toys; 

Nor  ever  is  its  stillness  stirred 

By  purr  of  cat,  or  chirp  of  bird. 

Or  mother's  twilight  legend,  told 

Of  Horner's  pie,  or  Tiddler's  gold. 

Or  fairy  hobbling  to  the  door. 

Red-cloaked  and  weird,  banned  and  poor, 

To  bless  the  good  child's  gracious  eyes, 

The  good  child's  wistful  charities. 

And  crippled  changehng's  hunch  to  make 

Dance  on  his  crutch,  for  good  child's  sake. 

How  is  it  with  the  child?    'Tis  well; 

Nor  would  I  any  miracle 

Might  stir  my  sleeper's  tranquil  trance, 

Or  plague  his  painless  countenance: 

I  would  not  any  seer  might  place 

His  staff  on  m}^  immortal's  face, 

Or  lip  to  lip,  and  eye  to  eye, 

Charm  back  his  pale  mortahty. 

No,  Shunamite!    I  would  not  break 

God's  stillness.    Let  them  weep  who  wake. 

For  Charlie's  sake  my  lot  is  blest: 
No  comfort  hke  his  mother's  breast. 
No  praise  Hke  hers;  no  charm  expressed 
In  fairest  forms  hath  half  her  zest. 
For  Charhe's  sake  this  bird's  caressed 
That  death  left  lonely  in  the  nest; 
For  Charlie's  sake  my  heart  is  dressed. 
As  for  its  birthday,  in  its  best; 
For  Charlie's  sake  we  leave  the  rest 
To  Him  who  gave,  and  who  did  take. 
And  saved  us  twice,  for  Charlie's  sake. 

John  Williamson  Palmer  [1825-1006] 


Are  the   Children   at  Home?"       31 1 


'ARE  THE   CHILDREN  AT  HOME?" 

Each  day,  when  the  glow  of  sunset 

Fades  in  the  western  sky, 
And  the  wee  ones,  tired  of  playing, 

Go  tripping  hghtly  by, 
I  steal  away  from  my  husband, 

Asleep  in  his  easy-chair. 
And  watch  from  the  open  doorway 

Their  faces  fresh  and  fair. 

Alone  in  the  dear  old  homestead 

That  once  was  fidl  of  life, 
Ringing  with  girlish  laughter, 

Echoing  boyish  strife, 
We  two  are  waiting  together; 

And  oft,  as  the  shadows  come, 
With  tremulous  voice  he  calls  me, 

"It  is  night!  are  the  children  home?" 

"Yes,  love!"  I  answer  hiim  gently, 

"They're  all  home  long  ago;" — 
And  I  sing,  in  my  quivering  treble, 

A  song  so  soft  and  low. 
Till  the  old  man  drops  to  slumber. 

With  his  head  upon  his  hand. 
And  I  teU  to  myself  the  number 

At  home  in  the  better  land. 

At  home,  where  never  a  sorrow 

Shall  dim  their  eyes  with  tears! 
Where  the  smile  of  God  is  on  them 

Through  all  the  summer  years! 
I  know, — yet  my  arms  are  empty, 

That  fondly  folded  seven. 
And  the  mother-heart  within  me 

Is  almost  starved  for  heaven. 

Sometimes,  in  the  dusk  of  evening, 

I  only  shut  my  eyes, 
And  the  children  are  all  about  me, 

A  vision  from  the  skies: 


3 1 1  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  babes  whose  dimpled  fingers 
Lost  the  way  to  my  breast, 

And  the  beautiful  ones,  the  angels, 
Passed  to  the  world  of  the  blest. 

With  never  a  cloud  upon  them, 

I  see  their  radiant  brows; 
My  boys  that  I  gave  to  freedom, — 

The  red  sword  sealed  their  vows! 
In  a  tangled  Southern  forest, 

Twin  brothers  bold  and  brave. 
They  fell;  and  the  flag  they  died  for. 

Thank  God!  floats  over  their  grave. 

A  breath,  and  the  vision  is  lifted 

Awa}^  on  wings  of  light, 
And  again  we  two  are  together. 

All  alone  in  the  night. 
They  tell  me  his  mind  is  failing, 

But  I  smile  at  idle  fears; 
He  is  only  back  with  the  children, 

In  the  dear  and  peaceful  years. 

And  still,  as  the  summer  sunset 

Fades  away  in  the  west, 
And  the  wee  ones,  tired  of  playing, 

Go  trooping  home  to  rest, 
My  husband  calls  from  his  corner, 

"Say,  love,  have  the  children  come?" 
And  I  answer,  with  eyes  uplifted, 

"Yes,  dear!  they  are  all  at  home." 

Margaret  Sangster  [1838- 


THE  MORNING-GLORY 

We  wreathed  about  our  darling 's  head 

The  morning-glory  bright ; 
Her  little  face  looked  out  beneath, 

So  full  of  life  and  light, 


V| 


The   Morning-Glory  313 

So  lit  ad  with  a  sunrise, 

That  we  could  only  say, 
''She  is  the  morning-glory  true, 

And  her  poor  types  are  they." 

So  always  from  that  happy  time 

We  called  her  by  their  name, 
And  very  fitting  did  it  seem — 

For,  sure  as  morning  came, 
Behind  her  cradle  bars  she  smiled 

To  catch  the  first  faint  ray, 
As  from  the  treUis  smiles  the  flower 

And  opens  to  the  day. 

But  not  so  beautiful  they  rear 

Their  airy  cups  of  blue. 
As  turned  her  sweet  eyes  to  the  light, 

Brimmed  with  sleep's  tender  dew; 
And  not  so  close  their  tendrils  fine 

Round  their  supports  are  thrown, 
As  those  dear  arms  whose  outstretched  plea 

Clasped  aU  hearts  to  her  own. 

We  used  to  think  how  she  had  come, 

Even  as  comes  the  flower, 
The  last  and  perfect  added  gift 

To  crown  Love 's  morning  hour; 
And  how  in  her  was  imaged  forth 

The  love  we  could  not  say. 
As  on  the  little  dewdrops  round 

Shines  back  the  heart  of  day. 

We  never  could  have  thought,  O  God, 

That  she  must  wither  up. 
Almost  before  a  day  was  flown. 

Like  the  morning-glory's  cup; 
We  never  thought  to  see  her  droop 

Her  fair  and  noble  head. 
Till  she  lay  stretched  before  our  eyes, 

Wilted,  and  cold,  and  dead! 


314  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  morning-glory's  blossoming 

Will  soon  be  coming  round — 
We  see  the  rows  of  heart-shaped  leaves 

Upspringing  from  the  ground; 
The  tender  things  the  winter  killed 

Renew  again  their  birth, 
But  the  glory  of  our  morning 

Has  passed  away  from  earth. 

O  Earth!  in  vain  our  aching  eyes 

Stretch  over  thy  green  plain! 
Too  harsh  thy  dews,  too  gross  thine  air 

Her  spirit  to  sustain; 
But  up  in  groves  of  Paradise 

FuU  surely  we  shall  see 
Our  morning-glory  beautiful 

Twine  round  our  dear  Lord's  knee. 

Maria  White  Lowell  [1821-1855] 


SHE  CAME  AND  WENT 

As  a  twig  trembles,  which  a  bird 

Lights  on  to  sing,  then  leaves  unbent, 

So  is  my  memory  thrilled  and  stirred; — - 
I  only  know  she  came  and  went. 

As  clasps  some  lake,  by  gusts  unriven. 
The  blue  dome's  measureless  content. 

So  my  soul  held  that  moment's  heaven;— 
I  only  know  she  came  and  went. 

As,  at  one  bound,  our  swift  spring  heaps 
The  orchards  full  of  bloom  and  scent. 

So  clove  her  May  my  wintry  sleeps; — 
I  only  know  she  came  and  went. 

An  angel  stood  and  met  my  gaze, 
Through  the  low  doorway  of  my  tent; 

The  tent  is  struck,  the  vision  stays; — 
I  only  know  she  came  and  went. 


The  First  Snow-fall  3 1  5 

Oh,  when  the  room  grows  slowly  dim, 

And  life's  last  oil  is  nearly  spent, 
One  gush  of  light  these  eyes  will  brim. 

Only  to  think  she  came  and  went. 

James  Russell  Lowell  [iSig-iSgi] 


THE   FIRST   SNOW-FALL 

The  snow  had  begun  in  the  gloaming. 

And  busily  all  the  night 
Had  been  heaping  field  and  highway 

With  a  silence  deep  and  white. 

Every  pine  and  fir  and  hemlock 
Wore  ermine  too  dear  for  an  earl, 

And  the  poorest  twig  on  the  elm-tree 
Was  ridged  inch  deep  with  pearl. 

From  sheds  new-roofed  with  Carrara 
Came  Chanticleer's  muffled  crow. 

The  stiflf  rails  softened  to  swan's-down, 
And  still  fluttered  down  the  snow. 

I  stood  and  watched  by  the  window 
The  noiseless  work  of  the  sky, 

And  the  sudden  flurries  of  snow-birds, 
Like  brown  leaves  whirling  by. 

I  thought  of  a  mound  in  sweet  Auburn 
Where  a  little  headstone  stood; 

How  the  flakes  were  folding  it  gently. 
As  did  robins  the  babes  in  the  wood. 

Up  spoke  our  own  little  Mabel, 

Saying,  "Father,  who  makes  it  snow?" 

And  1  told  of  the  good  All-father 
Who  cares  for  us  here  below. 

Again  I  looked  at  the  snow-fall. 
And  thought  of  the  leaden  sky 

That  arched  o'er  our  first  great  sorrow. 
When  that  mound  was  heaped  so  high. 


3i6  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

I  remembered  the  gradual  patience 
That  fell  from  that  cloud  like  snow, 

Flake  by  flake,  healing  and  hiding 
The  scar  that  renewed  our  woe. 

And  again  to  the  child  I  whispered, 

"The  snow  that  husheth  all, 
Darling,  the  merciful  Father 

Alone  can  make  it  fall!" 

Then,  with  eyes  that  saw  not,  I  kissed  her; 

And  she,  kissing  back,  could  not  know 
That  my  kiss  was  given  to  her  sister, 

Folded  close  under  deepening  snow. 

James  Russell  Lowell  [iSig-iSgiJ 


"WE  ARE  SEVEN" 

A  SIMPLE  Child, 
That  lightly  draws  its  breath. 
And  feels  its  life  in  every  limb, 
What  should  it  know  of  death? 

I  met  a  little  cottage  Girl: 

She  was  eiglit  years  old,  she  said: 

Her  hair  was  thick  with  many  a  curl 
That  clustered  round  her  head. 

She  had  a  rustic,  woodland  air, 

And  she  was  wildly  clad: 
Her  eyes  were  fair,  and  very  fair; 

— Her  beauty  made  me  glad. 

"Sisters  and  brothers,  little  Maid, 

How  many  may  you  be?" 
"How  many?    Seven  in  all,"  she  said, 

And  wondering  looked  at  me. 

"And  where  are  they?    I  pray  you  tell." 

She  answered,  "Seven  are  we; 
And  two  of  us  at  Conway  dwell, 
i     And  two  are  gone  to  sea; 


"We  Are  Seven"  317 

"Two  of  us  in  the  church-yard  He, 

My  sister  and  my  brother; 
And,  in  the  church-yard  cottage,  I 

Dwell  near  them  with  my  mother." 

"You  say  that  two  at  Conway  dwell, 

And  two  are  gone  to  sea, 
Yet  ye  are  seven! — I  pray  you  tell. 

Sweet  Maid,  how  this  may  be." 

Then  did  the  little  Maid  reply, 

"Seven  boys  and  girls  are  we; 
Two  of  us  in  the  church-yard  lie 

Beneath  the  church-yard  tree." 

"You  run  about,  my  Httle  Maid; 

Your  limbs  they  are  alive; 
If  two  are  in  the  church-yard  laid. 

Then  ye  are  only  five." 

"Their  graves  are  green,  they  may  be  seen," 

The  little  Maid  replied: 
"Twelve  steps  or  more  from  my  mother's  door, 

And  they  are  side  by  side. 

"My  stockings  there  I  often  knit, 

My  kerchief  there  I  hem; 
And  there  upon  the  ground  I  sit. 

And  sing  a  song  to  them. 

"And  often  after  sunset,  Sir, 

When  it  is  light  and  fair, 
I  take  my  Httle  porringer. 

And  eat  my  supper  there. 

"The  first  that  died  was  sister  Jane; 

In  bed  she  moaning  lay, 
Till  God  released  her  of  her  pain; 

And  then  she  went  away. 


3  1 8  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 

''So  in  the  church-yard  she  was  laid; 

And,  when  the  grass  was  dry, 
Together  round  her  grave  we  played, 

My  brother  John  and  I. 

"And  when  the  ground  was  white  with  snow, 

And  1  could  run  and  slide, 
My  brother  John  was  forced  to  go,  i  :  i 

And  he  lies  by  her  side." 

"How  many  are  you,  then,"  said  I,  .', 

"If  they  two  are  in  heaven?" 
Quick  was  the  little  Maid 's  reply, 

"O  Master!  we  are  seven." 

"But  they  are  dead;  those  two  are  dead! 

Their  spirits  are  in  heaven!" 
'Twas  throwing  words  away;  for  still 
The  little  Maid  would  have  her  will. 

And  said,  "Nay,  we  are  seven!" 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 


MY  CHILD 

I  CANNOT  make  him  dead! 

His  fair  sunshiny  head 
Is  ever  bounding  round  my  study  chair; 

Yet  when  my  eyes,  now  dim 

With  tears,  I  turn  to  him. 
The  vision  vanishes, — he  is  not  there! 

I  walk  my  parlor  floor. 

And,  through  the  open  door,    noiiW 
I  hear  a  footfall  on  the  chamber  stair;'   '  '  ' 

I  'm  stepping  toward  the  hall 

To  give  my  boy  a  call; 
And  then  bethink  me  that — he  is  not  there! 

1 

I  thread  the  crowded  street;  '■'.W 

A  satchellcd  lad  I  meet, 


J 


^T,A    y,,.  My  Child  319 

With  the  same  beaming  eyes  and  colored  hair; 

And,  as  he 's  running  by, 

Follow  him  with  my  eye, 
Scarcely  believing  that — he  is  not  there! 

I  know  his  face  is  hid 
Under  the  coffin-lid; 
Closed  are  his  ej^es;  cold  is  his  forehead  fair; 
My  hand  that  marble  felt; 

0  'er  it  in  prayer  I  knelt ; 

Yet  my  heart  whispers  that — he  is  not  there! 

1  cannot  make  him  dead ! 
When  passing  by  the  bed. 

So  long  watched  over  with  parental  care, 

My  spirit  and  my  eye, 

Seek  him  inquiringly,  j_ 

Before  the  thought  comes  that — he  is  not  there!.]/ 

When,  at  the  cool  gray  break 

Of  day,  from  sleep  I  wake. 
With  my  first  breathing  of  the  morning  air 

My  soul  goes  up,  with  joy, 

To  Him  who  gave  my  boy; 
Then  comes  the  sad  thought  that — he  is  not  there! 

When  at  the  day's  calm  close, 

Before  we  seek  repose, 
I'm  with  his  mother,  offering  up  our  prayer; 

Whate  'er  I  may  be  saying, 

I  am,  in  spirit,  praying 
For  our  boy's  spirit,  though — he  is  not  there! 

Not  there! — Where,  then,  is  he? 

The  form  I  used  to  see 
Was  but  the  raiment  that  he  used  to  wear. 

The  grave,  that  now  doth  press 

Upon  that  cast-off  dress, 
Is  but  his  wardrobe  locked;— Ae  is  not  there! 


320  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

He  lives! — In  all  the  past 

He  lives;  nor,  to  the  last, 
Of  seeing  him  again  will  I  despair; 

In  dreams  I  see  him  now; 

And  on  his  angel  brow, 
I  see  it  written,  "Thou  shalt  see  me  ihcrc!'^ 

Yes,  we  all  live  to  God! 

Father,  thy  chastening  rod 
So  help  us,  thine  afflicted  ones,  to  bear, 

That,  in  the  spirit-land, 

Meeting  at  thy  right  hand, 
'Twill  be  our  heaven  to  find  that — he  is  there! 

John  Pierpont  [i 785-1866] 

THE   CHILD'S  WISH   GRANTED 

Do  you  remember,  my  sweet,  absent  son, 

How  in  the  soft  June  days  forever  done 

You  loved  the  heavens  so  warm  and  clear  and  high; 

And  when  I  lifted  you,  soft  came  your  cry, — 

"Put  me  'way  up — 'way,  'way  up  in  blue  sky"? 

I  laughed  and  said  I  could  not; — set  you  down, 
Your  gray  eyes  wonder-filled  beneath  that  crown 
Of  bright  hair  gladdening  me  as  you  raced  by. 
Another  Father  now,  more  strong  than  I, 
Has  borne  you  voiceless  to  your  dear  blue  sky. 

George  Parsons  Lathrop  [i  851- 1898] 

CHALLENGE 

This  little  child,  so  white,  so  calm. 

Decked  for  her  grave. 
Encountered  death  without  a  qualm. 

Are  you  as  brave? 

So  small,  and  armed  with  naught  beside 

Her  mother's  kiss. 
Alone  she  stepped,  unterrified. 

Into  the  abyss. 


Tired   Mothers  321 

"Ah,"  you  explain,  "she  did  not  know — 

This  babe  of  four  — 
Just  what  it  signifies  to  go." 

Do  you  know  more? 

Kenton  Foster  Murray  [i8    - 


TIRED   MOTHERS 

A  LITTLE  elbow  leans  upon  your  knee, 

Your  tired  knee  that  has  so  much  to  bear; 
A  child 's  dear  eyes  are  looking  lovingly 

From  underneath  a  thatch  of  tangled  hair. 
Perhaps  you  do  not  heed  the  velvet  touch 

Of  warm,  moist  fingers,  folding  yours  so  tight; 
You  do  not  prize  this  blessing  overmuch, — • 

You  almost  are  too  tired  to  pray  to-night. 

But  it  is  blessedness!    A  year  ago 

I  did  not  see  it  as  I  do  to-day, — 
We  are  so  dull  and  thankless;  and  too  slow 

To  catch  the  sunshine  till  it  slips  away. 
And  now  it  seems  surpassing  strange  to  me 

That,  while  I  wore  the  badge  of  motherhood, 
I  did  not  kiss  more  oft  and  tenderly 

The  little  child  that  brought  me  only  good. 

And  if  some  night  when  you  sit  down  to  rest, 

You  miss  this  elbow  from  your  tired  knee, — 
This  restless,  curling  head  from  ofT  your  breast, — 

This  lisping  tongue  that  chatters  constantly; 
If  from  your  own  the  dimpled  hands  had  slipped, 

And  ne'er  would  nestle  in  your  palm  again; 
If  the  white  feet  into  their  grave  had  tripped, 

I  could  not  blame  you  for  your  heartache  then! 

I  wonder  so  that  mothers  ever  fret 

At  little  children  clinging  to  their  gown; 

Or  that  the  footprints,  when  the  days  are  wet, 
Are  ever  black  enough  to  make  them  frown. 


322  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

If  I  could  find  a  little  muddy  boot, 

Or  cap,  or  jacket,  on  my  chamber-floor, — 

If  I  could  kiss  a  rosy,  restless  foot, 

And  hear  its  patter  in  my  house  once  more,- 

If  I  could  mend  a  broken  cart  to-day, 

To-morrow  make  a  kite  to  reach  the  sky, 
There  is  no  woman  in  God 's  world  could  say 

She  was  more  blissfully  content  than  I. 
But  ah!  the  dainty  pillow  next  my  own 

Is  never  rumpled  by  a  shining  head; 
My  singing  birdhng  from  its  nest  has  flown, 

The  little  boy  I  used  to  kiss  is  dead. 

May  Riley  Smith  [1842- 


MY  DAUGHTER  LOUISE 

In  the  light  of  the  moon,  by  the  side  of  the  water, 

My  seat  on  the  sand  and  her  seat  on  my  knees, 
We  watch  the  bright  billows,  do  I  and  my  daughter, 

My  sweet  little  daughter  Louise. 
We  wonder  what  city  the  pathway  of  glory. 

That  broadens  away  to  the  limitless  west. 
Leads  up  to — she  minds  her  of  some  pretty  story 

And  says:  "To  the  city  that  mortals  love  best." 
Then  I  say:  "It  must  lead  to  the  far  away  city, 

The  beautiful  City  of  Rest." 

In  the  light  of  the  moon,  by  the  side  of  the  water, 

Stand  two  in  the  shadow  of  whispering  trees, 
And  one  loves  my  daughter,  my  beautiful  daughter. 

My  womanly  daughter  Louise. 
She  steps  to  the  boat  with  a  touch  of  his  fingers. 

And  out  on  the  diamonded  pathway  they  move; 
The  shallop  is  lost  in  the  distance,  it  lingers, 

It  waits,  but  I  know  that  its  coming  will  prove 
That  it  went  to  the  walls  of  the  wonderful  city. 

The  magical  City  of  Love. 


i 


Sonnets  323 

In  the  light  of  the  moon,  by  the  side  of  the  water, 

I  wait  for  her  coming  from  over  the  seas; 
I  wait  but  to  welcome  the  dust  of  my  daughter. 

To  weep  for  my  daughter  Louise. 
The  path,  as  of  old,  reaching  out  in  its  splendor, 

Gleams  bright,  like  a  way  that  an  angel  has  trod; 
I  kiss  the  cold  burden  its  billows  surrender. 

Sweet  clay  to  lie  under  the  pitiful  sod: 
But  she  rests,  at  the  end  of  the  path,  in  the  city 

Whose  "builder  and  maker  is  God." 

Homer  Greene  [1853- 

"I   AM  LONELY" 

From  "The  Spanish  Gypsy" 

The  world  is  great :  the  birds  all  fly  from  me, 
The  stars  are  golden  fruit  upon  a  tree 
All  out  of  reach:  my  little  sister  went, 
And  I  am  lonely. 

The  world  is  great:  I  tried  to  mount  the  hill 
Above  the  pines,  where  the  light  lies  so  still, 
But  it  rose  higher:  little  Lisa  went 
And  I  am  lonely. 

The  world  is  great:  the  wind  comes  rushing  by. 
I  wonder  where  it  comes  from;  sea  birds  cry 
And  hurt  my  heart:  my  little  sister  went, 
And  I  am  lonely. 

The  world  is  great :  the  people  laugh  and  talk, 
And  make  loud  holiday;  how  fast  they  walk! 
I'm  lame,  they  push  me:  little  Lisa  went, 
And  I  am  lonely. 

George  Eliot  [  1 8 1  g~  1 880] 

SONNETS 

From  "  Mimma  Bella  " 
I 

Have  dark  Egyptians  stolen  Thee  away. 
Oh  Baby,  Baby,  in  whose  cot  we  peer 
As  down  some  empty  gulf  that  opens  sheer 
And  fathomless,  illumined  by  no  ray? 


324  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  wilt  thou  come,  on  some  far  distant  day, 
With  unknown  face,  and  say,  "Behold!  I'm  here, 
The  child  you  lost;"  while  we  in  sudden  fear, 
Dumb  with  great  doubt,  shall  find  no  word  to  say? 
One  darker  than  dark  gipsy  holds  thee  fast; 
One  whose  strong  fingers  none  has  forced  apart 
Since  first  they  closed  on  things  that  were  too  fair; 
Nor  shall  we  see  thee  other  than  thou  wast. 
But  such  as  thou  art  printed  in  the  heart, 
In  changeless  baby  loveliness  still  there. 


Two  springs  she  saw — two  radiant  Tuscan  springs, 

What  time  the  wild  red  tulips  are  aflame 

In  the  new  wheat,  and  wreaths  of  young  vine  frame 

The  daffodils  that  every  light  breeze  swings; 

And  the  anemones  that  April  brings 

Make  purple  pools,  as  if  Adonis  came 

Just  there  to  die;  and  Florence  scrolls  her  name 

In  every  blossom  Primavera  flings. 

Now,  when  the  scented  iris,  straight  and  tall, 

Shall  hedge  the  garden  gravel  once  again 

With  pale  blue  flags,  at  May's  exulting  call, 

And  when  the  amber  roses,  wet  with  rain, 

Shall  tapestry  the  old  gray  villa  wall. 

We,  left  alone,  shall  seek  one  bud  in  vain. 


Oh,  rosy  as  the  lining  of  a  shell 

Were  the  wee  hands  that  now  are  white  as  snows; 

And  like  pink  coral,  with  their  elfin  toes, 

The  feet  that  on  life's  brambles  never  fell. 

And  with  its  tiny  smile,  adorable 

The  mouth  that  never  knew  life's  bitter  sloes; 

And  like  the  incurved  petal  of  a  rose 

The  little  ear,  now  deaf  in  Death's  strong  spell. 

Now,  while  the  seasons  in  their  order  roll. 

And  sun  and  rain  pour  dewn  from  God's  great  dome. 

And  deathless  stars  shine  nightly  overhead. 

Near  other  children,  with  her  little  doll, 


Sonnets  325 

She  waits  the  wizard  that  will  never  come 

To  wake  the  sleep-struck  playground  of  the  dead. 

VI 

Oh,  bless  the  law  that  veils  the  Future's  face; 

For  who  could  smile  into  a  baby's  eyes, 

Or  bear  the  beauty  of  the  evening  skies, 

If  he  could  see  what  cometh  on  apace? 

The  ticking  of  the  death-watch  would  replace 

The  baby's  prattle,  for  the  over-wise; 

The  breeze's  murmur  would  become  the  cries 

Of  stormy  petrels  where  the  breakers  race. 

We  live  as  moves  the  walker  in  his  sleep. 

Who  walks  because  he  sees  not  the  abyss 

His  feet  are  skirting  as  he  goes  his  way: 

If  we  could  see  the  morrow  from  the  steep 

Of  our  security,  the  soul  would  miss 

Its  footing,  and  fall  headlong  from  to-day. 

vin 

One  day,  I  mind  me,  now  that  she  is  dead. 

When  nothing  warned  us  of  the  dark  decree, 

I  crooned,  to  lull  her,  in  a  minor  key, 

Such  fancies  as  first  came  into  my  head. 

I  crooned  them  low,  beside  her  little  bed; 

And  the  refrain  was  somehow  "Come  with  me. 

And  we  will  wander  by  the  purple  sea;" 

I  crooned  it,  and — God  help  me! — felt  no  dread. 

O  Purple  Sea,  beyond  the  stress  of  storms. 

Where  never  ripple  breaks  upon  the  shore 

Of  Death's  pale  Isles  of  Twilight  as  they  dream, 

Give  back,  give  back,  O  Sea  of  Nevermore, 

The  frailest  of  the  unsubstantial  forms 

That  leave  the  shores  that  are  for  those  that  seem! 

XX 

What  essences  from  Idumean  palm. 

What  ambergris,  what  sacerdotal  wine. 

What  Arab  myrrh,  what  spikenard,  would  be  thine. 

If  I  could  swathe  thy  memory  in  such  balm  I 


32,6  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

Oh,  for  wrecked  gold,  from  depths  for  ever  calm, 

To  fashion  for  thy  name  a  fretted  shrine; 

Oh,  for  strange  gems,  still  locked  in  virgin  mine. 

To  stud  the  pyx,  where  thought  would  bring  sweet  psalm! 

I  have  but  this  small  rosary  of  rhyme, — 

No  rubies  but  heart's  drops,  no  pearls  but  tears, 

To  lay  upon  the  altar  of  thy  name, 

O  Mimma  Bella; — on  the  shrine  that  Time 

Makes  ever  holier  for  the  soul,  while  years 

Obliterate  the  rolls  of  human  fame. 

Eugene  Lee-H amiiton  [1845-1007! 


ROSE-MARIE  OF  THE  ANGELS 

Little  Sister  Rose-Marie, 
Will  thy  feet  as  willing-light 
Run  through  Paradise,  I  wonder, 
As  they  run  the  blue  skies  under, 
Willing  feet,  so  airy-light? 

Little  Sister  Rose-Marie, 

Will  thy  voice  as  bird-note  clear 

Lift  and  ripple  over  Heaven 

As  its  mortal  sound  is  given. 

Swift  bird-voice,  so  young  and  clear? 

How  God  will  be  glad  of  thee. 
Little  Sister  Rose-Marie! 

Adelaide  Crapscy  [1878-1914! 


MAIDENHOOD 

MAIDENHOOD 

Maiden!  with  the  meek,  brown  eyes, 
In  whose  orbs  a  shadow  lies 
Like  the  dusk  in  evening  skies! 

Thou  whose  locks  outshine  the  sun. 
Golden  tresses,  wreathed  in  one,        ■ ' 
As  the  braided  streamlets  run! 

Standing,  with  reluctant  feet. 
Where  the  brook  and  river  meet, 
Womanhood  and  childhood  fleet! 

Gazing,  with  a  timid  glance. 
On  the  brooklet's  swift  advance, 
On  the  river's  broad  expanse! 

Deep  and  still,  that  gliding  stream 
Beautiful  to  thee  must  seem, 
As  the  river  of  a  dream. 

Then  why  pause  with  indecision. 
When  bright  angels  in  thy  vision 
Beckon  thee  to  fields  Elysian? 

Seest  thou  shadow's  sailing  by. 
As  the  dove,  with  startled  eye. 
Sees  the  falcon's  shadow  fly? 

Hearest  thou  voices  on  the  shore. 
That  our  ears  perceive  no  more. 
Deafened  by  the  cataract's  roar? 

327 


328  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Oh,  thou  child  of  many  prayers! 

Life  hath  quicksands, — Life  hath  snares! 

Care  and  age  come  unawares! 

Like  the  swell  of  some  sweet  tune, 
Morning  rises  into  noon, 
May  glides  onward  into  June. 

Childhood  is  the  bough,  where  slumbered 
Birds  and  blossoms  many-numbered; — 
Age,  that  bough  with  snows  encumbered. 

Gather,  then',  each  liower  that  grows. 
When  the  young  heart  overflows. 
To  embalm  that  tent  of  snows. 

Bear  a  lily  in  thy  hand; 

Gates  of  brass  cannot  withstand 

One  touch  of  that  magic  wand. 

Bear  through  sorrow,  wrong,  and  ruth, 
In  thy  heart  the  dew  of  youth, 
On  thy  lips  the  smile  of  truth. 

Oh,  that  dew,  Hke  balm,  shall  steal 
Into  wounds  that  cannot  heal. 
Even  as  sleep  our  eyes  doth  seal; 

And  that  smile,  like  sunshine,  dart 
Into  many  a  sunless  heart 
For  a  smile  of  God  thou  art. 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807- 188 2] 


TO  THE   VIRGINS,  TO  MAKE   MUCH  OF  TIME 

Gather  ye  rosebuds  while  ye  may, 

Old  Time  is  still  a-flying: 
And  this  same  flower  that  smiles  to-day 

To-morrow  wUl  be  dying. 


To   Mistress   Margaret   Hussey        329 

The  glorious  land  of  heaven,  the  sun, 

The  higher  he 's  a-getting, 
The  sooner  will  his  race  be  run, 

And  nearer  he 's  to  setting, 

That  age  is  best  which  is  the  iirst. 
When  youth  and  blood  are  warmer; 

But  being  spent,  the  worse,  and  worst 
Times  still  succeed  the  former. 

Then  be  not  coy,  but  use  your  time, 

And  while  ye  may,  go  marry: 
For  having  lost  but  once  your  prime, 

You  may  for  ever  tarry. 

Robert  Herrick  [1501-1674! 

TO  MISTRESS  MARGARET  HUSSEY 

Merry  Margaret 

As  midsummer  flower, 

Gentle  as  falcon. 

Or  hawk  of  the  tower: 

With  solace  and  gladness, 

Much  mirth  and  no  madness, 

AU  good  and  no  badness; 

So  joyously, 

So  maidenly, 

So  womanly 

Her  demeaning 

In  every  thing, 

Far,  far  passing 

That  I  can  indite. 

Or  suffice  to  write 

Of  merry  Margaret 

As  midsummer  flower, 

Gentle  as  falcon. 

Or  hawk  of  the  tower. 

As  patient  and  still 

And  as  full  of  good  will 

As  fair  Isaphill, 


23^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Coliander, 
Sweet  pomander, 
Good  Cassander; 
Steadfast  of  thought, 
Well  made,  well  wrought, 
Far  may  be  sought. 
Ere  that  ye  can  find 
So  courteous,  so  kind, 
As  merry  Margaret, 
This  midsummer  flower, 
Gentle  as  falcon, 
Or  hav/k  of  the  towtr. 

John  Skelton  [1460?- 15  29] 


ON  HER  COMING  TO  LONDON 

What's  she,  so  late  from  Penshurst  come, 
More  gorgeous  than  the  mid-day  sun, 

That  all  the  world  amazes? 
Sure  'tis  some  angel  from  above, 
Or  'tis  the  Cyprian  Queen  of  Love 

Attended  by  the  Graces. 

Or  is't  not  Juno,  Heaven's  great  dame, 
Or  Pallas  armed,  as  on  she  came 

To  assist  the  Greeks  in  fight. 
Or  Cynthia,  that  huntress  bold. 
Or  from  old  Tithon's  bed  so  cold, 
Aurora  chasing  night? 

No,  none  of  those,  yet  one  that  shall 
Compare,  perhaps  exceed  them  all. 

For  beauty,  wit,  and  birth; 
As  good  as  great,  as  chaste  as  fair, 
A  brighter  nymph  none  breathes  the  air. 

Or  treads  upon  the  earth. 

'Tis  Dorothee,  a  maid  high-born, 
And  lovely  as  the  blushing  morn, 


i 


"  O,  Saw  Ye   Bonny   Ixsiey  "         j  j  i 

Of  noble  Sidney's  race; 
Oh!  could  you  see  into  her  mind, 
The  beauties  there  locked-up  outshine 

The  beauties  of  her  face. 

Fair  Dorothea,  sent  from  heaven 
To  add  more  wonders  to  the  seven, 

And  glad  each  e3^e  and  ear. 
Crown  of  her  sex,  the  Muse's  port, 
The  glory  of  our  English  court, 

The  brightness  of  our  sphere. 

To  welcome  her  the  Spring  breathes  forth 
Elysian  sweets,  March  strews  the  earth 

With  violets  and  posies, 
The  sun  renews  his  darting  fires, 
April  puts  on  her  best  attires. 

And  May  her  crown  of  roses. 

Go,  happy  maid,  increase  the  store 
Of  graces  born  with  you,  and  more 

Add  to  their  number  stiU; 
So  neither  all-consuming  age. 
Nor  envy's  blast,  nor  fortune's  rage 

Shall  ever  work  you  ill. 

Edmund  Waller  [1606-168;) 


'O,   SAW  YE  BONNY  LESLEY" 

O  SAW  ye  bonny  Lesley 
As  she  gaed  owre  the  Border? 

She's  gane,  Hke  Alexander, 
To  spread  her  conquests  farther. 

To  see  her  is  to  love  her, 
And  love  but  her  for  ever; 

For  nature  made  her  what  she  is, 
And  ne'er  made  sic  anither! 


^2'2.  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Thou  art  a  queen,  fair  Lesley, 
Thy  subjects  we,  before  thee; 

Thou  art  divine,  fair  Lesley, 
The  hearts  o'  men  adore  thee. 

The  deil  he  couldna  scaith  thee, 
Or  aught  that  wad  belang  thee; 

He'd  look  into  thy  bonny  face, 
And  say,  "I  canna  wrang  thee!" 

The  powers  aboon  will  tent  thee; 

Misfortune  sha'  na  steer  thee; 
Thou'rt  like  themselves  sae  lovely 

That  ill  they'll  ne'er  let  near  thee. 

Return  again,  fair  Lesley, 

Return  to  Caledonie! 
That  we  may  brag  we  hae  a  lass 

There's  nane  again  sae  bonny. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796! 

TO   A  YOUNG  LADY 

Sweet  stream,  that  winds  through  yonder  glade, 

Apt  emblem  of  a  virtuous  maid! — 

Silent  and  chaste  she  steals  along. 

Far  from  the  world's  gay  busy  throng: 

With  gentle  yet  prevailing  force. 

Intent  upon  her  destined  course; 

Graceful  and  useful  all  she  does. 

Blessing  and  blest  where'er  she  goes; 

Pure-bosomed  as  that  watery  glass, 

And  Heaven  reflected  in  her  face ! 

William  Cow  per  [i  731-1800] 

RUTH 

She  stood  breast  high  among  the  corn, 
Clasped  by  the  golden  light  of  morn. 
Like  the  sweetheart  of  the  sun. 
Who  many  a  glowing  kiss  had  won. 


The  Solitary   Reaper  jjj 

On  her  cheek  an  autumn  flush, 
Deeply  ripened; — such  a  blush 
In  the  midst  of  brown  was  born, 
Like  red  poppies  grown  with  corn.  ;  ' 

Round  her  eyes  her  tresses  fell. 
Which  were  blackest  none  could  ten. 
But  long  lashes  veiled  a  light, 
That  had  else  been  all  too  bright. 

And  her  hat,  with  shady  brim. 
Made  her  tressy  forehead  dim ; 
Thus  she  stood  amid  the  stooks, 
Praising  God  with  sweetest  looks: 

Sure,  I  said,  Heaven  did  not  mean. 
Where  I  reap  thou  shouldst  but  glean; 
Lay  thy  sheaf  adown  and  come. 
Share  my  harvest  and  my  home. 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 


THE   SOLITARY  REAPER 

Behold  her,  single  in  the  field, 
Yon  solitary  Highland  Lass! 
Reaping  and  singing  by  herself; 
Stop  here,  or  gently  pass! 
Alone  she  cuts  and  binds  the  grain, 
And  sings  a  melancholy  strain; 
O  listen !  for  the  Vale  profound 
Is  overflowing  with  the  sound. 

No  Nightingale  did  ever  chaunt 
More  welcome  notes  to  weary  bands 
Of  Travellers  in  some  shady  haunt, 
Among  Arabian  sands: 
A  voice  so  thrilling  ne'er  was  heard 
In  spring-time  from  the  Cuckoo-bird, 
Breaking  the  silence  of  the  seas 
Among  the  farthest  Hebrides. 


334  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Will  no  one  tell  me  what  she  sings? 
Perhaps  the  plaintive  numbers  flow 
For  old,  unhappy,  far-off  things. 
And  battles  long  ago: 
Or  is  it  some  more  humble  lay, 
Familiar  matter  of  to-day? 
Some  natural  sorrow,  loss,  or  pain. 
That  has  been,  and  may  be  again! 

Whate'er  the  theme,  the  Maiden  sang 
As  if  her  song  could  have  no  ending; 
I  saw  her  singing  at  her  work, 
And  o'er  the  sickle  bending; — 
I  listened,  motionless  and  still; 
And,  as  I  mounted  up  the  hill, 
The  music  in  my  heart  I  bore, 
Long  after  it  was  heard  no  more. 

William  Wordswortli  [17  70-1 850' 

THE  THREE   COTTAGE   GIRLS 


How  blest  the  Maid  whose  heart — yet  free 

From  Love's  uneasy  sovereignty — 

Beats  with  a  fancy  running  high, 

Her  simple  cares  to  magnif)^; 

Whom  Labor,  never  urged  to  toil, 

Hath  cherished  on  a  healthful  soil; 

Who  knows  not  pomp,  who  heeds  not  pelf; 

Whose  heaviest  sin  it  is  to  look 

Askance  upon  her  pretty  Self 

Reflected  in  some  crystal  brook; 

Whom  grief  hath  spared — who  sheds  no  tear 

But  in  sweet  pity;  and  can  hear 

Another's  praise  from  envy  clear. 


Such  (but  O  lavish  Nature!  why 
That  dark  unfathomable  eye, 
Where  lurks  a  Spirit  that  replies 
To  stillest  mood  of  softest  skies. 


The  Three  Cottage  Girls  335 

Yet  hints  at  peace  to  be  o'erthrown, 

Another's  first,  and  then  her  own?) 

Such  haply,  yon  Itahan  Maid, 

Our  Lady's  laggard  Votaress, 

Halting  beneath  the  chestnut  shade 

To  accomplish  there  her  loveliness: 

Nice  aid  maternal  fingers  lend; 

A  Sister  serves  with  slacker  hand; 

Then,  glittering  like  a  star,  she  joins  the  festal  band. 

Ill 

How  blest  (if  truth  may  entertain 
Coy  fancy  with  a  bolder  strain) 
The  Helvetian  Girl — who  daily  braves, 
In  her  light  skiff,  the  tossing  waves, 
And  quits  the  bosom  of  the  deep 
Only  to  climb  the  rugged  steep! 
— Say  whence  that  modulated  shout! 
From  Wood-nymph  of  Diana's  throng? 
Or  does  the  greeting  to  a  rout 
Of  giddy  Bacchanals  belong? 
Jubilant  outcry!  rock  and  glade 
Resounded — but  the  voice  obeyed 
The  breath  of  an  Helvetian  Maid. 

IV 

Her  beauty  dazzles  the  thick  wood; 

Her  courage  animates  the  flood; 

Her  steps  the  elastic  greensward  meets 

Returning  unreluctant  sweets; 

The  mountains  (as  ye  heard)  rejoice 

Aloud,  saluted  by  her  voice ! 

Blithe  Paragon  of  Alpine  grace, 

Be  as  thou  art — for  through  thy  veins 

The  blood  of  Heroes  runs  its  race! 

And  nobly  wilt  thou  brook  the  chains 

That,  for  the  virtuous.  Life  prepares; 

The  fetter  which  the  Matron  wears; 

The  patriot  Mother's  weight  of  anxious  cares! 


336  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


"Sweet  Highland  Girl!  a  very  shower 

Of  beauty  was  thy  earthly  dower," 

When  thou  didst  flit  before  mine  eyes^ 

Gay  Vision  under  suUen  skies, 

While  Hope  and  Love  around  thee  played, 

Near  the  rough  falls  of  Inversneyd ! 

Have  they,  who  nursed  the  blossom,  seen 

No  breach  of  promise  in  the  fruit? 

Was  joy,  in  following  joy,  as  keen 

As  grief  can  be  in  grief's  pursuit? 

When  youth  had  flown  did  hope  still  bless 

Thy  goings — or  the  cheerfulness 

Of  innocence  survive  to  mitigate  distress? 

VI 

But  from  our  course  why  turn — to  tread 
A  way  with  shadows  overspread; 
Where  what  we  gladliest  would  believe 
Is  feared  as  what  may  most  deceive? 
Bright  Spirit,  not  with  amaranth  crowned 
But  heath-bells  from  thy  native  ground. 
Time  cannot  thin  thy  flowing  hair. 
Nor  take  one  ray  of  light  from  Thee; 
For  in  my  Fancy  thou  dost  share 
The  gift  of  immortality; 
And  there  shall  bloom,  with  Thee  allied, 
The  Votaress  by  Lugano's  side; 
And  that  intrepid  Nymph,  on  Uri's  steep  descried! 
William  Wordsworth  [17  70-185 oj 


BLACKMWORE  MAIDENS 

The  primrwose  in  the  sheade  do  blow, 

The  cowslip  in  the  zun. 
The  thyme  upon  the  down  do  grow, 

The  clote  where  streams  do  run; 


Blackmwore   Maidens  337 

An'  where  do  pretty  maidens  grow 

An'  blow,  but  where  the  tower 
Do  rise  among  the  bricken  tuns, 

In  Blackmwore  by  the  Stour. 

If  you  could  zee  their  comely  gait, 

An'  pretty  feaces'  smiles, 
A-trippen  on  so  light  o'  waight. 

An'  stcppen  off  the  stiles; 
A-gwain  to  church,  as  bells  do  swing 

An'  ring  within  the  tower. 
You'd  own  the  pretty  maidens'  pleace 

Is  Blackmwore  by  the  Stour. 

If  you  vrom  Wimborne  took  your  road. 

To  Stower  or  Paladore, 
An'  all  the  farmers'  housen  showed 

Their  daughters  at  the  door; 
You'd  cry  to  bachelors  at  hwome — 

"Here,  come:  'ithin  an  hour 
You'll  vind  ten  maidens  to  your  mind, 

In  Blackmwore  by  the  Stour." 

An'  if  you  looked  'ithin  their  door. 

To  zee  em  in  their  pleace, 
A-doen  housework  up  avore 

Their  smilen  mother's  feiice; 
You'd  cry — "Why,  if  a  man  would  wive 

An'  thrive,  'ithout  a  dower, 
Then  let  en  look  en  out  a  wife 

In  Blackmwore  by  the  Stour." 

As  I  upon  my  road  did  pass 

A  school-house  back  in  May, 
There  out  upon  the  beaten  grass 

Wer  maidens  at  their  play; 
An'  as  the  pretty  souls  did  tweil 

An'  smile,  I  cried,  "The  flower 
O'  beauty,  then,  is  still  in  bud 

In  Blackmwore  by  the  Stour." 

William  Barnes  [1801-1886] 


22^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


A  PORTRAIT 

"  One  name  is  Elizabeth  " 

Ben  Jonson 

I  WILL  paint  her  as  I  see  her. 
Ten  times  have  the  lilies  blown 
Since  she  looked  upon  the  sun. 

And  her  face  is  lily-clear, 

Lily-shaped,  and  dropped  in  duty 
To  the  law  of  its  own  beauty. 

Oval  cheeks  encolored  faintly, 
Which  a  trail  of  golden  hair 
Keeps  from  fading  off  to  air: 

And  a  forehead  fair  and  saintly, 
Which  two  blue  eyes  undershine. 
Like  meek  prayers  before  a  shrine. 

Face  and  figure  of  a  child, — 

Though  too  calm,  you  think,  and  tender, 
For  the  childhood  you  would  lend  her. 

Yet  child-simple,  undefiled, 
Frank,  obedient,  waiting  still 
On  the  turnings  of  your  will. 

Moving  light,  as  all  young  things, 
As  young  birds,  or  early  wheat 
When  the  wind  blows  over  it. 

Only,  free  from  flutterings 

Of  loud  mirth  that  Scorneth  measure — - 
Taking  love  for  her  chief  pleasure. 

Choosing  pleasures,  for  the  rest. 
Which  come  softly — just  as  she, 
When  she  nestles  at  your  knee. 

Quiet  talk  she  liketh  best, 
In  a  bower  of  gentle  looks, — 
Watering  flowers,  or  reading  l:)Ooks, 


339 


A   Portrait 

And  her  voice,  it  murmurs  lowly, 
As  a  silver  stream  may  run, 
Which  yet  feels  (you  feel)  the  sun. 

And  her  smile  it  seems  half  holy, 
As  if  drawn  from  thoughts  more  far 
Than  our  common  jestings  are. 

And  if  any  poet  knew  her, 

He  would  sing  of  her  with  falls 
Used  in  lovely  madrigals. 

And  if  any  painter  drew  her. 
He  would  paint  her  unaware 
With  a  halo  round  her  hair. 

And  if  reader  read  the  poem, 

He  would  whisper — "You  have  done  a 
Consecrated  little  Una!" 

And  a  dreamer  (did  you  show  him 
That  same  picture)  would  exclaim, 
'"Tis  my  angel,  with  a  name!" 

And  a  stranger, — when  he  sees  her 
In  the  street  even — smileth  stilly, 
Just  as  you  would  at  a  lily. 

And  all  voices  that  address  her, 
Soften,  sleeken  every  word. 
As  if  speaking  to  a  bird. 

And  all  fancies  yearn  to  cover 

The  hard  earth,  whereon  she  passes, 
With  the  thymy-scented  grasses. 


And  all  hearts  do  pray,  "God  love  her!" 
Ay  and  always,  in  good  sooth, 
We  may  all  be  sure  He  doth. 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [1806-1861J 


34^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


TO  A   CHILD   OF  FANCY 

The  nests  are  in  the  hedgerows, 
The  lambs  are  on  the  grass; 
With  laughter  sweet  as  music 
The  hours  lightfooted  pass, 
My  darling  child  of  fancy. 
My  winsome  prattling  lass. 

Blue  eyes,  with  long  brown  lashes, 
Thickets  of  golden  curl, 
Red  little  lips  disclosing 
Twin  rows  of  fairy  pearl, 
Cheeks  like  the  apple  blossom. 
Voice  lightsome  as  the  merle. 

A  whole  Spring's  fickle  changes, 
In  every  short-lived  day, 
A  passing  cloud  of  April, 
A  flowery  smile  of  Ma}^ 
A  thousand  quick  mutations 
From  graver  moods  to  gay. 

Far  ofT,  I  see  the  season 

When  thy  childhood's  course  is  run. 

And  thy  girlhood  opens  wider 

Beneath  the  growing  sun. 

And  the  rose  begins  to  redden, 

But  the  violets  are  done. 

And  further  still  the  summer, 
When  thy  fair  tree,  fully  grown. 
Shall  bourgeon,  and  grow  splendid 
With  blossoms  of  its  own, 
And  the  fruit  begins  to  gather, 
But  the  buttercups  are  mown. 

If  I  should  see  thy  autumn, 
'Twill  not  be  close  at  hand, 
But  with  a  spirit  vision, 
From  some  far-distant  land. 


Daisy  341 

Or,  perhaps,  I  hence  may  see  thee 
Amongst  the  angels  stand. 

I  know  not  what  of  fortune 
The  future  holds  for  thee, 
Nor  if  skies  fair  or  clouded 
Wait  thee  in  days  to  be, 
But  neither  joy  nor  sorrow 
Shall  sever  thee  from  me. 

Dear  child,  whatever  changes 
Across  our  lives  may  pass, 
I  shall  see  thee  still  for  ever, 
Clearly  as  in  a  glass. 
The  same  sweet  child  of  fancy, 
The  same  dear  winsome  lass. 

Lewis  Morris  [1833- 1907] 


DAISY 

Where  the  thistle  lifts  a  purple  crown 

Six  foot  out  of  the  turf, 
And  the  harebell  shakes  on  the  windy  hill — 

0  the  breath  of  the  distant  surf! — 


The  hills  look  over  on  the  South, 
And  southward  dreams  the  sea; 

And,  with  the  sea-breeze  hand  in  hand. 
Came  innocence  and  she. 

Where  'mid  the  gorse  the  raspberry 
Red  for  the  gatherer  springs. 

Two  children  did  we  stray  and  talk 
Wise,  idle,  childish  things. 

She  listened  with  big-lipped  surprise. 
Breast-deep  'mid  flower  and  spine: 

Her  skin  was  like  a  grape,  whose  veins 
Run  snow  instead  of  wine. 


fIT 


34?i  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

She  knew  not  those  sweet  words  she  spake, 
Nor  knew  her  own  sweet  way; 

But  there's  never  a  bird,  so  sweet  a  song 
Thronged  in  whose  throat  that  day! 

Oh,  there  were  flowers  in  Storrington 

On  the  turf  and  on  the  spray; 
But  the  sweetest  flower  on  Sussex  hills 

Was  the  Daisy- flower  that  day! 

Her  beauty  smoothed  earth's  furrowed  face! 

She  gave  me  tokens  three: — 
A  look,  a  word  of  her  winsome  mouth, 

And  a  wild  raspberry. 

A  berry  red,  a  guileless  look, 
'"'"         A  still  word, — strings  of  sand! 

And  yet  they  made  my  wild,  wild  heart 
Fly  down  to  her  little  hand. 

For  standing  artless  as  the  air, 

And  candid  as  the  skies. 
She  took  the  berries  with  her  hand, 

And  the  love  with  her  sweet  eyes. 

The  fairest  things  have  fleetest  end: 
Their  scent  survives  their  close, 

But  the  rose's  scent  is  bitterness 
To  him  that  loved  the  rose! 

She  looked  a  little  wistfully, 
Then  went  her  sunshine  way: — 

The  sea's  eye  had  a  mist  on  it, 
And  the  leaves  fell  from  the  day. 

She  went  her  unremembering  way, 

She  went  and  left  in  me 
The  pang  of  all  the  partings  gone,  ^.^^^^  ^^^ 

And  partings  yet  to  be.  „^  „j^,jj 


i 


To   Petronilla        iH  343 

She  left  me  marveling  why  my  soul 

Was  sad  that  she  was  glad; 
At  all  the  sadness  in  the  sweet, 

The  sweetness  in  the  sad. 

Still,  still  I  seemed  to  see  her,  still 
.;     Look  up  with  soft  replies, 
And  take  the  berries  with  her  hand, 
And  the  love  with  her  lovely  eyes. 

Nothing  begins,  and  nothing  ends. 

That  is  not  paid  with  moan; 
For  we  are  born  in  others'  pain. 

And  perish  in  our  own. 

Francis  Thompson  [iSsoP-igo;] 

TO  PETRONILLA  WHO  HAS  PUT  UP  HER  HAIR 

Yesterday  it  blew  alway, 

Yesterday  is  dead. 

Now  forever  must  it  stay 

Coiled  about  your  head, 

Tell  me  Whence  the  great  Command 

Hitherward  has  sped. 

"Silly  boy,  as  if  I  knew," 

Petronilla  said. 

Nay,  but  I  am  very  sure, 
Since  you  left  my  side. 
Something  has  befallen  you, 
You  are  fain  to  hide, 
Homage  has  been  done  to  you, 
Innocents  have  died. 
"Silly  boy,  and  what  of  that?" 
Petronilla  cried. 

Petronilla,  much  I  fear 
Scarcely  have  you  wept 
All  those  merry  yesterdays, 
Slaughtered  whilst  you  slept, 
Slain  to  bind  that  pretty  crown 
Closer  round  your  head. 
"Silly  boy,  as  if  I  cared," 
Petronilla  said. 

11  airy  Howarth  Bash  ford  |i88o- 


344  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 


THE   GYPSY   GIRL 

Passing  I  saw  her  as  she  stood  beside 
A  lonely  stream  between  two  barren  wolds: 
Her  loose  vest  hung  in  rudely  gathered  folds 
On  her  swart  bosom,  which  in  maiden  pride 
Pillowed  a  string  of  pearls;  among  her  hair 
Twined  the  light  bluebell  and  the  stone-crop  gay; 
And  not  far  thence  the  small  encampment  lay, 
Curling  its  wreathed  smoke  into  the  air. 
She  seemed  a  child  of  some  sun-favored  clime; 
So  still,  so  habited  to  warmth  and  rest; 
And  in  my  wayward  musings  on  past  time, 
When  my  thought  fills  with  treasured  memories, 
That  image  nearest  borders  on  the  blest 
Creations  of  pure  art  that  never  dies. 

Henry  Alford  [1810-1871] 


FANNY 

A   SOUTHERN   BLOSSOM 

Come  and  see  her  as  she  stands, 
Crimson  roses  in  her  hands; 

And  her  eyes 
Are  as  dark  as  Southern  night. 
Yet  than  Southern  dawn  more  bright, 
And  a  soft,  alluring  light 

In  them  lies. 

None  deny  if  she  beseech 
With  that  pretty,  liquid  speech 

Of  the  South. 
All  her  consonants  are  slurred, 
And  the  vowels  are  preferred; 
There's  a  poem  in  each  word 

From  that  mouth. 

Even  Cupid  is  her  slave; 
Of  her  arrows,  half  he  gave 


\ 


Somebody's  Child  345 

Her  one  day 
In  a  merry,  playful  hour. 
Dowered  with  these  and  beauty's  dower, 
Strong  indeed  her  magic  power, 

So  they  say. 

Venus,  not  to  be  outdone 
By  her  generous  Httle  son, 

Shaped  the  mouth 
Very  like  to  Cupid's  bow. 
Lack-a-day!    Our  North  can  show 
No  such  lovely  flowers  as  grow 

In  the  South! 

Aiuie  Reeve  Aldrich  [i866-i8g2] 


SOMEBODY'S   CHILD 

Just  a  picture  of  Somebody's  child, — 

Sweet  face  set  in  golden  hair, 
Violet  eyes,  and  cheeks  of  rose. 

Rounded  chin,  with  a  dimple  there, 

Tender  eyes  where  the  shadows  sleep. 

Lit  from  within  by  a  secret  ray, — 
Tender  eyes  that  will  shine  like  stars 

When  love  and  womanhood  come  this  way. 

Scarlet  lips  with  a  story  to  tell, — 

Blessed  be  he  who  shall  find  it  out. 
Who  shall  learn  the  eyes'  deep  secret  well, 

And  read  the  heart  with  never  a  doubt. 

Then  you  will  tremble,  scarlet  lips, 

Then  you  will  crimson,  loveliest  cheeks: 

Eyes  will  brighten  and  blushes  will  burn 
Wlien  the  one  true  lover  bends  and  speaks. 

But  she's  only  a  child  now,  as  you  see, 

Only  a  child  in  her  careless  grace: 
When  Love  and  Womanhood  come  this  way 

Will  anything  sadden  the  flower-like  face? 

Louise  Chandler  Moulton  [iS35-iqoS] 


346  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 

EMILIA 

Halfway  up  the  Hemlock  valley  turnpike.  ^  - 

In  the  bend  of  Silver  Water's  arm, 
Where  the  deer  come  trooping  down  at  even, 

Drink  the  cowslip  pool,  and  fear  no  harm, 
Dwells  Emilia, 

Flower  of  the  fields  of  Camlet  Farm. 

Sitting  sewing  by  the  western  window 
As  the  too  brief  mountain  sunshine  flies. 

Hast  thou  seen  a  slender-shouldered  figure 
With  a  chestnut  braid,  Minerva-wise, 

Round  her  temples. 
Shadowing  her  gray,  enchanted  eyes? 

When  the  freshets  flood  the  Silver  Water, 
When  the  swallow  flying  northward  braves 

Sleeting  rains  that  sweep  the  birchen  foothills 
Where  the  windflowers'  pale  plantation  waves — 

(Fairy  gardens 
Springing  from  the  dead  leaves  in  their  graves)  ,- 

Falls  forgotten,  then,  Emilia's  needle; 

Ancient  ballads,  fleeting  through  her  brain. 
Sing  the  cuckoo  and  the  English  primrose,  ;; 

Outdoors  calling  with  a  quaint  refrain; 
And  a  rainbow 

Seems  to  brighten  through  the  gusty  rain. 

Forth  she  goes,  in  some  old  dress  and  faded. 
Fearless  of  the  showery  shifting  wind; 

Kilted  are  her  skirts  to  clear  the  mosses, 

And  her  bright  braids  in  a  'kerchief  pinned,   1 T' 

Younger  sister 
Of  the  damsel-errant  Rosalind.  ^ 

While  she  helps  to  serve  the  harvest  supper 
In  the  lantern-lighted  village  hall,         ^j^fe  iuS 

Moonlight  rises  on  the  burning  woodland,  yinQ 
Echoes  dwindle  from  the  distant  Fall.  ,  j  nodV/ 

Hark,  Emilia!  uynu  HiV/ 

In  her  ear  the  airy  voices  call. 


-■■'    To  a  Greek  Girl  347 

Hidden  papers  in  the  dusty  garret, 

Where  her  few  and  secret  poems  h'e, — 
Thither  flies  her  heart  to  join  her  treasure, 

While  she  serves,  with  absent-musing  eye, 
Mighty  tankards 

Foaming  cider  in  the  glasses  high. 

"Would  she  mingle  with  her  young  companions!" 

Vainly  do  her  aunts  and  uncles  say; 
Ever,  from  the  village  sports  and  dances, 

Early  missed,  Emilia  slips  away. 
Whither  vanished? 

With  what  unimagined  mates  to  play? 

Did  they  seek  her,  wandering  by  the  water, 

They  should  find  her  comrades  shy  and  strange: 

Queens  and  princesses,  and  saints  and  fairies, 
Dimly  moving  in  a  cloud  of  change: — 

Desdemona; 
Mariana  of  the  Moated  Grange. 

Up  this  valley  to  the  fair  and  market 

When  young  farmers  from  the  southward  ride, 
Oft  they  linger  at  a  sound  of  chanting 
In  the  meadows  by  the  turnpike  side; 

Long  they  listen, 
Deep  in  fancies  of  a  fairy  bride. 

Sarah  N.  Clcghorn  [1876- 


TO  A  GREEK   GIRL 

With  breath  of  thyme  and  bees  that  hum, 
Across  the  years  you  seem  to  come, — 
Across  the  years  with  nymph-like  head, 
And  wind-blown  brows  unfilleted; 
A  girlish  shape  that  slips  the  bud 

In  lines  of  unspoiled  symmetry; 
A  girlish  shape  that  stirs  the  blood 

With  pulse  of  Spring,  Autonoe! 


34^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Where'er  you  pass, — where'er  you  go, 
I  hear  the  pebbly  rillet  flow; 
Where'er  you  go, — where'er  you  pass, 
There  comes  a  gladness  on  the  grass ; 
You  bring  blithe  airs  where'er  you  tread, — 

Blithe  airs  that  blow  from  down  and  sea; 
You  wake  in  me  a  Pan  not  dead, — 

Not  wholly  dead! — Autonoe! 

How  sweet  with  you  on  some  green  sod 
To  wreathe  the  rustic  garden-god; 
How  sweet  beneath  the  chestnut's  shade 
With  you  to  weave  a  basket-braid; 
To  watch  across  the  stricken  chords 

Your  rosy- twinkling  lingers  flee; 
To  woo  you  in  soft  woodland  words, 

With  woodland  pipe,  Autonoe! 

In  vain, — in  vain!     The  years  divide: 
Where  Thamis  rolls  a  murky  tide, 
I  sit  and  fill  my  painful  reams. 
And  see  you  only  in  my  dreams; — 
A  vision,  like  Alcestis,  brought 

From  under-lands  of  Memory, — 
A  dream  of  Form  in  days  of  Thought, — 

A  dream, — a  dream,  Autonoe! 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 

"CHAMBER  SCENE" 

AN   EXQUISITE   PICTURE   IN  THE   STUDIO   OF  A   YOUNG 
ARTIST  AT   ROME 

She  rose  from  her  untroubled  sleep, 

And  put  away  her  soft  brown  hair, 
And,  in  a  tone  as  low  and  deep 

As  love's  first  whisper,  breathed  a  prayer — 
Her  snow-white  hands  together  pressed, 

Hei^blue  eyes  sheltered  in  the  lid. 
The  folded  linen  on  her  breast. 

Just  swelling  wi-th  the  charms  it  hid; 


i 


:■       A  Life-Lesson  349 

And  from  her  long  and  flowing  dress 

Escaped  a  bare  and  slender  foot, 
Whose  shape  upon  the  earth  did  press 

Like  a  new  snow-flake,  white  and  "mute"; 
And  there,  from  slumber  pure  and  warm, 

Like  a  young  spirit  fresh  from  heaven, 
She  bowed  her  slight  and  graceful  form. 

And  humbly  prayed  to  be  forgiven. 

Oh  God!  if  souls  unsoiled  as  these 
Need  daily  mercy  from  Thy  throne; 

If  she  upon  her  bended  knees. 

Our  loveliest  and  our  purest  one, — 

She,  with  a  face  so  clear  and  bright. 

We  deem  her  some  stray  child  of  light;— 

If  she,  with  those  soft  eyes  in  tears, 

Day  after  day  in  her  first  years. 

Must  kneel  and  pray  for  grace  from  Thee, 
What  far,  far  deeper  need  have  we! 

How  hardly,  if  she  win  not  heaven, 

Will  our  wild  errors  be  forgiven! 

Nathaniel  Parker  Willis  [1806-1867] 

"AH,   BE  NOT   FALSE" 

Ah,  be  not  false,  sweet  Splendor! 

Be  true,  be  good; 
Be  wise  as  thou  art  tender; 

Be  all  that  Beauty  should. 

Not  lightly  be  thy  citadel  subdued; 

Not  ignobly,  not  untimely, 
Take  praise  in  solemn  mood; 

Take  love  sublimely. 

Richard  Watson  Gilder  [i  844-1909] 

A  LIFE-LESSON 

There!  little  girl,  don't  cry! 

They  have  broken  your  doll,  I  know; 

And  your  tea-set  blue, 

And  your  play-house,  too, 
Are  things  of  the  long  ago; 


J ^6  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

But  childish  troubles  will  soon  pass  by. — 
There!  little  girl,  don't  cry! 

There!  little  girl,  don't  cry! 

They  have  broken  your  slate,  I  know; 
And  the  glad,  wild  ways 
Of  your  school-girl  days 
Are  things  of  the  long  ago; 

But  life  and  love  will  soon  come  by. — 
There!  little  girl,  don't  cry! 

There!  little  girl,  don't  cry! 

They  have  broken  your  heart,  I  know;  I 

And  the  rainbow  gleams 
Of  your  youthful  dreams 
Are  things  of  the  long  ago; 

But  Heaven  holds  all  for  which  you  sigh. — 
There!  little  girl,  don't  cry! 

James  Whilcomb  Riley  [1852-1910] 


\ 


THE  MAN 

THE   BREAKING 

THE  LORD  GOD  SPEAKS  TO  A  YOUTH 

Bend  now  thy  body  to  the  common  weight: 

(But  oh,  that  vine-clad  head,  those  Hmbs  of  morn! 

Those  proud  young  shoulders,  I  myself  made  straight! 
How  shall  ye  wear  the  yoke  that  must  be  worn?) 

■Look  thou,  my  son,  what  wisdom  comes  to  thee: 
(But  oh,  that  singing  mouth,  those  radiant  eyes! 

Those  dancing  feet — that  I  myself  made  free! 
How  shall  I  sadden  them  to  make  them  wise?) 

Nay,  then,  thou  shalt!    Resist  not — have  a  care! 

(Yea,  I  must  work  my  plans  who  sovereign  sit; 
Yet  do  not  tremble  so!    I  cannot  bear — 

Though  I  am  God — to  see  thee  so  submit !) 

Margaret  Steele  A  ndcrson  [  1 8    - 


THE  FLIGHT  OF  YOUTH 

There  are  gains  for  all  our  losses, 
There  are  balms  for  all  our  pain : 
But  when  youth,  the  dream,  departs. 
It  takes  something  from  our  hearts. 
And  it  never  comes  again. 

We  are  stronger,  and  are  better, 

Under  manhood's  sterner  reign: 
Still  we  feel  that  something  sweet 
Followed  youth,  with  flying  feet, 
And  will  never  come  again. 
351 


352  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Something  beautiful  is  vanished, 

And  we  sigh  for  it  in  vain: 
We  behold  it  everywhere, 
On  the  earth,  and  in  the  air, 
But  it  never  comes  again. 

Richard  Henry  Stoddard  [1825-1003] 


"DAYS  OF  MY  YOUTH" 

Days  of  my  youth. 

Ye  have  glided  away; 
Hairs  of  my  youth, 

Ye  are  frosted  and  gray; 
Eyes  of  my  youth, 

Your  keen  sight  is  no  more; 
Cheeks  of  my  youth, 

Ye  are  furrowed  all  o'er; 
Strength  of  my  youth. 

All  your  vigor  is  gone; 
Thoughts  of  my  youth. 

Your  gay  visions  are  flown. 

Days  of  my  youth, 

I  wish  not  your  recall; 
Hairs  of  my  youth, 

I'm  content  ye  should  fall; 
Eyes  of  my  youth, 

You  much  evil  have  seen; 
Cheeks  of  my  youth, 

Bathed  in  tears  have  you  been; 
Thoughts  of  my  youth, 
sjtj      You  have  led  me  astray; 
Strength  of  my  youth, 

Why  lament  your  decay? 

Days  of  my  age. 

Ye  will  shortly  be  past; 
Pains  of  my  age, 

Yet  awhile  ye  can  last; 


Ave  Atque  Vale     ■■''  j^^^ 

Joys  of  my  age, 

In  true  wisdom  delight; 
Eyes  of  my  age, 

Be  religion  your  light; 
Thoughts  of  my  age, 

Dread  ye  not  the  cold  sod; 
Hopes  of  my  age, 

Be  ye  fixed  on  your  God, 

St.  George  Tucker  [1752-1828] 


AVE  ATQUE  VALE 

Farewell,  my  Youth!  for  now  we  needs  must  part. 
For  here  the  paths  divide; 

Here  hand  from  hand  must  sever,  heart  from  heart,— 
Divergence  deep  and  wide. 

You'll  wear  no  withered  roses  for  my  sake. 
Though  I  go  mourning  for  you  all  day  long. 
Finding  no  magic  more  in  bower  or  brake, 
No  melody  in  song. 

Gray  Eld  must  travel  in  my  company 
To  seal  this  severance  more  fast  and  sure. 
A  joyless  fellowship,  i'  faith,  'twill  be. 
Yet  must  we  fare  together,  I  and  he, 
Till  I  shall  tread  the  footpath  way  no  more. 

But  when  a  blackbird  pipes  among  the  boughs, 
On  some  dim,  iridescent  day  in  spring. 
Then  I  may  dream  you  are  remembering 
Our  ancient  vows. 

Or  when  some  joy  foregone,  some  fate  forsworn. 
Looks  through  the  dark  eyes  of  the  violet, 
I  may  re-cross  the  set,  forbidden  bourne, 

I  may  forget 
Our  long,  long  parting  for  a  little  while, 
Dream  of  the  golden  splendors  of  your  smile, 

Dream  you  remember  yet. 

Rosamund  Marriott  Watson  [1863-1911 


354  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 


TO  YOUTH 

Where  art  thou  gone,  light-ankled  Youth? 

With  wing  at  either  shoulder, 
And  smile  that  never  left  thy  mouth 

Until  the  Hours  grew  colder: 

Then  somewhat  seemed  to  whisper  near 

That  thou  and  I  must  part; 
I  doubted  it;  I  felt  no  fear, 

No  weight  upon  the  heart. 

If  aught  befell  it.  Love  was  by 

And  rolled  it  off  again;  a  lu  t 

So,  if  there  ever  was  a  sigh,  :  ^igH 

'Twas  not  a  sigh  of  pain. 

I  may  not  call  thee  back;  but  thou 

Returnest  when  the  hand 
Of  gentle  Sleep  waves  o'er  my  brow 

His  poppy-crested  wand; 

Then  smiling  eyes  bend  over  mine, 

Then  lips  once  pressed  invite; 
But  sleep  hath  given  a  silent  sign, 

And  both,  alas!  take  flight. 

Waller  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 


STANZAS  WRITTEN  ON  THE   ROAD   BETWEEN 

FLORENCE  AND  PISA 

) 
Oh,  talk  not  to  me  of  a  name  great  in  story; 
The  days  of  our  youth  are  the  days  of  our  glory; 
And  the  myrtle  and  ivy  of  sweet  two-and-twenty 
Are  worth  all  your  laurels,  though  ever  so  plenty. 

What  are  garlands  and  crowns  to  the  brow  that  is  wrinkled? 
'Tis  but  as  a  dead-flower  with  May-dew  besprinkled: 
Then  away  v/ith  all  such  from  the  head  that  is  hoary! 
What  care  I  for  the  wreaths  that  can  only  give  glory? 


Stanzas  for  Music  355 

Oh  Fame! — if  I  e'er  took  delight  in  thy  praises, 
'Twas  less  for  the  sake  of  thy  high-sounding  phrases,         '  ' 
Than  to  see  the  bright  eyes  of  the  dear  one  discover,  • 
She  thought  that  I  was  not  unworthy  to  love  her. 

There  chiefly  I  sought  thee,  there  only  I  found  thee; 
Her  glance  was  the  best  of  the  rays  that  surround  thee; 
When  it  sparkled  o'er  aught  that  was  bright  in  my  story, 
I  knew  it  was  love,  and  I  felt  it  was  glory. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [17SS-1S24] 


STANZAS   FOR   MUSIC 

There's  not  a  joy  the  world  can  give  like  that  it  takes  away, 

When  the  glow  of  early  thought  declines  in  feeling's  dull  de- 
cay; 

'Tis  not  on  youth's  smooth  cheek  the  blush  alone,  which 
fades  so  fast. 

But  the  tender  bloom  of  heart  is  gone,  ere  youth  itself  be 
past. 

Then  the  few  whose  spirits  float  above  the  wreck  of  happiness 
Are  driven  o'er  the  shoals  of  guilt  or  ocean  of  excess: 
The  magnet  of  their  course  is  gone,  or  only  points  in  vain 
The  shore  to  which  their  shivered  sail  shall  never  stretch 
again. 

Then  the  mortal  coldness  of  the  soul  like  death  itself  comes 

down; 
It  cannot  feel  for  others'  woes,  it  dare  not  dream  its  own; 
That  heavy  chill  has  frozen  o'er  the  fountain  of  our  tears. 
And  though  the  eye  may  sparkle  still,  'tis  where  the  ice 

appears. 

Though  wit  may  flash  from  fluent  lips,  and  mirth  distract 
the  breast. 

Through  midnight  hours  that  yield  no  more  their  former 
hope  of  rest; 

'Tis  but  as  ivy-leaves  around  the  ruined  turret  wreathe. 

All  green  and  wildly  fresh  without,  but  worn  and  gray  be- 
neath. 


2^6  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Oh  could  I  feel  as  I  have  felt, — or  be  what  I  have  been, 

Or  weep  as  I  could  once  have  wept  o'er  many  a  vanished 

scene ; 
As  springs  in  deserts  found  seem  sweet,  all  brackish  though 

they  be, 
So,  midst  the  withered  waste  of  life,  those  tears  would  flow 

to  me, 

George  Gordon  Byron  [1788- 1824] 


"WHEN  AS   A  LAD" 

When,  as  a  lad,  at  break  of  day 

I  watched  the  fishers  sail  away,  ,  ^. 

My  thoughts,  like  flocking  birds,  would  follow 
Across  the  curving  sky's  blue  hollow. 

And  on  and  on — 

Into  the  very  heart  of  dawn! 

For  long  I  searched  the  world!    Ah  me! 

I  searched  the  sky,  I  searched  the  sea, 
With  much  of  useless  grief  and  rueing,  .^  neHT 

Those  winged  thoughts  of  mine  pursuing — 

So  dear  were  they. 

So  lovely  and  so  far  away! 

I  seek  them  still  and  always  will 

Until  my  laggard  heart  is  still, 
And  I  am  free  to  follow,  follow, 
Across  the  curving  sky's  blue  hollow, 

Those  thoughts  too  fleet 

For  any  save  the  soul's  swift  feet! 

Isabel  Ecclestone  Mackay  [18     - 

"AROUND   THE   CHILD" 

Around  the  child  bend  all  the  three 
Sweet  Graces — Faith,  Hope,  Charity. 
Around  the  man  bend  other  faces — 
Pride,  Envy,  Malice,  are  his  Graces. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 


The   Quest  357 


ALADDIN 

When  I  was  a  beggarly  boy, 

And  lived  in  a  cellar  damp, 
I  had  not  a  friend  nor  a  toy, 

But  I  had  Aladdin's  lamp; 
When  I  could  not  sleep  for  the  cold, 

I  had  fire  enough  in  my  brain, 
And  builded,  with  roofs  of  gold, 

My  beautiful  castles  in  Spain! 

Since  then  I  have  toiled  day  and  night, 

I  have  money  and  power  good  3tore, 
But  I'd  give  all  my  lamps  of  silver  bright 

For  the  one  that  is  mine  no  more. 
Take,  Fortune,  whatever  you  choose; 

You  gave,  and  may  snatch  again; 
I  have  nothing  'twould  pain  me  to  lose, 

For  I  own  no  more  castles  in  Spain! 

James  Russell  Lowell  [iSig-iSgi] 


THE  QUEST 

It  was  a  heavenly  time  of  life 
When  first  I  went  to  Spain, 

The  lovely  land  of  silver  mists, 
The  land  of  golden  grain. 

My  little  ship  through  unknown  seas 
Sailed  many  a  changing  day; 

Sometimes  the  chilling  winds  came  up 
And  blew  across  her  way; 

Sometimes  the  rain  came  down  and  hid 
The  shining  shores  of  Spain, 

The  beauty  of  the  silver  mists 
And  of  the  golden  grain. 


358  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

But  through  the  rains  and  through  the  winds, 

Upon  the  untried  sea, 
My  fairy  ship  sailed  on  and  on, 

With  all  my  dreams  and  me. 

And  now,  no  more  a  child,  I  long 

For  that  sweet  time  again, 
When  on  the  far  horizon  bar 

Rose  up  the  shores  of  Spain. 

0  lovely  land  of  silver  mists, 
O  land  of  golden  grain, 

1  look  for  you  with  smiles,  with  tears, 
But  look  for  you  in  vain! 

Ellen  Mackey  Hutchinson  Cortissoz  [18    - 


MY  BIRTH-DAY 

"My  birth-day" — what  a  different  sound 

That  word  had  in  my  youthful  ears! 
And  how,  each  time  the  day  comes  round, 

Less  and  less  white  its  mark  appears! 
When  first  our  scanty  years  are  told. 
It  seems  like  pastime  to  grow  old; 
And,  as  Youth  counts  the  shining  links 

That  Time  around  him  binds  so  fast, 
Pleased  with  the  task,  he  little  thinks 

How  hard  that  chain  will  press  at  last. 
Vain  was  the  man,  and  false  as  vain, 

Who  said —  "  were  he  ordained  to  run 
His  long  career  of  Hfe  again, 

He  would  do  aU  that  he  had  done. " 

Ah,  'tis  not  thus  the  voice,  that  dwells 

In  sober  birth-days,  speaks  to  me; 
Far  otherwise — of  time  it  tells 

Lavished  unwisely,  carelessly; 
Of  counsel  mocked;  of  talents,  made 

fidpiy  for  high  and  pure  designs, 
Bnt  oft,  like  Israel's  incense,  laid 

lipon  unholy,  earthly  shrines; 


Sonnet  359 

Of  nursing  many  a  wrong  desire; 

Of  wandering  after  Love  too  far, 
And  taking  every  meteor-fire 

That  crossed  my  pathway,  for  a  star. 
All  this  it  tells,  and,  could  I  trace 

The  imperfect  picture  o'er  again. 
With  power  to  add,  retouch,  efface 

The  lights  and  shades,  the  joy  and  pain. 
How  little  of  the  past  would  stay! 
How  quickly  all  should  melt  away- 
All — but  that  Freedom  of  the  Mind, 

Which  hath  been  more  than  wealth  to  me; 
Those  friendships,  in  my  boyhood  twined. 

And  kept  till  now  unchangingly; 
And  that  dear  home,  that  saving-ark, 

Where  Love's  true  light  at  last  I've  found. 
Cheering  within,  when  all  grows  dark. 

And  comfortless,  and  stormy  round! 

Thomas  Moore  [177 9- 1852] 


SONNET 

ON    IIIS   HAVING    ARRIVED    TO    THE    AGE    OF    TWENTY-THREE 

How  soon  hath  Time,  the  subtle  thief  of  youth, 
Stolen  on  his  wing  my  three-and-twentieth  year! 
My  hasting  days  fly  on  with  full  career, 
But  my  late  spring  no  bud  or  blossom   shew'th. 

Perhaps  my  semblance  might  deceive  the  truth 
That  I  to  manhood  am  arrived  so  near; 
And  inward  ripeness  doth  much  less  appear. 
That  some  more  timely-happy  spirits  endu'th. 

Yet,  be  it  less  or  more,  or  soon  or  slow, 
It  shall  be  still  in  strictest  measure  even 
To  that  same  lot,  however  mean  or  high, 

Toward  which  Time  leads  me,  and  the  will  of  Heaven: 
All  is,  if  I  have  grace  to  use  it  so, 
As  ever  in  my  great  Task-master's  eye. 

John  Milton  [160S-1674I 


360  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


ON  THIS  DAY  I  COMPLETE  MY  THIRTY-SIXTH 
YEAR 

'Tis  time  this  heart  should  be  unmoved, 

Since  others  it  hath  ceased  to  move: 
Yet,  though  I  cannot  be  beloved, 
Still  let  me  love! 

My  days  are  in  the  yellow  leaf; 

The  flowers  and  fruits  of  love  are  gone; 
The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  grief 
Are  mine  alone! 

The  fire  that  on  my  bosom  preys 

Is  lone  as  some  volcanic  isle; 
No  torch  is  kindled  at  its  blaze — 
A  funeral  pile. 

The  hope,  the  fear,  the  jealous  care, 

The  exalted  portion  of  the  pain 
And  power  of  love,  I  cannot  share, 
But  wear  the  chain. 

But  'tis  not  thus — and  'tis  not  here — 

Such  thoughts  should  shake  my  soul,  nor  now, 
Where  glory  decks  the  hero 's  bier, 
Or  binds  his  brow. 

The  sword,  the  banner,  and  the  field, 
Glory  and  Greece,  around  me  see! 
The  Spartan,  borne  upon  his  shield. 
Was  not  more  free. 

Awake!  (not  Greece — she  is  awake!) 

Awake,  my  spirit !     Think  through  whom 
Thy  life-blood  tracks  its  parent  lake, 
And  then  strike  home! 

Tread  those  reviving  passions  down, 

Unworthy  manhood ! — unto  thee 
Indifferent  should  the  smile  or  frown 
Of  beauty  be. 


Growing  Gray  •        361 

If  thou  regret 'st  thy  j'outh,  why  live? 

The  land  of  honorable  death 
Is  here: — up  to  the  field,  and  give 
Away  thy  breath! 

Seek  out — less  often  sought  than  found — 

A  soldier's  grave,  for  thee  the  best; 
Then  look  around,  and  choose  thy  ground. 
And  take  thy  rest. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [17S8-1824] 


GROWING   GRAY 

"  On  a  V  age  de  son  cxur." 

A.  d'  Houdetot 

A  LITTLE  more  toward  the  light ; — 
Me  miserable!    Here's  one  that's  white; 

And  one  that's  turning; 
Adieu  to  song  and  "salad  days;" 
My  Muse,  let's  go  at  once  to  Jay's, 

And  order  mourning. 

We  must  reform  our  rhymes,  my  Dear, — 
Renounce  the  gay  for  the  severe, — 

Be  grave,  not  witty; 
We  have,  no  more,  the  right  to  find 
That  Pyrrha's  hair  is  neatly  twined, — 

That  Chloe's  pretty. 

Young  Love's  for  us  a  farce  that's  played; 
Light  canzonet  and  serenade 

No  more  may  tempt  us; 
Gray  hairs  but  ill  accord  with  dreams; 
From  aught  but  sour  didactic  themes 

Our  years  exempt  us. 

Indeed!  you  really  fancy  so? 

You  think  for  one  white  streak  we  grow 

At  once  satiric? 
A  fiddlestick!    Each  hair's  a  string 
To  which  our  ancient  Muse  shall  sing 

A  younger  lyric. 


26^         '  Poems  of  Youth  and   Age 

The  heart's  still  sound.    Shall  "cakes  and  ale" 
Grow  rare  to  youth  because  we  rail 

At  schoolboy  dishes? 
Perish  the  thought !    'Tis  ours  to  chant 
When  neither  Time  nor  Tide  can  grant 

Belief  with  wishes. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


THE  ONE  WHITE  HAIR 

The  wisest  of  the  wise 
Listen  to  pretty  lies 

And  love  to  hear  'em  told. 
Doubt  not  that  Solomon 
Listened  to  many  a  one, — 
Some  in  his  youth,  and  more  when  he  grew  old. 

I  never  w^as  among 

The  choir  of  Wisdom's  song, 

But  pretty  lies  loved  I 
As  much  as  any  king, 
When  youth  was  on  the  wing, 
And  (must  it  then  be  told?)  when  youth  had  quite  gone  by. 

Alas!  and  I  have  not 
The  pleasant  hour  forgot 

When  one  pert  lady  said, 
"0  Walter!  I  am  quite 
Bewildered  with  affright! 
I  sec  (sit  quiet  now)  a  white  hair  on  your  head!" 

Another  more  benign 
Snipped  it  away  from  mine, 
And  in  her  own  dark  hair 
Pretended  it  was  found  .  .  . 

She  leaped,  and  twirled  it  round  .  .  . 
Fair  as  she  was,  she  never  was  so  fair! 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 


Middle  Age  ^^^ 


B.\LLADE  OF  MIDDLE  AGE 

Our  youth  began  with  tears  and  sighs, 

With  seeking  what  we  could  not  find; 
Our  verses  all  were  threnodies, 

In  elegiacs  still  we  whined; 

Our  ears  were  deaf,  our  eyes  were  blind, 
We  sought  and  knew  not  what  wc  sought. 

We  marvel,  now  we  look  behind: 
Life's  more  amusing  than  we  thought! 

Oh,  fooKsh  youth,  untimely  wise!* 

Oh,  phantoms  of  the  sickly  mind! 

What?  not  content  with  seas  and  skies, 
.  With  rainy  clouds  and  southern  wind, 
With  common  cares  and  faces  kind. 

With  pains  and  joys  each  morning  brought? 
Ah,  old,  and  worn,  and  tired  we  find 

Life's  more  amusing  than  we  thought! 

Though  youth  "turns  spectre-thin  and  dies," 

To  mourn  for  youth  we're  not  inclined; 
We  set  our  souls  on  salmon  flies. 

We  whistle  where  we  once  repined. 

Confound  the  woes  of  human-kind! 
By  Heaven  we're  "well  deceived,"  I  wot; 

Who  hum,  contented  or  resigned, 
"Life's  more  amusing  than  we  thought"! 

Em'OY 

O  nate  mecuni,  worn  and  lined 
Our  faces  show,  but  that  is  naught ; 

Our  hearts  are  young  'neath  wrinkled  rind: 
Life's  more  amusing  than  we  thought! 

Andrew  Lang  [1S44-1912] 

MIDDLE   AGE 

When  that  my  days  were  fewer, 

Some  twenty  years  ago. 
And  all  that  is  was  nev/er. 

And  time  itself  seemed  slow, 


364  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

With  ardor  all  impassioned, 

I  let  my  hopes  fly  free, 
And  deemed  the  world  was  fashioned 

My  playing-field  to  be. 

The  cup  of  joy  was  filled  then 

With  Fancy's  sparkling  wine; 
And  all  the  things  I  willed  then 

Seemed  destined  to  be  mine. 
Friends  had  I  then  in  plenty, 

And  gvery  friend  was  true; 
Friends  always  are  at  twenty. 

And  on  to  twenty-two. 

The  men  whose  hair  was  sprinkled 

With  httle  flecks  of  gray, 
Whose  faded  brows  were  wrinkled — • 

Sure  they  had  had  their  day. 
And  though  we  bore  no  malice, 

We  knew  their  hearts  were  cold, 
For  they  had  drained  their  chalice, 

And  now  were  spent  and  old. 

At  thirty,  we  admitted, 

A  man  may  be  alive, 
But  slower,  feebler  witted; 

And  done  at  thirty-five. 
If  Fate  prolongs  his  earth-days, 

His  joys  grow  fewer  still; 
And  after  five  more  birthdays 

He  totters  down  the  hill. 

We  were  the  true  immortals 

Who  held  the  earth  in  fee; 
For  us  were  flung  the  portals 

Of  fame  and  victory. 
The  days  were  bright  and  breezy, 

And  gay  our  banners  flew. 
And  every  peak  was  easy 

To  scale  at  twenty-two. 


Middle  Age  365 

And  thus  we  spent  our  gay  time 

As  having  much  to  spend; 
Swift,  swift,  that  pretty  playtime 

Flew  by  and  had  its  end. 
And  lo !  without  a  warning 

I  woke,  as  others  do, 
One  fine  mid-winter  morning, 

A  man  of  forty-two. 

And  now  I  see  how  vainly 

Is  youth  with  ardor  fired; 
How  fondly,  how  insanely 

I  formerly  aspired. 
A  boy  may  still  detest  age, 

But  as  for  me  I  know, 
A  man  has  reached  his  best  age 

At  forty-two  or  so. 

For  youth  it  is  the  season 

Of  restlessness  and  strife; 
Of  passion  and  unreason. 

And  Ignorance  01  lite. 
Since,  though  his  cheeks  have  roses, 

No  boy  can  understand 
That  everything  he  knows  is 

A  graft  at  second  hand. 

But  we  have  toiled  and  wandered 

With  weary  feet  and  numb; 
Have  doubted,  sifted,  pondered, — 

How  else  should  knowledge  come? 
Have  seen,  too  late  for  heeding, 

Our  hopes  go  out  in  tears, 
Lost  in  the  dim  receding. 

Irrevocable  years. 

Yet,  though  with  busy  fingers 

No  more  we  wreathe  the  flowers,  . 

An  airy  perfume  lingers, 
A  brightness  still  is  ours. 


366  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  though  no  rose  our  cheeks  have, 
The  sky  still  shines  as  blue; 

And  still  the  distant  peaks  have 
The  glow  of  twenty-two. 

Rudolph  Chambers  Lckmaim  [1856- 


TO   CRITICS 

When  I  was  seventeen  I  heard    . 

From  each  censorious  tongue, 
"I'd  not  do  that  if  I  were  you; 

You  see  you're  rather  young." 

Now  that  I  number  forty  years, 

I'm  quite  as  often  told 
Of  this  or  that  I  shouldn't  do 

Because  I'm  quite  too  old. 

O  carping  world !    If  there's  an  age 
Where  youth  and  manhood  keep 

An  equal  poise,  alas!    I  must 
Have  passed  it  in  my  sleep. 

Walter  Learned  [1847-1915] 

THE  RAINBOW 

My  heart  leaps  up  when  I  behold 

A  rainbow  in  the  sky: 
So  was  it  when  my  life  began; 
So  is  it  now  I  am  a  man; 
So  be  it  when  I  shall  grow  old, 

Or  let  me  die! 
The  Child  is  father  of  the  Man; 
And  I  could  wish  my  days  to  be 
Bound  each  to  each  by  natural  piety. 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 


LEAVETAKING 

Pass,  thou  wild  Ught, 
Wild  light  on  peaks  that  so 


Equinoctial  c|  367 

Grieve  to  let  go 

The  day. 
Lovely  thy  tarrying,  lovely  too  is  night: 

Pass  thou  away. 

Pass,  thou  wild  heart. 

Wild  heart  of  youth  that  still 

Hast  half  a  will 

To  stay. 
I  grow  too  old  a  comrade,  let  us  part: 

Pass  thou  away. 

William  Watson  \i8%8- 


EQUINOCTIAL 

The  sun  of  life  has  crossed  the  line; 

The  summer-shine  of  lengthened  hght 
Faded  and  failed,  till,  where  I  stand, 

'Tis  equal  day  and  equal  night. 

One  after  one,  as  dwindling  hours. 

Youth's  glowing  hopes  have  dropped  away, 
And  soon  may  barely  leave  the  gleam 

That  coldly  scores  a  winter's  day. 

I  am  not  young;  I  am  not  old; 

The  flush  of  morn,  the  sunset  calm, 
Pahng  and  deepening,  each  to  each, 

Meet  midway  with  a  solemn  charm. 

One  side  I  see  the  summer  fields, 
Not  yet  disrobed  of  all  their  green; 

While  westerly,  along  the  hills, 

Flame  the  first  tints  of  frosty  sheen. 

Ah,  middle-point,  where  cloud  and  storm 
Make  battle-ground  of  this  my  life! 

Where,  even-matched,  the  night  and  day 
Wage  round  me  their  September  strife! 


368  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

I  bow  me  to  the  threatening  gale: 
I  know  when  that  is  overpast, 

Among  the  peaceful  harvest  days, 
An  Indian  Summer  comes  at  last! 

Adeline  D.  T.  Whitney  [1824-1906] 


'BEFORE  THE  BEGINNING  OF  YEARS" 

From  "  Atalanta  in  Calydon" 

Before  the  beginning  of  years, 

There  came  to  the  making  of  man 
Time,  with  a  gift  of  tears; 

Grief,  with  a  glass  that  ran; 
Pleasure,  with  pain  for  leaven; 

Summer,  with  flowers  that  fell; 
Remembrance,  fallen  from  heaven; 

And  madness,  risen  from  hell; 
Strength,  without  hands  to  smite; 

Love,  that  endures  for  a  breath; 
Night,  the  shadow  of  light; 

And  life,  the  shadow  of  death. 

And  the  high  gods  took  in  hand 

Fire,  and  the  falling  of  tears, 
And  a  measure  of  sliding  sand 

From  under  the  feet  of  the  years; 
And  froth  and  drift  of  the  sea; 

And  dust  of  the  laboring  earth; 
And  bodies  of  things  to  be 

In  the  houses  of  death  and  of  birth; 
And  wrought  with  weeping  and  laughter, 

And  fashioned  with  loathing  and  love, 
With  Hfe  before  and  after, 

And  death  beneath  and  above. 
For  a  day  and  a  night  and  a  morrow. 

That  his  strength  might  endure  for  a  span, 
With  travail  and  heavy  sorrow. 

The  holy  spirit  of  man."^»^°*'^SfiW 


Man  369 


From  the  winds  of  the  north  and  the  south 

They  gathered  as  unto  strife; 
They  breathed  upon  his  mouth, 

They  tilled  his  body  with  Hfe; 
Eyesight  and  speech  they  wrought 

For  the  veils  of  the  soul  therein, 
A  time  for  labor  and  thought, 

A  time  to  serve  and  to  sin; 
They  gave  him  light  in  his  ways, 

And  love,  and  a  space  for  delight, 
And  beauty  and  length  of  days. 

And  night,  and  sleep  in  the  night. 
His  speech  is  a  burning  fire; 

With  his  lips  he  travaileth ; 
In  his  heart  is  a  blind  desire,  ''>-> 

In  his  eyes  foreknowledge  of  death; 
He  weaves,  and  is  clothed  with  derision' 

Sows,  and  he  shall  not  reap; 
His  life  is  a  watch  or  a  vision 

Between  a  sleep  and  a  sleep. 

Algernon  Charles  Sunnhiirne  [1837-1909] 


MAN 

Weighing  the  steadfastness  and  state 
Of  some  mean  things  which  here  below  reside. 
Where  birds,  hke  watchful  clocks,  the  noiseless  date 

And  intercourse  of  times  divide, 
Where,  bees  at  night  get  home  and  hive,  and  flowers, 

Early  as  well  as  late, 
Rise  with  the  sun,  and  set  in  the  same  bowers; 

I  would,  said  I,  my  God  would  give 
The  staidness  of  these  things  to  man!  for  these 
To  His  divine  appointments  ever  cleave, 

And  no  new  business  breaks  their  peace; 
The  birds  nor  sow  nor  reap,  yet  sup  and  dine, 

The  flowers  without  clothes  live, 
Yet  Solomon  was  never  dressed  so  fine. 


370  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Man  hath  still  either  toys,  or  care;  ■ 

He  hath  no  root,  nor  to  one  place  is  tied, 
But  ever  restless  and  irregular 

About  this  earth  doth  run  and  ride; 
He  knows  he  hath  a  home,  but  scarce  knows  where; 

He  says  it  is  so  far. 
That  he  hath  quite  forgot  how  to  go  there. 

He  knocks  at  all  doors,  strays  and  roams; 
Nay,  hath  not  so  much  wit  as  some  stones  have. 
Which  in  the  darkest  nights  point  to  their  homes 

By  some  hid  sense  their  Maker  gave; 
Man  is  the  shuttle,  to  whose  winding  quest 

And  passage  through  these  looms 
God  ordered  motion,  but  ordained  no  rest. 

Henry  Vaiighan  [1622-16QS] 

THE  PULLEY 

When  God  at  first  made  Man, 
Having  a  glass  of  blessings  standing  by — 
Let  us  (said  He)  pour  on  him  all  we  can; 
Let  the  world's  riches,  which  dispersed  lie, 

Contract  into  a  span. 

So  strength  first  made  a  way. 
Then  beauty  flowed,  then  wisdom,  honor,  pleasure: 
When  almost  all  was  out,  God  made  a  stay, 
Perceiving  that,  alone  of  all  His  treasure,    '   "  '  "  "  ' 

Rest  in  the  bottom  lay.  "^'^^  '^"'^'^ 

For  if  I  should  (said  He) 
Bestow  this  jewel  also  on  My  creature. 
He  would  adore  My  gifts  instead  of  Me, 
And  rest  in  Nature,  not  the  God  of  Nature: 

So  both  should  losers  be. 

Yet  let  him  keep  the  rest, 
But  keep  them  with  repining  restlessness; 
Let  him  be  rich  and  weary,  that  at  least. 
If  goodness  lead  him  not,  yet  weariness. 

May  toss  him  to  My  breast. 

George  Hefh'&tirM^iesii] 


mM 


Ode  on   the   Intimations   of  Immortality    371 


.■>fi/.. 


ODE   ON  THE   INTIMATIONS  OF  IMMORTALITY 
FROM  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  EARLY  CHILDHOOD 


There  was  a  time  when  meadow,  grove,  and  stream. 
The  earth,  and  every  common  sight, 
To  me  did  seem 
Apparelled  in  celestial  light, 
The  glory  and  the  freshness  of  a  dream. 
It  is  not  now  as  it  hath  been  of  yore; — 
Turn  wheresoe'er  I  may. 
By  night  or  day. 
The  things  which  I  have  seen  I  now  can  see  no  more. 


The  Rainbow  comes  and  goes, 

And  lovely  is  the  Rose ; 

The  Moon  doth  with  dehght 
Look  round  her  when  the  heavens  are  bare; 

Waters  on  a  starry  night 

Are  beautiful  and  fair; 
The  sunshine  is  a  glorious  birth; 
But  yet  I  know,  where'er  I  go. 
That  there  hath  passed  away  a  glory  from  the  earth. 

Ill 

Now,  while  the  Birds  thus  sing  a  joyous  song, 
And  while  the  young  Lambs  bound 

As  to  the  tabor's  sound, 
To  me  alone  there  came  a  thought  of  grief: 
A  timely  utterance  gave  that  thought  relief, 

And  I  again  am  strong. 
The  Cataracts  blow  their  trumpets  from  the  steep: 
No  more  shall  grief  of  mine  the  season  wrong; 
I  hear  the  Echoes  through  the  mountains  throng, 
The  Winds  come  to  me  from  the  fields  of  sleep. 


37^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age     lo  aJjQ 

And  all  the  earth  is  gay; 

Land  and  Sea 
Give  themselves  up  to  jollity, 

And  with  the  heart  of  May  •.  I  [ 

Doth  every  Beast  keep  holiday;— 
Thou  Child  of  Joy, 
Shout  round  me,  let  me  hear  thy  shouts,  thou  happy  Shep- 
herd-boy ! 

IV 

Ye  blessed  Creatures,  I  have  heard  the  call 

Ye  to  each  other  make;  I  sec 
The  heavens  laugh  with  you  in  your  jubilee; 

My  heart  is  at  your  festival, 
My  head  hath  its  coronal. 
The  fulness  of  your  bliss,  I  feel — I  feel  it  all. 

0  evil  day!  if  I  were  sullen 
While  Earth  herself  is  adorning 

This  sweet  May  morning. 
And  the  Children  are  culling 

On  every  side. 
In  a  thousand  valleys  far  and  wide, 
Fresh  flowers;  while  the  sun  shines  warm, 
And  the  Babe  leaps  up  on  his  Mother's  arm: — 

1  hear,  I  hear,  with  joy  I  hear! 

— But  there's  a  Tree,  of  many,  one, 
A  single  Field  which  I  have  looked  upon. 
Both  of  them  speak  of  something  that  is  gone: 

The  Pansy  at  my  feet 

Doth  the  same  tale  repeat: 
Whither  is  fled  the  visionary  gleam? 
Where  is  it  now,  the  glory  and  the  dream? 


Our  birth  is  but  a  sleep  and  a  forgetting: 
The  Soul  that  rises  with  us,  our  hfe's  Star, 
Hath  had  elsewhere  its  setting. 

And  Cometh  from  afar: 
Not  in  entire  forgetfulness, 
And  not  in  utter  nakedness, 


Ode  on   the   Intimations  of  Immortality    373 

But  trailing  clouds  of  glory  do  wc  come 

From  God,  who  is  our  home: 
Heaven  lies  about  us  in  our  infancy! 
Shades  of  the  prison-house  begin  to  close 

Upon  the  growing  Boy, 
But  he  beholds  the  light,  and  whence  it  flows, 

He  sees  it  in  his  joy; 
The  Youth,  who  daily  farther  from  the  East 
Must  travel,  still  is  Nature's  Priest, 

And  by  the  vision  spendid 

Is  on  his  way  attended; 
At  length  the  Man  perceives  it  die  away, 
And  fade  into  the  light  of  common  day. 


Earth  fills  her  lap  with  pleasures  of  her  own; 
Yearnings  she  hath  in  her  own  natural  kind, 
And  even  with  something  of  a  Mother's  mind, 

And  no  unworthy  aim. 

The  homely  Nurse  doth  all  she  can, 
To  make  her  Foster-child,  her  Inmate  Man, 
Forget  the  glories  he  hath  known. 
And  that  imperial  palace  whence  he  came. 

VII 

Behold  the  Child  among  his  new-born  blisses, 
A  six  years'  darling  of  a  pigmy  size! 
See,  where  'mid  work  of  his  own  hand  he  lies. 
Fretted  by  salhcs  of  his  Mother's  kisses. 
With  light  upon  him  from  his  Father's  eyes! 
See,  at  his  feet,  some  little  plan  or  chart, 
Some  fragment  from  his  dream  of  human  life. 
Shaped  by  himself  with  newly-learned  art; 

A  wedding  or  a  festival, 

A  mourning  or  a  funeral; 
And  this  hath  now  his  heart, 

And  unto  this  he  frames  his  song: 
Then  will  he  fit  his  tongue 
To  dialogues  of  business,  love,  or  strife: 

But  it  will  not  be  long 


374  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Ere  this  be  thrown  aside, 

And  with  new  joy  and  pride 
The  little  Actor  cons  another  part; 
Filling  from  time  to  time  his  "humorous  stage" 
With  all  the  Persons,  down  to  palsied  Age, 
That  Life  brings  with  her  in  her  equipage; 

As  if  his  whole  vocation 

Were  endless  imitation. 

vni 

Thou,  whose  exterior  semblance  doth  belie 

Thy  Soul's  immensity; 
Thou  best  Philosopher,  who  yet  dost  keep 
Thy  heritage,  thou  Eye  among  the  blind, 
That,  deaf  and  silent,  read'st  the  eternal  deep, 
Haunted  for  ever  by  the  eternal  mind, — 

Mighty  Prophet!  Seer  blest! 

On  whom  those  truths  do  rest, 
Which  we  are  toiling  all  our  lives  to  find, 
In  darkness  lost,  the  darkness  of  the  grave: 
Thou,  over  whom  thy  Immortality 
Broods  hke  the  Day,  a  master  o'er  a  Slave, 
A  Presence  which  is  not  to  be  put  by; 
Thou  little  Child,  yet  glorious  in  the  might 
Of  heaven-born  freedom  on  thy  being's  height. 
Why  with  such  earnest  pains  dost  thou  provoke 
The  years  to  bring  the  inevitable  yoke, 
Thus  blindly  with  thy  blessedness  at  strife? 
Full  soon  thy  Soul  shall  have  her  earthly  freight, 
And  custom  lie  upon  thee  with  a  weight 
Heavy  as  frost,  and  deep  almost  as  life! 

IX 

O  joy!  that  in  our  embers 

Is  something  that  doth  live, 

That  nature  yet  remembers 

What  was  so  fugitive! 
The  thought  of  our  past  years  in  me  doth  breed 
Perpetual  benediction:  not  indeed 


Ode  on   the   Intimations  ot   Immortality    375 

For  that  which  is  most  worthy  to  be  blest — 
Dehght  and  hberty,  the  simple  creed 
Of  Childhood,  whether  busy  or  at  rest, 
With  new-fledged  hope  stiU  fluttering  in  his  breast: — 
Not  for  these  I  raise 
The  song  of  thanks  and  praise; 
But  for  those  obstinate  questionings 
Of  sense  and  outward  things, 
Fallings  from  us,  vanishings; 
Blank  misgivings  of  a  Creature 
Moving  about  in  worlds  not  realized. 
High  instincts  before  which  our  mortal  Nature 
Did  tremble  like  a  guilty  thing  surprised: 
But  for  those  first  affections, 
Those  shadowy  recollections^ 
Which,  be  they  what  they  may, 
Are  yet  the  fountain-light  of  all  our  day, 
Are  yet  a  master-hght  of  all  our  seeing; 

Uphold  us,  cherish,  and  have  power  to  make 
Our  noisy  years  seem  moments  in  the  being 
Of  the  eternal  Silence:  truths  that  wake. 

To  perish  never; 
Which  neither  listlessness,  nor  mad  endeavor, 

Nor  Man  nor  Boy, 
Nor  all  that  is  at  enmity  with  joy. 
Can  utterly  abolish  or  destroy! 

Hence,  in  a  season  of  calm  weather, 
Though  inland  far  we  be. 
Our  Souls  have  sight  of  that  immortal  sea 
Which  brought  us  hither, 
Can  in  a  moment  travel  thither 
And  see  the  children  sport  upon  the  shore. 
And  hear  the  mighty  waters  rolling  evermore. 


Then  sing,  ye  Birds,  sing,  sing  a  joyous  song! 
And  let  the  young  Lambs  bound 
As  to  the  tabor's  sound! 
We  in  thought  will  join  your  throng, 


3^6  ]*oeins  of  Youth  and  Age 

Ye  that  pipe  and  ye  that  play, 

Ye  that  through  your  hearts  to-day 

Feel  the  gladness  of  the  May! 

What  though  the  radiance  which  was  once  so  bright 

Be  now  for  ever  taken  from  my  sight, 

Though  nothing  can  bring  back  the  hour 

Of  splendor  in  the  grass,  of  glory  in  the  flower; 
We  will  grieve  not,  rather  find 
Strength  in  what  remains  behind; 
In  the  primal  sympathy 
Which  having  been  must  ever  be; 
In  the  soothing  thoughts  that  spring 
Out  of  human  suffering; 
In  the  faith  that  looks  through  death, 

In  years  that  bring  the  philosophic  mind. 


And  O,  ye  Fountains,  Meadows,  Hills,  and  Groves, 

Forebode  not  any  severing  of  our  loves! 

Yet  in  my  heart  of  hearts  I  feel  your  might; 

I  only  have  relinquished  one  delight 

To  live  beneath  your  more  habitual  sway. 

I  love  the  Brooks,  which  down  their  channels  fret, 

Even  more  than  when  I  tripped  lightly  as  they: 

The  innocent  brightness  of  a  new-born  Day 

Is  lovely  yet; 
The  Clouds  that  gather  round  the  setting  sun 
Do  take  a  sober  coloring  from  an  eye 
That  hath  kept  watch  o'er  man's  mortahty; 
Another  race  hath  been,  and  other  palms  are  won. 
Thanks  to  the  human  heart  by  which  we  live, 
Thanks  to  its  tenderness,  its  joys,  and  fears, 
To  me  the  meanest  flower  that  blows  can  give 
Thoughts  that  do  often  lie  too  deep  for  tears. 

William  Wordsworth  [i 770-1 850] 


THE  WOMAN 

WOMAN 

Not  she  with  traitorous  kiss  her  Saviour  stung, 
Not  she  denied  him  with  unholy  tongue; 
She,  while  apostles  shrank,  could  dangers  brave, 
Last  at  the  cross  and  earliest  at  the  grave. 

Eaton  Stannard  Barrett  [i 786-1820] 

WOMAN 

There  in  the  fane  a  beauteous  creature  stands, 

The  first  best  work  of  the  Creator's  hands, 

Whose  slender  limbs  inadequately  bear 

A  full-o.rbed  bosom  and  a  weight  of  care; 

Whose  teeth  like  pearls,  whose  lips  like  cherries,  show, 

And  fawn-like  eyes  stiU  tremble  as  they  glow. 

From  the  Sanskrit  of  CaJidasa 


SIMPLEX  MUNDITIIS 

From  "  Epicoen8  " 

Still  to  be  neat,  still  to  be  dressed 

As  you  were  going  to  a  feast; 

Still  to  be  powdered,  still  perfumed: 

Lady,  it  is  to  be  presumed. 

Though  art's  hid  causes  are  not  found, 

All  is  not  sweet,  all  is  not  sound. 

Give  me  a  look,  give  me  a  face. 

That  makes  simplicity  a  grace; 

Robes  loosely  flowing,  hair  as  free: 

Such  sweet  neglect  more  taketh  me 

Than  all  the  adulteries  of  art; 

They  strike  mine  eyes,  but  not  my  heart. 

Ben  Jonson  [iS73?-i637] 

377 


378  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


DELIGHT  IN  DISORDER 

A  SWEET  disorder  in  the  dress 

Kindles  in  clothes  a  wantonness: 

A  lawn  about  the  shoulders  thrown 

Into  a  fine  distraction: 

An  erring  lace,  which  here  and  there 

Enthrals  the  crimson  stomacher: 

A  cuflf  neglectful,  and  thereby 

Ribbons  to  flow  confusedly: 

A  winning  wave,  deserving  note, 

In  the  tempestuous  petticoat: 

A  careless  shoe-string,  in  whose  tie 

I  see  a  wild  civility: 

Do  more  bewitch  me  than  when  art 

Is  too  precise  in  every  part. 

Robert  Herrick  [1501-1674] 


A  PRAISE  OF  HIS  LADY 

Give  place,  you  ladies,  and  begone! 

Boast  not  yourselves  at  all! 
For  here  at  hand  approacheth  one 

Whose  face  will  stain  you  all. 

The  virtue  of  her  lively  looks 
Excels  the  precious  stone; 

I  wish  to  have  none  other  books 
To  read  or  look  upon. 

In  each  of  her  two  crystal  eyes 

Smileth  a  naked  boy; 
It  would  you  all  in  heart  sufi5ce 

To  see  that  lamp  of  joy. 

I  think  Nature  hath  lost  the  mould 
Where  she  her  shape  did  take; 

Or  else  I  doubt  if  Nature  could 
So  fair  a  creature  make. 


A  Praise  of  His   Lady  379 

She  may  be  well  compared 

Unto  the  Phoenix  kind, 
Whose  like  was  never  seen  nor  heard, 

That  any  man  can  find. 

In  life  she  is  Diana  chaste, 

In  truth  Penelope; 
In  word  and  eke  in  deed  steadfast. 

What  will  you  more  we  say? 

If  all  the  world  were  sought  so  far, 

Who  could  find  such  a  wight? 
Her  beauty  twinkleth  like  a  star 

Within  the  frosty  night. 

Her  roseal  color  comes  and  goes 

With  such  a  comely  grace, 
More  ruddier,  too,  than  doth  the  rose 

Within  her  lively  face. 

At  Bacchus'  feast  none  shall  her  meet. 

Nor  at  no  wanton  play, 
Nor  gazing  in  an  open  street, 

Nor  gadding  as  a  stray. 

The  modest  mirth  that  she  doth  use 

Is  mixed  with  shamefastness; 
All  vice  she  doth  wholly  refuse. 

And  hateth  idleness. 

O  Lord!  it  is  a  world  to  see 

How  virtue  can  repair. 
And  deck  her  in  such  honesty. 

Whom  Nature  made  so  fair. 

Truly  she  doth  so  far  exceed 

Our  women  nowadaj's. 
As  doth  the  gillyflower  a  weed; 

And  more  a  thousand  ways. 


380  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

How  might  1  do  to  get  a  graff 

Of  this  unspotted  tree? 
For  all  the  rest  are  plain  but  chaff, 

Which  seem  good  corn  to  be. 

This  gift  alone  I  shall  her  give: 
When  death  doth  what  he  can, 

Her  honest  fame  shall  ever  live 
Within  the  mouth  of  man. 

John  Heywood  [i4g7?-i58o?] 


ON  A   CERTAIN  LADY  AT   COURT 

I  KNOW  a  thing  that's  most  uncommon; 

(Envy,  be  silent  and  attend!) 
I  know  a  reasonable  woman. 

Handsome  and  witty,  yet  a  friend. 

Not  warped  by  passion,  awed  by  rumor; 

Not  grave  through  pride,  nor  gay  through  folly; 
An  equal  mixture  of  good-humor 

And  sensible  soft  melancholy. 

"Has  she  no  faults  then  (Envy  says),  Sir?" 

Yes,  she  has  one,  I  must  aver: 
When  all  the  world  conspires  to  praise  her. 

The  woman's  deaf,  and  does  not  hear. 

Alexander  Pope  [1688-1744I 

PERFECT  WOMAN 

She  was  a  phantom  of  delight 
When  first  she  gleamed  upon  my  sight; 
A  lovely  apparition,  sent 
To  be  a  moment's  ornament; 
Her  eyes  as  stars  of  twilight  fair; 
Like  twilight's,  too,  her  dusky  hair; 
But  all  things  else  about  her  drawn 
From  May-time  and  the  cheerful  dawn; 
A  dancing  shape,  an  image  gay, 
To  haunt,  to  startle,  and  waylay. 


■I 


The  Solitary-Hearted  381 

I  saw  her  upon  nearer  view, 

A  Spirit,  yet  a  Woman  too! 

Her  household  motions  hght  and  free, 

And  steps  of  virgin  hberty; 

A  countenance  in  which  did  meet 

Sweet  records,  promises  as  sweet; 

A  creature  not  too  bright  or  good 

For  human  nature's  daily  food; 

For  transient  sorrows,  simple  wiles. 

Praise,  blame,  love,  kisses,  tears,  and  smiles. 

And  now  I  see  with  eye  serene 
The  very  pulse  of  the  machine; 
A  being  breathing  thoughtful  breath, 
A  traveller  between  life  and  death; 
The  reason  firm,  the  temperate  will. 
Endurance,  foresight,  strength,  and  skill; 
A  perfect  Woman,  nobly  planned. 
To  warn,  to  comfort,  and  command; 
And  yet  a  Spirit  still,  and  bright 
With  something  of  angelic  light. 

William  Wordsworth  [1770- 1850] 


THE   SOLITARY-HEARTED 

She  was  a  queen  of  noble  Nature's  crowning, 

A  smile  of  hers  was  like  an  act  of  grace; 

She  had  no  winsome  looks,  no  pretty  frowning. 

Like  daily  beauties  of  the  vulgar  race: 

But  if  she  smiled,  a  light  was  on  her  face, 

A  clear,  cool  kindliness,  a  lunar  beam 

Of  peaceful  radiance,  silvering  o'er  the  stream 

Of  human  thought  with  unabiding  glory; 

Not  quite  a  waking  truth,  not  quite  a  dream, 

A  visitation,  bright  and  transitory. 

But  she  is  changed, — hath  felt  the  touch  of  sorrow. 
No  love  hath  she,  no  understanding  friend; 
O  grief!  when  Heaven  is  forced  of  earth  to  borrow 
What  the  poor  niggard  earth  has  not  to  lend ; 


382  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

But  when  the  stalk  is  snapped,  the  rose  must  bend. 

The  tallest  flower  that  skyward  rears  its  head 

Grows  from  the  common  ground,  and  there  must  shed 

Its  delicate  petals.     Cruel  fate,  too  surely, 

That  they  should  find  so  base  a  bridal  bed, 

Who  lived  in  virgin  pride,  so  sweet  and  purely. 

She  had  a  brother,  and  a  tender  father, 
And  she  was  loved,  but  not  as  others  are 
From  whom  we  ask  return  of  love, — but  rather 
As  one  might  love  a  dream;  a  phantom  fair 
Of  something  exquisitely  strange  and  rare, 
Which  all  were  glad  to  look  on,  men  and  maids, 
Yet  no  one  claimed — as  oft,  in  dewy  glades, 
The  peering  primrose,  like  a  sudden  gladness, 
Gleams  on  the  soul,  yet  unregarded  fades; — 
The  joy  is  ours,  but  all  its  own  the  sadness. 

'Tis  vain  to  say — her  worst  of  grief  is  only 
The  common  lot,  which  all  the  world  have  known; 
To  her  'tis  more,  because  her  heart  is  lonely. 
And  yet  she  hath  no  strength  to  stand  alone, — 
Once  she  had  playmates,  fancies  of  her  own, 
And  she  did  love  them.     They  are  passed  away 
As  Fairies  vanish  at  the  break  of  day; 
And  like  a  spectre  of  an  age  departed. 
Or  unsphered  Angel  wofully  astray. 
She  gHdes  along — the  solitary-hearted. 

Hartley  Coleridge  [1706-1840] 


OF  THOSE  WHO  WALK  ALONE 

Women  there  are  on  earth,  most  sweet  and  high, 

Who  lose  their  own,  and  walk  bereft  and  lonely. 
Loving  that  one  lost  heart  until  they  die. 
Loving  it  only. 

And  so  they  never  see  beside  them  grow 

Children,  whose  coming  is  like  breath  of  flowers; 
Consoled  by  subtler  loves  the  angels  know 
Through  childless  hours. 


"She   Walks  in   Beauty"  383 

Good  deeds  they  do :  they  comfort  and  they  bless 

In  duties  others  put  off  till  the  morrow; 
Their  look  is  balm,  their  touch  is  tenderness 
To  all  in  sorrow. 

Betimes  the  world  smiles  at  them,  as  'twere  shame, 

This  maiden  guise,  long  after  youth's  departed; 
But  in  God's  Book  they  bear  another  name — 
"The  faithful-hearted." 

Faithful  in  life,  and  faithful  unto  death, 

Such  souls,  in  sooth,  illume  with  lustre  splendid 
That  glimpsed,  glad  land  wherein,  the  Vision  saith, 
Earth's  wrongs  are  ended. 

Richard  Burton  [1859- 


"SHE  WALKS  IN  BEAUTY" 

She  walks  in  beauty,  like  the  night 
Of  cloudless  climes  and  starry  skies; 

And  all  that's  best  of  dark  and  bright 
Meet  in  her  aspect  and  her  eyes: 

Thus  mellowed  to  that  tender  light 
Which  heaven  to  gaudy  day  denies. 

One  shade  the  more,  one  ray  the  less, 
Had  half  impaired  the  nameless  grace 

Which  waves  in  every  raven  tress 
Or  softly  lightens  o'er  her  face; 

Where  thoughts  serenely  sweet  express 
How  pure,  how  dear  their  dwelling-place. 

And  on  that  cheek,  and  o'er  that  brow 

So  soft,  so  calm,  yet  eloquent, 
The  smiles  that  win,  the  tints  that  glow, 

But  tell  of  days  in  goodness  spent, 
A  mind  at  peace  with  all  below, 

A  heart  whose  love  is  innocent! 

George  Gordon  Byron  [178S-1824] 


384  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age 


PRELUDES 

From  "  The  Angel  in  the  House  " 
I 
UNTHRIFT 

Ah,  wasteful  woman,  she  that  may 

On  her  sweet  self  set  her  own  price, 
Knowing  man  cannot  choose  but  pay, 

How  has  she  cheapened  paradise; 
How  given  for  nought  her  priceless  gift. 

How  spoiled  the  bread,  and  spilled  the  wine, 
Which,  spent  v/ith  due,  respective  thrift, 

Had  made  brutes  men,  and  men  divine. 

II 

HONOR   AiSTD   DESERT 

O  Queen,  awake  to  thy  renown. 

Require  what  'tis  our  wealth  to  give. 
And  comprehend  and  wear  the  crown 

Of  thy  despised  prerogative! 
I,  who  in  manhood's  name  at  length 

With  glad  songs  come  to  abdicate 
The  gross  regality  of  strength. 

Must  yet  in  this  thy  praise  abate. 
That,  through  thine  erring  humbleness 

And  disregard  of  thy  degree. 
Mainly,  has  man  been  so  much  less 

Than  fits  his  fellowship  with  thee. 

High  thoughts  had  shaped  the  foolish  brow. 

The  coward  had  grasped  the  hero's  sword, 
The  vilest  had  been  great,  hadst  thou. 

Just  to  thyself,  been  worth's  reward. 
But  lofty  honors  undersold 

Seller  and  buyer  both  disgrace; 
And  favors  that  make  folly  bold 

Banish  the  light  from  virtue's  face. 


Preludes  385 


THE   ROSE    OF   THE   WORLD 

Lo,  when  the  Lord  made  North  and  South, 

And  sun  and  moon  ordained,  He, 
Forthbringing  each  by  word  of  mouth 

In  order  of  its  dignity, 
Did  man  from  the  crude  clay  express 

By  sequence,  and  all  else  decreed, 
He  formed  the  woman;  nor  might  less 

Than  Sabbath  such  a  work  succeed. 

And  still  with  favor  singled  out, 

Marred  less  than  man  by  mortal  fall, 
Her  disposition  is  devout, 

Her  countenance  angelical: 
The  best  things  that  the  best  believe 

Are  in  her  face  so  kindly  writ 
The  faithless,  seeing  her,  conceive 

Not  only  heaven,  but  hope  of  it; 
No  idle  thought  her  instinct  shrouds, 

But  fancy  chequers  settled  sense, 
Like  alteration  of  the  clouds 

On  noonday's  azure  permanence. 

Pure  dignity,  composure,  ease, 

Declare  affections  nobly  fixed. 
And  impulse  sprung  from  due  degrees 

Of  sense  and  spirit  sweetly  mixed. 
Her  modesty,  her  chiefest  grace. 

The  cestus  clasping  Venus'  side. 
How  potent  to  deject  the  face 

Of  him  who  would  affront  its  pride! 

Wrong  dares  not  in  her  presence  speak, 

Nor  spotted  thought  its  taint  disclose 
Under  the  protest  of  a  cheek 

Outbragging  Nature's  boast,  the  rose. 
In  mind  and  manners  how  discreet; 

How  artless  in  her  very  art; 
How  candid  in  discourse;  how  sweet 

The  concord  of  her  lips  and  heart! 


386  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

How  simple  and  how  circumspect; 

How  subtle  and  how  fancy-free; 
Though  sacred  to  her  love,  how  decked 

With  unexclusive  courtesy; 
How  quick  in  talk  to  sec  from  far 

The  way  to  vanquish  or  evade; 
How  able  her  persuasions  are 

To  prove,  her  reasons  to  persuade. 

How  (not  to  call  true  instinct's  bent 

And  woman's  very  nature,  harm), 
How  amiable  and  innocent 

Her  pleasure  in  her  power  to  charm; 
How  humbly  careful  to  attract, 

Though  crowned  with  all  the  soul  desireSj, 
Connubial  aptitude  exact, 

Diversity  that  never  tires! 


THE   TRIBUTE 

Boon  Nature  to  the  woman  bows; 

She  walks  in  earth's  whole  glory  clad, 
And,  chiefest  far  herself  of  shows, 

All  others  help  her  and  are  glad: 
No  splendor  'neath  the  sky's  proud  dome 

But  serves  her  for  familiar  wear; 
The  far-fetched  diamond  finds  its  home 

Flashing  and  smouldering  in  her  hair; 
For  her  the  seas  their  pearls  reveal; 

Art  and  strange  lands  her  pomp  supply 
With  purple,  chrome,  and  cochineal, 

Ochre,  and  lapis  lazuli; 
The  worm  its  golden  woof  presents; 

Whatever  runs,  flies,  dives,  or  delves, 
All  doff  for  her  their  ornaments. 

Which  suit  her  better  than  themselves; 
And  all,  by  this  their  power  to  give, 

Proving  her  right  to  take,  proclaim 
tier  beauty's  clear  prerogative 

To  profit  so  by  Eden"s  blame. 


A  Health  387 


NEAREST   THE   DEAREST 

Till  Eve  was  brought  to  Adam,  he 

A  solitary  desert  trod, 
Though  in  the  great  society 

Of  nature,  angels,  and  of  God. 
If  one  slight  column  counterweighs 

The  ocean,  'tis  the  Maker's  law, 
Wlio  deems  obedience  better  praise 

Than  sacrifice  of  erring  awe. 

VI 

THE    FOREIGN    LAND 

A  woman  is  a  foreign  land. 

Of  which,  though  there  he  settle  young, 
A  man  will  ne'er  quite  understand 

The  customs,  politics,  and  tongue. 
The  foolish  hie  them  post-haste  through, 

See  fashions  odd  and  prospects  fair. 
Learn  of  the  language,  "How  d'ye  do," 

And  go  and  brag  they  have  been  there. 
The  most  for  leave  to  trade  apply. 

For  once,  at  Empire's  seat,  her  heart, 
Then  get  what  knov/ledge  ear  and  eye 

Glean  chancewise  in  the  life-loQg  mart. 
And  certain  others,  few  and  fit. 

Attach  them  to  the  Court,  and  see 
The  Country's  best,  its  accent  hit. 

And  partly  sound  its  polity. 

Coventry  Patmore  [1823-1896] 


A  HEALTH 

I  FILL  this  cup  to  one  made  up 

Of  loveliness  alone, 
A  woman,  of  her  gentle  sex 

The  seeming  paragon; 


388  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

To  whom  the  better  elements 

And  kindly  stars  have  given 
A  form  so  fair,  that,  like  the  air, 

'Tis  less  of  earth  than  heaven. 

Her  every  tone  is  music's  own, 

Like  those  of  morning  birds, 
And  something  more  than  melody 

Dwells  ever  in  her  words; 
The  coinage  of  her  heart  are  they, 

And  from  her  lips  each  flows 
As  one  may  see  the  burdened  bee 

Forth  issue  from  the  rose. 

Affections  are  as  thoughts  to  her, 

The  measures  of  her  hours; 
Her  feelings  have  the  fragrancy. 

The  freshness  of  young  flowers; 
And  lovely  passions,  changing  oft. 

So  fill  her,  she  appears 
The  image  of  themselves  by  turns, — 

The  idol  of  past  years! 

Of  her  bright  face  one  glance  will  trace 

A  picture  on  the  brain, 
And  of  her  voice  in  echoing  hearts 

A  sound  must  long  remain; 
But  memory,  such  as  mine  of  her, 

So  very  much  endears, 
When  death  is  nigh  my  latest  sigh 

Will  not  be  life's,  but  hers. 

I  fill  this  cup  to  one  made  up 

Of  loveliness  alone, 
A  woman,  of  her  gentle  sex 

The  seeming  paragon — 
Her  health!  and  would  on  earth  there  stood 

Some  more  of  such  a  frame. 
That  life  might  be  all  poetry, 

And  weariness  a  name. 

Edward  Coate  Plnkney  [i8o2-i82f 


Our  Sister  ogn 


OUR  SISTER 

Her  face  was  very  fair  to  see, 

So  luminous  with  purity: — 

It  had  no  roses,  but  the  hue 

Of  lihes  histrous  with  their  dew — ■ 

Her  very  soul  seemed  shining  through! 

Her  quiet  nature  seemed  to  be 

Tuned  to  each  season's  harmony. 

The  holy  sky  bent  near  to  her; 

She  saw  a  spirit  in  the  stir 

Of  solemn  woods.     The  riUs  that  beat 

Their  mosses  with  voluptuous  feet, 

Went  dripping  music  through  her  thought. 

Sweet  impulse  came  to  her  unsought 

From  graceful  things,  and  beauty  took 

A  sacred  meaning  in  her  look. 

In  the  great  Master's  steps  went  she 

With  patience  and  humility. 

The  casual  gazer  could  not  guess 

Half  of  her  veiled  loveliness; 

Yet  ah!  what  precious  things  lay  hid 

Beneath  her  bosom's  snowy  lid: — 

What  tenderness  and  sympathy, 

What  beauty  of  sincerity, 

What  fancies  chaste,  and  loves,  that  grew 

In  heaven's  own  stainless  light  and  dew! 

True  woman  was  she  day  by  day 
In  suffering,  toil,  and  victory. 
Her  life,  made  holy  and  serene 
By  faith,  was  hid  with  things  unseen. 
She  knew  what  they  alone  can  know 
Who  live  above  but  dwell  below. 

Horatio  Nelson  Powers  [1826-1800] 


Poems  of   Yourh  and  Age 


FROM  LIFE 

Her  thoughts  are  like  a  flock  of  butterflies. 

She  has  a  merry  love  of  little  things,     it  jf^H 

And  a  bright  flutter  of  speech,  whereto  she  brings 
A  threefold  eloquence — voice,  hands  and  eyes. 
Yet  under  all  a  subtle  sflence  Ues      '-^.ul  syilil  1'  > 

As  a  bird's  heart  is  hidden  by  its  wings; 

And  you  shall  search  through  many  wanderings 
The  fairyland  of  her  realities. 

She  hides  herself  behind  a  busy  brain^    ,f{  r^^'Y 
A  woman,  with  a  child's  laugh  in  her  blood; 
A  maid,  wearing  the  shadow  of  motherhood- 
Wise  with  the  quiet  memory  of  old  pain,  .;  p 
As  the  soft  glamor  of  remembered  rain  ./ 
Hallows  the  gladness  of  a  sunlit  wood. 

Brian  Hooker  [1880- 


THE  ROSE  OF  THE  WORLD 

Who  dreamed  that  beauty  passes  like  a  dream? 
For  these  red  lips,  with  all  their  mournful  pride, 
Mournful  that  no  new  wonder  may  betide, 
Troy  passed  away  in  one  high  funeral  gleam, 
And  Usna's  children  died. 

We  and  the  laboring  world  are  passing  by:    ' 
Amid  men's  souls,  that  waver  and  give  place, 
Like  the  pale  waters  in  their  wintry  race, 
Under  the  passing  stars,  foam  of  the  sky. 
Lives  on  this  lonely  face. 

Bow  down,  archangels,  in  your  dim  abode: 
Before  you  were,  or  any  hearts  to  beat. 
Weary  and  kind  one  lingered  by  His  seat; 
He  made  the  world  to  be  a  grassy  road 
Before  her  wandering  feet. 

WilHatn  Butler  Vcats  [1865- 


Dawn  of  Womanhood  391 


DAWN  OF  WOMANHOOD 

Thus  will  I  have  the  woman  of  my  dream. 

Strong  must  she  be  and  gentle,  like  a  star 
Her  soul  burn  whitely;  nor  its  arrowy  beam 

May  any  cloud  of  superstition  mar: 

True  to  the  earth  she  is,  patient  and  calm. 
Her  tranquil  eyes  shall  penetrate  afar 

Through  centuries,  and  her  maternal  arm 

Enfold  the  generations  yet  unborn; 
Nor  she,  by  passing  glamor  nor  alarm, 

Will  from  the  steadfast  way  of  life  be  drawn. 

Gray-eyed  and  fearless,  I  behold  her  gaze 
Outward  into  the  furnace  of  the  dawn. 

Sacred  shall  be  the  purport  of  her  days, 

Yet  human;  and  the  passion  of  the  earth 
Shall  be  for  her.  adornment  and  her  praise. 

She  is  most  often  joyous,  with  a  mirth 

That  rings  true-tempered  holy  womanhood. 
She  cannot  fear  the  agonies  of  birth, 

Nor  sit  in  pallid  lethargy  and  brood 

Upon  the  coming  seasons  of  her  pain: 
By  her  the  mystery  is  understood 

Of  harvest,  and  fulfilment  in  the  grain. 

Yea,  she  is  wont  to  labor  in  the  field, 

Delights  to  heap,  at  sunset,  on  the  wain 

Festoons  and  coronals  of  the  golden  yield. 

A  triumph  is  the  labor  of  her  soul, 
Sublime  along  eternity  revealed. 


.1/1 


Lo,  everlastingly  in  her  control. 

Under  the  even  measure  of  her  breath. 
Like  crested  waves  the  onward  centuries  roll. 

Nor  to  far  heaven  her  spirit  wandereth, 

Nor  lif teth  she  her  voice  in  barren  prayer,; 
Nor  trembleth  at  appearances  of  death. 


2^2  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

She,  godlike  in  her  womanhood,  will  fare 

Calm-visaged  and  heroic  to  the  end. 
The  homestead  is  her  most  especial  care; 

She  loves  the  sacred  hearth:  she  will  defend 

Her  gods  from  desecration  of  the  vile. 
Fierce,  like  a  wounded  tigress,  she  can  rend 

Whatever  may  have  entered  to  defile. 
I  see  her  in  the  evening  by  the  fire, 
And  in  her  eyes,  illumined  from  the  pile 

Of  blazing  logs,  a  motherly  desire 

Glows  like  the  moulded  passion  of  a  rose; 
Beautiful  is  her  presence  in  the  bower: 

Her  spirit  is  the  spirit  of  repose. 

Mankind  shall  hold  her  motherhood  in  awe^:.p 
Woman  is  she  indeed,  and  not  of  those  / 

That  he  with  sacramental  gold  hiust  draw 

Discreetly  to  his  chamber  in  the  night, 
Or  bind  to  him  with  fetters  of  the  law. 

He  holds  her  by  a  spiritual  right. 

With  diamond  and  with  pearl  he  need  not  sue; 
Nor  will  she  deck  herself  for  his  delight : 

Beauty  is  the  adornment  of  the  true. 

She  shall  possess  for  ornament  and  gem 
A  flower,  the  glowworm,  or  the  drop  of  dew: 

More  innocently  fair  than  all  of  them, 

It  will  not  even  shame  her  if  she  make 
A  coronal  of  stars  her  diadem. 

Though  she  is  but  a  vision,  I  can  take 

Courage  from  her.     I  feel  her  arrowy  beam 
Already,  for  her  spirit  is  awake. 

And  passes  down  the  future  like  a  gleam, —  • 
Thus  have  I  made  the  woman  of  my  dream. 

Harold  Monro  [187Q- 


A    Portrait  393 

THE  SHEPHERDESS 

She  walks — the  lady  of  my  delight — 

A  shepherdess  of  sheep. 
Her  flocks  are  thoughts.  She  keeps  them  white; 

She  guards  them  from  the  steep. 
She  feeds  them  on  the  fragrant  height, 

And  folds  them  in  for  sleep. 

She  roams  maternal  hills  and  bright, 

Dark  valleys  safe  and  deep. 
Into  that  tender  breast  at  night 

The  chastest  stars  may  peep. 
She  walks — the  lady  of  my  delight — 

A  shepherdess  of  sheep. 

She  holds  her  little  thoughts  in  sight, 

Though  gay  they  run  and  leap. 
She  is  so  circumspect  and  right; 

She  has  her  soul  to  keep. 
She  walks — the  lady  of  my  delight — 

A  shepherdess  of  sheep. 

Alice  Meynell  [1853- 

A  PORTRAIT 

Mother  and  maid  and  soldier,  bearing  best 
Her  girl's  lithe  body  under  matron  gray. 
And  opening  new  eyes  on  each  new  day 

With  faith  concealed  and  courage  unconfessed; 

Jealous  to  cloak  a  blessing  in  a  jest, 
Clothe  beauty  carefully  in  disarray, 
And  love  absurdly,  that  no  word  betray 

The  worship  all  her  deeds  make  manifest : 

Armored  in  smiles,  a  motley  Britomart — 

Her  lance  is  high  adventure,  tipped  with  scorn; 
Her  banner  to  the  suns  and  winds  unfurled, 

Washed  white  with  laughter;  and  beneath  her  heart, 
Shrined  in  a  garland  of  laborious  thorn, 
Blooms  the  unchanging  Rose  of  all  the  World. 

Brian  Hooker  [1880- 


394  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


THE  WIFE 

The  little  Dreams  of  Maidenhood — 
I  put  them  all  away  ;  i 

As  tenderly  as  mother  would 
The  toys  of  yesterday, 

When  little  children  grow  to  men 
Too  over-wise  for  play. 

The  little  dreams  I  put  aside — 

I  loved  them  every  one, 
And  yet  since  moon-blown  buds  must  hide 
•  Before  the  noon-day  sun, 
I  close  them  wistfully  away  ^'''. 

And  give  the  key  to  none. 

O  little  Dreams  of  Maidenhood — 

Lie  quietly,  nor  care 
If  some  day  in  an  idle  mood  (^ 

I,  searching  unaware 
Through  some  closed  corner  of  my  he^rt, 

Should  laugh  to  find  you  ther^^^^fg  /^ 

TJicodosia  Garrison  [1874- 


'TRUSTY,  DUSKY,  VIVID,  TRUE" 

v  Trusty,  dusky,  vivid,  true)  ^''^'T!  laH 
With  eyes  of  gold  and  bramble-deW}-'- 
Steel  true  and  blade  straight  rljiW 

The  great  Artificer  made  my  mate.'jf* ''I 

r.) 

Honor,  anger,  valor,  fire,  ,y 

A  love  that  life  could  never  tir^^j^^^,^,^  ,^^^1 
Death  quench,  or  evil  stir, 
The  mighty  Master  gave  to  her. 

'"'  Teacher,  tender  comrade,  wife,    '        ' 

A  fellow-farer  true  through  hfe,'' 
Heart-whole  and  soul-free. 
The  August  Father  gave  to  me. 

■  I'  Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [iSso-iSg^l  j 


3gA   {       The   Voice      -goS  395 

■ ,,  ,rf  I, ,,  .-I  ., 
THE  SHRINE 

There  is  a  shrine  whose  golden  gate 

Was  opened  by  the  Hand  of  God ; 
It  stands  serene,  inviolate, 

Though  millions  have  its  pavement  trod; 
As  fresh,  as  when  the  first  sunrise 
Awoke  the  lark  in  Paradise. 

'Tis  compassed  with  the  dust  and  toil 
Of  common  days,  yet  should  there  fall 

A  single  speck,  a  single  soil 
Upon  the  whiteness  of  its  wall, 

The  angels'  tears  in  tender  rain 

Would  make  the  temple  theirs  again.  ^  ^ 

Without,  the  world  is  tired  and  old. 
But,  once  within  the  enchanted  door. 

The  mists  of  time  are  backward  rolled, 
And  creeds  and  ages  are  no  more; 

But  all  the  human-hearted  meet 

In  one  communion  vast  and  sweet. 

! 

I  enter — all  is  simply  fair,  ,7 

Nor  incense-clouds,  nor  carven  throne; 

But  in  the  fragrant  morning  air 
A  gentle  lady  sits  alone; 

My  mother — ah!  whom  should  I  see   ,  . 

Within,  save  ever  only  thee?  " 

Digby  Mackworth  Dolben  [1848-1867] 

THE  VOICE 

As  I  went  down  the  hill  I  heard 

The  laughter  of  the  countryside; 
For,  rain  being  past,  the  whole  land  stirred   , 

With  new  emotion,  hke  a  bride. 
I  scarce  had  left  the  grassy  lane, 

When  something  made  me  catch  my  breath: 
A  woman  called,  and  called  again, 

Elizabeth!  Elizabeth! 


396  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

It  was  my  mother's  name.     A  part 

Of  wounded  memory  sprang  to  tears, 
And  the  few  violets  of  my  heart 

Shook  in  the  wind  of  happier  years. 
Quicker  than  magic  came  the  face 

That  once  was  sun  and  moon  for  me; 
The  garden  shawl,  the  cap  of  lace, 

The  collie's  head  against  her  knee. 

Mother,  who  findest  out  a  way 
To  pass  the  sentinels,  and  stand 

Behind  my  chair  at  close  of  day, 

To  touch  me — almost — with  thy  hand, 

Deep  in  my  breast,  how  sure,  how  clear, 
The  lamp  of  love  burns  on  till  death! — 

How  trembles  if  I  chance  to  hear 

Elizabeth!    Elizabeth! 

Norman  Gale  [1862- 

MOTHER 

I  HAVE  praised  many  loved  ones  in  my  song. 

And  yet  I  stand 
Before  her  shrine,  to  whom  all  things  belong, 

With  empty  hand. 

Perhaps  the  ripening  future  holds  a  time 

For  things  unsaid; 
Not  now;  men  do  not  celebrate  in  rhyme 

Their  daily  bread. 

Theresa  Helburn  [1888- 

AD  MATREM 

Oft  in  the  after  days,  when  thou  and  I 
Have  fallen  from  the  scope  of  human  view, 
When,  both  together,  under  the  sweet  sky, 
We  sleep  beneath  the  daisies  and  the  dew. 
Men  will  recall  thy  gracious  presence  bland, 
Conning  the  pictured  sweetness  of  thy  face; 
Will  pore  o'er  paintings  by  thy  plastic  hand. 
And  vaunt  thy  skill  and  tell  thy  deeds  of  grace. 
Oh,  may  they  then,  who  crown  thee  with  true  bays. 
Saying,  "What  love  unto  her  son  she  bore!" 


C.  L.   M.  397 

Make  this  addition  to  thy  perfect  praise, 
"Nor  ever  yet  was  mother  worshipped  more!" 
So  shall  I  Hve  with  Thee,  and  thy  dear  fame 
Shall  link  my  love  unto  thine  honored  name. 

Julian  Fane  [1827-1870] 

C.  L.  M. 

In  the  dark  womb  where  I  began, 
My  mother's  life  made  me  a  man. 
Through  all  the  months  of  human  birth 
Her  beauty  fed  my  common  earth. 
I  cannot  see,  nor  breathe,  nor  stir, 
But  through  the  death  of  some  of  her. 

Down  in  the  darkness  of  the  grave 
She  cannot  see  the  life  she  gave. 
For  all  her  love,  she  cannot  tell 
Whether  I  use  it.  ill  or  well. 
Nor  knock  at  dusty  doors  to  find 
Her  beauty  dusty  in  the  mind. 

If  the  grave's  gates  could  be  undone, 
She  would  not  know  her  little  son, 
I  am  so  grown.     If  we  should  meet. 
She  would  pass  by  me  in  the  street, 
Unless  my  soul's  face  let  her  see 
My  sense  of  what  she  did  for  me. 

What  have  I  done  to  keep  in  mind 
My  debt  to  her  and  womankind? 
What  woman's  happier  life  repays 
Her  for  those  months  of  wretched  days? 
For  all  my  mouthless  body  leeched 
Ere  Birth's  releasing  hell  was  reached? 

What  have  I  done,  or  tried,  or  said 

In  thanks  to  that  dear  woman  dead? 

Men  triumph  over  women  still. 

Men  trample  women's  rights  at  will. 

And  man's  lust  roves  the  world  untamed.  .  .  . 

O  grave,  keep  shut  lest  I  be  shamed. 

John  Mascfield  [i«74- 


STEPPING  WESTWARD 

STEPPING  WESTWARD 

''What,  you  arc  stepping  westward?" — "Yea." 
—  'Twould  be  a  wildish  destiny, 
If  we,  who  thus  together  roam 
In  a  strange  Land,  and  far  from  home, 
Were  in  this  place  the  guests  of  Chance: 
Yet  who  would  stop,  or  fear  to  advance 
Though  home  or  shelter  he  had  none,   • 
With  such  a  sky  to  lead  him  on?  '■ 

The  dewy  ground  was  dark  and  cold; 
Behind,  all  gloomy  to  behold; 
And  stepping  westward  seemed  to  be 
A  kind  of  heavenly  destiny: 
I  liked  the  greeting;  'twas  a  sound 
Of  something  without  place  or  bound; 
And  seemed  to  give  me  spiritual  right 
To  travel  through  that  region  bright. 

The  voice  was  soft,  and  she  who  spake 

Was  walking  by  her  native  lake : 

The  salutation  had  to  me 

The  very  sound  of  courtesy: 

Its  power  was  felt;  and  while  my  eye 

Was  fixed  upon  the  glowing  Sky, 

The  echo  of  the  voice  enwrought 

A  human  sweetness  with  the  thought 

Of  travelling  through  the  world  that  lay 

Before  me  in  my  endless  way. 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 

398 


The  World  ^99 


A  FAREWELL  TO  ARMS 

(to  queen  Elizabeth) 

His  golden  locks  Time  hath  to  silver  turned ; 

O  Time  too  swift,  O  swiftness  never  ceasing! 
His  youth  'gainst  time  and  age  hath  ever  spurned, 

But  spurned  in  vain;  youth  waneth  by  increasing: 
Beauty,  strength,  youth,  are  flowers  but  fading  seen; 
Duty,  faith,  love,  are  roots,  and  ever  green. 

His  helmet  now  shall  make  a  hive  for  bees; 

And  lovers'  sonnets  turned  to  holy  psalms, 
A  man-at-arms  must  now  serve  on  his  knees, 

And  feed  on  prayers,  which  are  Age  his  alms: 
But  though  from  court  to  cottage  he  depart, 
His  Saint  is  sure  of  his  unspotted  heart. 

And  when  he  saddest  sits  in  homely  cell, 

He  '11  teach  his  swains  this  carol  for  a  song, — 

"Blest  be  the  hearts  that  wish  my  sovereign  well, 
Curst  be  the  souls  that  think  her  any  wrong." 

Goddess,  allow  this  aged  man  his  right 

To  be  your  beadsman  now  that  was  your  knight. 

George  Peek  [issSP-isg;?] 

THE  WORLD 

The  World's  a  bubble,  and  the  life  of  Man 

Less  than  a  span: 
In  his  conception  wretched, — from  the  womb. 

So  to  the  tomb; 
Curst  from  his  cradle,  and  brought  up  to  years 

With  cares  and  fears. 
Who  then  to  frail  mortality  shall  trust, 
But  limns  on  water,  or  but  writes  in  dust. 

Yet  whilst  with  sorrow  here  we  live  oppressed, 

What  life  is  best? 
Courts  are  but  only  superficial  schools 

To  dandle  fools; 


400  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  rural  parts  are  turned  into  a  den 

Of  savage  men; 
And  Where's  a  city  from  foul  vice  so  free, 
But  may  be  termed  the  worst  of  all  the  three? 

Domestic  cares  afflict  the  husband's  bed, 

Or  pains  his  head: 
Those  that  live  single,  take  it  for  a  curse. 

Or  do  things  worse: 
Some  would  have  children ;  those  that  have  them  moan 

Or  wish  them  gone: 
What  is  it,  then,  to  have,  or  have  no  wife, 
But  single  thraldom,  or  a  double  strife? 

Our  own  affections  still  at  home  to  please 

Is  a  disease; 
To  cross  the  seas  to  any  foreign  soil, 

Peril  and  toil; 
Wars  with  their  noise  affright  us;  when  they  cease, 

We  are  worse  in  peace: 
— What  then  remains,  but  that  we  still  should  cry 
For  being  born,  or,  being  born,  to  die? 

Francis  Bacon  [1561-1626] 

"WHEN  THAT  I  WAS   AND   A  LITTLE  TINY 
BOY" 

From  "Twelfth  Night" 

When  that  I  was  and  a  little  tiny  boy, 
With  hey,  ho,  the  wind  and  the  rain, 

A  foolish  thing  was  but  a  toy, 
For  the  rain  it  raineth  every  day. 

But  when  I  came  to  man's  estate, 

With  hey,  ho,  the  wind  and  the  rain, 
'Gainst  knaves  and  thieves  men  shut  their  gate, 
For  the  rain  it  raineth  every  day. 

But  when  I  came,  alas!  to  wive, 

With  hey,  ho,  the  wind  and  the  rain, 

By  swaggering  could  I  never  thrive. 
For  the  rain  it  raineth  every  day. 


A   Lament  401 

But  when  I  came  unto  my  beds, 

With  hey,  ho,  the  wind  and  the  rain, 

With  toss-pots  still  had  drunken  heads; 
For  the  rain  it  raineth  every  day. 

A  great  while  ago  the  world  begun, 
With  hey,  ho,  the  wind  and  the  rain, 

But  that's  all  one,  our  play  is  done, 

And  we'll  strive  to  please  you  every  day. 

William  Shakespeare  [i 564-161 6] 

OF  THE  LAST  VERSES   IN  THE   BOOK 

When  we  for  age  could  neither  read  nor  write, 
The  subject  m.ade  us  able  to  indite; 
The  soul,  with  nobler  resolutions  decked. 
The  body  stooping  does  herself  erect. 
No  mortal  parts  are  requisite  to  raise 
Her  that,  unbodied,  can  her  Maker  praise. 

The  seas  are  quiet  when  the  v/inds  give  o'er; 
So  calm  are  we  when  passions  are  no  more. 
For  then  we  know  how  vain  it  was  to  boast 
Of  fleeting  things,  so  certain  to  be  lost. 
Clouds  of  affection  from  our  younger  eyes 
Conceal  that  emptiness  which  age  descries. 

The  soul's  dark  cottage,  battered  and  decayed, 

Lets  in  new  light  through  chinks  that  Time  has  made: 

Stronger  by  weakness,  wiser  men  become 

As  they  draw  near  to  their  eternal  home. 

Leaving  the  old,  both  worlds  at  once  they  view 

That  stand  upon  the  threshold  of  the  new. 

Edmund  Waller  [1606-1687] 

A  LAMENT 

THE   NIGHT   BEFORE   HIS   EXECUTION 

My  prime  of  youth  is  but  a  frost  of  cares; 

My  feast  of  joy  is  but  a  dish  of  pain; 
My  crop  of  corn  is  but  a  field  of  tares; 

And  all  my  good  is  but  vain  hope  of  gain; 


402  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

The  day  is  fled,  and  yet  I  saw  no  sun; 
And  now  I  live,  and  now  my  life  is  done! 

The  spring  is  past,  and  yet  it  is  not  sprung; 

The  fruit  is  dead,  and  yet  the  leaves  be  green; 
My  youth  is  gone,  and  yet  I  am  but  young; 

I  saw  the  world,  and  yet  I  was  not  seen; 
My  thread  is  cut,  and  yet  it  is  not  spun; 
And  now  I  live,  and  now  my  life  is  done! 

I  sought  my  death,  and  found  it  in  my  womb; 

I  looked  for  life,  and  saw  it  was  a  shade; 
I  trod  the  earth,  and  knew  it  was  my  tomb; 

And  now  I  die,  and  nov/  I  am  but  made; 
The  glass  is  full,  and  now  my  glass  is  run; 
And  now  I  live,  and  now  my  life  is  done! 

Chidiock  Tichborne  [1558?-! 586] 

TOMORROW 

In  the  down-hill  of  life,  when  I  find  I'm  declining, 

May  my  fate  no  less  fortunate  be 
Than  a  snug  elbow-chair  will  afford  for  reclining, 

And  a  cot  that  o'erlooks  the  wide  sea; 
With  an  ambhng  pad-pony  to  pace  o'er  the  lawn, 

While  I  carol  away  idle  sorrow, 
And  blithe  as  the  lark  that  each  day  hails  the  dawn. 

Look  forward  with  hope  for  Tomorrow. 

With  a  porch  at  my  door,  both  for  shelter  and  shade  too, 

As  the  sunshine  or  rain  may  prevail. 
And  a  small  spot  of  ground  for  the  use  of  the  spade  too, 

With  a  barn  for  the  use  of  the  flail: 
A  cow  for  my  dairy,  a  dog  for  my  game, 

And  a  purse  when  a  friend  wants  to  borrow; 
I'll  envy  no  Nabob  his  riches  or  fame, 

Nor  what  honors  may  wait  him  Tomorrow. 

From  the  bleak  northern  blast  may  my  cot  be  completely 

Secured  by  a  neighboring  hill; 
And  at  night  may  repose  steal  upon  me  more  sweetly 

By  the  sound  of  a  murmuring  rilL 


Youth  and  Age  403 

And  while  peace  and  plenty  I  find  at  my  board, 
With  a  heart  free  from  sickness  and  sorrow, 

With  my  friends  may  I  share  what  Today  may  afford. 
And  let  them  spread  the  table  Tomorrow. 

And  when  I  at  last  must  throw  off  this  frail  covering, 

Which  I've  worn  for  three-score  years  and  ten, 
On  the  brink  of  the  grave  I'll  not  seek  to  keep  hovering, 

Nor  my  thread  wish  to  spin  o'er  again; 
But  my  face  in  the  glass  I'll  serenely  survey, 

And  with  smiles  count  each  wrinkle  and  furrow; 
And  this  old  worn-out  stuff,  which  is  threadbare  Today, 

Maj'  become  everlasting  Tomorrow. 

John  Collins  [i742?-i8o8] 

LATE  WISDOM 

We've  trod  the  maze  of  error  round, 

Long  wandering  in  the  winding  glade; 
And  now  the  torch  of  truth  is  found, 

It  only  shows  us  where  we  strayed: 
By  long  experience  taught,  we  know — 

Can  rightly  judge  of  friends  and  foes; 
Can  all  the  worth  of  these  allow. 

And  all  the  faults  discern  in  those. 

Now,  'tis  our  boast  that  we  can  quell 

The  wildest  passions  in  their  rage, 
Can  their  destructive  force  repel, 

And  their  impetuous  wrath  assuage. — 
Ah,  Virtue!  dost  thou  arm  when  now 

This  bold  rebellious  race  are  fled? 
When  all  these  tyrants  rest,  and  thou 

Art  warring  with  the  mighty  dead? 

George  Crabbe  [1754- 183 2] 

YOUTH  AND   AGE 

Verse,  a  breeze  'mid  blossoms  straying. 
Where  Hope  clung  feeding  like  a  bee, — 

Both  were  mine!    Life  went  a-maying 
With  Nature,  Hope,  and  Poesy 

When  I  was  young! 


404  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

When  I  was  young? — Ah,  woful  When! 
Ah,  for  the  change  'twixt  Now  and  Then! 
This  breathing  house  not  built  with  hands, 
This  body  that  does  me  grievous  wrong, 
O'er  aery  diffs  and  glittering  sands. 
How  lightly  Iheii  it  flashed  along: — 
Like  those  trim  skiffs,  unknown  of  yore, 
On  winding  lakes  and  rivers  wide, 
That  ask  no  aid  of  sail  or  oar, 
That  fear  no  spite  of  wind  or  tide! 
Naught  cared  this  body  for  wind  or  weather 
When  Youth  and  I  lived  in't  together. 

Flowers  are  lovely;  Love  is  flower-like; 
Friendship  is  a  sheltering  tree; 
Oh!  the  joys  that  came  down  shower-like, 
Of  Friendship,  Love,  and  Liberty 

Ere  I  was  old! 

Ere  I  was  old?    Ah,  woful  Ere, 

Which  tells  me,  Youth's  no  longer  here! 

0  Youth!  for  years  so  many  and  sweet, 
'Tis  known  that  Thou  and  I  were  one. 
I'll  think  it  but  a  fond  conceit — 

It  cannot  be  that  Thou  art  gone! 
Thy  vesper-bell  hath  not  yet  tolled: — 
And  thou  wert  aye  a  masker  bold! 
What  strange  disguise  hast  now  put  on 
To  make  believe  that  thou  art  gone? 

1  see  these  locks  in  silvery  slips. 
This  drooping  gait,  this  altered  size: 
But  Springtide  blossoms  on  thy  lips. 
And  tears  take  sunshine  from  thine  eyes! 
Life  is  but  thought:  so  think  I  will 
That  Youth  and  I  are  house-mates  still. 

Dewdrops  are  the  gems  of  morning, 
But  the  tears  of  mournful  eve! 
Where  no  hope  is,  life's  a  warning 
That  only  serves  to  make  us  grieve 

When  we  are  old: 


The  Old  Man's  Comforts  405 

That  only  serves  to  make  us  grieve 
With  oft  and  tedious  taking-leave, 
Like  some  poor  nigh-related  guest, 
That  may  not  rudely  be  dismissed, 
Yet  hath  outstayed  his  welcome  while, 
And  tells  the  jest  without  the  smile. 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [17  7  2-1834] 


THE  OLD   MAN'S   COMFORTS 

AND   HOW   HE   GAINED   THEM 

"You  are  old,  Father  William,"  the  young  man  cried; 

'•The  few  locks  which  are  left  you  are  gray; 
You  are  hale.  Father  William, — a  hearty  old  man: 

Now  tell  me  the  reason,  I  pray." 

"In  the  days  of  my  youth,"  Father  William  replied, 
"I  rem^embered  that  youth  would  fly  fast. 

And  abused  not  my  health  and  my  vigor  at  first, 
That  I  never  might  need  them  at  last." 

"You  are  old.  Father  William,"  the  young  man  cried, 

"And  pleasures  with  youth  pass  away; 
And  yet  you  lament  not  the  days  that  are  gone: 

Now  tell  me  the  reason,  I  pray." 

"In  the  days  of  my  youth,"  Father  William  replied, 
"I  remembered  that  youth  could  not  last; 

I  thought  of  the  future,  whatever  I  did. 
That  I  never  might  grieve  for  the  past." 

"You  are  old,  Father  William,"  the  young  man  cried, 

"And  life  must  be  hastening  away; 
You  are  cheerful,  and  love  to  converse  upon  death: 

Now  tell  me  the  reason,^  I  pray." 

"I  am  cheerful,  young  man,"  Father  William  replied; 

"Let  the  cause  thy  attention  engage; 
In  the  days  of  my  youth,  I  remembered  my  God, 

And  He  hath  not  forgotten  my  age." 

Robert  Sonthcy  [1774- 1843] 


4o6  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


TO  AGE 

Welcome,  old  friend!    These  many  years 

Have  we  lived  door  by  door: 
The  Fates  have  laid  aside  their  shears 

Perhaps  for  some  few  more. 

I  was  indocile  at  an  age 

When  better  boys  were  taught, 
But  thou  at  length  hast  made  me  sage, 

If  I  am  sage  in  aught. 

fi>  uoY" 

Little  I  know  from  other  men,  j-r-,-- 

Too  little  they  from  me, 
But  thou  hast  pointed  well  the  peii,.,  ,,   .        ,. 
That  writes  these  lines  to  thee. 

Thanks  for  expelling  Fear  and  Hope, 

One  vile,  the  other  vain ; 
One's  scourge,  the  other's  telescope,  

I  shall  not  see  again: 


LuA 


Rather  what  lies  before  my  feet 

My  notice  shall  engage. —  "  ' 

He  who  hath  braved  Youth's  dizzy  he^t 
Dreads  not  the  frost  of  Age. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775 -1864] 


I  JfiriT 
LATE  LEAVES 

The  leaves  are  falling;  so  am  I; 

The  few  late  flowers  have  moisture  in  the  eye; 

So  have  I  too.  ,,  ^       , . 

c         1  V.       \,  ■    I,      A  '"  ^^^^  ^o*^^ 

Scarcely  on  any  bough  is  neard 

Joyous,  or  even  unjoyous,  bird  [3  niB  I" 

The  whole  wood  through.  \  jgj*' 

b  arfj  nl 
Winter  may  come:  he  brings  but  nigher  ;|  bnh 
His  circle  (yearly  narrowing)  to  the  fire 


The   River  of  Life  407 

Where  old  friends  meet. 
Let  him;  now  heaven  is  overcast, 
And  spring  and  summer  both  are  past/ 

And  all  things  sweet. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 


YEARS 

Years,  many  parti-colored  years. 

Some  have  crept  on,  and  some  have  flown 

Since  first  before  me  fell  those  tears 
I  never  could  see  fall  alone. 

Years,  not  so  many,  are  to  come. 

Years  not  so  varied,  when  from  you 

One  more  will  fall:  when,  carried  home,    '' '  ' ' 
X        •  ,         \  ,■  V 101 

1  see  it  not,  nor  hear  Adieu. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 


THE  RIVER  OF  LIFE  [ 

The  more  we  hve,  more  brief  appear 

Our  life's  succeeding  stages: 
A  day  to  childhood  seems  a  year. 

And  years  like  passing  ages. 

The  gladsome  current  of  our  youth, 

Ere  passion  yet  disorders, 
Steals,  lingering  like  a  river  smooth 

Along  its  grassy  borders! 

But  as  the  careworn  cheek  grows  wan, 

And  sorrow's  shafts  fly  thicker,  T-fHT 

Ye  Stars,  that  measure  life  to  man. 
Why  seem  your  courses  quicker? 

When  joys  have  lost  their  bloom  and  breath, 

And  Hfe  itself  is  vapid. 
Why,  as  we  reach  the  Falls  of  Death, 

Feel  we  its  tide  more  rapid? 


4o8  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

It  may  be  strange — yet  who  would  change 
Time's  course  to  slower  speeding, 

When  one  by  one  our  friends  have  gone 
And  left  our  bosoms  bleeding? 

Heaven  gives  our  years  of  fading  strength 

Indemnifying  fleetness; 
And  those  of  youth,  a  seeming  length, 

Proportioned  to  their  sweetness. 

Thomas  Campbell  [1777-1844] 


"LONG  TIME   A  CHILD" 

Long  time  a  child,  and  still  a  child,  when  years 

Had  painted  manhood  on  my  cheek,  was  I, — 

For  yet  I  lived  like  one  not  born  to  die; 

A  thriftless  prodigal  of  smiles  and  tears. 

No  hope  I  needed,  and  I  knew  no  fears. 

But  sleep,  though  sweet,  is  only  sleep;  and  waking, 

I  waked  to  sleep  no  more;  at  once  o'ertaking 

The  vanguard  of  my  age,  with  all  arrears 

Of  duty  on  my  back.    Nor  child,  nor  man, 

Nor  youth,  nor  sage,  I  find  my  head  is  gray, 

For  I  have  lost  the  race  I  never  ran: 

A  rathe  December  blights  my  lagging  May; 

And  still  I  am  a  child,  though  I  be  old: 

Time  is  my  debtor  for  my  years  untold. 

Hartley  Coleridge  [i  796-1 849] 


THE  WORLD  I  AM   PASSING  THROUGH 

Few,  in  the  days  of  early  youth. 
Trusted  like  me  in  love  and  truth. 
I've  learned  sad  lessons  from  the  years; 
But  slowly,  and  with  many  tears; 
For  God  made  me  to  kindly  view  j. 

The  world  that  I  was  passing  through. 


The  World   I   Am   Passing  Through     409 

How  little  did  I  once  believe 
That  friendly  tones  could  e'er  deceive! 
That  kindness,  and  forbearance  long, 
Might  meet  ingratitude  and  wrong! 
I  could  not  help  but  kindly  view 
The  world  that  I  was  passing  through. 

And  though  I've  learned  some  souls  are  base, 
I  would  not,  therefore,  hate  the  race; 
I  still  would  bless  my  fellow  men, 
And  trust  them,  though  deceived  again. 
God  help  me  still  to  kindly  view 
The  world  that  I  am  passing  through! 

Through  weary  conflicts  I  have  passed, 
And  struggled  into  rest  at  last; 
Such  rest  as  when  the  rack  has  broke 
A  joint,  or  nerve,  at  every  stroke. 
The  wish  survives  to  kindly  view 
The  world  that  I  am  passing  through. 

From  all  that  fate  has  brought  to  me 

I  strive  to  learn  humility, 

And  trust  in  Him  who  rules  above, 

AVhose  universal  law-  is  love. 

Thus  only  can  I  kindly  view 

The  world  that  I  am  passing  through. 

When  I  approach  the  setting  sun, 
And  feel  my  journey  nearly  done. 
May  earth  be  veiled  in  genial  light. 
And  her  last  smile  to  me  seem  bright! 
Help  me  till  then  to  kindly  view 
The  world  that  I  am  passing  through! 

And  all  who  tempt  a  trusting  heart 

From  faith  and  hope  to  drift  apart, — 

May  they  themselves  be  spared  the  pain 

Of  losing  power  to  trust  again! 

God  help  us  all  to  kindly  view 

The  world  that  we  are  passing  through! 

Lydia  Maria  Child  [1802-1880] 


4IO  Poems   of  Youth  and  Age         ;T 


TERMINUS 

It  is  time  to  be  old, 

To  take  in  sail : — 

The  god  of  bounds, 

Who  sets  to  seas  a  shore, 

Came  to  me  in  his  fatal  rounds, 

And  said:  "No  more! 

No  farther  shoot 

Thy  broad  ambitious  branches,  and  thy  root. 

Fancy  departs:  no  more  invent; 

Contract  thy  firmament 

To  compass  of  a  tent. 

There's  not  enough  for  this  and  that, 

Make  thy  option  which  of  two; 

Economize  the  failing  river. 

Not  the.  less  revere  the  Giver, 

Leave  the  many  and  hold  the  few. 

Timely  wise  accept  the  terms. 

Soften  the  fall  with  wary  foot; 

A  little  while 

Still  plan  and  smile. 

And, — fault  of  novel  germs, — 

Mature  the  unfallen  fruit. 

Curse,  if  thou  wilt,  thy  sires, 

Bad  husbands  of  their  fires, 

Who,  when  they  gave  thee  breath, 

Failed  to  bequeath 

The  needful  sinew  stark  as  once. 

The  Baresark  marrow  to  thy  bones, 

But  left  a  legacy  of  ebbing  veins. 

Inconstant  heat  and  nerveless  reins, — 

Amid  the  Muses,  left  thee  deaf  and  dumb, 

Amid  the  Gladiators,  halt  and  numb." 

'■'■''[   idt  \ry !(•>(] 

As  the  bird  trims  her  to  the  gale, 
I  trim  myself  to  the  storm  of  time, 
I  man  the  rudder,  reef  the  sail, 
'Obey  the  voice  at  eve  obeyed  at  prime: 


■'     Rabbi   Ben   Ezra       "  411 

"Lowly  faithfuJ,  banish  fear, 

Right  onward  drive  unharmed; 

The  port,  well  worth  the  cruise,  is  near. 

And  every  wave  is  charmed." 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803- 1882] 


RABBI  BEN  EZRA 

Grow  old  along  with  me! 

The  best  is  yet  to  be, 
The  last  of  life,  for  which  the  first  was  made: 

Our  times  are  in  his  hand 

Who  saith  "A  whole  I  planned, 
Youth  shows  but  half;  trust  God;  see  all,  nor  be  afraid!" 

Not  that,  amassing  flowers, 

Youth  sighed,  "Which  rose  make  ours, 
Which  lily  leave  and  then  as  best  recall?" 

Not  that,  admiring  stars, 

It  yearned,  "Nor  Jove,  nor  Mars; 
Mine  be  some  figured  flame  which  blends,  transcends  them 
aU!" 

Not  for  such  hopes  and  fears 

Annulling  youth's  brief  years,  '■ 

Do  I  remonstrate:  folly  wide  the  mark! 

Rather  I  prize  the  doubt 

Low  kinds  exist  without. 
Finished  and  finite  clods,  untroubled  by  a  spark. 

Poor  vaunt  of  life  indeed, 

Were  man  but  formed  to  feed 
On  joy,  to  solely  seek  and  find  and  feast: 

Such  feasting  ended,  then 

As  sure  an  end  to  men; 
Irks  care  the  crop-full  bird?    Frets  doubt  the  maw-crammed 
beast? 

Rejoice  we  are  allied 

To  that  which  doth  provide 


t|..i!2  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  not  partake,  effect  and  not  receive! 

A  spark  disturbs  our  clod; 

Nearer  we  hold  of  God 
Who  gives,  than  of  his  tribes  that  take,  I  must  believe. 

Then,  welcome  each  rebuff 

That  turns  earth's  smoothness  rough, 
Each  sting  that  bids  nor  sit  nor  stand  but  go! 

Be  our  joys  three-parts  pain! 

Strive,  and  hold  cheap  the  strain; 
Learn,  nor  account  the  pang;  dare,  never  grudge  the  throe! 

For  thence, — a  paradox 

Which  comforts  while  it  mocks, — 
Shall  life  succeed  in  that  it  seems  to  fail: 

What  I  aspired  to  be. 

And  was  not,  comforts  me: 
A  brute  I  might  have  been,  but  would  not  sink  i'  the  scale. 

What  is  he  but  a  brute 

Whose  flesh  has  soul  to  suit, 
Whose  spirit  works  lest  arms  and  legs  want  play? 

To  man,  propose  this  test — 

Thy  body  at  its  best. 
How  far  can  that  project  thy  soul  on  its  lone  way? 

Yet  gifts  should  prove  their  use: 

I  own  the  Past  profuse 
Of  power  each  side,  perfection  every  turn: 

Eyes,  ears  took  in  their  dole, 

Brain  treasured  up  the  whole: 
Should  not  the  heart  beat  once  "How  good  to^live  and 
learn"?  t,xp[a(^ 

Not  once  beat  "Praise  be  thine!  a 

I  see  the  whole  design,  ■  ■ 

I,  who  saw  power,  see  now  Love  perfect  too: 

Perfect  I  call  thy  plan: 

Thanks  that  I  was  a  man! 
Maker,  remake,  complete, — I  trust  what  thou  shalt  do!" 


Rabbi   Ben   Ezra       '•  413 

For  pleasant  is  this  flesh; 

Our  soul,  in  its  rose-mesh 
Pulled  ever  to  the  earth,  still  yearns  for  rest: 

Would  we  some  prize  might  hold 

To  match  those  manifold 
Possessions  of  the  brute, — gain  most,  as  we  did  best! 

Let  us  not  always  say, 

"Spite  of  this  flesh  to-day 
I  strove,  made  head,  gained  ground  upon  the  whole!" 

As  the  bird  wings  and  sings, 

Let  us  cry,  "All  good  things 
Are  ours,  nor  soul  helps  flesh  more,  now,  than  flesh  helps 
soul!" 

Therefore  I  summon  age 

To  grant  youth's  heritage, 
Life's  struggle  having  so  far  reached  its  term: 

Thence  shall  I  pass,  approved 

A  man,  for  aye  removed 
From  the  developed  brute ;  a  God  though  in  the  germ. 

And  I  shall  thereupon 

Take  rest,  ere  I  be  gone 
Once  more  on  my  adventure  brave  and  new: 

Fearless  and  unperplexed, 

When  I  wage  battle  next. 
What  weapons  to  select,  what  armor  to  indue. 

Youth  ended,  I  shall  try 

My  gain  or  loss  thereby; 
Leave  the  lire  ashes,  what  survives  is  gold: 

And  I  shall  weigh  the  same, 

Give  life  its  praise  or  blame: 
Young,  all  lay  in  dispute;  I  shall  know,  being  old. 

For  note,  when  evening  shuts, 

A  certain  moment  cuts 
The  deed  off,  calls  the  glory  from  the  gray:  rruiiri 

A  whisper  from  the  west 

Shoots — "Add  this  to  the  rest, 
Take  it  and  try  its  worth:  here  dies  another  day." 


414  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

So,  still  within  this  life,  -  ^■"^'  ^'  i"--'  ■-'-  ••'•'•t 

Though  lifted  o'er  its  strife, 
Let  me  discern,  compare,  pronounce  at  last,  iliu'I 

"This  rage  was  right  i'  the  main, 

That  acquiescence  vain: 
The  Future  I  may  face  now  I  have  proved  the  Past."  <'>  1 

For  more  is  not  reserved 

To  man,  with  soul  just  nerved  "" 

To  act  to-morrow  what  he  learns  to-day:  ^ 

Here,  work  enough  to  watch 

The  Master  work,  and  catch 
Hints  of  the  proper  craft,  tricks  of  the  tool's  true  play. 

As  it  was  better,  youth 

Should  strive,  through  acts  uncouth, 
Toward  making,  than  repose  on  aught  found  made: 

So,  better,  age,  exempt 

From  strife,  should  know,  than  tempt 
Further.    Thou  waitedest  age :  wait  death  nor  be  afraid! 

Enough  now,  if  the  Right  , 

And  Good  and  Infinite  .-j. 

Be  named  here,  as  thou  callest  thy  hand  thine  own, 

With  knowledge  absolute, 

Subject  to  no  dispute 
From  fools  that  crowded  youth,  nor  let  thee  feel  alone. 

Be  there,  for  once  and  all. 

Severed  great  minds  from  small. 
Announced  to  each  his  station  in  the  Past! 

Was  I,  the  world  arraigned,,  fxii, 7/  Hi: 

Were  they,  my  soul  disdained, 
Right?    Let  age  speak  the  truth  and  give  us  peace  at  last ! 

Now,  who  shall  arbitrate?  .'/•{ 

Ten  men  love  what  I  hate,  m:i  nijiJi-jo  A 

Shun  what  I  follow,  slight  what  I  receivejIiKO  ^Bo  baabarlT 
Ten,  who  in  ears  and  eyes     i  moii  laqaidw  A 
Match  me:  we  all  surmise,     '    '  '  '  '     ^■:- 

They  this  thing,  and  I  that:  whom  shall  my  soul  believe?,  : 


Rabbi   Ben   Ezra  41^ 

Not  on  the  vulgar  mass 

Called  "work,"  must  sentence  pass, 
Things  done,  that  took  the  eye  and  had  the  price; 

O'er  which,  from  level  stand, 

The  low  world  laid  its  hand, 
Found  straightway  to  its  mind,  could  value  in  a  trice; 

But  all,  the  world's  coarse  thumb 

And  finger  failed  to  plumb. 
So  passed  in  making  up  the  main  account; 

All  instincts  immature, 

All  purposes  unsure, 
That  weighed  not  as  his  work,  yet  swelled  the  man's  amount: 

Thoughts  hardly  to  be  packed 

Into  a  narrow  act, 
Fancies  that  broke  through  language  and  escaped; 

All  I  could  never  be, 

All,  men  ignored  in  me, 
This,  I  was  worth  to  God,  whose  wheel  the  pitcher  shaped. 

Ay,  note  that  Potter's  wheel,  ^ 

That  metaphor!  and  feel 
Why  time  spins  fast,  why  passive  lies  our  clay, — 

Thou,  to  whom  fools  propound. 

When  the  wine  makes  its  round,  ^^^■'  ^' 

"  Since  life  fleets,  all  is  change;  the  Past  gone,  seize  to-day! " 

Fool!    All  that  is,  at  all,  y/oiqqa  agji  joJ 

Lasts  ever,  past  recall; 
Earth  changes,  but  thy  soul  and  God  stand  sure: 

What  entered  into  thee, 

That  was,  is,  and  shall  be: 
Time's  wheel  runs  back  or  stops:  Potter  and  clay  endure. 

He  fixed  thee  'mid  this  dance  j 

Of  plastic  circumstance,  uo  nl 

This  Present,  thou,  forsooth,  would  fain  arrest:       <    o 

Machinery  just  meant  : 

To  give  thy  soul  its  bent, 
Try  thee  and  turn  thee  forth,  sufiiciently  impressed. 


41 6  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

What  though  the  earlier  grooves 

Which  ran  the  laughing  loves 
Around  thy  base,  no  longer  pause  and  press?  .  ijriirlT 

What  though,  about  thy  rim, 

Scull-things  in  order  grim 
Grow  jout,  in  graver  mood,  obey  the  sterner  stress? 

Look  not  thou  down  but  up! 

To  uses  of  a  cup. 
The  festal  board,  lamp's  flash  and  trumpet's  peal,boe2£q  o 

The  new  wine's  foaming  flow,  ' ' ' 

The  Master's  lips  a-glow! 
Thou,  heaven's  consummate  cup,  what  needest  thou  with 

earth's  wheel? 

•  '  I 

But  I  need,  now  as  then, 

Thee,  God,  who  mouldest  men; 
And  since,  not  even  while  the  whirl  was  worst, 

Did  I, — to  the  wheel  of  life 

With  shapes  and  colors  rife, 
Bound  dizzily,— mistake  my  end,  to  slake  thy  thirst: 

So,  take  and  use  thy  work: 

Amend  what  flaws  may  lurk, 
What  strain  o'  the  stuff,  what  warpings  past  the  aim! 

My  times  be  in  thy  hand! 

Perfect  the  cup  as  planned! 
Let  age  approve  of  youth,  and  death  complete  the  same! 

Robert  Browning  [i8i2ri889] 

HUMAN  LIFE 

Sad  is  our  youth,  for  it  is  ever  going, 
Crumbling  away  beneath  our  very  feet ; 
Sad  is  our  life,  for  onward  it  is  flowing. 
In  current  unperceived  because  so  fleet; 
Sad  are  our  hopes  for  they  were  sweet  in  sowing. 
But  tares,  self-sown,  have  overtopped  the  wheat; 
Sad  are  our  joys,  for  they  were  sweet  in  blowing; 
And  still,  O  stiU,  their  dying  breath  is  sweet: 


The   Isle  of  the   Long  Ago  ^ij 

And  sweet  is  youth,  although  it  hath  bereft  us  t 

Of  that  which  made  our  childhood  sweeter  still; 
And  sweet  our  life's  decline,  for  it  hath  left  us 
A  nearer  Good  to  cure  an  older  111; 
And  sweet  are  all  things,  when  we  learn  to  prize  them 
Not  for  their  sake,  but  His  who  grants  them  or  denies  them. 
Aubrey  Thomas  dc  Vere  [i Si 4-1 902] 


YOUNG  AND   OLD 

From  "The  Water  Babies" 

When  all  the  world  is  young,  lad, 

And  all  the  trees  are  green; 
And  every  goose  a  swan,  lad, 

And  every  lass  a  queen ; 
Then  hey  for  boot  and  horse,  lad. 

And  round  the  world  away; 
Young  blood  must  have  its  course,  lad, 

And  every  dog  his  day. 

When  all  the- world  is  old,  lad. 

And  all  the  trees  are  brown; 
And  all  the  sport  is  stale,  lad, 

And  all  the  wheels  run  down: 
Creep  home,  and  take  3^our  place  there, 

The  spent  and  maimed  among: 
God  grant  you  find  one  face  there 

You  loved  when  all  was  young. 

Charles  Kingsley  [1819-1875] 


THE   ISLE  OF  THE  LONG  AGO 

O!  A  wonderful  stream  is  the  River  Time, 

As  it  runs  through  the  realm  of  tears. 
With  a  faultless  rhythm  and  a  musical  rhj-me, 
And  a  broader  sweep  and  a  surge  sublime. 
As  it  blends  with  the  Ocean  of  Years. 


41 8  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

How  the  winters  are  drifting,  like  flakes  of  snow, .  ,.a  bnA 

And  the  summers,  like  buds  between,  rfv/  jbHj  iO 

And  the  year  in  the  sheaf — so  they  come  and  they  go,    fv 

On  the  river's  breast,  with  its  ebb  and  its  flow,  A 

As  it  glides  in  the  shadow  and  sheen. 

There's  a  magical  isle  up  the  River  Time, 

Where  the  softest  of  airs  are  playing; 
There's  a  cloudless  sky  and  a  tropical  clime. 
And  a  song  as  sweet  as  a  vesper  chime, 

And  the  Junes  with  the  roses  are  straying. 

And  the  name  of  the  isle  is  the  Long  Ago, 

And  we  bury  our  treasures  there; 
There  are  brows  of  beauty,  and  bosoms  of  snow; 
There  are  heaps  of  dust — but  we  loved  them  so! 

There  are  trinkets,  and  tresses  of  hair. 

There  are  fragments  of  song  that  nobody  sings. 

And  a  part  of  an  infant's  prayer; 
There's  a  lute  unswcp>t,  and  a  harp  without  strings; 
There  are  broken  vows,  and  pieces  of  rings. 

And  the  garments  that  She  used  to  wear; 

There  are  hands  that  are  waved,  when  the  fairy  shore 

By  the  mirage  is  lifted  in  air; 
And  we  sometimes  hear,  through  the  turbulent  roar, 
Sweet  voices  we  heard  in  the  days  gone  before, 

When  the  wind  down  the  river  is  fair. 

O!  remembered  for  aye  be  the  blessed  isle, 

All  the  day  of  our  life  tiU  night ; 
When  the  evening  comes  with  its  beautiful  smile. 
And  our  eyes  are  closing  to  slumber  awhile. 

May  that  "Greenwood"  of  Soul  be  in  sight! 

Benjamin  Franklin  Taylor  [1819-1887] 


GROWING  OLD 

What  is  it  to  grow  old? 

Is  it  to  lose  the  glory  of  the  form,,  ,,, 

The  lustre  of  the  eye?        rinold  3i  eA 


rrowin 


g  Old  :  419 


Is  it  for  beauty  to  forego  her  wealth? 
— Yes,  but  not  this  alone. 

Is  it  to  feci  our  strength — 

Not  our  bloom  only,  but  our  strength — decay? 

Is  it  to  feel  each  limb 

Grow  stififer,  every  function  less  exact, 

Each  nerve  more  loosely  strung? 

Yes,  this,  and  more;  but  not — 

Ah,  'tis  not  what  in  youth  we  dreamed  'twould  be! 

'Tis  not  to  have  our  life 

IMellowed  and  softened  as  with  sunset  glow, 

A  golden  day's  decline. 

'Tis  not  to  see  the  world 

As  from  a  height,  with  rapt  prophetic  eyes, 

And  heart  profoundly  stirred; 

And  weep,  and  feel  the  fulness  of  the-past, 

The  years  that  are  no  more.  '^  ""  ^''^^^^'  '^oH 

It  is  to  spend  long  days 

And  not  once  feel  that  we  were  ever  young; 

It  is  to  add,  immured  ' 

In  the  hot  prison  of  the  present,  month  ^' 

To  month  with  weary  pain. 

a 

It  is  to  suffer  this, 

And  feel  but  half,  and  feebly,  w^hat  we  feel. 

Deep  in  our  hidden  heart  A 

Festers  the  dull  remembrance  of  a  change, 

But  no  emotion — none. 

It  is! — last  stage  of  ail —  ,, 

When  we  are  frozen  up  within,  and  quite  .d 

The  phantom  of  ourselves,  jrn  oT 

To  hear  the  world  applaud  the  hollow  ghost       '  '  '^ 
Which  blessed  the  living  man. 

Mattheiv  Arnold\i?,2  2~iZ?,?, 


420  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


PAST 

The  clocks  are  chiming  in  my  heart 
Their  cobweb  chime; 
Old  murmurings  of  days  that  die, 
The  sob  of  things  a-drifting  by. 
The  clocks  are  chiming  in  my  heart! 

The  stars  have  twinkled,  and  gone  out — 
Fair  candles  blown! 
The  hot  desires  burn  low,  and  wan 
Those  ashy  fires,  that  flamed  anon. 
The  stars  have  twinkled,  and  gone  out! 

John  Galsworthy  [1867- 

TWILIGHT 

When  I  was  young  the  twilight  seemed  too  long. 
How  often  on  the  western  window-seat 

I  leaned  my  book  against  the  misty  pane 
And  spelled  the  last  enchanting  lines  again, 
The  while  my  mother  hummed  an  ancient  song, 
Or  sighed  a  little  and  said:  "The  hour  is  sweet!" 
When  I,  rebellious,  clamored  for  the  light. 

But  now  I  love  the  soft  approach  of  night, 

And  now  with  folded  hands  I  sit  and  dream 
While  all  too  fleet  the  hours  of  twilight  seem; 

And  thus  I  know  that  I  am  growing  old. 

0  granaries  of  Age!     O  manifold 

And  royal  harvest  of  the  common  years! 

There  are  in  all  thy  treasure-house  no  ways 

But  lead  by  soft  descent  and  gradual  slope 

To  memories  more  exquisite  than  hope. 

Thine  is  the  Iris  born  of  olden  tears,  ■■■  -- 

And  thrice  more  happy  are  the  happy  days    •'loiriW 

That  live  divinely  in  the  lingering  rays. 

A.  Mary  F.  Robinson  [1857- 


Forty  Years  On  421 


YOUTH  AND   AGE 

Youth  hath  many  charms, — 

Hath  many  joys,  and  much  dehght; 

Even  its  doubts,  and  vague  alarms, 
By  contrast  make  it  bright: 

And  yet — and  yet — forsooth, 
I  love  Age  as  well  as  Youth! 

Well,  since  I  love  them  both, 

The  good  of  both  I  will  combine, — 

In  women,  I  will  look  for  Youth, 
And  look  for  Age,  in  wine: 

And  then — and  then— I'll  bless 

This  twain  that  gives  me  happiness! 

George  Arnold  [1834-1865] 


FORTY  YEARS  ON 

Forty  years  on,  when  afar  and  asunder 

Parted  are  those  who  are  singing  today. 
When  you  look  back,  and  forgetfully  wonder 

What  you  were  like  in  your  work  and  your  play; 
Then,  it  may  be,  there  will  often  come  o  'er  you 

Glimpses  of  notes  like  the  catch  of  a  song — 
Visions  of  boyhood  shall  float  them  before  you, 
Echoes  of  dreamland  shall  bear  them  along. 
Follow  up!  Follow  up!  Follow  up!  Follow  up! 
Till  the  field  ring  again  and  again, 
With  the  tramp  of  the  twenty-two  men, 
Follow  up!  Follow  up! 

Routs  and  discomfitures,  rushes  and  rallies, 
Bases  attempted,  and  rescued,  and  won, 

Strife  without  anger,  and  art  without  malice, — 
How  will  it  seem  to  you  forty  years  on? 


422  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Then,  you  will  say,  not  a  feverish  minute 

Strained  the  weak  heart,  and  the  wavering  knee, 

Never  the  battle  raged  hottest,  but  in  it 
Neither  the  last  nor  the  faintest  were  we! 
Follow  up!  Follow  up! 

O  the  great  days,  in  the  distance  enchanted, 

Days  of  fresh  air,  in  the  rain  and  the  sun. 
How  we  rejoiced  as  we  struggled  and  panted — 

Hardly  believable,  forty  years  on ! 
How  we  discoursed  of  them,  one  with  another, 

Auguring  triumph,  or  balancing  fate. 
Loved  the  ally  with  the  heart  of  a  brother, 

Hated  the  foe  with  a  playing  at  hate! 
Follow  up!  Follow  up! 

Forty  years  on,  growing  older  and  older, 

Shorter  in  wind,  and  in  memory  long. 
Feeble  of  foot  and  rheumatic  of  shoulder. 

What  will  it  help  you  that  once  you  were  strong? 
God  gives  us  bases  to  guard  or  beleaguer. 

Games  to  play  out,  whether  earnest  or  fun. 
Fights  for  the  fearless,  and  goals  for  the  eager. 

Twenty,  and  thirty,  and  forty  years  on! 
Follow  up!  Follow  up! 

Edward  Ernest  Bowen  [1836- igoi] 

DREGS 

The  fire  is  out,  and  spent  the  warmth  thereof, 
(This  is  the  end  of  every  song  man  sings!) 
The  golden  wine  is  drunk,  the  dregs  remain, 
Bitter  as  wormwood  and  as  salt  as  pain; 
And  health  and  hope  have  gone  the  way  of  love 
Into  the  drear  oblivion  of  lost  things. 
Ghosts  go  along  with  us  until  the  end; 
This  was  a  mistress,  this,  perhaps,  a  friend. 
With  pale,  indifferent  eyes,  we  sit  and  wait 
For  the  dropped  curtain  and  the  closing  gate: 
This  is  the  end  of  all  the  songs  man  sings. 

Ernest  Dowson  [1867-1900] 


The   Paradox  of  Time  423 


THE   PARADOX  OF  TIME 

A  VARIATION  ON  RONSARD 

"  Le  lemps  s'en  va,  le  temps  s'en  va,  ma  dame! 
Las!  le  temps  non:  mats  nous  nous  en  allonsl" 

Time  goes,  you  say?    Ah  no! 
Alas,  Time  stays,  we  go; 

Or  else,  were  this  not  so, 
What  need  to  chain  the  hours, 
For  Youth  were  always  ours? 

Time  goes,  you  say? — ah  no! 

Ours  is  the  eyes '  deceit 
Of  men  whose  flying  feet 

Lead  through  some  landscape  low; 
We  pass,  and  think  we  see 
The  earth's  fixed  surface  flee: — 

Alas,  Time  stays — we  go! 

Once  in  the  days  of  old. 
Your  locks  were  curling  gold. 

And  mine  had  shamed  the  crow. 
Now,  in  the  self-same  stage. 
We've  reached  the  silver  age; 

Time  goes,  you  say? — ah  no! 

Once,  when  my  voice  was  strong, 
I  filled  the  woods  with  song 

To  praise  your  "  rose"  and  "snow' 
My  bird,  that  sang,  is  dead; 
Where  are  your  roses  fled? 

Alas,  Time  stays — we  go! 

See,  in  what  traversed  ways, 
What  backward  Fate  delays 

The  hopes  we  used  to  know; 
Where  are  our  old  desires? — • 
Ah,  where  those  vanished  fires? 

Time  goes,  you  say? — ah  no! 


424  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

How  far,  how  far,  O  Sweet, 
The  past  behind  our  feet 

Lies  in  the  even-glow! 
Now,  on  the  forward  way, 
Let  us  fold  hands,  and  pray; 

Alas,  Time  stays, — we  go! 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 

AGE 

Snow  and  stars,  the  same  as  ever 
In  the  days  when  I  was  young, — 

But  their  silver  song,  ah  never, 
Never  now  is  sung! 

Cold  the  stars  are,  cold  the  earth  is. 

Everything  is  grim  and  cold! 
Strange  and  drear  the  sound  of  mirth  is — 

Life  and  I  are  old! 

William  Winter  [1836-1917] 

OMNIA   SOMNIA 

Dawn  drives  the  dreams  away,  yet  some  abide. 
Once,  in  a  tide  of  pale  and  sunless  weather, 

I  dreamed  I  wandered  on  a  bare  hillside. 
When  suddenly  the  birds  sang  all  together. 

Still  it  was  Winter,  even  in  the  dream; 

There  was  no  leaf  nor  bud  nor  young  grass  springing; 
The  skies  shone  cold  above  the  frost-bound  stream: 

It  was  not  Spring,  and  yet  the  birds  were  singing. 

Blackbird  and  thrush  and  plaintive  willow-wren, 
Chaffinch  and  lark  and  linnet,  all  were  calling; 

A  golden  web  of  music  held  me  then. 
Innumerable  voices,  rising,  falling. 

O,  never  do  the  birds  of  April  sing 

More  sweet  than  in  that  dream  I  still  remember: 
Perchance  the  heart  may  keep  its  songs  of  Spring 

Even  through  the  wintry  dream  of  life's  December. 
Rosamund  Marriott  Watson  [1863-1911I 


An   Old   Man's  Song  425 


THE  YEAR'S  END 

Full  happy  is  the  man  who  comes  at  last 

Into  the  safe  completion  of  his  year; 
Weathered  the  perils  of  his  spring,  that  blast 

How  many  blossoms  promising  and  dear! 
And  of  his  summer,  with  dread  passions  fraught 

That  oft,  like  fire  through  the  ripening  corn, 
Blight  all  with  mocking  death  and  leave  distraught 

Loved  ones  to  mourn  the  ruined  waste  forlorn. 
But  now,  though  autumn  gave  but  harvest  slight, 

Oh,  grateful  is  he  to  the  powers  above 
For  winter's  sunshine,  and  the  lengthened  night 

By  hearth-side  genial  with  the  warmth  of  love. 
Through  silvered  days  of  vistas  gold  and  green 
Contentedly  he  glides  away,  serene. 

Timothy  Cole  [1852- 


AN  OLD   MAN'S   SONG 

Ye  are  young,  ye  are  young, 

I  am  old,  I  am  old; 
And  the  song  has  been  sung 

And  the  story  been  told. 

Your  locks  are  as  brown 
As  the  mavis  in  May, 

Your  hearts  are  as  warm 
As  the  sunshine  to-day. 

But  mine  white  and  cold 
As  the  snow  on  the  brae. 

And  Love,  like  a  flower, 

Is  growing  for  you. 
Hands  clasping,  lips  meeting. 

Hearts  beating  so  true; 
While  Fame  like  a  star 
In  the  midnight  afar 

Is  flashing  for  you. 


426  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


For  you  the  To-come, 

But  for  me  the  Gone-by, 
You  are  panting  to  live, 

I  am  waiting  to  die; 
The  meadow  is  empty. 

No  flower  groweth  high, 
And  naught  but  a  socket 

The  face  of  the  sky. 

Yea,  howso  we  dream. 

Or  how  bravely  we  do; 
The  end  is  the  same, 

Be  we  traitor  or  true: 
And  after  the  bloom 

And  the  passion  is  past, 

Death  cometh  at  last. 

Richard  Le  Callieime  [1866- 


SONGS  OF  SEVEN 

SEVEN   TIMES   ONE. — EXULTATION 

There's  no  dew  left  on  the  daisies  and  clover, 

There's  no  rain  left  in  heaven ; 
I've  said  my  "seven  times"  over  and  over, 

Seven  times  one  are  seven. 

I  am  old,  so  old,  I  can  write  a  letter; 

My  birthday  lessons  are  done; 
The  lambs  play  always,  they  know  no  better; 

They  are  only  one  times  one. 

0  moon!  in  the  night  I  have  seen  you  sailing 
And  shining  so  round  and  low; 

You  were  bright!  ah,  bright!  but  your  light  is  failing,- 
You  are  nothing  now  but  a  bow. 

You  moon,  have  you  done  something  wrong  in  heaven 
That  God  has  hidden  your  face? 

1  hope  if  you  have,  you  will  soon  be  forgiven, 
And  shine  again  in  your  place. 


Songs  of  Seven  427 

O  velvet  bee,  you're  a  dusty  fellow, 

You've  powdered  your  legs  with  gold! 
O  brave  marsh  marybuds,  rich  and  yellow, 

Give  me  your  money  to  hold! 

O  columbine,  open  your  folded  wrapper. 
Where  two  twin  turtle-doves  dwell? 

0  cuckoopint,  toll  me  the  purple  clapper 
That  hangs  in  your  clear  green  bell! 

And  show  me  your  nest  with  the  young  ones  in  it; 
I  will  not  steal  them  away; 

1  am  old!  you  may  trust  me,  linnet,  linnet, — 
I  am  seven  times  one  to-day. 

SEVEN   TIMES   TWO. — ROMANCE 

You  bells  in  the  steeple,  ring,  ring  out  your  changes. 

How  many  soever  they  be. 
And  let  the  brown  meadow-lark's  note  as  he  ranges 

Come  over,  come  over  to  me. 

Yet  birds'  clearest  carol  by  fall  or  by  swelling 

No  magical  sense  conveys. 
And  bells  have  forgotten  their  old  art  of  telling 

The  fortune  of  future  days 

J  •■ 

"Turn  again,  turn  again,"  once  they  rang  cheerily. 

While  a  boy  listened  alone; 
Made  his  heart  yearn  again,  musing  so  wearily 

All  by  himself  on  a  stone. 

Poor  bells!  I  forgive  you;  your  good  days  are  over. 

And  mine,  they  are  yet  to  be; 
No  listening,  no  longing  shall  aught,  aught  discover: 

You  leave  the  story  to  me. 

The  foxglove  shoots  out  of  the  green  matted  heather 

Preparing  her  hoods  of  snow; 
She  was  idle,  and  slept  till  the  sunshiny  weather: 

Oh!  children  take  long  to  grow. 


428  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

I  wish  and  I  wish  that  the  spring  would  go  faster, 

Nor  long  summer  bide  so  late; 
And  I  could  grow  on  like  the  foxglove  and  aster, 

For  some  things  are  ill  to  wait. 

I  wait  for  the  day  when  dear  hearts  shall  discover, 
While  dear  hands  are  laid  on  my  head; 

"The  child  is  a  woman,  the  book  may  close  over, 
For  all  the  lessons  are  said." 

I  wait  for  miy  story, — the  birds  cannot  sing  it, 

Not  one,  as  he  sits  on  the  tree; 
The  bells  cannot  ring  it,  but  long  years,  oh,  bring  it! 

Such  as  I  wish  it  to  be. 

SEVEN   TIMES   THREE. — LOVE 

I  LEANED  out  of  window,  I  smelt  the  white  clover. 
Dark,  dark  was  the  garden,  I  saw  not  the  gate; 
"Now,  if  there  be  footsteps,  he  comes,  my  one  lover, — 
Hush,  nightingale,  hush!  O  sweet  nightingale,  wait 
Till  I  listen  and  hear 
If  a  step  draweth  near. 
For  my  love  he  is  late! 

"The  skies  in  the  darkness  stoop  nearer  and  nearer, 

A  cluster  of  stars  hangs  like  fruit  in  the  tree. 
The  fall  of  the  water  comes  sweeter,  comes  clearer: 
To  what  art  thou  listening,  and  what  dost  thou  see? 
Let  the  star-clusters  grow. 
Let  the  sweet  waters  flow. 
And  cross  quickly  to  me.  ..i^ 

"You  night-moths  that  hover,  where  honey  brims  over 

From  sycamore  blossoms,  or  settle  or  sleep; 
You  glowworms,  shine  out,  and  the  pathway  discover 
To  him  that  comes  darkling  along  the  rough  steep. 
Ah,  my  sailor,  make  haste, 
For  the  time  runs  to  waste. 
And  my  love  lieth  deep, — 


Songs  of  Seven  429 

"Too  deep  for  swift  telling;  and  yet,  my  one  lover, 

I've  conned  thee  an  answer,  it  waits  thee  to-night." 
By    the    sycamore    passed    he,    and    through    the    white 
clover, 
Then  all  the  sweet  speech  I  had  fashioned  took  flight; 
But  I'll  love  him  more,  more 
Than  e'er  wife  loved  before. 
Be  the  days  dark  or  bright. 


SEVEN   TIMES    FOUR. — MATERNITY 

Heigh-ho!  daisies  and  buttercups! 

Fair  yellow  daffodils,  stately  and  tall! 
When  the  wind  wakes  how  they  rock  in  the  grasses, 

And  dance  with  the  cuckoo-buds  slender  and  small! 
Here's  two  bonny  boys,  and  here's  mother's  own  lasses, 

Eager  to  gather  them  all. 

Heigh-ho!  daisies  and  buttercups;  '' ' 

Mother  shall  thread  them  a  daisy  chain; 
Sing  them  a  song  of  the  pretty  hedge-sparrow. 

That  loved  her  brown  little  ones,  loved  them  full  fain; 
Sing,  "Heart,  thou  art  wide  though  the  house  be  but  nar- 
row,"— 

Sing  once,  and  sing  it  again. 

Heigh-ho!  daisies  and  buttercups! 

Sweet  wagging  cowsHps,  they  bend  and  they  bow; 
A  ship  sails  afar  over  warm  ocean  waters, 

And  haply  one  musing  doth  stand  at  her  prow. 
O  bonny  brown  sons,  and  O  sweet  httle  daughters, 

Maybe  he  thinks  of  you  now. 

Heigh-ho!  daisies  and  buttercups! 

Fair  yellow  daffodils,  stately  and  tall! 
A  sunshiny  world  full  of  laughter  and  leisure. 

And  fresh  hearts  unconscious  of  sorrow  and  thrall! 
Send  down  on  their  pleasure  smiles  passing  its  measure, 

God  that  is  over  us  all! 


4;j©  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


SEVEN   TIMES   FIVE. — WIDOWHOOD 

1  -' 

1  SLEEP  and  rest,  my  heart  makes  moan 

Before  I  am  well  awake; 
"Let  me  bleed!     O  let  me  alone, 

Since  I  must  not  break!" 


For  children  wake,  though  fathers  sleep 
With  a  stone  at  foot  and  at  head: 

0  sleepless  God,  forever  keep, 
Keep  both  living  and  dead! 

1  lift  mine  eyes,  and  what  to  see 
But  a  world  happy  and  fair! 

,1  have  not  wished  it  to  mourn  with  me,— 
' ' '       Comfort  is  not  there. 

Oh,  what  anear  but  golden  brooms, 

But  a  waste  of  reedy  rills! 
Oh,  what  afar  but  the  fine  glooms 

On  the  rare  blue  hills! 

•nifi't  h;]-^  ^^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^''  ^^^  ^^^^  forlore, — 
__,,,,   ,,,^1      How  bitter  it  is  to  part! 

Oh,  to  meet  thee,  my  love,  once  more! 

0  my  heart,  my  heart! 

No  more  to  hear,  no  more  to  see! 

Oh,  that  an  echo  might  wake 
And  waft  one  note  of  thy  psalm  to  me 

Ere  my  heart-strings  break! 

I  should  know  it  how  faint  soe'er. 

And  with  angel  voices  blent ; 
Oh,  once  to  feel  thy  spirit  anear; 

1  could  be  content! 

Or  once  between  the  gates  of  gold, 
While  an  entering  angel  trod, 

But  once, — thee  sitting  to  behold 
On  the  hills  of  God! 


vS 


Songs  of  Seven         •'■  4ji 

SEVEN  TIMES   SIX. — GIVING  IN  MARRIAGE 

To  bear,  to  nurse,  to  rear. 

To  watch,  and  then  to  lose:  '      ^ 

To  see  my  bright  ones  disappear, 

Drawn  up  hke  morning  dews, — 
To  bear,  to  nurse,  to  rear,  ..^  I 

To  watch  and  then  to  lose: 
This  have  I  done  when  God  drew  near 

Among  his  own  to  choose. 

To  hear,  to  heed,  to  wed, 

And  with  thy  lord  depart 
In  tears,  that  he,  as  soon  as  shed,  ']'■  ' 

Will  let  no  longer  smart, — 
To  hear,  to  heed,  to  wed, 

This  while  thou  didst  I  smiled. 
For  now  it  was  not  God  wlio  said, 

"Mother,  give  me  thy  ctiild." 

O  fond,  O  fool,  and  blind! 

To  God  I  gave  with  tears; 
But  when  a  man  like  grace  would  find, 

My  soul  put  by  her  fears, — 
0  fond,  O  fool,  and  blind! 

God  guards  in  happier  spheres; 
That  man  will  guard  where  he  did  bind 

Is  hope  for  unknown  years. 

To  hear,  to  heed,  to  wed. 

Fair  lot  that  maidens  choose. 
Thy  mother's  tenderest  words  are  said, 

Thy  face  no  more  she  views; 
Thy  mother's  lot,  my  dear,  ,[^ 

She  doth  in  naught  accuse; 
Her  lot  to  bear,  to  nurse,  to  rear, 

To  love, — and  then  to  lose. 

seven   times    seven. — LONGING   FOR  HOME         ,    , 

A  SONG  of  a  boat: —  ' 

There  was  once  a  boat  on  a  billow : 
Lightly  she  rocked  to  her  port  remote. 


43  2  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  the  foam  was  white  in  her  wake  like  snow, 
And  her  frail  mast  bowed  when  the  breeze  would  blow, 
And  bent  like  a  wand  of  willow. 

I  shaded  mine  eyes  one  day  when  a  boat 

Went  curtsying  over  the  billow, 
I  marked  her  course  till  a  dancing  mote, 

She  faded  out  on  the  moonlit  foam, 

And  I  stayed  behind  in  the  dear-loved  home; 
And  my  thoughts  all  day  were  about  the  boat, 

And  my  dreams  upon  the  pillow. 

I  pray  you  hear  my  song  of  a  boat 

For  it  is  but  short : — 
My  boat  you  shall  find  none  fairer  afloat, 

In  river  or  port. 
Long  I  looked  out  for  the  lad  she  bore, 

On  the  open  desolate  sea, 
And  I  think  he  sailed  to  the  heavenly  shore, 

For  he  came  not  back  to  me — 

Ah  me! 
A  song  of  a  nest: — 

There  was  once  a  nest  in  a  hollow: 
Down  in  the  mosses  and  knot-grass  pressed. 
Soft  and  warm  and  full  to  the  brim — - 
Vetches  leaned  over  it  purple,  and  dim, 

With  buttercup  buds  to  follow. 

I  pray  you  hear  my  song  of  a  nest, 

For  it  is  not  long: — 
You  shall  never  light  in  a  summer  quest 

The  bushes  among — 
Shall  never  light  on  a  prouder  sitter, 

A  fairer  nestful,  nor  ever  know 
A  softer  sound  than  their  tender  twitter, 

That  v/ind-like  did  come  and  go. 

I  had  a  nestful  once  of  my  own, 

Ah,  happy,  happy  I! 
Right  dearly  I  loved  them;  but  when  they  were  grown 

They  spread  out  their  wings  to  fly — 


Songs  of  Seven  433 

Oh,  one  after  one  they  flew  away 

Far  up  to  the  heavenly  blue, 
To  the  better  country,  the  upper  day, 

And — I  wish  I  was  going  too. 

I  pray  you  what  is  the  nest  to  me, 

My  empty  nest? 
And  what  is  the  shore  where  I  stood  to  see 

My  boat  sail  down  to  the  west? 
Can  I  call  that  home  where  I  anchor  yet, 

Though  my  good  man  has  sailed? 
Can  I  call  that  home  where  my  nest  was  set, 

Now  all  its  hope  hath  failed? 

Nay,  but  the  port  where  my  sailor  went. 

And  the  land  where  my  nestlings  be: 
There  is  the  home  where  my  thoughts  are  sent, 
The  only  home  for  me — 

Ah  me! 
Jean  Ingelow  [1820- 1897] 


LOOKING  BACKWARD 

THE   RETREAT  v  ^Jstq  1 

,  .  . ,  r  /' 
Happy  those  early  days,  when  I 

Shined  in  my  Angel-infancy! 

Before  I  understood  this  place 

Appointed  for  my  second  race, 

Or  taught  my  soul  to  fancy  aught 

But  a  white,  celestial  thought; 

When  yet  I  had  not  walked  above 

A  mile  or  two  from  my  first  Love, 

And  looking  back,  at  that  short  space 

Could  see  a  glimpse  of  His  bright  face; 

When  on  some  gilded  cloud  or  flower 

My  gazing  soul  would  dwell  an  hour, 

And  in  those  weaker  glories  spy 

Some  shadows  of  eternity; 

Before  I  taught  my  tongue  to  wound 

My  Conscience  with  a  sinful  sound, 

Or  had  the  black  art  to  dispense 

A  several  sin  to  every  sense; 

But  felt  through  all  this  fleshly  dress 

Bright  shoots  of  everlastingness. 

O  how  I  long  to  travel  back, 
And  tread  again  that  ancient  track! 
That  I  might  once  more  reach  that  plain 
Where  first  I  left  my  glorious  train; 
From  whence  the  enlightened  spirit  sees 
That  shady  City  of  Palm-trees. 
But  ah!  my  soul  with  too  much  stay 
Is  drunk,  and  staggers  in  the  way! 
Some  men  a  forward  motion  love, 
But  I  by  backward  steps  would  move; 
And,  when  this  dust  falls  to  the  urn. 
In  that  state  I  came,  return. 

Henry  Vaughan  [1622-1695] 

434 


Castles  in  the  Air  435 

A  SUPERSCRIPTION 

Look  in  my  face;  my  name  is  IMight-have-been;  [ 

I  am  also  called  No-more,  Too-late,  Farewell; 

Unto  thine  ear  I  hold  the  dead-sea  shell 

Cast  up  thy  Life's  foam-fretted  feet  between; 

Unto  thine  eyes  the  glass  where  that  is  seen 

Which  had  Life's  form  and  Love's,  but  by  my  spell 

Is  now  a  shaken  shadow  intolerable, 

Of  ultimate  things  unuttered  the  frail  screen. 

Mark  me,  how  still  I  am!     But  should  there  dart 

One  moment  through  thy  soul  the  soft  surprise 

Of  that  winged  Peace  which  lulls  the  breath  of  sighs,— 

Then  shalt  thou  see  me  smile,  and  turn  apart 

Thy  visage  to  mine  ambush  at  thy  heart 

Sleepless  with  cold  commemorative  eyes. 

Dante  Gabriel  Rosselti  [1828-1882J 

THE   CHILD   IN  THE   GARDEN 

When  to  the  garden  of  untroubled  thought 

I  came  of  late,  and  saw  the  open  door. 

And  wished  again  to  enter,  and  explore 

The  sweet,  wild  ways  with  stainless  bloom  inwrought, 

And  bowers  of  innocence  with  beauty  fraught, 

It  seemed  some  purer  voice  must  speak  before 

I  dared  to  tread  that  garden  loved  of  yore. 

That  Eden  lost  unknown  and  found  unsought. 

Then  just  within  the  gate  I  saw  a  child, — 

A  stranger-child,  yet  to  my  heart  most  dear, — 

Who  held  his  hands  to  me  and  softly  smiled 

With  eyes  that  knew  no  shade  of  sin  or  fear; 

"Come  in,"  he  said,  "and  play  awhile  with  me; 

I  am  the  little  child  you  used  to  be." 

Henry  Van  Dyke  [1852- 

CASTLES  IN  THE  AIR 

AIy  thoughts  by  night  are  often  filled 

With  visions  false  as  fair: 
For  in  the  Past  alone  I  build 

My  castles  in  the  air. 


436  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

I  dwell  not  now  on  what  may  be; 

Night  shadows  o'er  the  scene; 
But  still  my  fancy  wanders  free     '^i  X^  ^^  300.  i 

Through  that  which  might  have  been.  '  '  ' 

Thomas  Love  Peacock  [1785-1866] 

I   qU   Jdii 

SOMETIMES  iiiflloJn'.i 


Across  the  fields  of  yesterday 
He  sometimes  comes  to  me, 

A  little  lad  just  back  from  play — 
The  lad  I  used  to  be. 


i:ff  fl-jirlV.^ 


,3fl§ia  And  yet  he  smiles  so  wistfully  ;  Jjjrfj  }( 

Once  he  has  crept  within, 
I  wonder  if  he  hopes  to  see 

The  man  I  might  have  been. 
! ;  Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr.  [1882- 


THE  LITTLE   GHOSTS 


:,TnY^ 


Where  are  they  gone,  and  do  you  know 
If  they  come  back  at  fall  o'  dew, 

The  little  ghosts  of  long  ago,  "  ""^' 

That  long  ago  were  you?  '^'  '* 

And  all  the  songs  that  ne  'er  were  sung, 
And  all  the  dreams  that  ne  'er  came  true, 

Like  httle  children  dying  young — 
Do  they  come  back  to  you? 

Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr.  [1882- 

MY   OTHER   ME 


Children,  do  you  ever. 
In  walks  by  land  or  sea, 

Meet  a  little  maiden 
Long  time  lost  to  me? 

She  is  gay  and  gladsome, 
Has  a  laughing  face, 

And  a  heart  as  sunny; 
And  her  name  is  Grace, 


1  lui:  1 


A  Shadow  Boat  437 

Naught  she  knows  of  sorrow, 

Naught  of  doubt  or  Wight; 
Heaven  is  just  above  her — 

All  her  thoughts  are  white. 

Long  time  since  I  lost  her, 

That  other  Me  of  mine; 
She  crossed,  into  Time's  shadow 

Out  of  Youth's  sunshine. 

Now  the  darkness  keeps  her; 

And,  call  her  as  I  will, 
The  years  that  He  between  us 

Hide  her  from  me  still. 

I  am  dull  and  pain-worn. 

And  lonely  as  can  be — 
Oh,  children,  if  you  meet  her, 

Send  back  my  other  Me! 

Grace  Denio  Litchfield  [1849- 


A  SHADOW  BOAT 

Under  my  keel  another  boat 

Sails  as  I  sail,  floats  as  I  float;         :  ;:i 

Silent  and  dim  and  mystic  still, 

It  steals  through  that  weird  nether-world, 

Mocking  my  power,  though  at  my  will 
The  foam  before  its  prow  is  curled, 
Or  calm  it  lies,  with  canvas  furled. 

Vainly  I  peer,  and  fain  would  see 
\^Tiat  phantom  in  that  boat  may  be; 

Yet  half  I  dread,  lest  I  with  ruth 
Some  ghost  of  my  dead  past  divine. 

Some  gracious  shape  of  my  lost  youth. 
Whose  deathless  eyes  once  fixed  on  mine 
Would  draw  me  downward  through  the  brine! 
Arlo  Bales  [1850- 


■4^^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


A  LAD   THAT  IS   GONE 

Slug  mc  a  song  of  a  lad  that  is  gone; 

Say,  could  that  lad  be  I? 
Mary  of  soul  he  sailed  on  a  day 

Over  the  sea  to  Skyc. 

]\Iull  was  astern,  Rum  on  the  port, 

Eigg  on  the  starboard  bow; 
Glory  of  youth  glowed  in  his  soul: 

Where  is  that  glory  now? 

Sing  me  a  song  of  a  lad  that  is  gone; 

Say,  could  that  lad  be  I? 
Merry  of  soul  he  sailed  on  a  day 

Over  the  sea  to  Skye. 

Give  me  again  all  that  was  there, 

Give  me  the  sun  that  shone! 
Give  me  the  eyes,  give  me  the  soul. 

Give  me  the  lad  that's  gone! 

Sing  me  a  song  of  a  lad  tliat  is  gone; 

Say,  coidd  that  lad  be  I? 
Merry  of  soul  he  sailed  on  a  day 

Over  the  sea  to  Skye. 

Billow  and  breeze,  islands  and  seas, 

Mountains  of  rain  and  sun. 
All  that  was  good,  all  that  was  fair. 

All  that  was  me  is  gone. 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1894] 


CARCASSONNE  * 

"I'm  growing  old,  I've  sixty  years; 

I've  labored  all  my  hfe  in  vain. 
In  all  that  time  of  hopes  and  fears, 

I've  failed  my  dearest  wish  to  gain. 


!  3niid 


For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3844. 

-o;.8ij  ti'iu'd  'jV'.  ■ 


M 


Carcassonne  439 

I  see  full  well  that  here  below 

Bliss  unalloyed  there  is  for  none; 
My  prayer  would  else  fulfilment  know — 

Never  have  I  seen  Carcassonne! 


"You  see  the  city  from  the  hill, 

It  lies  beyond  the  mountains  blue; 
And  yet  to  reach  it  one  must  still 

Five  long  and  wear}^  leagues  pursue, 
And,  to  return,  as  many  more. 

Had  but  the  vintage  plenteous  grown— 
But,  ah!  the  grape  withheld  its  store. 

I  shall  not  look  on  Carcassonne! 

"They  tell  me  every  day  is  there 

Not  more  or  less  than  Sunday  gay; 
In'shining  robes  and  garments  fair 

The  people  walk  upon  their  way. 
One  gazes  there  on  castle  walls 

As  grand  as  those  of  Babylon, 
A  bishop  and  two  generals! 

What  joy  to  dwell  in  Carcassonne! 

"The  vicar's  right:  he  says  that  we 

Are  ever  wayward,  weak,  and  blind; 
He  tells  us  in  his  homily 

Ambition  ruins  aU  mankind; 
Yet  could  I  there  two  days  have  spent. 

While  still  the  autumn  sweetly  shone, 
Ah,  me!  I  might  have  died  content 

When  I  had  looked  on  Carcassonne. 

"Thy  pardon,  Father,  I  beseech, 

In  this  my  prayer  if  I  offend; 
One  something  sees  beyond  his  reach 

From  childhood  to  his  journey's  end.  rlT 

My  wife,  our  little  boy,  Aignan, 

Have  travelled  even  to  Narbonne; 
My  grandchild  has  seen  Perpignan;       Lgjaai  bri/. 

And  I — have  not  seen  Carcassonne!"   .'rjslq 


440  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

So  crooned,  one  day,  dose  by  Limoux, 

A  peasant,  double-bent  with  age. 
"Rise  up,  my  friend,"  said  I;  "with  you 

I'll  go  upon  this  pilgrimage." 
We  left,  next  morning,  his  abode, 

But  (Heaven  forgive  him !)  half-way  on 
The  old  man  died  upon  the  road. 

He  never  gazed  on  Carcassonne. 
Translated  by  John  R.  Thompson  from  the  French  of 
Gitslavc  Nadaud  [1820-    ?    ] 


CHILDHOOD 

Old  Sorrow  I  shall  meet  again. 

And  Joy,  perchance — but  never,  never, 

Happy  Childhood,  shall  we  twain 
See  each  other's  face  forever! 

And  yet  I  would  not  call  thee  back, 
Dear  Childhood,  lest  the  sight  of  me. 

Thine  old  companion,  on  the  rack 
Of  Age,  should  sadden  even  thee. 

John  Banister  Tabb  [184  5- 1909] 


THE  WASTREL 

Once,  when  I  was  little,  as  the  summer  night  was  falling. 
Among  the  purple  upland  fields  I  lost  my  barefoot  way; 
The  road  to  home  was  hidden  fast,  and  frightful  shadows, 
crawling 
Along  the  sky-line,  swallowed  up  the  last  kind  light  of 
day; 
And  then  I  seemed  to  hear  you 
In  the  twilight,  and  be  near  you; 
Seemed  to  hear  your  dear  voice  calling — 
Through  the  meadows,  calling,  calling — 
And  I  followed  and  I  found  you. 
Flung  my  tired  arms  around  you. 
And  rested  on  the  mother-breast,  returned,  tired  out  from 
play. 


Troia   Fuit  441 

Down   the   days  from   that   day,  though   I   trod   strange 
paths  unheeding,  j  jg-jj'^j 

Though  I  chased  the  jack-o'-lanterns  of  so  many  mad- 
dened years, 
Though  I  never  looked  behind  me,  where  the  home-lights 
were  receding, 
Though  I  never  looked  enough  ahead  to  ken  the  Imi  of 
Fears ; 
Still  I  knew  your  heart  was  near  me, 
That  your  ear  was  strained  to  hear  m'e, 
That  your  love  would  need  no  pleading 
To  forgive  me,  but  was  pleading 
Of  its  self  that,  in  disaster, 
I  should  run  to  you  the  faster 
And  be  sure  that  I  was  dearer  for  your  sacrifice  of  tears. 

Now  on  life 's  last  Summertime  the  long  last  dusk  is  falling, 
And  I,  who  trod  one  way  so  long,  can  tread  no  other  way 
Until  at  death's   dim   crpssroads  I   watch,   hesitant,   the 
crawling 
Night-passages  that  maze  me  with  the  ultimate  dismay. 
Then  when  Death  and  Doubt  shall  blind  me — 
Even  then — I  know  you'll  iind  me:- 
I  shall  hear  you,  Mother,  calling — 
Hear  you  calling — calling — calling : 
I  shall  fight  and  follow — find  you 
Though  the  grave-clothes  swathe  and  bind  you, 
And  I  know  your  love  will   answer:   "Here's  my  laddie 
home  from  play!" 

Reginald  Wright  Kanffman  [1877- 


TROIA  FUIT 

The  world  was  wide  when  I  was  young. 
My  schoolday  hills  and  dales  among; 
But,  oh,  it  needs  no  Puck  to  put, 
With  whipping  wing  and  flying  foot, 
A  girdle  'round  the  narrow  sphere 
In  which  I  labor  now  and  here! 


44^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Life's  face  was  fair  when  careless  I  orii   nwo<T^ 

First  loved  beneath  an  April  sky,  i  zdisq 

And  wept  those  fine-imagined  woes        '  il-guodi 
That  Youth  at  nineteen  thinks  it  knowsjh'J^'jb 
^'^'ci^"='''Now  love  and  woe  both  run  so  deepf-'van  I  ligjjoril 
I  have  not  any  time  to  weep.  •'     ..-  .t  . /r 

No  matter;  though  at  last  we  see 

That  what  was  could  not  always  be, 

It  girds  our  loins  and  steels  our  hands 

In  duller  days  and  smaller  lands 

To  recollect  the  country  where  '  .  '     '  rp 

The  world  was  wide  and  life  was  fair. 

Reginald  Wright  Kaujffman  [1877- 

TEMPLE  GARLANDS 

.'^niUuf        There  is  a  temple  in  my  heart 

Where  moth  or  rust  can  never  come, 
A  temple  swept  and  set  apart, 
To  make  my  soul  a  home. 

And  round  about  the  doors  of  it 
Hang  garlands  that  forever  last. 

That  gathered  once  are  always  sweet; 
The  roses  of  the  Past! 

A.  Mary  F.  Robinson  [1857- 

TIME  LONG  PAST 

Like  the  ghost  of  a  dear  friend  dead 

Is  Time  long  past. 
A  tone  which  is  now  forever  fled, 
A  hope  which  is  now  forever  past, 
A  love  so  sweet  it  could  not  last. 

Was  Time  long  past. 

There  were  sweet  dreams  in  the  night 
Of  Time  long  past:  .^- 

And,  was  it  sadness  or  delight,      '  ''>' 

Each  day  a  shadow  onward  cast 

Which  made  us  wish  it  yet  might  last, — 
That  Time  long  past. 


1    Remember,   I    Remember "        443 

There  is  regret,  almost  remorse, 

For  Time  long  past. 
'Tis  like  a  child's  beloved  corse 
A  father  watches,  till  at  last 
Beauty  is  like  remembrance,  cast 

From  Time  long  past. 

Percy  By s she  Shelley  [i7g2-i82  2] 


"I  REMEMBER,   I  REMEMBER" 

I  REMEMBER,  I  remember 
The  house  where  I  was  born, 
The  little  window  where  the  sun 
Came  peeping  in  at  morn ; 
He  never  came  a  wink  too  soon 
Nor  brought  too  long  a  day; 
But  now,  I  often  wish  the  night 
Had  borne  my  breath  away. 

I  remember,  I  remember 
The  roses,  red  and  white. 
The  violets,  and  the  lily-cups — 
Those  flowers  made  of  light ! 
The  lilacs  where  the  robin  built, 
And  where  my  brother  set 
The  laburnum  on  his  birthday, — 
The  tree  is  living  yet! 

I  remember,  I  remember 

Where  I  was  used  to  swing, 

And  thought  the  air  must  rush  as  fresh 

To  swallows  on  the  wing; 

My  spirit  flew  in  feathers  then 

That  is  so  heavy  now, 

The  summer  pools  could  hardly  cool 

The  fever  on  my  brow. 

I  remember,  I  remember 
The  fir-trees  dark  and  high; 
I  used  to  think  their  slender  tops 
Were  close  against  the  sky: 


444  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

It  was  a  childish  ignorance, 

But  now  'tis  Httle  joy 

To  know  I'm  farther  off  from  Heaven 

Than  when  I  was  a  boy. 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 

MY  LOST  YOUTH 

Often  I  think  of  the  beautiful  town 

That  is  seated  by  the  sea; 
Often  in  thought  go  up  and  down 
The  pleasant  streets  of  that  dear  old  town, 
And  my  youth  comes  back  to  me. 
And  a  verse  of  a  Lapland  song 
Is  haunting  my  memory  still: 
"A  boy's  will  is  the  wind's  will, 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth,  are  long,  long  thoughts." 

I  can  see  the  shadowy  lines  of  its  trees. 

And  catch,  in  sudden  gleams, 
The  sheen  of  the  far-surrounding  seas,     , 
And  islands  that  were  the  Hesperides 
Of  all  my  boyish  dreams. 

And  the  burden  of  that  old  song, 
It  murmurs  and  whispers  still: 
"A  boy's  will  is  the  wind's  will. 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth  are  long,  long  thoughts." 

I  remember  the  black  wharves  and  the  slips, 

And  the  sea-tides  tossing  free ; 
And  Spanish  sailors  with  bearded  lips. 
And  the  beauty  and  mystery  of  the  ships. 
And  the  magic  of  the  sea. 

And  the  voice  of  that  wayward  song 
Is  singing  and  saying  still: 
"A  boy's  will  is  the  wind's  will, 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth  are  long,  long  thoughts." 

I  remember  the  bulwarks  by  the  shore, 

And  the  fort  upon  the  hill ; 
The  sunrise  gun,  with  its  hollow  roar. 
The  drum-beat  repeated  o'er  and  o'er, 


My   Lost  Youth  445 

And  the  bugle  wild  and  shrill. 
And  the  music  of  that  old  song 
Throbs  in  my  memory  still : 
"A  boy's  will  is  the  wind's  will, 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth  are  long,  long  thoughts.' 

I  remember  the  sea-fight  far  away, 
How  it  thundered  o'er  the  tide! 
And  the  dead  captains,  as  they  lay 
In  their  graves,  o'erlooking  the  tranquil  bay 
Where  they  in  battle  died. 

And  the  sound  of  that  mournful  song 
Goes  through  me  with  a  thrill: 
"A  boy's  will  is  the  wind's  will, 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth  are  long,  long  thoughts." 

I  can  see  the  breezy  dome  of  groves, 
The  shadows  of  Deering's  Woods; 
And  the  friendships  old  and  the  early  loves 
Come  back  with  a  Sabbath  sound,  as  of  doves 
In  quiet  neighborhoods. 

And  the  verse  of  that  sweet  old  song, 
It  flutters  and  murmurs  still: 
"A  boy's  will  is  the  wind's  wall, 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth  are  long,,  long  thoughts." 

I  remember  the  gleams  and  glooms  that  dart 

Across  the  school-boy's  brain ; 
The  song  and  the  silence  in  the  heart. 
That  in  part  are  prophecies,  and  in  part 

Are  longings  wild  and  vain. 

And  the  voice  of  that  fitful  song 

Sings  on,  and  is  never  still : 

"A  boy's  will  is  the  wind's  will. 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth  arc  long,  long  thoughts." 

There  are  things  of  which  I  may  not  speak; 

There  are  dreams  that  cannot  die; 
There  are  thoughts  that  make  the  strong  heart  weak, 
And  bring  a  pallor  into  the  cheek, 


446  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

And  a  mist  before  the  eye.  :!  -^fh  Fin  A 

And  the  words  of  that  fatal  son^ 
Come  over  me  hke  a  chill: 
"A  boy's  will  is  the  wind's  will, 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth  are  long,  long  thoughts  " 

Strange  to  me  are  the  forms  I  meet  ,              ,. 

„,,       ^    .  .     ,      ,         , ,  imamai  I 

When  1  visit  the  dear  old  town ;  .       -t 

-^       ,           .        .    .                 1  It  woH 

But  the  native  air  is  pure  and  sweet,  ,^  ,     , 

And  the  trees  that  o'ershadow  each  well-known  street. 

As  they  balance  up  and  down, 

Are  singing  the  beautiful  song, 

Are  sighing  and  whispering  still : 

"A  boy's  will  is  the  wind's  will, 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth  are  long,  long  thoughts." 

And  Deering's  Woods  are  fresh  and  fair, 

And  with  joy  that  is  almost  pain  •       > 

My  heart  goes  back  to  wander  there,  ■!«:  sdT 

And  among  the  dreams  of  the  days  that  were    ■■■•'  ^'"/ 
I  find  my  lost  youth  again. 

And  the  strange  and  beautiful  song, 
The  groves  are  repeating  it  still : 
"A  boy's  will  is  the  wind's  will. 
And  the  thoughts  of  youth  are  long,  long  thoughts." 
Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 

"VOICE   OF  THE  WESTERN  WIND" 

Voice  of  the  western  wind! 

Thou  singest  from  afar, 
Rich  with  the  music  of  a  land 

Where  all  my  memories  are; 
But  in  thy  song  I  only  hear 

The  echo  of  a  tone 
That  fell  divinely  on  my  ear 

In  days  forever  flown. 

Star  of  the  western  sky!        0  r'^Trrf?  '^m  'norfT 

Thou  beamest  from  afar, 
With  lustre  caught  from  eyes  I  knew 

Whose  orbs  were  each  a  star; 


The  Shoogy-Shoo  447 

But,  oh,  those  orbs — too  wildly  bright — 

No  more  ecUpse  thine  own. 
And  never  shall  I  find  the  hght 

Of  days  forever  flown! 

Edmund  Clarence  Sledman  [1833-1908] 

"LANGSYNE,  WHEN  LIFE  WAS  BONNIE"      ■[[ 

Langsyne,  when  life  was  bonnie, 

An'  a'  the  skies  were  blue, 
When  ilka  thocht  took  blossom, 

An'  hung  its  held  wi'  dew, 
When  winter  wasna  winter,  ' 

Though  snaws  cam'  happin'  doon, 
Langsyne,  when  life  was  bonnie. 

Spring  gaed  a  twalmonth  roun'.  '"■ 

Langsyne,  when  life  was  bonnie, 

An'  a'  the  days  were  lang; 
When  through'  them  ran  the  music 

That  comes  to  us  in  sang. 
We  never  wearied  liltin' 

The  auld  love-laden  tune; 
Langsyne,  when  life  was  bonnie, 

Love  gaed  a  twalmonth  roun'. 

Langsyne,  when  life  was  bonnie, 

An'  a'  the  warld  was  fair,  ^  '     . ' 

The  leaves  were  green  wi'  simmer, 

For  autumn  wasna  there. 
But  listen  hoo  they  rustle, 

Wi'  an  eerie,  weary  soun', 
For  noo,  alas,  'tis  winter 

That  gangs  a  twalmonth  roun'. 

Alexander  Anderson  [184 5- 1909] 

THE   SHOOGY-SHOO 

I  DO  be  thinking,  lassie,  of  the  old  days  now; 
For  oh!  your  hair  is  tangled  gold  above  your  Irish  brow; 
And  oh!  your  eyes  are  fairy  flax!  no  other  eyes  so  blue; 
Come  nestle  in  my  arms,  and  swing  upon  the  shoogy-shoo. 


Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Sweet  and  slow,  swinging  low,  eyes  of  Irish  blue, 
All  my  heart  is  swinging,  dear,  swinging  here  with  you; 
Irish  eyes  are  like  the  flax,  and  mine  are  wet  with  dew, 
Thinking  of  the  old  days  upon  the  shoogy-shoo. 

When  meadow-larks  would  singing  be  in  old  Glentair, 
Was  one  sweet  lass  had  eyes  of  blue  and  tangled  golden  hair; 
She  was  a  wee  bit  girleen  then,  dear  heart,  the  like  of  you. 
When  we  two  swung  the  braes  among,  upon  the  shoogy- 
shoo. 

Ah  well,  the  world  goes  up  and  down,  and  some  sweet  day 
Its  shoogy-shoo  will  swing  us  two  where  sighs  will  pass  away; 
So  nestle  close  your  bonnie  head,  and  close  your  eyes  so 

true. 
And  swing  with  me,  and  memory,  upon  the  shoogy-shoo. 

Sweet  and  slow,  swinging  low,  eyes  of  Irish  blue, 
All  my  heart  is  swinging,  dear,  swinging  here  with  you; 
Irish  eyes  are  like  the  flax,  and  mine  are  wet  with  devv', 
Thinking  of  the  old  days  upon  the  shoogy-shoo. 
Winthrop  Packard  [1862- 

BABYLON 

"  We  shall  meet  again  in  Babylon." 

I'm  going  softly  all  my  years  in  wisdom  if  in  pain — 
For,  oh,  the  music  stirs  my  blood  as  once  it  did  before, 

And  still  I  hear  in  Babylon,  in  Babylon,  in  Babylon, 

The  dancing  feet  in  Babylon,  of  those  who  took  my  floor. 

I'm  going  silent  all  my  years,  but  garnered  in  my  brain 
Is  that  swift  wit  which  used  to  flash  and  cut  them  like  a 
sword — 
And  now  I  hear  in  Babylon,  in  Babylon,  in  Babylon, 

The  foolish  tongues  in  Babylon,  of  those  who  took  my 
word. 

I'm  going  lonely  all  my  days,  who  was  the  first  to  crave 
The  second,  fierce,  unsteady  voice,  that  struggled  to  speak 
free — ■ 

And  now  I  watch  in  Babylon,  in  Babylon,  in  Babylon, 
The  pallid  loves  in  Babylon  of  men  who  once  loved  me. 


The  Triumph  of  Forgotten  Things     449 

I'm  sleeping  early  by  a  flame  as  one  content  and  gray, 
But,  oh,  I  dream  a  dream  of  dreams  beneath  a  winter 
moon, 

I  breathe  the  breath  of  Babylon,  of  Babylon,  of  Babylon, 
The  scent  of  silks  in  Babylon  that  floated  to  a  tune. 

A  band  of  years  has  flogged  me  out — an  exile's  fate  is  mine, 
To  sit  with  mumbling  crones  and  stiU  a  heart  that  cries 
with  youth. 
But,  oh,  to  walk  in  Babylon,  in  Babylon,  in  Babylon, 
The  happy  streets  in  Babylon,  when  once  the  dream  was 
truth. 

Viola  Taylor  [i8 

THE  ROAD   OF  REMEMBRANCE 

The  old  wind  stirs  the  hawthorn  tree; 

The  tree  is  blossoming; 
Northward  the  rgad  runs  to  the  sea, 

And  past  the  House  of  Spring. 

The  folk  go  down  it  unafraid; 

The  still  roofs  rise  before; 
When  you  were  lad  and  I  was  maid. 

Wide  open  stood  the  door. 

Now,  other  children  crowd  the  stair, 

And  hunt  from  room  to  room ; 
Outside,  under  the  hawthorn  fair. 

We  pluck  the  thorny  bloom. 

Out  in  the  quiet  road  we  stand, 

Shut  in  from  wharf  and  mart, 
The  old  wind  blowing  up  the  land, 

The  old  thoughts  at  our  heart. 

Lizette  Woodworth  Reese  [1856- 

THE  TRIUMPH  OF  FORGOTTEN  THINGS 

There  is  a  pity  in  forgotten  things. 

Banished  the  heart  they  can  no  longer  fill, 
Since  restless  Fancy,  spreading  swallow  wings, 
Must  seek  new  pleasures  still! 


450  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

There  is  a  patience,  too,  in  things  forgot; 

They  wait — they  find  the  portal  long  unused; 
And  knocking  there,  it  shall  refuse  them  not, — 
Nor  aught  shall  be  refused! 

Ah,  yes!  though  we,  unheeding  years  on  years, 

In  alien  pledges  spend  the  heart's  estate. 
They  bide  some  blessed  moment  of  quick  tears— 
Some  moment  without  date — • 

Some  gleam  on  flower,  or  leaf,  or  beaded  dew, 
Some  tremble  at  the  ear  of  memoricd  sound 
Of  mother-song, — they  seize  the  slender  clew, — 
The  old  loves  gather  round! 

When  that  which  lured  us  once  now  lureth  not, 

But  the  tired  hands  their  garnered  dross  let  fall, 
This  is  the  triumph  of  the  things  forgot — 
To  hear  the  tired  heart  call! 

And  they  are  with  us  at  Life's  farthest  reach, 

A  light  when  into  shadow  all  else  dips, 
As,  in  the  stranger's  land,  their  native  speech 
Returns  to  dying  lips! 

Edith  M.  Thomas  [1854- 


IN  THE  TWILIGHT 

Men  say  the  sullen  instrument, 
That,  from  the  Master's  bow. 
With  pangs  of  joy  or  woe. 
Feels  music's  soul  through  every  fibre  sent, 

Whispers  the  ravished  strings 
More  than  he  knew  or  meant ; 
Old  summers  in  its  memory  glow; 
The  secrets  of  the  wind  it  sings; 
It  hears  the  April-loosened  springs; 
And  mixes  with  its  mood 
All  it  dreamed  when  it  stood 
In  the  murmurous  pine- wood 
Long  ago! 


In  the  Twilight  45 

The  magical  moonlight  then 

Steeped  every  bough  and  cone; 
The  roar  of  the  brook  in  the  glen 

Came  dim  from  the  distance  blown; 
The  wind  through  its  glooms  sang  low, 
And  it  swayed  to  and  fro, 
With  delight  as  it  stood, 
In  the  wonderful  wood. 
Long  ago! 

O  my  life,  have  we  not  had  seasons 
That  only  said.  Live  and  rejoice? 
That  asked  not  for  causes  and  reasons. 

But  made  us  all  feeling  and  voice? 
When  we  went  with  the  winds  in  their  blowing. 

When  Nature  and  we  were  peers, 
And  we  seemed  to  share  in  the  flowing 
Of  the  inexhaustible  years? 
Have  we  not  from  the  earth  drawn  juices 
Too  fine  for  earth's  sordid  uses? 
Have  I  heard,  have  I  seen 

All  I  feel,  all  I  know? 
Doth  my  heart  overween? 
Or  could  it  have  been 
Long  ago? 

Sometimes  a  breath  floats  by  me. 
An  odor  from  Dreamland  sent. 
That  makes  the  ghost  seem  nigh  me 
Of  a  splendor  that  came  and  went, 
Of  a  life  lived  somewhere,  I  know  not 

In  what  diviner  sphere. 
Of  memories  that  stay  not  and  go  not,  ■ 
Like  music  heard  once  by  an  ear 
That  cannot  forget  or  reclaim  it, 
A  something  so  shy,  it  would  shame  it 
To  make  it  a  show, 
A  something  too  vague,  could  I  name  it. 
For  others  to  know, 


45^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

As  if  I  had  lived  it  or  dreamed  it, 
As  if  I  had  acted  or  schemed  it, 
Long  ago ! 

And  yet,  could  I  hve  it  over. 

This  life  that  stirs  in  my  biain, 
Could  I  be  both  maiden  and  lover, 
Moon  and  tide,  bee  and  clover, 

As  I  seem  to  have  been,  once  again, 
Could  I  but  speak  it  and  show  it, 
This  pleasure  more  sharp  than  pain, 
That  baffles  and  lures  me  so. 
The  world  should  once  more  have  a  poet, 
Such  as  it  had 
In  the  ages  glad, 

Long  ago! 

James  Russell  Lowell  [1819-1891] 

AN  IMMORALITY 

Sing  we  for  love  and  idleness. 
Naught  else  is  worth  the  having. 
Though  I  have  been  in  many  a  land, 
There  is  naught  else  in  living. 

And  I  would  rather  have  my  sweet. 
Though  rose-leaves  die  of  grieving, 
Than  do  high  deeds  in  Hungary 
To  pass  all  men's  believing. 

Ezra  Pound  [1885- 

THREE  SEASONS 

"A  CUP  for  hope!"  she  said, 
In  springtime  ere  the  bloom  was  old: 
The  crimson  wine  was  poor  and  cold 

By  her  mouth's  richer  red. 

"A  cup  for  love!"  how  low, 
How  soft  the  words;  and  all  the  while 
Her  blush  was  rippling  with  a  smile 

Like  summer  after  snow. 


The  Old   Familiar  Faces  453 

"A  cup  for  memory!" 
Cold  cup  that  one  must  drain  alone: 
While  autumn  winds  are  up  and  moan 

Across  the  barren  sea. 

Hope,  memory,  love: 
Hope  for  fair  morn,  and  love  for  day, 
And  memory  for  the  evening  gray 

And  solitary  dove. 

Christina  Georgina  Rossetti  [1830-1894] 


THE  OLD   FAMILIAR  FACES 

I  HAVE  had  playmates,  I  have  had  companions, 

In  my  days  of  childhood,  in  my  joyful  schooldays, — 

All,  all  are  gone,  the  old  familiar  faces. 

I  have  been  laughing,  I  have  been  carousing, 
Drinking  late,  sitting  late,  with  my  bosom  cronies, — 
All,  all  are  gone,  the  old  familiar  faces. 

I  loved  a  Love  once,  fairest  among  women: 
Closed  are  her  doors  on  me,  I  must  not  see  her, — 
All,  all  are  gone,  the  old  familiar  faces. 

I  have  a  friend,  a  kinder  friend  has  no  man: 
Like  an  ingrate,  I  left  my  friend  abruptly; 
Left  him,  to  muse  on  the  old  familiar  faces. 

Ghost-like,  I  paced  round  the  haunts  of  my  childhood. 
Earth  seemed  a  desert  I  was  bound  to  traverse. 
Seeking  to  find  the  old  familiar  faces. 

Friend  of  my  bosom,  thou  more  than  a  brother, 
Why  wert  not  thou  born  in  my  father's  dwelling? 
So  might  we  talk  of  the  old  familiar  faces — 

How  some  they  have  died,  and  some  they  have  left  me, 
And  some  are  taken  from  me;  all  are  departed, — 
All,  all  are  gone,  the  old  familiar  faces. 

Charles  Lamb  [i 775-1 834] 


454  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


THE  LIGHT  OF  OTHER  DAYS 

Oft  in  the  stilly  night, 

Ere  Slumber 's  chain  hath  bound  me, 
Fond  memory  brings  the  light 
Of  other  days  around  me: 
The  smiles,  the  tears. 
Of  boyhood 's  years, 
The  words  of  love  then  spoken; 
The  eyes  that  shone, 
Now  dimmed  and  gone. 
The  cheerful  hearts  now  broken! 
Thus  in  the  stilly  night, 

Ere  Slumber's  chain  hath  bound  me>; ;/ ;;  ] 
Sad  Memory  brings  the  light  f,  r^m  nl 

Of  other  days  around  me. 

When  I  remember  all                    ,  /      „  j  r 

The  friends,  so  hnked  together,,  ,  _      .,  .._.. 
I've  seen  around  me  fall, 

Like  leaves  in  wintry  weather, 

I  feel  like  one  ,.  ^gyol  J 

Who  treads  alone  ,  ^.  ^gsoj^j 

Some  banquet-hall  deserted,  ,y  jj^  ||^ 

Whose  lights  are  fled, 

Whose  garlands  dead,  n  3V£ri  1 

And  all  but  he  departed!  '<  nn  o>(IJ 

Thus  in  the  stilly  night. 

Ere  Slumber's  chain  hath  bound  me, 

Sad  Memory  brings  the  light  oriO 

Of  other  days  around  me.  ' 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 

"TEARS,   IDLE  TEARS "^^^  ^o  bnaiiT 

From     The  Princess  ^ 

Tears,  idle  tears,  I  know  not  what  they  mean. 
Tears  from  the  depth  of  some  divine  despajr  v.un 
Rise  in  the  heart  and  gather  to  the  eyes„-no8  bnA 
In  looking  on  the  happy  Autumn-fields,  [{/^ 

And  thinking  of  the  days  that  are  no  more. 


The  Pet  Name  455 

Fresh  as  the  first  beam  glittering  on  a  sail, 
That  brings  our  friends  up  from  the  underworld, 
Sad  as  the  last  which  reddens  over  one 
That  sinks  with  all  we  love  below  the  verge; 
So  sad,  so  fresh,  the  days  that  are  no  more. 

Ah,  sad  and  strange  as  in  dark  summer  dawns 

The  earliest  pipe  of  half-awakened  birds 

To  dying  ears,  when  unto  dying  eyes 

The  casement  slowly  grows  a  glimmering  square; 

So  sad,  so  strange,  the  days  that  are  no  more. 

Dear  as  remembered  kisses  after  death, 
And  sweet  as  those  by  hopeless  fancy  feigned 
On  hps  that  are  for  others;  deep  as  love,  >^ 
Deep  as  first  love,  and  wild  with  all  regret; 
O  Death  in  Life,  the  days  that  are  no  more! 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


THE   PET  NAME 

"...     the  name 
Which  from  their  lips  seemed  a  caress." 

— Miss  Milford's  "  Dramatic  Scenes  ' 

I  HAVE  a  name,  a  little  name, 

Uncadenced  for  the  ear, 
Unhonored  by  ancestral  claim, 
Unsanctified  by  prayer  and  psalm 

The  solemn  font  anear. 

It  never  did  to  pages  wove 

For  gay  romance  belong; 
It  never  dedicate  did  move 
As  "Sacharissa  "  unto  love, 

"Orinda  "  unto  song. 

Though  1  write  books,  it  will  be  read 

Upon  the  leaves  of  none, 
And  afterward,  when  I  am  dead, 
Will  ne'er  be  graved  for  sight  or  tread. 

Across  my  funeral-stone. 


456  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


.bf- 


This  name,  whoever  chance  to  call, 

Perhaps  your  smile  may  win: 
Nay,  do  not  smile!  mine  eyelids  fall 
Over  mine  eyes  and  feel  withal 

The  sudden  tears  within. 

Is  there  a  leaf,  that  greenly  grows '^  hr.p  ,rfA 
Where  summer  meadows  bloom, 

But  gathereth  the  winter  snows. 

And  changcth  to  the  hue  of  those,  flT 

If  lasting  till  they  come?  -  o?, 

Is  there  a  word,  or  jest,  or  game. 

But  time  incrusteth  round 
With  sad  associate  thoughts  the  same? 
And  so  to  me  my  very  name 

Assumes  a  mournful  sound. 

My  brother  gave  that  name  to  me 

When  we  were  children  twain. 
When  names  acquired  baptismally 
Were  hard  to  utter,  as  to  see 

That  life  had  any  pain. 

No  shade  was  on  us  then,  save  one 

Of  chestnuts  from  the  hill; 
And  through  the  word  our  laugh  did  run 
As  part  thereof:  the  mirth  being  done, 

He  calls  me  by  it  still. 

Nay,  do  not  smile!    I  hear  in  it 

What  none  of  you  can  hear, — 
The  talk  upon  the  willow  seat. 
The  bird  and  wind  that  did  repeat    Z 

Around,  our  human  cheer. 

I  hear  the  birthday's  noisy  bliss 

My  sisters'  woodland  glee. 
My  father's  praise  I  did  not  miss 
When  stooping  down,  he  cared  to  kiss 

The  poet  at  his  knee, — 


i 


Threescore  and  Ten  457 

And  voices  which,  to  name  me,  aye 
Their  tenderest  tones  were  keeping, — 

To  some  I  nevermore  can  say 

An  answer  till  God  wipes  away 
In  heaven  these  drops  of  weeping. 

My  name  to  me  a  sadness  wears: 

No  murmurs  cross  my  mind — 
Now  God  be  thanked  for  these  thick  tears. 
Which  show,  of  those  departed  years, 

Sweet  memories  left  behind. 

Now  God  be  thanked  for  years  enwrought 

With  love  which  softens  yet : 
Now  God  be  thanked  for  every  thought 
Which  is  so  tender  it  has  caught 

Earth 's  guerdon  of  regret. 

Earth  saddens,  never  shall  remove 

Affections  purely  given; 
And  e'en  that  mortal  grief  shall  prove 
The  immortality  of  love, 

And  heighten  it  with  Heaven. 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [i  806-1861] 


THREESCORE  AND   TEN 

Who  reach  their  threescore  years  and  ten, 

As  I  have  mine,  without  a  sigh, 
Are  either  more  or  less  than  men — 
Not  such  am  I. 

I  am  not  of  them;  life  to  me 

Has  been  a  strange,  bewildering  dream, 
Wherein  I  knew  not  things  that  be 
From  things  that  seem. 

I  thought,  I  hoped,  I  knew  one  thing, 

And  had  one  gift,  when  I  was  young — ^ 
The  impulse  and  the  power  to  sing, 
And  so  I  sung. 


458  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

To  have  a  place  in  the  high  choir 

Of  poets,  and  deserve  the  same — 
What  more  could  mortal  man  desire 
Than  poet's  fame? 

I  sought  it  long,  but  never  found; 

The  choir  so  full  was  and  so  strong     /I 
The  jubilant  voices  there,  they  drowned 
My  simple  song. 

Men  would  not  hear  me  then,  and  now 

I  care  not,  I  accept  my  fate. 
When  white  hairs  thatch  the  furrowed  brow 
Crowns  come  too  late! 

The  best  of  life  went  long  ago 

From  me;  it  was  not  much  at  best; 
Only  the  love  that  young  hearts  know, 

The  dear  unrest.  .^ 

Back  on  my  past,  through  gathering  tears. 

Once  more  I  cast  my  eyes,  and  see 
Bright  shapes  that  in  my  better  years 
Surrounded  me! 

They  left  me  here,  they  left  me  there. 

Went  down  dark  pathways,  one  by  one— 
The  wise,  the  great,  the  young,  the  fair; 
But  I  went  on. 

And  I  go  on!     And  bad  or  good, 
The  old  allotted  years  of  men 
I  have  endured  as  best  I  could. 
Threescore  and  ten! 

Richard  Henry  Stoddard  [1825-1903] 


RAIN  ON  THE  ROOF 

When  the  humid  shadows  hover 
Over  aU  the  starry  spheres, 

And  the  melancholy  darkness 
Gently  weeps  in  rainy  tears. 


i 


Rain  on  the   Roof     ^i  459 

What  a  bliss  to  press  the  pillow 

Of  a  cottage-chamber  bed, 
And  to  listen  to  the  patter 

Of  the  soft  rain  overhead! 

Every  tinkle  on  the  shingles 

Has  an  echo  in  the  heart; 
And  a  thousand  dreamy  fancies 

Into  busy  being  start, 
And  a,  thousand  recollections 

Weave  their  air-threads  into  woof, 
As  I  listen  to  the  patter 

Of  the  rain  upon  the  roof. 

Now  in  memory  comes  my  mother, 

As  she  used,  in  years  agone, 
To  regard  the  darling  dreamers 

Ere  she  left  them  till  the  dawn;. 
And  I  feel  her  fond  look  on  me. 

As  I  list  to  this  refrain 
Which  is  played  upon  the  shingles 

By  the  patter  of  the  rain. 

Then  my  Httle  seraph  sister, 

With  her  wings  and  waving  hair, 
And  her  star-eyed  cherub  brother-^  '  -''''- 

A  serene  angelic  pair — 
Glide  around  my  wakeful  pillow, 

With  their  praise  or  mild  reproof. 
As  I  listen  to  the  murmur 

Of  the  soft  rain  on  the  roof. 

And  another  comes,  to  thrill  me 

With  her  eyes'  delicious  blue; 
And  I  mind  not,  musing  on  her, 

That  her  heart  was  all  untrue: 
I  remember  but  to  love  her 

With  a  passion  kin  to  pain. 
And  my  heart's  quick  pulses  vibrate 

To  the  patter  of  the  rain. 


460  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Art  hath  naught  of  tone  or  cadence 

That  can  work  with  such  a  speil 
In  the  soul's  mysterious  fountains, 

Whence  the  tears  of  rapture  well, 
As  that  melody  of  nature, 

That  subdued,  subduing  strain 
Which  is  played  upon  the  shingles 

By  the  patter  of  the  rain. 

Coates  Kinney  [1826-1904I 


ALONE  BY  THE  HEARTH 

Here,  in  my  snug  little  fire-ht  chamber, 

Sit  I  alone: 
And,  as  I  gaze  in  the  coals,  I  remember 

Days  long  agone. 
Saddening  it  is  when  the  night  has  descended, 

Thus  to  sit  here. 
Pensively  musing  on  episodes  ended 

Many  a  year. 

Still  in  my  visions  a  golden-haired  glory 

Flits  to  and  fro; 
She  whom  I  loved— but  'tis  just  the  old  story: 

Dead,  long  ago. 
'Tis  but  a  wraith  of  love;  yet  I  linger 

(Thus  passion  errs) , 
Foolishly  kissing  the  ring  on  my  finger — 

Once  it  was  hers. 

Nothing  has  changed  since  her  spirit  departed, 

Here,  in  this  room 
Save  I,  who,  weary,  and  half  broken-hearted, 

Sit  in  the  gloom. 
Loud  'gainst  the  window  the  winter  rain  dashes, 

Dreary  and  cold; 
Over  the  floor  the  red  fire-light  flashes 

Just  as  of  old. 


The  Old   Man   Dreams  461 

Just  as  of  old — but  the  embers  are  scattered, 

Whose  ruddy  blaze 
Flashed  o  'er  the  floor  where  the  fairy  feet  pattered 

In  other  days! 
Then,  her  dear  voice,  like  a  silver  cliime  ringing, 

Melted  away; 
Often  these  walls  have  re-echoed  her  singing, 

Now  hushed  for  aye! 

Why  should  love  bring  naught  but  sorrow,  I  wonder? 

Everything  dies! 
Time  and  death,  sooner  or  later,  must  sunder 

Holiest  ties. 
Years  have  rolled  by;  I  am  wiser  and  older — 

Wiser,  but  yet 
Not  till  my  heart  and  its  feelings  grow  colder, 

Can  I  forget. 

So,  in  my  snug  little  fire-lit  chamber. 

Sit  I  alone; 
And,  as  I  gaze  in  the  coals,  I  remember 

Days  long  agone! 

George  Ar?!old  [1834-1865] 


THE  OLD   MAN  DREAMS 

Oh  for  one  hour  of  youthful  joy! 

Give  back  my  twentieth  spring! 
I  'd  rather  laugh,  a  bright-haired  boy, 

Than  reign,  a  gray-beard  king. 

Off  with  the  spoils  of  wrinkled  age! 

Away  with  Learning's  crown! 
Tear  out  life's  Wisdom-written  page, 

And  dash  its  trophies  down! 

One  moment  let  my  life-blood  stream 
From  boyhood's  fount  of  flame! 

Give  me  one  giddy,  reeling  dream 
Of  life  all  love  and  fame! 


462  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

My  listening  angel  heard  the  prayer, 
And,  calmly  smiling,  said, 

"If  I  but  touch  thy  silvered  hair, 
Thy  hasty  wish  hath  sped. 

"But  is  there  nothing  in  thy  track 
To  bid  thee  fondly  stay, 

While  the  swift  seasons  hurry  back 
To  find  the  wished-for  day?" 

"Ah,  truest  soul  of  womankind! 

Without  thee  what  were  life? 
One  bliss  I  cannoi  leave  behind: 

I'll  take — my — precious — wife!" 

The  angel  took  a  sapphire  pen 
And  wrote  in  rainbow  dew. 

The  man  would  he  a  hoy  again, 
And  he  a  Imshand,  too! 

"And  is  there  nothing  yet  unsaid, 
Before  the  change  appears? 

Remember,  all  their  gifts  have  fled 
With  those  dissolving  years." 

"Why,  yes;"  for  memory  would  recall 

My  fond  paternal  joys; 
"I  could  not  bear  to  leave  them  all — 

I'll  take — my — girl — and — boys." 

The  smiling  angel  dropped  his  pen,— 
"Why,  this  will  never  do; 

The  man  would  be  a  boy  again, 
And  be  a  father,  too!" 


And  so  I  laughed, — my  laughter  woke 

The  household  with  its  noise, — 
And  wrote  my  dream,  when  morning  broke, 

To  please  the  gray-haired  boys. 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [1809-1804] 


The  Garret  •46'} 


THE  GARRET* 

AFTER    BERANGER 

With  pensive  eyes  the  little  room  I  view, 

Where,  in  my  youth,  I  weathered  it  so  long; 
With  a  wild  mistress,  a  stanch  friend  or  two, 

And  a  light  heart  still  breaking  into  song: 
Making  a  mock  of  life,  and  all  its  cares, 

Rich  in  the  glory  of  my  rising  sun, 
Lightly  I  vaulted  up  four  pair  of  stairs. 

In  the  brave  days  when  I  was  twenty-one. 

Yes;  'tis  a  garret — let  him  know't  who  will — 

There  was  my  bed — full  hard  it  was  and  small; 
My  table  there — and  I  decipher  still 

Half  a  lame  couplet  charcoaled  on  the  wall. 
Ye  joys,  that  Time  hath  swept  with  him  away, 

Come  to  mine  eyes,  ye  dreams  of  love  and  fun; 
For  you  I  pawned  my  watch  how  many  a  day, 

In  the  brave  days  when  I  was  twenty-one. 

And  see  my  little  Jessy,  first  of  all; 

She  comes  with  pouting  lips  and  sparkling  eyes: 
Behold,  how  roguishly  she  pins  her  shawl 

Across  the  narrow  casement,  curtain-wise; 
Now  by  the  bed  her  petticoat  glides  down. 

And  when  did  woman  look  the  worse  in  none? 
I  have  heard  since  who  paid  for  many  a  gown, 

In  the  brave  days  when  I  was  twenty-one. 

One  jolly  evening,  when  my  friends  and  I 

Made  happy  m.usic  Vv^ith  our  songs  and  cheers, 
A  shout  of  triumph  mounted  up  thus  high, 

And  distant  cannon  opened  on  our  ears: 
We  rise, — we  join  in  the  triumphant  strain, — 

Napoleon  conquers — Austerlitz  is  won — 
Tyrants  shall  never  tread  us  down  again. 

In  the  brave  days  when  I  was  twenty-one. 
*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3839. 


464  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Let  us  begone — the  place  is  sad  and  strange — 

How  far,  far  off,  these  happy  times  appear; 
All  that  I  have  to  live  I'd  gladly  change 

For  one  such  month  as  I  have  wasted  here — 
To  draw  long  dreams  of  beauty,  love,  and  power, 

From  founts  of  hope  that  never  will  outrun. 
And  drink  all  life's  quintessence  in  an  hour, 

Give  me  the  days  when  I  was  twenty-one! 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863! 

AULD  LANG  SYNE 

Should  auld  acquaintance  be  forgot, 

And  never  brought  to  min'? 
Should  auld  acquaintance  be  forgot, 

And  days  o'  lang  syne? 

For  auld  lang  syne,  my  dear, 

For  auld  lang  syne. 
We'll  tak  a  cup  o'  kindness  yet 

For  auld  lang  syne. 

We  twa  hae  rin  about  the  braes, 

And  pu'd  the  gowans  fine; 
But  we've  wandered  monie  a  weary  fit 

Sin'  auld  lang  syne. 

We  twa  hae  paidl't  i'  the  burn, 

Frae  mornin'  sun  till  dine; 
But  seas  between  us  braid  hae  roared 

Sin'  auld  lang  syne. 

And  here's  a  hand,  my  trusty  fiere. 

And  gie's  a  hand  o'  thine; 
And  we'll  tak  a  right  guid  willie-waught 

For  auld  lang  syne. 

And  surely  ye'll  be  your  pmt-stowp, 

And  surely  I'll  be  mine. 
And  we'll  tak  a  cup  0'  kindness  yet 

For  auld  lang  syne! 

Robert  Burns  [i  759-1 796] 


I 


Rock  Me  To  Sleep  465 


ROCK  ME   TO  SLEEP 

Backward,  turn  backward,  O  Time,  in  your  flight, 
Make  me  a  child  again,  just  for  to-night! 
Mother,  come  back  from  the  echoless  shore. 
Take  me  again  to  your  heart  as  of  yore; 
Kiss  from  my  forehead  the  furrows  of  care, 
Smooth  the  few  silver  threads  out  of  my  hair; 
Over  my  slumbers  your  loving  watch  keep; — 
Rock  me  to  sleep,  mother, — rock  me  to  sleep! 

Backward,  flow  backward,  O  tide  of  the  years! 
I  am  so  weary  of  toil  and  of  tears, — 
Toil  without  recompense,  tears  all  in  vain, — 
Take  them,  and  give  me  my  childhood  again! 
I  have  grown  weary  of  dust  and  decay, — 
Weary  of  flinging  my  soul-wealth  away; 
Weary  of  sowing  for  others  to  reap;^ 
Rock  me  to  sleep,  mother, — rock  me  to  sleep! 

Tired  of  the  hollow,  the  base,  the  untrue, 
Mother,  O  mother,  my  heart  calls  for  you! 
Many  a  summer  th-e  grass  has  grown  green, 
Blossomed  and  faded,  our  faces  between: 
Yet,  with  strong  yearning  and  passionate  pain, 
Long  I  to-night  for  your  presence  again. 
Come  from  the  silence  so  long  and  so  deep; — 
Rock  me  to  sleep,  mother, —  rock  me  to  sleep! 

Over  my  heart,  in  the  days  that  are  flown. 
No  love  like  mother-love  ever  has  shone; 
No  other  worship  abides  and  endures, — 
Faithful,  unselfish,  and  patient,  like  yours: 
None  like  a  mother  can  charm  away  pain 
From  the  sick  soul  and  the  world-weary  brain. 
Slumber's  soft  calms  o'er  my  heavy  lids  creep;— 
Rock  me  to  sleep,  mother, — rock  me  to  sleep! 

Come,  let  your  brown  hair,  just  lighted  with  gold, 
Fafl  on  your  shoulders  again  as  of  old; 


466  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

Let  it  drop  over  my  forehead  to-night, 
Shading  my  faint  eyes  away  from  the  Hght; 
For  with  its  sunny-edged  shadows  once  more 
Haply  will  throng  the  sweet  visions  of  yore; 
Lovingly,  softly,  its  bright  billows  sweep;- — 
Pock  me  to  sleep,  mother, — rock  me  to  sleep! 

Mother,  dear  mother,  the  years  have  been  long 
Since  I  last  listened  your  lullaby  song: 
Sing,  then,  and  unto  my  soul  it  shall  seem 
Womanhood's  years  have  been  only  a  dream. 
Clasped  to  your  heart  in  a  loving  embrace. 
With  yoiir  light  lashes  just  sweeping  my  face, 
Never  hereafter  to  wake  or  to  weep; — 
Rock  me  to  sleep,  mother, — rock  me  to  sleep! 

Elizabeth  A kcrs  [  1 83  2- 1 9 1 1] 

THE  BUCKET 

How  dear  to  this  heart  are  the  scenes  of  my  childhood. 

When  fond  recollection  presents  them  to  view! 
The  orchard,  the  meadow,  the  deep-tangled  wild-wood, 

And  every  loved  spot  which  my  infancy  knew! 
The  wide-spreading  pond,  and  the  mill  that  stood  by  it, 

The  bridge,  and  the  rock  where  the  cataract  fell. 
The  cot  of  my  father,  the  dairy-house  nigh  it. 

And  e'en  the  rude  bucket  that  hung  in  the  well — 
The  old  oaken  bucket,  the  iron-bound  bucket, 
The  moss-covered  bucket  which  hung  in  the  well. 

That  moss-covered  vessel  I  hailed  as  a  treasure, 

For  often  at  noon,  when  returned  from  the  field, 
I  found  it  the  source  of  an  exquisite  pleasure, 

The  purest  and  sweetest  that  nature  can  yield. 
How  ardent  I  seized  it,  with  hands  that  were  glowing, 

And  quick  to  the  white-pebbled  bottom  it  fell;    ^ 
Then  soon,  with  the  emblem  of  truth  overflowing, 

And  dripping  with  coolness,  it  rose  from  the  well — 
The  old  oaken  bucket,  the  iron-bound  bucket, 
The  moss-covered  bucket  arose  from  the  \yell., .,,  ,,,  , 


The  Grape-Vine  Swing  467 

How  sweet  from  the  green  mossy  brim  to  receive  it, 

As  poised  on  the  curb  it  inclined  to  my  Hps! 
Not  a  full  blushing  goblet  would  tempt  me  to  leave  it, 

The  brightest  that  beauty  or  revelry  sips. 
And  now,  far  removed  from  the  loved  habitation, 

The  tear  of  regret  will  intrusively  swell, 
As  fancy  reverts  to  my  father's  plantation, 

And  sighs  for  the  bucket  that  hangs  in  the  well — 
The  old  oaken  bucket,  the  iron-bound  bucket. 
The  moss-covered  bucket  that  hangs  in  the  well! 

Samuel  Woodwortli  [1785-1842] 

THE   GRAPE-VINE  SWING 

Lithe  and  long  as  the  serpent  train. 

Springing  and  clinging  from  tree  to  tree. 
Now  darting  upward,  now  down  again. 

With  a  twist  and  a  twirl  that  are  strange  to  see; 
Never  took  serpent  a  deadlier  hold. 

Never  the  cougar  a  wilder  spring. 
Strangling  the  oak  with  the  boa's  fold, 

Spanning  the  beach  with  the  condor's  wing. 

Yet  no  foe  that  we  fear  to  seek, — 

The  boy  leaps  wild  to  thy  rude  embrace; 
Thy  bulging  arms  bear  as  soft  a  cheek 

As  ever  on  lover's  breast  found  place; 
On  thy  waving  train  is  a  playful  hold 

Thou  shalt  never  to  lighter  grasp  persuade; 
While  a  maiden  sits  in  thy  drooping  fold, 

And  swings  and  sings  in  the  noondrfy  shade! 

0  giant  strange  of  our  Southern  woods! 

I  dream  of  thee  still  in  the  well-known  spot, 
Though  our  vessel  strains  o'er  the  ocean  floods, 
And  the  Northern  forest  beholds  thee  not ; 

1  think  of  thee  still  with  a  sweet  regret. 

As  the  cordage  yields  to  my  playful  grasp, — 
Dost  thou  spring  and  cling  in  our  woodlands  yet? 
Does  the  maiden  still  swing  in  thy  giant  clasp? 

William  Gilmore  Simms  [1S06-1870] 


468  Poems   of  Youth  and   Age 


THE  OLD  SWIMMIN'-HOLE 

Oh!  the  old  swimmin'-hole!  whare  the  crick  so  still  and  deep 
Looked  like  a  baby-river  that  was  laying  half  asleep, 
And  the  gurgle  of  the  worter  round  the  drift  jest  below 
Sounded  like  the  laugh  of  something  we  onc't  ust  to  know 
Before  we  could  remember  anything  but  the  eyes 
Of  the  angels  lookin'  out  as  we  left  Paradise; 
But  the  merry  days  of  youth  is  beyond  our  controle, 
And  it's  hard  to  part  ferever  with  the  old  swimmin'-hole. 

Oh!  the  old  swimmin'-hole!     In  the  happy  days  of  yore, 

When  I  ust  to  lean  above  it  on  the  old  sickamore, 

Oh!  it  showed  me  a  face  in  its  warm  sunny  tide 

That  gazed  back  at  me  so  gay  and  glorified, 

It  made  me  love  myself  as  I  leaped  to  caress 

My  shadder  smilin'  up  at  me  with  sich  tenderness. 

But  them  days  is  past  and  gone,  and  old  Time's  tuck  his  toll 

From  the  old  man  come  back  to  the  old  swimmin'-hole. 

Oh!  the  old  swimmin'-hole!     In  the  long,  lazy  days 
When  the  hum-drum  of  school  made  so  many  run-a-ways, 
How  pleasant  was  the  journey  down  the  old  dusty  lane, 
Whare  the  tracks  of  our  bare  feet  was  all  printed  so  plane 
You  could  tell  by  the  dent  of  the  heel  and  the  sole 
They  was  lots  o'  fun  on  hand  at  the  old  swimmin'-hole. 
But  the  lost  joys  is  past!     Let  your  tears  in  sorrow  roll 
Like  the  rain  that  ust  to  dapple  up  the  old  swimmin'-hole. 

Thare  the  bulrushes  growed,  and  the  cattails  so  tall. 

And  the  sunshine  and  shadder  fell  over  it  all; 

And  it  mottled  the  worter  with  amber  and  gold 

Tel  the  glad  lihes  rocked  in  the  ripples  that  rolled; 

And  the  snake-feeder's  four  gauzy  wings  fluttered  by 

Like  the  ghost  of  a  daisy  dropped  out  of  the  sky. 

Or  a  wownded  apple-blossom  in  the  breeze's  controle 

As  it  cut  acrost  some  orchurd  to'rds  the  old  swimmin'-hole. 

Oh!  the  old  swimmin'-hole!     When  I  last  saw  the  place, 
The  scenes  wai  all  changed,  like  the  change  in  my  face; 


Forty   Years  Ago  469 

The  bridge  of  the  railroad  now  crosses  the  spot 

Whare  the  old  divin'-log  lays  sunk  and  fergot. 

And  I  stray  down  the  banks  whare  the  trees  ust  to  be — 

But  never  again  will  theyr  shade  shelter  me! 

And  I  wish  in  my  sorrow  1  could  strip  to  the  soul. 

And  dive  off  in  my  grave  like  the  old  swimmin'-hole. 

James  Wldlcomb  Riley  [1852-1916) 

FORTY  YEARS  AGO 

I've  wandered  to  the  village,  Tom,  I've  sat  beneath  the  tree, 
Upon  the  schoolhouse  playground,  that  sheltered  you  and 

me; 
But  none  were  there  to  greet  me,  Tom;  and  few  were  left 

to  know, 
Who  played  with  us  upon  that  green  some  forty  years  ago. 

The  grass  is  just  as  green,  Tom;  barefooted  boys  at  play 
Were  sporting,  just  as  we  did  then,  with  spirits  just  as  gay. 
But  the  "master"  sleeps  upon  the  hill,  which,  coated  o'er 

with  snow, 
Afforded  us  a  sliding-place  some  forty  years  ago. 

The  old  schoolhouse  is  altered  some;  the  benches  are  re- 
placed 

By  new  ones,  very  like  the  same  our  jackknives  once  defaced; 

But  the  same  old  bricks  are  in  the  wall,  the  bell  swings  to 
and  fro; 

Its  music's  just  the  same,  dear  Tom,  'twas  forty  years  ago. 

The  boys  were  playing  some  old  game,  beneath  that  same 
old  tree;  ./f  1y)m.  U  iv;  oqoii  i 

1  have  forgot  the  name  just  now — you've  played  the  same 
with  me, 

On  that  same  spot;  'twas  played  with  knives,  by  throwing 
so  and  so; 

The  loser  had  a  task  to  do,  there,  forty  years  ago.         ^ 

The  river's  running  just  as  still;  the  willows  on  its  side 
Are  larger  than  they  were,  Tom;  the  stream  appears  less 
wide; 


^yo  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 

But  the  grape-vine  swing  is  ruined  now,  where  once  we 

played  the  beau, 
And  swung  our  sweetliearts — pretty  girls — just  forty  years 

ago. 

The  spring  that  bubbled  'neath  the  hill,  close  by  the  spread- 
ing beech. 

Is  very  low — 'twas  then  so  high  that  we  could  scarcely 
reach ; 

And,  kneeling  down  to  get  a  drink,  dear  Tom,  I  started  so. 

To  see  how  sadly  I  am  changed  since  forty  years  ago. 

Near  by  that  spring,  upon  an  elm,  j'ou  know  I  cut  your  name, 
Your  sweetheart's  just  beneath  it,  Tom,  and.  you  did  mine 

the  same;  •  iw  br/&lq  ori 

Some  heartless  wretch  has  peeled  the  bark,  'twas  dying  sure 

but  slow, 
Just  as  she  died,  whose  name  you  cut,  some  forty  years 

ago. 

My  lids  have  long  been  dry,  Tom,  but  tears  came  to  my 

eyes; 
I  thought  of  her  I  loved  so  well,  those  early  broken  ties; 
I  visited  the  old  churchyard,  and  took  some  flowers  to 

strow 
Upon  the  graves  of  those  we  loved  some  forty  years  ago. 

Some  are  in  the  churchyard  laid,  some  sleep  beneath  the  sea, 
And  none  are  left  of  our  old  class,  excepting  you  and  me; 
But  when  our  time  shall  come,  Tom,  and  we  are  called  to  go, 
I  hope  we'll  meet  with  those  we  loved  some  forty  years  ago. 

Francis  Hicston  [i8    - 


BEN  BOLT 

Don't  you  remember  sweet  Alice,  Ben  Bolt, — 
Sweet  Alice  whose  hair  was  so  brown. 

Who  wept  with  delight  when  you  gave  her  a  smile, 
And  trembled  with  fear  at  your  frown? 


■f     '•"■  Ben   Bolt  471 

In  the  old  churchyard  in  the  valley,  Ben  Bolt, 

In  a  corner  obscure  and  alone, 
They  have  fitted  a  slab  of  the  granite  so  gray, 

And  Alice  lies  under  the  stone. 

Under  the  hickory  tree,  Ben  Bolt, 

Which  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  hill, 
Together  we  've  lain  in  the  noonday  shade, 

And  listened  to  Appleton's  mill. 
The  mill-wheel  has  fallen  to  pieces,  Ben  Bolt, 

The  rafters  have  tumbled  in. 
And  a  quiet  which  crawls  round  the  walls  as  you  gaze 

Has  followed  the  olden  din. 

Do  you  mind  of  the  cabin  of  logs,  Ben  Bolt. 

At  the  edge  of  the  pathless  wood, 
And  the  button-ball  tree  with  its  motley  limbs. 

Which  nigh  by  the  doorstep  stood? 
The  cabin  to  ruin  has  gone,  Ben  Bolt, 

The  tree  you  would  seek  for  in  vain; 
And  where  once  the  lords  of  the  forest  waved 

Are  grass  and  the  golden  grain. 

And  don 't  you  remember  the  school,  Ben  Bolt, 

With  the  master  so  cruel  and  grim, 
And  the  shaded  nook  in  the  running  brook 

Where  the  children  went  to  swim? 
Grass  grows  on  the  master's  grave,  Ben  Bolt, 

The  spring  of  the  brook  is  dry, 
And  of  all  the  boys  who  were  schoolmates  then 

There  are  only  you  and  I. 

There  is  change  in  the  things  I  loved,  Ben  Bolt, 

They  have  changed  from  the  old  to  the  new; 
But  I  feel  in  the  deeps  of  my  spirit  the  truth. 

There  never  was  change  in  you. 
Twelvemonths  twenty  have  passed,  Ben  Bolt, 

Since  first  we  were  friends — yet  I  hail 
Your  presence  a  blessing,  your  friendship  a  truth, 

Ben  Bolt  of  the  salt -sea  gale. 

Thomas  Dunn  English  [1810-1902] 


47^  Poems  of  Youth  and  Age 


"BREAK,  BREAK,  BREAK" 

Break,  break,  break. 

On  thy  cold  gray  stones,  O  Sea! 
And  I  would  that  my  tongue  could  utter 

The  thoughts  that  arise  in  me. 

O,  well  for  the  fisherman 's  boy, 
That  he  shouts  with  his  sister  at  play! 

O,  well  for  the  sailor  lad. 

That  he  sings  in  his  boat  on  the  bay! 

And  the  stately  ships  go  on. 

To  their  haven  under  the  hill; 
But  O  for  the  touch  of  a  vanished  hand, 

And  the  sound  of  a  voice  that  is  still! 

Break,  break,  break. 

At  the  foot  of  thy  crags,  O  Sea! 
But  the  tender  grace  of  a  day  that  is  dead 

Will  never  come  back  to  me. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


i 


PART  II 
POEMS  OF   LOVE 


EROS 

The  sense  of  the  world  is  short, — 
Long  and  various  the  report, — 

To  love  and  be  beloved; 
Men  and  gods  have  not  outlearned  it; 
And,  how  oft  soe'er  they've  turned  it, 

'Tis  not  to  be  improved. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803- 


i 


"  NOW  WHAT  IS  LOVE  ';^ 

"NOW  WHAT  IS  LOVE" 

Now  what  is  Love,  I  pray  thee,  tell? 
It  is  that  fountain  and  that  well 
Where  pleasure  and  repentance  dwell; 
It  is,  perhaps,  the  sauncing  bell 
That  tolls  all  into  heaven  or  hell; 
And  this  is  Love,  as  I  hear  teU. 

Yet  what  is  Love,  I  prithee,  say? 
It  is  a  work  on  holiday. 
It  is  December  matched  with  May, 
When  lusty  bloods  in  fresh  array 
Hear  ten  months  after  of  the  play; 
And  this  is  Love,  as  I  hear  say. 

Yet  what  is  Love,  good  shepherd,  sain? 
It  is  a  sunshine  mixed  with  rain, 
It  is  a  toothache  or  Like  pain. 
It  is  a  game  where  none  hath  gain; 
The  lass  saith  no,  yet  would  full  fain; 
And  this  is  Love,  as  I  hear  sain. 

Yet,  shepherd,  what  is  Love,  I  pray? 
It  is  a  yes,  it  is  a  nay, 
A  pretty  kind  of  sporting  fray, 
It  is  a  thing  will  soon  away. 
Then,  nymphs,  take  vantage  while  ye  may; 
And  this  is  Love,  as  I  hear  say. 

Yet  what  is  Love,  good  shepherd,  show? 
A  thing  that  creeps,  it  cannot  go, 
A  prize  that  passeth  to  and  fro, 
A  thing  for  one,  a  thing  for  moe. 
And  he  that  proves  shall  fmd  it  so; 
And  shepherd,  this  is  Love,  I  trow. 

Waller  Raleigh  [i5S2?-i6i8] 

475 


476  Poems  of  Love 

WOOING  SONG 

From  "  Christ's  Victory  " 

Love  is  the  blossom  where  there  blows 
Every  thing  that  lives  or  grows: 
Love  doth  make  the  Heavens  to  move, 
And  the  Sun  doth  burn  in  love: 
Love  the  strong  and  weak  doth  yoke, 
And  makes  the  ivy  climb  the  oak, 
Under  whose  shadows  lions  wild, 
Softened  by  love,  grow  tame  and  mild: 
Love  no  medicine  can  appease, 
He  burns  fishes  in  the  seas: 
Not  all  the  skill  his  wounds  can  stench, 
Not  all  the  sea  his  fire  can  quench. 
Love  did  make  the  bloody  spear 
Once  a  leavy  coat  to  wear, 
While  in  his  leaves  there  shrouded  lay 
Sweet  birds,  for  love  that  sing  and  play 
And  of  all  love 's  joyful  flame 
I  the  bud  and  blossom  am. 

Only  bend  thy  knee  to  me, 

Thy  wooing  shall  thy  winning  be! 

See,  see  the  flowers  that  below 
Now  as  fresh  as  morning  blow; 
And  of  all  the  virgin  rose 
That  as  bright  Aurora  shows; 
How  they  all  unleaved  die, 
Losing  their  virginity! 
Like  unto  a  summer  shade, 
But  now  born,  and  now  they  fade. 
Every  thing  doth  pass  away; 
There  is  danger  in  delay: 
Come,  come,  gather  then  the  rose, 
Gather  it,  or  it  you  lose! 
All  the  sand  of  Tagus'  shore 
Into  my  bosom  casts  his  ore: 
All  the  valleys'  swimming  corn 
To  my  house  is  yearly  borne: 


Rosalind's   Madrigal  477 

Every  grape  of  every  vine 

Is  gladly  bruised  to  make  me  wine: 

While  ten  thousand  kings,  as  proud, 

To  carry  up  my  train  have  bowed, 

And  a  world  of  ladies  send  me 

In  my  chambers  to  attend  me: 

All  the  stars  in  Heaven  that  shine, 

And  ten  thousand  more,  are  mine: 
Only  bend  thy  knee  to  me, 
Thy  wooing  shall  thy  winning  be. 

Giles  Fletcher  [i54q?-i6ii] 


ROSALIND'S   MADRIGAL 

From  "  Rosalind" 

Love  in  my  bosom  like  a  bee 

Doth  suck  his  sweet: 
Now  with  his  wings  he  plays  with  me, 

Now  with  his  feet. 
Within  mine  eyes  he  makes  his  nest. 
His  bed  amidst  my  tender  breast; 
My  kisses  are  his  daily  feast, 
And  yet  he  robs  me  of  my  rest: 

Ah!  wanton,  will  ye? 

And  if  1  sleep,  then  percheth  he 

With  pretty  flight. 
And  makes  his  pillow  of  my  knee 

The  livelong  night. 
Strike  I  my  lute,  he  tunes  the  string; 
He  music  plays  if  so  I  sing; 
He  lends  me  every  lovely  thing. 
Yet  cruel  he  my  heart  doth  sting: 

Whist,  wanton,  still  ye! 

Else  I  with  roses  every  day 

Will  whip  you  hence, 
And  bind  you,  when  you  long  to  play. 

For  your  offence. 


478  ■         '  Poems  of  Love 

I'll  shut  mine  eyes  to  keep  you  in;     '^ 
I  '11  make  you  fast  it  for  your  sin; 
I  '11  count  your  power  not  worth  a  pin. 
— ^Alas!  what  hereby  shall  I  win 

If  he  gainsay  me?  i:/; 

What  if  I  beat  the  wanton  boy 

With  many  a  rod? 
He  will  repay  me  with  annoy, 

Because  a  god. 
Then  sit  thou  safely  on  my  knee; 
Then  let  thy  bower  my  bosom  be; 
Lurk  in  mine  eyes,  I  like  of  thee; 
O  Cupid,  so  thou  pity  me, 

Spare  not,  but  play  thee! 

Thomas  Lodge  [1558?- 1625] 


SONG 

From  "  Hymen's  Triumph  " 

Love  is  a  sickness  full  of  woes. 

All  remedies  refusing; 
A  plant  that  with  most  cutting  grows, 
Most  barren  with  best  using. 
Why  so? 
More  we  enjoy  it,  more  it  dies; 
If  not  enjoyed,  it  sighing  cries — 
Heigh  ho! 

Love  is  a  torment  of  the  mind, 

A  tempest  everlasting; 
And  Jove  hath  made  it  of  a  kind 
Not  well,  nor  full  nor  fasting. 
Why  so? 
More  we  enjoy  it,  more  it  dies; 
If  not  enjoyed,  it  sighing  cries — 
Heigh  ho! 

Samuel  Daniel    [1562-1619] 


Venus'    Runaway  47^ 


LOVE'S   PERJURIES 

From  "Love's  Labor's  Lost" 

On  a  day,  alack  the  day! 
Love,  whose  month  is  ever  May, 
Spied  a  blossom  passing  fair 
Playing  in  the  wanton  air: 
Through  the  velvet  leaves  the  wind,' 
All  unseen,  'gan  passage  find; 
That  the  lover,  sick  to  death, 
Wished  himself  the  heaven 's  breath.^^  J 
Air,  quoth  he,  thy  cheeks  may  blow; 
Air,  would  I  might  triumph  so! 
But,  alack,  my  hand  is  sworn 
Ne'er  to  pluck  thee  from  thy  thorn: 
Vow,  alack,  for  youth  unmeet; 
Youth  so  apt  to  pluck  a  sweet. 
Do  not  call  it  sin  in  me 
That  I  am  forsworn  for  thee: 
Thou  for  whom  e  'en  Jove  would  swear 
Juno  but  an  Ethiope  were. 
And  deny  himself  for  Jove, 
Turning  mortal  for  thy  love. 

William  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 


VENUS'   RUNAWAY 

From  "  The  Hue  and  Cry  JKiter  Cupid  " 

Beauties,  have  ye  seen  this  toy, 
Called  Love,  a  little  boy, 
Almost  naked,  wanton,  blind; 
Cruel  now,  and  then  as  kind? 
If  he  be  amongst  ye,  say? 
He  is  Venus'  runaway. 

She  that  will  but  now  discover 
Where  the  winged  wag  doth  hover, 
Shall  to-night  receive  a  kiss, 
How  or  where  herself  would  wish: 


480  Poems  of  Love 

But  who  brings  him  to  his  mother, 
Shall  have  that  kiss,  and  another. 

He  hath  marks  about  him  plenty: 
You  shall  know  him  among  twenty. 
All  his  body  is  a  fire, 
And  his  breath  a  flame  entire. 
That,  being  shot  like  lightning  in, 
Wounds  the  heart,  but  not  the  skin. 

At  his  sight,  the  sun  hath  turned, 
Neptune  in  the  waters  burned; 
Hell  hath  felt  a  greater  heat ; 
Jove  himself  forsook  his  seat: 
From  the  centre  to  the  sky. 
Are  his  trophies  reared  high. 

Wings  he  hath,  which  though  ye  clip, 
He  will  leap  from  lip  to  lip. 
Over  liver,  lights,  and  heart, 
But  not  stay  in  any  part; 
But  if  chance  his  arrow  misses, 
He  will  shoot  himself  in  kisses. 

He  doth  bear  a  golden  bow, 
And  a  quiver,  hanging  low. 
Full  of  arrows,  that  outbrave 
Dian's  shafts;  where,  if  he  have 
Any  head  more  sharp  than  other, 
With  that  first  he  strikes  his  mother. 

Still  the  fairest  are  his  fuel. 
When  his  days  are  to  be  cruel, 
Lovers'  hearts  are  all  his  food. 
And  his  baths  their  warmest  blood: 
Naught  but  wounds  his  hands  doth  season, 
And  he  hates  none  like  to  Reason. 

Trust  him  not ;  his  words,  though  sweet, 
Seldom  with  his  heart  do  meet. 


What  is   Love?  481 

All  his  practice  is  deceit; 
Every  gift  it  is  a  bait; 
Not  a  kiss  but  poison  bears; 
And  most  treason  in  his  tears. 

Idle  minutes  are  his  reign; 

Then,  the  straggler  makes  his  gain 

By  presenting  maids  with  toys, 

And  would  have  ye  think  them  joys: 

'Tis  the  ambition  of  the  elf 

To  have  all  childish  as  himself. 

If  by  these  ye  please  to  know  him, 
Beauties,  be  not  nice,  but  show  him. 
Though  ye  had  a  will  to  hide  him. 
Now,  we  hope,  ye'll  not  abide  him; 
Since  you  hear  his  falser  play. 
And  that  he's  Venus'  runaway. 

Ben  Jonson  [iS73?-i637l 


WHAT  IS  LOVE? 

From  "  The  Captain  " 

Tell  me,  dearest,  what  is  love? 
'Tis  a  lightning  from  above; 
'Tis  an  arrow,  'tis  a  fire, 
'Tis  a  boy  they  call  Desire. 

'Tis  a  grave, 

Gapes  to  have 
Those  poor  fools  that  long  to  prove. 

Tell  me  more,  are  women  true? 
Yes,  some  are,  and  some  as  you. 
Some  are  willing,  some  are  strange. 
Since  you  men  first  taught  to  change. 

And  till  troth 

Be  in  both, 
All  shall  love,  to  love  anew. 


4.Ba  Poems  of  Love 

Tell  me  more  yet,  can  they  grieve? 
Yes,  and  sicken  sore,  but  live, 
And  be  wise,  and  delay,       l  ^  ^^'^ 
When  you  men  are  wise  as  they.  ' 

Then  I  see, 

Faith  will  be  'in  yibi 

Never  till  they  both  believe.  >     'T 

John  Fletcher  [1570-1625] 

LOVE'S  EMBLEMS 

From  "  V'alentinian  " 

Now  the  lusty  spring  is  seen; 

Golden  yellow,  gaudy  blue. 

Daintily  invite  the  view:  ■<.>- 

Everywhere  on  every  green  '^ 

Roses  blushing  as  they  blow, 

And  enticing  men  to  pull. 
Lilies  whiter  than  the  snow,  / 

Woodbines  of  sweet  honey  full: 
All  love's  emblems,  and  all  cry, 
"Ladies,  if  not  plucked,  we  die." 

Yet  the  lusty  spring  hath  stayed; 
Blushing  red  and  purest  white 
Daintily  to  love  invite 
Every  woman,  every  maid: 
Cherries  kissing  as  they  grow, 
And  inviting  men  to  taste. 
Apples  even  ripe  below. 

Winding  gently  to  the  waist: 
All  love's  emblems,  and  all  cry, 
"Ladies,  if  not  plucked,  we  die." 

John  Fletcher  [1579-1625] 

THE   POWER  OF  LOVE 

From  "  Valentinian  " 

Hear,  ye  ladies  that  despise 

What  the  mighty  Love  has  done; 

Fear  examples  and  be  wise: 
Fair  Callisto  was  a  nun; 


Advice  to  a   Lover  483 

Leda,  sailing  on  the  stream 

To  deceive  the  hopes  of  man, 
Love  accounting  but  a  dream, 
Doted  on  a  silver  swan; 
Danae,  in  a  brazen  tower, 
Where  no  love  was,  loved  a  shower. 

Hear,  ye  ladies  that  are  coy, 

What  the  mighty  Love  can  do; 
Fear  the  fierceness  of  the  boy: 

The  chaste  Moon  he  makes  to  woo; 
Vesta,  kindling  holy  fires,  /. 

Circled  round  about  with  spies,  A 

Never  dreaming  loose  desires,  r 

Doting  at  the  altar  dies;  ■>] 

Ilion,  in  a  short  hour,  higher 
He  can  build,  and  once  more  fire. 

John  Fletcher  [1579-1625] 

ADVICE  TO  A  LOVER 

The  sea  hath  many  thousand  sands, 
The  sun  hath  motes  as  many; 
The  sky  is  full  of  stars,  and  Love 
As  full  of  woes  as  any: 
Believe  me,  that  do  know  the  elf, 
And  make  no  trial  by  thyself! 

It  is  in  truth  a  pretty  toy 

For  babes  to  play  withal : 

But  O,  the  honies  of  our  youth 

Are  oft  our  age's  gall: 

Self-proof  in  time  will  make  thee  know 

He  was  a  prophet  told  thee  so: 

A  prophet  that,  Cassandra-like,  , . j 

Tells  truth  without  belief; 
For  headstrong  Youth  will  run  his  race, 
Although  his  goal  be  grief : —  '■ 

Love's  Martyr,  when  his  heat  is  past,      ' 
Proves  Care's  Confessor  at  the  last. 

Unknown 


^8(4  Poems  of  Love 


LOVE'S  HOROSCOPE 

Love,  brave  Virtue's  younger  brother,   i 
Erst  hath  made  my  heart  a  m.othqr, 
She  consults  the  anxious  spheres, 
To  calculate  her  young  son's  years; 
She  asks  if  sad  or  saving  powers 
Gave  omen  to  his  infant  hours; 
She  asks  each  star  that  then  stood  by 
If  poor  Love  shall  live  or  die. 

Ah,  my  heart!  is  that  the  way? 

Are  these  the  beams  that  rule  thy  day? 

Thou  know'st  a  face  in  whose  each  look 

Beauty  lays  ope  Love's  fortune-book, 

On  whose  fair  revolutions  wait 

The  obsequious  motions  of  Love's  fate. 

Ah,  my  heart!  her  eyes  and  she 

Have  taught  thee  new  astrology. 

Howe'er  Love's  native  hours  were  set, 

Whatever  starry  synod  met, 

'Tis  in  the  mercy  of  her  eye. 

If  poor  Love  shall  live  or  die. 

If  those  sharp  rays,  putting  on 

Points  of  death,  bid  Love  be  gone; — 

Though  the  heavens  in  council  sate 

To  crown  an  uncontrolled  fate; 

Though  their  best  aspects  twined  upon 

The  kindest  constellation. 

Cast  amorous  glances  on  its  birth. 

And  whispered  the  confederate  earth 

To  pave  his  paths  with  all  the  good 

That  warms  the  bed  of  youth  and  blood:— 

Love  has  no  plea  against  her  eye; 

Beauty  frowns,  and  Love  must  die. 

•1 
But  if  her  milder  influence  move,  ..j,/.^ 
And  gild  the  hopes  of  humble  Love|r^-,, j 
Though  heaven's  inauspicious  eye  jvoi<I 
Lay  black  on  Love's  nativity; 


"Ah,  How  Sweet  It  Is  To   Love"     485 

Though  every  diamond  in  Jove's  crown 
Fixed  his  forehead  to  a  frown; — 
Her  eye  a  strong  appeal  can  give, 
Beauty  smiles,  and  Love  shall  live. 

0,  if  Love  shall  live,  O  where, 
But  in  her  eye,  or  in  her  ear. 
In  her  breast,  or  in  her  breath. 
Shall  I  hide  poor  Love  from  death? 
For  in  the  life  aught  else  can  give, 
Love  shall  die,  although  he  live. 

Or,  if  Love  shall  die,  O  where, 
But  in  her  eye,  or  in  her  ear, 
In  her  breath,  or  in  her  breast, 
Shall  I  build  his  funeral  nest? 
While  Love  shall  thus  entombed  lie, 
Love  shall  live,  although  he  die! 

Richard  Crashaw  [i6i3?-i64g] 


'AH,  HOW   SWEET  IT  IS  TO  LOVE!' 

From  "Tyrannic  Love" 

Ah,  how  sweet  it  is  to  love! 

Ah,  how  gay  is  young  Desire! 
And  what  pleasing  pains  we  prove 

When  we  first  approach  Love's  fire! 
Pains  of  Love  be  sweeter  far 
Than  all  other  pleasures  are. 

Sighs  which  are  from  lovers  blown 
Do  but  gently  heave  the  heart: 

Even  the  tears  they  shed  alone 

Cure,  like  trickling  balm,,  their  smart: 

Lovers,  when  they  lose  their  breath, 

Bleed  away  in  easy  death. 

Love  and  Time  with  reverence  use, 
Treat  them  like  a  parting  friend; 

Nor  the  golden  gifts  refuse 

Which  in  youth  sincere  they  send: 


486  Poems  of  Love 

For  each  year  their  price  is  more, 
And  they  less  simple  than  before. 

Love,  like  spring-tides  full  and  high, 
Swells  in  every  youthful  vein; 

But  each  tide  does  less  supply, 
Till  they  quite  shrink  in  again: 

If  a  flow  in  age  appear, 

'Tis  but  rain,  and  runs  not  clear. 

John  Dryden  [i 631-1700] 

SONG 

Love  still  has  something  of  the  sea. 

From  whence  his  Mother  rose; 
No  time  his  slaves  from  doubt  can  free. 

Nor  give  their  thoughts  repose. 

They  are  becalmed  in  clearest  days, 

And  in  rough  weather  tossed; 
They  wither  under  cold  delays, 

Or  are  in  tempests  lost. 

One  while  they  seem  to  touch  the  port, 

Then  straight  into  the  main 
Some  angry  wind,  in  cruel  sport, 

The  vessel  drives  again. 

At  first  Disdain  and  Pride  they  fear, 

Which  if  they  chance  to  'scape. 
Rivals  and  Falsehood  soon  appear, 

In  a  more  dreadful  shape. 

By  such  degrees  to  joy  they  come, 

And  are  so  long  withstood, 
So  slowly  they  receive  the  sun. 

It  hardly  does  them  good. 

'Tis  cruel  to  prolong  a  pain; 

And  to  defer  a  joy. 
Believe  me,  gentle  Celemene, 

Offends  the  winged  boy. 


Song  487 

An  hundred  thousand  oaths  your  fears, 

Perhaps,  would  not  remove; 
And  if  I  gazed  a  thousand  years, 

I  could  not  deeper  love. 

Charles  Scdlcy  [i63g?-i7io] 

THE  VINE 

The  wine  of  Love  is  music, 

And  the  feast  of  Love  is  song: 
And  when  Love  sits  down  to  the  banquet, 

Love  sits  long: 

Sits  long  and  arises  drunken, 

But  not  with  the  feast  and  the  wine; 

He  reeleth  with  his  own  heart, 
That  great,  rich  Vine. 

James  Thomson  [1S34-1SS2] 

SONG 

Fain  would  I  change  that  note 

To  which  fond  love  hath  charmed  me. 

Long,  long  to  sing  by  rote, 

Fanc3ang  that  that  harmed  me: 

Yet  when  this  thought  doth  come, — 

Love  is  the  perfect  sum 
Of  all  delight. 

I  have  no  other  choice 

Either  for  pen  or  voice 
To  sing  or  write. 

0  love,  they  wrong  thee  much 
That  say  thy  sweet  is  bitter 

When  thy  rich  fruit  is  such 

As  nothing  can  be  sweeter. 
Fair  house  of  joy  and  bUss 
Where  truest  pleasure  is, 

I  do  adore  thee: 

1  know  thee  what  thou  art, 

I  serve  thee  with  my  heart, 

And  fall  before  thee. 

Unknown 


488  Poems  of  Love 


CUPID   STUNG 

Cupid  once  upon  a  bed 
Of  roses  laid  his  weary  head; 
Luckless  urchin,  not  to  see 
Within  the  leaves  a  slumbering  bee. 
The  bee  awaked — with  anger  wild 
The  bee  awaked,  and  stung  the  child. 
Loud  and  piteous  are  his  cries; 
To  Venus  quick  he  runs,  he  flies; 
"Oh  Mother!    I  am  wounded  through — ' 
I  die  with  pain — in  sooth  I  do! 
Stung  by  some  little  angry  thing, 
Some  serpent  on  a  tiny  wing — 
A  bee  it  was — for  once,  I  know, 
I  heard  a  rustic  call  it  so." 
Thus  he  spoke,  and  she  the  while 
Heard  him  with  a  soothing  smile; 
Then  said,  "My  infant,  if  so  much 
Thou  feel  the  little  wild  bee's  touch, 
How  must  the  heart,  ah,  Cupid!  be, 
The  hapless  heart  that's  stung  by  thee!" 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 


CUPID   DROWNED 

T'other  day,  as  I  was  twining 

Roses,  for  a  crown  to  dine  in, 

What,  of  all  things,  'mid  the  heap, 

Should  I  light  on,  fast  asleep, 

But  the  little  desperate  elf, 

The  tiny  traitor.  Love,  himself! 

By  the  wings  I  picked  him  up 

Like  a  bee,  and  in  a  cup 

Of  my  wine  I  plunged  and  sank  him. 

Then  what  d'ye  think  I  did? — I  drank  him. 

Faith,  I  thought  him  dead.    Not  he! 

There  he  lives  with  ten-fold  glee; 


"In  the   Days  of  Old"  489 

And  now  this  moment  with  his  wings 
I  feel  him  tickling  my  heart-strings. 

Leigh  Hunt  [1784-18.59] 

SONG 

Oh!  say  not  woman's  heart  is  bought 

With  vain  and  empty  treasure. 
Oh!  say  not  woman's  heart  is  caught 

By  every  idle  pleasure. 
When  first  her  gentle  bosom  knows 

Love's  flame,  it  wanders  never; 
Deep  in  her  heart  the  passion  glows, 

She  loves,  and  loves  for  ever. 

Oh!  say  not  w-oman's  false  as  fair. 

That  like  the  bee  she  ranges! 
Still  seeking  flowers  more  sweet  and  rare, 

As  fickle  fancy  changes. 
Ah!  no,  the  love  that  first  can  w'arm 

Will  leave  her  bosom  never; 
No  second  passion  e  'er  can  charm. 

She  loves,  and  loves  for  ever. 

Thomas  Love  Peacock  [i  785-1 866] 


'IN  THE  DAYS  OF  OLD" 

From  "  Crotchet  Castle  " 

In  the  days  of  old 
Lovers  felt  true  passion. 
Deeming  years  of  sorrow 
By  a  smile  repaid: 
Now  the  charms  of  gold, 
Spells  of  pride  and  fashion. 
Bid  them  say  Good-morrow 
To  the  best-loved  Maid. 

Through  the  forests  wild, 
O  'er  the  mountains  lonely, 
They  were  never  weary 
Honor  to  pursue: 


490  Poems  of  Love 

If  the  damsel  smiled 
Once  in  seven  years  only, 
All  their  wanderings  dreary 
Ample  guerdon  knew. 

Now  one  day 's  caprice 
Weighs  down  years  of  smiling, 
Youthful  hearts  are  rovers, 
Love  is  bought  and  sold. 
Fortune 's  gifts  may  cease, 
Love  is  less  beguiling: 
Wiser  were  the  lovers 
In  the  days  of  old. 

Thomas  Love  Peacock  [1785-1866] 


SONG 

How  delicious  is  the  winning 
Of  a  kiss  at  Love 's  beginning, 
When  two  mutual  hearts  are  sighing 
For  the  knot  there's  no  untying! 

Yet  remember,  'midst  your  wooing. 
Love  has  bliss,  but  Love  has  ruing; 
Other  smiles  may  make  you  fickle. 
Tears  for  other  charms  may  trickle. 

Love  he  comes,  and  Love  he  tarries, 
Just  as  fate  or  fancy  carries; 
Longest  stays,  when  sorest  chidden; 
Laughs  and  flies,  when  pressed  and  bidden. 

Bind  the  sea  to  slumber  stilly. 
Bind  its  odor  to  the  lily. 
Bind  the  aspen  ne  'er  to  quiver, 
Then  bind  Love  to  last  forever! 

Love 's  a  fire  that  needs  renewal 

Of  fresh  beauty  for  its  fuel : 

Love 's  wing  moults  when  caged  and  captured, 

.Only  free,  he  soars  enraptured. 


Stanzas 


491 


Can  you  keep  the  bee  from  ranging, 
Or  the  ringdove's  neck  from  changing? 
No!  nor  fettered  Love  from  dying 
In  the  knot  there 's  no  untying. 

Thomas  Campbell  [1777-1844] 


STANZAS 

Could  Love  for  ever 
Run  like  a  river, 
And  Time 's  endeavor 

Be  tried  in  vain — 
No  other  pleasure 
With  this  could  measure, 
And  like  a  treasure 

We'd  hug  the  chain. 
But  since  our  sighing 
Ends  not  in  dying, 
And,  formed  for  flying. 

Love  plumes  his  wing; 
Then  for  this  reason 
Let's  love  a  season; 
But  let  that  season 

Be  only  Spring. 

When  lovers  parted 
Feel  brc ken-hearted, 
And,  all  hopes  thwarted, 

Expect  to  die; 
A  few  years  older, 
Ah!  how  much  colder 
They  might  behold  her 

For  whom  they  sigh! 
When  linked  together, 
In  every  weather, 
They  pluck  Love 's  feather 

From  out  his  wing — 
He  '11  stay  for  ever, 
But  sadly  shiver 


492  Poems  of  Love 


Without  his  plumage, 
When  past  the  Spring. 

Like  Chiefs  of  Faction, 
His  hfe  is  action — 
A  formal  paction 

That  curbs  his  reign, 
Obscures  his  glory, 
Despot  no  more,  he 
Such  territory 

Quits  with  disdain. 
Still,  still  advancing, 
With  banners  glancing, 
His  power  enhancing. 

He  must  move  on— 
Repose  but  cloys  him. 
Retreat  destroys  him, 
Love  brooks  not  a 

Degraded  throne. 

Wait  not,  fond  lover! 
Till  years  are  over. 
And  then  recover. 

As  from  a  dream. 
While  each  bewailing 
The  other 's  failing, 
With  wrath  and  railing^ 

All  hideous  seem — 
While  first  decreasing. 
Yet  not  quite  ceasing. 
Wait  not  till  teasing 

All  passion  blight: 
If  once  diminished 
Love 's  reign  is  finished- 
Then  part  in  friendship,- 

And  bid  good-night. 

So  shall  Affection 
To  recollection 
The  dear  connection 


They   Speak   O'  Wiles"  493 

Bring  back  with  joy: 
You  had  not  waited 
Till,  tired  or  hated, 
Your  passions  sated 

Began  to  cloy. 
Your  last  embraces 
Leave  no  cold  traces — 
The  same  fond  faces 

As  through  the  past; 
And  eyes,  the  mirrors 
Of  your  sweet  errors, 
Reflect  but  rapture — 

Not  least  though  last. 

True,  separations 

Ask  more  than  patience; 

What  desperations 

From  such  have  risen! 
But  yet  remaining, 
What  is 't  but  chaining 
Hearts  which,  once  waning, 

Beat  'gainst  their  prison? 
Time  can  but  cloy  love. 
And  use  destroy  love : 
The  winged  boy.  Love, 

Is  but  for  boys — 
You'll  find  it  torture 
Though  sharper,  shorter. 
To  wean  and  not 

Wear  out  your  joys. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [i 788-1824] 


"THEY   SPEAK  O'  WILES" 

They  speak  o'  wiles  in  woman's  smiles. 

An'  ruin  in  her  ee; 
I  ken  they  bring  a  pang  at  whiles 

That's  unco'  sair  to  dree; 


494  Poems  ot  Love 

But  mind  ye  this,  the  half-ta'en  kiss, 

The  fust  fond  fa'in'  tear, 
Is,  heaven  kens,  fu'  sweet  amends. 

An'  tints  o'  heaven  here. 

When  two  leal  hearts  in  fondness  meet, 
Life's  tempests  howl  in  vain; 

The  very  tears  o'  love  are  sweet 
When  paid  with  tears  again. 

Shall  hapless  prudence  shake  its  pow? 

Shall  cauldrife  caution  fear? 
Oh,  dinna,  dinna  droun  the  lowe 

That  lights  a  heaven  here! 

William  Thorn  [1798?-!  J 


"LOVE   WILL  FIND   OUT  THE  WAY" 

Over  the  mountains 

And  over  the  waves, 
Under  the  fountains 

And  under  the  graves. 
Under  floods  that  are  deepest, 

Which  Neptune  obey. 
Over  rocks  that  are  steepest, 

Love  will  find  out  the  way. 

Where  there  is  no  place 

For  the  glow-worm  to  lie, 
Where  there  is  no  space 

For  receipt  of  a  fly, 
Where  the  midge  dares  not  venture,; 

Lest  herself  fast  she  lay, 
If  Love  come,  he  will  enter, 

And  find  out  the  way. 

You  may  esteem  him 

A  child  for  his  might,  / 

Or  you  may  deem  him 
A  coward  from  his  flight: 


J 


A  Woman's  Shortcomings  495 

But  if  she  whom  Love  doth  honor 

Be  concealed  from  the  day, 
Set  a  thousand  guards  upon  her, 

Love  will  find  out  the  way. 

Some  think  to  lose  him, 

By  having  him  confined, 
And  some  do  suppose  him, 

Poor  thing,  to  be  blind; 
But  if  ne'er  so  close  ye  wall  him, 

Do  the  best  that  you  may. 
Blind  Love,  if  so  ye  call  him, 

Will  find  out  the  way. 

You  may  train  the  eagle 

To  stoop  to  your  fist, 
Or  you  may  inveigle 

The  phoenix  of  the  east; 
The  tiger,  ye  may  move  her 

To  give  over  her  prey; 
But  3'ou  '11  ne'er  stop  a  lover — 

He  will  find  out  the  way. 

Unktiown 


A  WOMAN'S  SHORTCOMINGS 

She  has  laughed  as  softly  as  if  she  sighed, 

She  has  counted  six,  and  over, 
Of  a  purse  well  filled,  and  a  heart  well  tried — 

Oh,  each  a  worthy  lover! 
They  "give  her  time";  for  her  soul  must  slip 

Where  the  world  has  set  the  grooving; 
She  will  lie  to  none  with  her  fair  red  lip: 

But  love  seeks  truer  loving. 

She  trembles  her  fan  in  a  sweetness  dumb. 
As  her  thoughts  were  beyond  recalling; 

With  a  glance  for  one,  and  a  glance  for  some, 
From  her  eyelids  rising  and  falling; 


49^  Poems  of  Love 

Speaks  common  v/ords  with  a  blushful  air, 

Hears  bold  words,  unreproving; 
But  her  silence  says — what  she  never  will  swear^ 

And  love  seeks  better  loving. 

Go,  lady!  lean  to  the  night-guitar, 

And  drop  a  smile  to  the  bringer; 
Then  smile  as  sweetly,  when  he  is  far, 

At  the  voice  of  an  in-door  singer. 
Bask  tenderly  beneath  tender  eyes; 

Glance  lightly,  on  their  removing; 
And  join  new  vows  to  old  perjuries — 

But  dare  not  call  it  loving! 

Unless  you  can  think,  when  the  song  is  done, 

No  other  is  soft  in  the  rhythm; 
Unless  you  can  feel,  when  left  by  One, 

That  all  men  else  go  with  him; 
Unless  you  can  know,  when  upraised  by  his  breath, 

That  your  beauty  itself  wants  proving; 
Unless  you  can  swear  "For  life,  for  death!" — 

Oh,  fear  to  call  it  loving! 

Unless  you  can  muse  in  a  crowd  all  day 

On  the  absent  face  that  fixed  you; 
Unless  you  can  love,  as  the  angels  may, 

With  the  breadth  of  heaven  betwixt  you; 
Unless  you  can  dream  that  his  faith  is  fast, 

Through  behoving  and  unbehoving;  ''■'"■ 

Unless  you  can  die  when  the  dream  is  past — 

Oh,  never  call  it  loving! 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [1806-186: 


"LOVE  HATH  A  LANGUAGE" 

From  "To  My  Son  " 

Love  hath  a  language  for  all  years —     : 
Fond  hieroglyphs,  obscure  and  old — 

Wherein  the  heart  reads,  writ  in  tears. 
The  talc  which  never  yet  was  told. 


Amaturus  49-7 

Love  hath  his  meter  too,  to  trace 

Those  bounds  which  never  yet  were  given, — 
To  measure  that  which  mocks  at  space. 

Is  deep  as  death,  and  high  as  heaven. 

Love  hath  his  treasure  hoards,  to  pay 

True  faith,  or  goodi}^  service  done, — 
Dear  priceless  nothings,  which  outweigh 

All  riches  that  the  sun  shines  on. 

Helen  Selina  Sheridan  [1S07-1S67] 


SONG 

From  "  Maud  " 

O,  LET  the  solid  ground, 

Not  fail  beneath  my  feet 
Before  my  life  has  found 

What  some  have  found  so  sweet; 
Then  let  come  what  come  may, 
What  matter  if  I  go  mad, 
I  shall  have  had  my  day. 

Let  the  sweet  heavens  endure. 
Not  close  and  darken  above  me 

Before  I  am  quite  quite  sure 
That  there  is  one  to  love  me!. 

Then  let  come  what  come  may 

To  a  life  that  has  been  so  sad, 

I  shall  have  had  my  day. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1S09-1892] 


AMATURUS 

Somewhere  beneath  the  sun, 

These  quivering  heart-strings  prove  it, 
Somewhere  there  must  be  one 

Made  for  this  soul  to  mpve  it; 


49,8  Poems  of  Love 

Some  one  that  hides  her  sweetness 

From  neighbors  whom  she  shghts, 
Nor  can  attain  completeness, 

Nor  give  her  heart  its  rights; 
Some  one  whom  I  could  court 

With  no  great  change  of  manner, 
Still  holding  reason's  fort, 

Though  \vaving  fancy's  banner; 
A  lady,  not  so  queenly 

As  to  disdain  my  hand, 
Yet  born  to  smile  serenely 

Like  those  that  rule  the  land; 
Noble,  but  not  too  proud; 

With  soft  hair  simply  folded. 
And  bright  face  crescent-browed, 

And  throat  by  Muses  moulded; 
And  cyeHds  lightly  falling 

On  little  glistening  seas, 
Deep-calm,  when  gales  are  brawling. 

Though  stirred  by  every  breeze; 
Swift  voice,  like  flight  of  dove 

Through  minster-arches  floating, 
With  sudden  turns,  when  love 

Gets  overnear  to  doting; 
Keen  Hps,  that  shape  soft  sayings 

Like  crystals  of  the  snow, 
With  pretty  half-betrayings 

Of  things  one  may  not  know; 
Fair  hand  whose  touches  thrill. 

Like  golden  rod  of  wonder, 
Which  Hermes  wields  at  will 

Spirit  and  flesh  to  sunder; 
Light  foot,  to  press  the  stirrup 

In  fearlessness  and  glee, 
Or  dance,  till  finches  chirrup, 

And  stars  sink  to  the  sea. 

Forth,  Love,  and  find  this  maid;'"^   '' 
Wherever  she  be  hidden: 

Speak,  Love,  be  not  afraid, 
But  plead  as  thou  art  bidden; 


A   Ballad  of  Dreamland  499 

And  say,  that  he  who  taught  thee 

His  yearning  want  and  pain, 
Too  dearly,  dearly  bought  thee»Oi  lot  ,i|iJ<i  *j!.i 
.     To  part  with  thee  in  vain.  •-'  f.  i'  ■ 

William  Johnson-Cory  [1823-1892] 


THE  SURFACE  AND  THE  DEPTHS  ' 

>  yiI02  3fij  XltlO 

Love  took  my  life  and  thrilled  it 

Through  all  its  strings,  ^     .^rp 

Played  round  my  mind  and  filled  it 

With  sound  of  wings; 
But  to  my  heart  he  never  came 
To  touch  it  with  his  golden  flame. 

Therefore  it  is  that  singing 

I  do  rejoice, 
Nor  heed  the  slow  years  bringing   °' 

A  harsher  voice; 
Because  the  songs  which  he  has  sung 
Still  leave  the  untouched  singer  young. 


But  whom  in  fuller  fashion 

The  Master  sways. 
For  him,  swift-winged  with  passion. 

Fleet  the  brief  days. 
Betimes  the  enforced  accents  come. 
And  leave  him  ever  after  dumb. 

Lewis  Morris  [1833-1007] 

A  BALLAD  OF  DREAMLAND 

I  HID  my  heart  in  a  nest  of  roses, 

Out  of  the  sun's  way,  hidden  apart; 
In  a  softer  bed  then  the  soft  white  snow's  is, 

Under  the  roses  I  hid  my  heart. 

Why  would  it  sleep  not?  why  should  it  start, 
WTren  never  a  leaf  of  the  rose-tree  stirred? 

W'hat  made  sleep  flutter  his  wings  and  part? 
Only  the  song  of  a  secret  bird. 


It  10 


500  '■     Poems  of  Love 

Lie  still,  I  said,  for  the  wind's  wing  closes, 

And  mild  leaves  muffle  the  keen  sun's  dart; 
Lie  still,  for  the  wind  on  the  warm  seas  dozes, 

And  the  wind  is  unquieter  yet  than  thou  art. 

Does  a  thought  in  thee  still  as  a  thorn 's  wound  smart? 
Does  the  fang  still  fret  thee  of  hope  deferred? 

What  bids  the  lips  of  thy  sleep  dispart? 
Only  the  song  of  a  secret  bird. 

The  green  land 's  name  that  a  charm  encloses, 

It  never  was  writ  in  the  traveller's  chart. 
And  sweet  on  its  trees  as  the  fruit  that  grows  is, 

It  never  was  sold  in  the  merchant 's  mart. 

The  swallows  of  dreams  through  its  dim  fields  dart, 
And  sleep's  are  the  tunes  in  its  tree-tops  heard; 

No  hound 's  note  wakens  the  wildwood  hart, 
Only  the  song  of  a  secret  bird. 

ENVOI 

In  the  world  of  dreams  I  have  chosen  my  part, 

To  sleep  for  a  season  and  hear  no  word 
Of  true  love's  truth  or  of  light  love's  art. 

Only  the  song  of  a  secret  bird. 

Algernon,  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1909] 


ENDYMION 

The  rising  moon  has  hid  the  stars; 

Her  level  rays,  hke  golden  bars,    , 

^ .  ,     ,      ,  '  i^rti  OIK 

Lie  on  the  landscape  green, 

.-■  .  ■ With  shadows  brown  between. 


And  silver  white  the  river  gleams,     , ,  , . 
As  if  Diana,  in  her  dreams  jvsri  norf 

Had  dropped  her  silver  bow 

Upon  the  meadows  low. 


Endymfon  roi 


On  such  a  tranquil  night  as  this, 

She  woke  Endymion  with  a  kiss, 

When,  sleeping  in  the  grove. 
He  dreamed  not  of  her  love. 

Like  Dian's  kiss,  unasked,  unsought. 
Love  gives  itself,  but  is  not  bought; 
Nor  voice,  nor  sound  betrays 
Its  deep,  impassioned  gaze. 

It  comes, — the  beautiful,  the  free, 
The  crown  of  all  humanity, — 

In  silence  and  alone 

To  seek  the  elected  one. 

It  lifts  the  boughs,  whose  shadows  deep 
Are  life 's  oblivion,  the  soul 's  sleep. 
And  kisses  the  closed  eyes 
Of  him  who  slumbering  lies. 

O  weary  hearts!    O  slumbering  eyes! 
O  drooping  souls,  whose  destinies 

Are  fraught  with  fear  and  pain, 

Ye  shall  be  loved  again! 

No  one  is  so  accursed  by  fate, 
No  one  so  utterly  desolate, 

But  some  heart,  though  unknown, 

Responds  unto  his  own. 

Responds, — as  if  with  unseen  wings. 
An  angel  touched  its  quivering  strings; 
And  whispers,  in  its  song, 
"Where  hast  thou  stayed  so  long?" 
Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  [1807-15 


T 


'^82  Poems  of  Love 


FATE 

Two  shall  be  born,  the  whole  wide  world  apart, 

And  speak  in  different  tongues  and  have  no  thought 

Each  of  the  other's  being,  and  no  heed. 

And  these,  o'er  unknown  seas,  to  unknown  lands 

Shall  cross,  escaping  wreck,  defying  death; 

And  all  unconsciously  shape  every  act 

And  bend  each  wandering  step  to  this  one  end — 

That,  one  day,  out  of  darkness  they  shall  meet 

And  read  life's  meaning  in  each  other's  eyes. 

And  two  shall  walk  some  narrow  way  of  life 

So  nearly  side  by  side  that,  should  one  turn 

Ever  so  little  space  to  left  or  right, 

They  needs  must  stand  acknowledged,  face  to  face. 

And,  yet,  with  wistful  eyes  that  never  meet 

And  groping  hands  that  never  clasp  and  lips 

Calling  in  vain  to  ears  that  never  hear, 

They  seek  each  other  all  their  weary  days 

And  die  unsatisfied — and  this  is  Fate! 

Susan  Man  Spalding  [i8     -    ?    ] 


"GIVE  ALL  TO  LOVE" 

Give  all  to  love; 

Obey  thy  heart; 

Friends,  kindred,  days, 

Estate,  good  fame. 

Plans,  credit,  and  the  Muse, — 

Nothing  refuse. 

'Tis  a  brave  master; 
Let  it  have  scope: 
Follow  it  utterly, 
Hope  beyond  hope: 
High  and  more  high 


"Give  All   To   Love"  503 

It  dives  into  noon, 

With  wing  unspent, 

Untold  intent; 

But  it  is  a  god, 

Knows  its  own  path 

And  the  outlets  of  the  sky. 

It  was  never  for  the  mean; 
It  requireth  courage  stout. 
Souls  above  doubt. 
Valor  unbending. 
It  will  reward, — 
They  shall  return 
More  than  they  were, 
And  ever  ascending. 

Leave  all  for  love; 

Yet,  hear  me,  yet, 

One  word  more  thy  heart  behoved, 

One  pulse  more  of  firm  endeavor, — • 

Keep  thee  to-day, 

To-morrow,  forever, 

Free  as  an  Arab 

Of  thy  beloved. 

Cling  with  life  to  the  maid; 

But  when  the  surprise. 

First  vague  shadow  of  surmise, 

Flits  across  her  bosom  young. 

Of  a  joy  apart  from  thee. 

Free  be  she,  fancy-free; 

Nor  thou  detain  her  vesture's  hem. 

Nor  the  palest  rose  she  flung 

From  her  summer  diadem. 

Though  thou  loved  her  as  thyself, 
As  a  self  of  purer  clay, 
Though  her  parting  dims  the  day. 
Stealing  grace  from  all  alive; 


504  Poems  of  Love 


Heartily  know, 
When  half -gods  go, 
The  gods  arrive. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-1S82] 


"O,   LOVE  IS  NOT  A   SUMMER  MOOD" 

O,  LOVE  is  not  a  summer  mood, 

Nor  flying  phantom  of  the  brain, 

Nor  youthful  fever  of  the  blood. 

Nor  dream,  nor  fate,  nor  circumstance. 
Love  is  not  born  of  blinded  chance, 
Nor  bred  in  simple  ignorance. 

Love  is  the  flower  of  maidenhood; 

Love  is  the  fruit  of  mortal  pain; 
And  she  hath  winter  in  her  blood. 

True  love  is  steadfast  as  the  skies. 
And  once  ahght,  she  never  flies; 
And  love  is  strong,  and  love  is  wise. 

Richard  Watson  Gilder  [1844-1909] 


WHEN  WILL  LOVE   COME? 

Some  find  Love  late,  some  find  him  soon, 

Some  with  the  rose  in  May, 
Some  with  the  nightingale  in  June, 

And  some  when  skies  are  gray; 
Love  comes  to  some  with  smiling  eyes, 

And  comes  with  tears  to  some; 
For  some  Love  sings,  for  some  Love  sighs, 

For  some  Love's  lips  are  dumb. 

How  will  you  come  to  me,  fair  Love? 

Will  you  come  late  or  soon? 
With  sad  or  smiling  skies  above. 

By  light  of  sun  or  moon? 


fl 


The  Secret  505 

Will  you  be  sad,  will  you  be  sweet, 

Sing,  sigh,  Love,  or  be  dumb? 
Will  it  be  summer  when  we  meet,  ' 

Or  autumn  ere  you  come? 

Pakenham  Beatty  [1855- 


"AWAKE,   MY  HEART" 

Awake,  my  heart,  to  be  loved,  awake,  awake! 
The  darkness  silvers  away,  the  morn  doth  break, 
It  leaps  in  the  sky:  unrisen  lustres  slake 
The  o'ertaken  moon.     Awake,  O  heart,  awake! 

She  too  that  loveth  awaketh  and  hopes  for  thee: 
Her  eyes  already  have  sped  the  shades  that  flee, 
Already  they  watch  the  path  thy  feet  shall  take: 
Awake,  O  heart,  to  be  loved,  awake,  awake! 

And  if  thou  tarry  from  her, — if  this  could  be, — 
She  cometh  herself,  O  heart,  to  be  loved,  to  thee; 
For  thee  would  unashamed  herself  forsake: 
Awake,  to  be  loved,  my  heart,  awake,  awake! 

Awake!  The  land  is  scattered  with  light,  and  see, 
Uncanopied  sleep  is  flying  from  field  and  tree; 
And  blossoming  boughs  of  April  in  laughter  shake: 
Awake,  O  heart,  to  be  loved,  awake,  awake! 

Lo,  all  things  wake  and  tarry  and  look  for  thee: 
She  looketh  and  saith,  "O  sun,  now  bring  him  to  me. 
Come,  more  adored,  O  adored,  for  his  coming's  sake, 
And  awake,  my  heart,  to  be  loved,  awake,  awake!" 

Robert  Bridges  [1855- 

THE   SECRET 

Nightingales  warble  about  it 
All  night  under  blossom  and  star; 

The  wild  swan  is  dying  without  it, 
And  the  eagle  crieth  afar; 


fo6  Poems  of  Love 

The  sun,  he  doth  mount  but  to  find  it, 
Searching  the  green  earth  o'er; 

But  more  doth  a  man's  heart  mind  it — 
0  more,  more,  more! 

Over  the  gray  leagues  of  ocean 

The  infinite  yearneth  alone; 
The  forests  with  wandering  emotion 

The  thing  they  know  not  intone; 
Creation  arose  but  to  see  it, 

A  million  lamps  in  the  blue; 
But  a  lover,  he  shall  be  it. 

If  one  sweet  maid  is  true. 

George  EHward  Woodberry  [1855- 


THE  ROSE   OF  STARS 

When  Love,  our  great  Immortal, 

Put  on  mortality. 
And  down  from  Eden's  portal 

Brought  this  sweet  life  to  be. 
At  the  sublime  archangel 

He  laughed  with  veiled  eyes. 
For  he  bore  within  his  bosom 

The  seed  of  Paradise. 

He  hid  it  in  his  bosom. 

And  there  such  warmth  it  found. 
It  brake  in  bud  and  blossom. 

And  the  rose  fell  on  the  ground; 
As  the  green  light  on  the  prairie. 

As  the  red  light  on  the  sea. 
Through  fragrant  belts  of  summer 

Came  this  sweet  life  to  be. 

And  the  grave  archangel  seeing, 

Spread  his  mighty  wings  for  flight, 

But  the  glow  hung  round  him  fleeing 
Like  the  rose  of  an  Arctic  night; 


i 


Love  is  Strong  507 

And  sadly  moving  heavenward 

By  Venus  and  by  Mars, 
He  heard  the  joyful  planets 

Hail  Earth,  the  Rose  of  Stars. 

George  Edivard  Woodbcrry  [1855- 

0    TIO.V 
SONG  OF  EROS 

From  "  Agathon  " 

When  love  in  the  faint  heart  trembles, 

And  the  eyes  with  tears  are  wet, 
O,  tell  me  what  resembles 

Thee,  young  Regret? 
Violets  with  dewdrops  drooping, 

Lilies  o'erfuU  of  gold, 
Roses  in  June  rains  stooping, 

That  weep  for  the  cold. 
Are  like  thee,  young  Regret. 

Bloom,  violets,  Hlies,  and  roses! 

But  what,  young  Desire, 
Like  thee,  when  love  discloses 

Thy  heart  of  fire? 
The  wild  swan  unreturning. 

The  eagle  alone  with  the  sun. 
The   long-winged   storm-gulls   burning 

Seaward  when  day  is  done. 
Are  like  thee,  young  Desire. 

George  Edward  Woodbcrry  [1855- 


LOVE  IS   STRONG 


I  /', 


A  VIEWLESS  thing  is  the  wind. 

But  its  strength  is  mightier  far 
Than  a  phalanxed  host  in  battle  line,  ■^^' 

Than  the  limbs  of  a  Samson  are.  "^ 


508  Poems  of  Love 

And  a  viewless  thing  is  Love, 

And  a  name  that  vanisheth; 
But  her  strength  is  the  wind's  wild  strength  above, 

For  she  conquers  shame  and  Death. 

Richard  Burton  [1859- 

•'LOVE    ONCE    WAS    LIKE    AN    APRIL    DAWN" 

Love  once  was  like  an  April  dawn: 

Song  throbbed  within  the  heart  by  rote, 
And  every  tint  of  rose  or  fawn 
Was  greeted  by  a  joyous  note. 
How  eager  was  my  thought  to  see 
Into  that  morning  mystery! 

Love  now  is  like  an  August  noon, 

No  spot  is  empty  of  its  shine; 
The  sun  makes  silence  seem  a  boon, 
And  not  a  voice  so  dumb  as  mine. 

Yet  with  what  words  I'd  welcome  thee — 
Couldst  thou  return,  dear  mystery! 

Robert  Underwood  Johnson  [1853- 


THE   GARDEN  OF   SHADOW 

Love  heeds  no  more  the  sighing  of  the  wind 
Against  the  perfect  flowers:  thy  garden's  close 
Is  grown  a  wilderness,  where  none  shall  find 
One  strayed,  last  petal  of  one  last  year's  rose. 

O  bright,  bright  hair!  O  mouth  like  a  ripe  fruit! 
Can  famine  be  so  nigh  to  harvesting? 
Love,  that  was  songful,  with  a  broken  lute 
In  grass  of  graveyards  goeth  murmuring. 

Let  the  wind  blow  against  the  perfect  flowers, 
And  all  thy  garden  change  and  glow  with  spring: 
Love  is  grown  blind  with  no  more  count  of  hours 
Nor  part  in  seed-time  nor  in  harvesting. 

Ernest  Dawson  [1867- iqoo] 


The  Highway  .509 


THE   CALL 

Love  comes  laughing  up  the  valleys,  ' 
Hand  in  hand  with  hoyden  Spring; 

All  the  Flower-People  nodding, 
All  the  Feathered-Folk  a-wing. 

"Higher!  Higher'"  call  the  thrushes; 

"Wilder!  Freer!"  breathe  the  trees; 
And  the  purple  mountains  beckon 

Upward  to  their  mysteries. 

Always  farther  leagues  to  wander, 
Peak  to  peak  and  slope  to  slope; 

Lips  to  sing  and  feet  to  follow, 
Eyes  to  dream  and  heart  to  hope! 

Tarry?   Nay,  but  who  can  tarry? 

All  the  world  is  on  the  v/ing; 
Love  comes  laughing  up  the  valleys, 

Hand  in  hand  with  hoyden  Spring. 

Reginald  Wright  Kaiijfman  [1877- 


THE  HIGHWAY 

All  day  long  on  the  highway 
The  King's  fleet  couriers  ride; 

You  may  hear  the  tread  of  their  horses  sped 
Over  the  country  side. 

They  ride  for  life  and  they  ride  for  death 

And  they  override  who  tarrieth. 
With  show  of  color  and  flush  of  pride 
They  stir  the  dust  on  the  highway. 

Let  them  ride  on  the  highway  wide. 
Love  walks  in  little  paths  aside. 

All  day  long  on  the  highway 
Is  a  tramp  of  an  army's  feet; 

You  may  see  them  go  in  a  marshaled  row 


5 TO  Poems  of   Love 

With  the  tale  of  their  arms  complete: 
They  march  for  war  and  they  march  for  peace, 
For  the  lust  of  gold  and  fame's  increase, 

For  victories  sadder  than  defeat 

They  raise  the  dust  on  the  highway. 

All  the  armies  of  earth  defied, 
Love  dwells  in  little  paths  aside. 

All  day  long  on  the  highway 

Rushes  an  eager  band, 

With  straining  eyes  for  a  worthless  prize 

That  slips  from  the  grasp  like  sand. 

And  men  leave  blood  where  their  feet  have  stood 
And  bow  them  down  unto  brass  and  wood— 

Idols  fashioned  by  their  own  hand —  ,:  ,- 

Blind  in  the  dust  of  the  highway. 

Power  and  gold  and  fame  denied, 
Love  laughs  glad  in  the  paths  aside. 

Louise  Driscoll  [1875- 


SONG 

Take  it,  love! 

'Twill  soon  be  over, 

With  the  thickening  of  the  clover, 

With  the  caUing  of  the  plover, 

Take  it,  take  it,  lover. 

Take  it,  boy!  ^  , 

The  blossom's  falling, 
And  the  farewell  cuckoo's  calling, 
While  the  sun  and  showers  are  on,e,  ,i,.-fr 
Take  your  love  out  in  the  sun.       .,;      i-^A'v 

Take  it,  girl!  r^  , .  j 

And  fear  no  after. 

Take  your  fill  of  all  this  laughter, 

Laugh  or  not,  the  tears  will  fall. 

Take  the  laughter  first  of  all. 

Richard  J^e  Gallicnne  [1866- 


Song  ,,  511 


"NEVER   GIVE  ALL  THE  HEART" 

Never  give  all  the  heart,  for  love 
Will  hardly  seem  worth  thinking  of 
To  passionate  women,  if  it  seem 
Certain,  and  they  never  dream 
That  it  fades  out  from  kiss  to  kiss; 
For  everything  that's  lovely  is 
But  a  brief,  dreamy,  kind  delight. 
O  never  give  the  heart  outright 
For  they,  for  all  smooth  lips  can  say, 
Have  given  their  hearts  up  to  the  play, 
And  who  can  play  it  well  enough 
If  deaf  and  dumb  and  blind  with  love? 
He  that  made  this  knows  all  the  cost, 
For  he  gave  all  his  heart  and  lost. 

William  Butler  Yeats  [1865- 


SONG 

I  CAME  to  the  door  of  the  House  of  Love 
And  knocked  as  the  starry  night  went  by; 

And  my  true  love  cried  "Who  knocks?"  and  I  said 
"It  is  I." 

And  Love  looked  down  from  a  lattice  above 

Where  the  roses  were  dry  as  the  lips  of  the  dead: 

"There  is  not  room  in  the  House  of  Love 
For  you  both,"  he  said. 

I  plucked  a  leaf  from  the  porch  and  crept 
Away  through  a  desert  of  scoffs  and  scorns 

To  a  lonely  place  where  I  prayed  and  wept 
And  wove  me  a  crown  of  thorns. 

I  came  once  more  to  the  House  of  Love 
And  knocked,  ah,  softly  and  wistfully, 

And  my  true  love  cried  "Who  knocks?"  and  I  said 
"None  now  but  thee." 


^12  Poems  of  Love 

And  the  great  doors  opened  wide  apart 
And  a  voice  rang  out  from  a  glory  of  light, 

"Make  room,  make  room  for  a  faithful  heart 
In  the  House  of  Love,  to-night." 

Alfred  Noycs  [1880- 

" CHILD,  CHILD" 

Child,  child,  love  while  you  can 

The  voice  and  the  eyes  and  the  soul  of  a  man, 

Never  fear  though  it  break  your  heart — 

Out  of  the  wound  new  joy  will  start ; 

Only  love  proudly  and  gladly  and  well 

Though  love  be  heaven  or  love  be  hell. 

Child,  child,  love  while  you  may. 
For  life  is  short  as  a  happy  day; 
Never  fear  the  thing  you  feel — 
Only  by  love  is  life  made  real ; 
Love,  for  the  deadly  sins  are  seven. 
Only  through  love  will  you  enter  heaven. 

Sara  Teasdale  [1884- 

WISDOM 

The  young  girl  questions:  "Whether  were  it  better 

To  lie  for  ever,  a  warm  slug-a-bed, 

Or  to  rise  up  and  bide  by  Fate  and  Chance, 

The  rawness  of  the  morning, 

The  gibing  and  the  scorning 
Of  the  stern  Teacher  of  my  ignorance?  " 

"I  know  not,"  Wisdom  said. 

The  young  girl  questions:  "Friend,  shall  I  die  calmer, 
If  I've  lain  for  ever,  sheets  above  the  head, 
Warm  in  a  dream,  or  rise  to  take  the  worst 

Of  peril  in  the  highways 

Of  straying  in  the  by-ways, 
Of  hunger  for  the  truth,  of  drought  and  thirst?" 

"We  do  not  know,"  he  said, 

"Nor  may  till  we  be  dead." 

Ford  Madox  TTiirffrr  [1873- 


Epilogue  ,   513 


EPILOGUE 

FROM    "emblems   OF   LOVe" 

What  shall  we  do  for  Love  these  days? 

How  shall  we  make  an  altar-blaze 

To  smite  the  horny  eyes  of  men 

With  the  renown  of  our  Pleaven, 

And  to  the  unbelievers  prove 

Our  service  to  our  dear  god,  Love? 

What  torches  shall  we  lift  above 

The  crowd  that  pushes  through  the  mire, 

To  amaze  the  dark  heads  with  strange  fire? 

I  should  think  I  were  much  to  blame,      . 

If  never  I  held  some  fragrant  flame         ,  , 

Above  the  noises  of  the  world,  ,, 

And  openly  'mid  men's  hurrying  stares,    - 

Worshipped  before  the  sacred  fears 

That  are  Hke  flashing  curtains  furled 

Across  the  presence  of  our  lord  Love. 

Nay,  would  that  I  could  fill  the  gaze 

Of  the  whole  earth  with  some  great  praise 

Made  in  a  inarvel  for  men's  eyes, 

Some  tower  of  glittering  masonries. 

Therein  such  a  spirit  flourishing 

Men  should  see  what  my  heart  can  sing: 

All  that  Love  hath  done  to  me 

Built  into  stone,  a  visible  glee; 

]Marble  carried  to  gleaming  height 

As  moved  aloft  by  inward  delight; 

Not  as  with  toil  of  chisels  hewn. 

But  seeming  poised  in  a  mighty  tune. 

For  of  all  those  who  have  been  known 

To  lodge  with  our  kind  host,  the  sun, 

I  envy  one  for  just  one  thing: 

In  Cordova  of  the  Moors 

There  dwelt  a  passion-minded  King, 

Who  set  great  bands  of  marble-hewers 

To  fashion  his  heart's  thanksgiving 

In  a  tall  palace,  shapen  so  i  .,,-,.- 


514  I^oems  ot   Love 

All  the  wondering  world  might  know 
The  joy  he  had  of  his  Moorish  lass. 
His  love,  that  brighter  and  larger  was 
Than  the  starry  places,  into  firm  stone 
He  sent,  as  if  the  stone  were  glass 
Fired  and  into  beauty  blown. 

Solemn  and  invented  gravely 
In  its  bulk  the  fabric  stood, 
Even  as  Love,  that  trusteth  bravely 
In  its  own  exceeding  good 
To  be  better  than  the  waste 
Of  time's  devices;  grandly  spaced,  t. 

Seriously  the  fabric  stood. 
But  over  it  all  a  pleasure  went 
Of  carven  delicate  ornament, 
Wreathing  up  like  ravishment. 
Mentioning  in  sculptures  twined 
The  blitheness  Love  hath  in  his  mind; 
And  like  delighted  senses  were 
The  windows,  and  the  columns  there 
Made  the  following  sight  to  ache  " 

As  the  heart  that  did  them  make. 
Well  I  can  see  that  shining  song 
Flowering  there,  the  upward  throng 
Of  porches,  pillars  and  windowed  walls, 
Spires  like  piercing  panpipe  calls, 
Up  to  the  roof's  snow-cloud  flight; 
All  glancing  in  the  Spanish  light 
White  as  water  of  arctic  tides, 
Save  an  amber  dazzle  on  sunny  sides. 
You  had  said,  the  radiant  sheen 
Of  that  palace  might  have  been 
A  young  god's  fantasy,  ere  he  came 
His  serious  worlds  and  suns  to  frame; 
Such  an  immortal  passion 
Quivered  among  the  slim  hewn  stone. 
And  in  the  nights  it  seemed  a  jar 
Cut  in  the  substance  of  a  star. 
Wherein  a  wine,  that  will  be  poured 
Some  time  for  feasting  Heaven,  was  stored. 


Epilogue  515 

But  within  this  fretted  shell, 
The  wonder  of  Love  made  visible, 
The  King  a  private  gentle  mood 
There  placed,  of  pleasant  quietude. 
Foi  right  amidst  there  was  a  court, 
Where  always  musked  silences 
Listened  to  water  and  to  trees; 
And  herbage  of  all  fragrant  sort, — 
Lavender,  lad's-love,  rosemary, 
Basil,  tansy,  centaury, — 
Was  the  grass  of  that  orchard,  hid 
Love's  amazements  all  amid. 
Jarring  the  air  with  rumor  cool, 
Small  fountains  played  into  a  pool 
With  sound  as  soft  as  the  barley's  hiss 
When  its  beard  just  sprouting  is; 
Whence  a  young  stream,  that  trod  on  moss. 
Prettily  rimpled  the  court  across. 
And  in  the  pool's  clear  idleness, 
Moving  like  dreams  through  happiness, 
Shoals  of  small  bright  fishes  were; 
In  and  out  weed-thickets  bent 
Peich  and  carp,  and  sauntering  went 
With  mounching  jaws  and  eyes  a-stare; 
Or  on  a  lotus  leaf  would  crawl 
A  brindled  loach  to  bask  and  sprawl, 
Tasting  the  warm  sun  ere  it  dipped 
Into  the  water;  but  quick  as  fear 
Back  his  shining  brown  head  slipped 
To  crouch  on  the  gravel  of  his  lair, 
Where  the  cooled  sunbeams,  broke  in  wrack, 
Spilt  shattered  gold  about  his  back. 

So  within  tliat  green-veiled  air, 
Within  that  white-walled  quiet,  where 
Innocent  water  thought  aloud, — 
Childish  prattle  that  must  make 
The  wise  sunlight  with  laughter  shake 
On  the  leafage  overbowed,  — 
Often  the  King  and  his  love-lass 
Let  the  delicious  hours  pass. 


ci6  Poems  of  Love 

All  the  outer  world  could  see 
Graved  and  sawn  amazingly 
Their  love's  delighted  riotise, 
Fixed  in  marble  for  all  men's  eyes; 
But  only  these  twain  could  abide 
In  the  cool  peace  that  withinside 
Thrilling  desire  and  passion  dwelt; 
They  only  knew  the  still  meaning  spelt 
By  Love's  flaming  script,  which  is 
God's  word  written  in  ecstasies. 

And  where  is  now  that  palace  gone, 
All  the  magical  skilled  stone, 
All  the  dreaming  towers  wrought 
By  Love  as  if  no  more  than  thought      . 
The  unresisting  marble  was?  ; 

How  could  such  a  wonder  pass?  j 

Ah,  it  was  but  built  in  vain 
Against  the  stupid  horns  of  Rome, 
That  pushed  down  into  the  common  loam 
The  loveliness  that  shone  in  Spain. 
But  we  have  raised  it  up  again! 
A  loftier  palace,  fairer  far, 
Is  ours,  and  one  that  fears  no  war. 
Safe  in  marvellous  walls  we  are; 
Wondering  sense  like  builded  fires, 
High  amazement  of  desires, 
Delight  and  certainty  of  love, 
Closing  around,  roofing  above 
Our  unapproached  and  perfect  hour 
Within  the  splendors  of  love's  power. 

LasceUes  Abcrcrombic  [i38i- 


ON  HAMPSTEAD  HEATH 

Against  the  green  flame  of  the  hawthorn-tree, 
His  scarlet  tunic  burns; 

And  livelier  than  the  green  sap's  mantling  glee 
The  Spring  fire  tingles  through  him  headily 
As  quivering  he  turns 


Once  on  a  Time  517 

And  stammers  out  the  old  amazing  tale 

Of  youth  and  April  weather; 

While  she,  with  half-breathed  jests  that,  sobbing,  fail, 

Sits,  tight-lipped,  quaking,  eager-eyed  and  pale, 

Beneath  her  purple  feather. 

Wilfrid  Wilson  Gibson  [1S7S- 


ONCE  ON  A  TIME 

Once  on  a  time,  once  on  a  time. 

Before  the  Dawn  began, 
There  was  a  nymph  of  Dian's  train 

Who  was  beloved  of  Pan ; 
Once  on  a  time  a  peasant  lad 

Who  loved  a  lass  at  home; 
Once  on  a  time  a  Saxon  king 

Who  loved  a  queen  of  Rome. 

The  world  has  but  one  song  to  sing, 

And  it  is  ever  new, 
The  first  and  last  of  all  the  songs 

For  it  is  ever  true — 
A  little  song,  a  tender  song, 

The  only  song  it  hath; 
"There  was  a  youth  of  Ascalon 

Who  loved  a  girl  of  Gath." 

A  thousand  thousand  years  have  gone. 

And  a^ons  still  shall  pass. 
Yet  shall  the  world  forever  sing 

Of  him  who  loved  a  lass — 
An  olden  song,  a  golden  song, 

And  sing  it  unafraid; 
"There  was  a  youth,  once  on  a  time, 

Who  dearly  loved  a  maid." 

Kendall  Banning  [1879- 


•iflJa  brrA 

•ijuoY  '10 

•"7/  (OrisalidW 

IN  PRAISE  OF  HER 

FIRST  SONG 

From  "  Astrophel  and  Stella" 

Doubt  you  to  whom  my  Muse  these  notes  intendcth, 
Which  now  my  breast,  o'ercharged,  to  music  lendeth? 

To  you!  to  you!  all  song  of  praise  is  due; 
Only  in  you  my  song  begins  and  endeth. 

Who  hath  the  eyes  which  marry  state  with  pleasure? 
Who  keeps  the  key  of  Nature's  chiefest  treasure? 

To  you!  to  you!  all  song  of  praise  is  due; 
Only  for  you  the  heaven  forgat  all  measure. 

Who  hath  the  lips  where  wit  in  fairness  reigneth? 
Who  womankind  at  once  both  decks  and  staineth? 

To  you!  to  you!  all  song  of  praise  is  due; 
Only  by  you  Cupid  his  crown  maintaineth. 

iiiy  i:  l.-c 
Who  hath  the  feet,  whose  step  all  sweetness  planteth? 
Who  else,  for  whom  Fame  worthy  trumpets  wanteth? 

To  you!  to  you!  all  song  of  praise  is  due; 
Only  to  you  her  sceptre  Venus  granteth. 

Who  hath  the  breast,  whose  milk  doth  passions  nourish^ 
Whose  grace  is  such,  that  when  it  chides  doth  cherish? 

To  you!  to  you!  all  song  of  praise  is  due; 
Only  through  you  the  tree  of  life  doth  flourish. 

Who  hath  the  hand,  which  without  stroke  subdueth? 
Who  long-dead  beauty  with  increase  reneweth? 

To  you!  to  you!  all  song  of  praise  is  due; 
Only  at  you  all  envy  hopeless  rueth. 
Si8 


5^9 


Silvia 

Who  hath  the  hair,  which,  loosest  fastest  tieth? 
Who  makes  a  man  live  then  glad  when  he  dieth? 

To  you!  to  you!  all  song  of  praise  is  due; 
Only  of  you  the  llattercr  never  lieth. 

Who  hath  the  voice,  which  soul  from  senses  sunders? 
Whose  force  but  yours  the  bolts  of  beauty  thunders? 

To  you!  to  you!  all  song  of  praise  is  due; 
Only  with  you  not  miracles  are  wonders. 


Doubt  you  to  whom  my  IMuse  these  notes  intendeth, 
Which  now  my  breast,  o'ercharged,  to  music  lendeth? 

To  you!  to  you!  all  song  of  praise  is  due; 
Only  in  you  my  song  begins  and  endcth. 

Philip  Sidney  [1554-1586] 


SILVIA 

From  "The  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona"  ,       ^-r     ^  . 

mqiiU  vM 

Who  is  Silvia?     What  is  she?  f 

That  all  our  swains  commend  her? 

Holy,  fair,  and  wise  is  she; 

The  heaven  sucli  grace  did  lend  her, 

That  she  might  admired  be. 

L 

Is  she  kind  as  she  is  fair? 

For  beauty  lives  with  kindness:  •    ' 

Love  doth  to  her  eyes  repair. 

To  help  him  of  his  blindness; 
And,  being  helped,  inhabits  there. 

Then  to  Silvia  let  us  sing,  J  ;TT/'T 

That  Silvia  is  excelling; 
She  excels  each  mortal  thing 

Upon  the  dull  earth  dwelling: 
To  her  let  us  garlands  bring. 

William  Shakefpeare  [1464-1616] 


520  Poems  of  Love 

CUPID  AND   CAMPASPE 

From  "  Alexander  and  Campaspe  " 

Cupid  and  my  Campaspe  played 
At  cards  for  kisses;  Cupid  paid: 
He  stakes  his  quiver,  bow,  and  arrows, 
His  mother's  doves,  and  team  of  sparrows;      " 
Loses  them  too;  then  down  he  throws  ''    ' 

The  coral  of  his  lip,  the  rose  ' 

Growing  on's  cheek  (but  none  knows  how); 
With  these,  the  crystal  of  his  brow. 
And  then  the  dimple  on  his  chin; 
All  these  did  my  Campaspe  win: 
And  last  he  set  her  both  his  eyes- 
She  won,  and  Cupid  blind  did  rise. 

O  Love!  has  she  done  this  to  thee? 

What  shall,  alas!  become  of  me? 

John  Lyly  [i554?-i6o6] 

APOLLO'S  SONG 

From  "  Midas  " 

My  Daphne's  hair  is  twisted  gold. 

Bright  stars  apiece  her  eyes  do  hold, 

My  Daphne's  brow  enthrones  the  Graces, 

My  Daphne's  beauty  stains  all  faces, 

On  Daphne's  cheek  grow  rose  and  cherry, 

On  Daphne's  lip  a  sweeter  berry, 

Daphne's  snowy  hand  but  touched  does  melt, 

And  then  no  heavenlier  warmth  is  felt. 

My  Daphne's  voice  tunes  all  the  spheres, 

My  Daphne's  music  charms  all  ears. 

Fond  am  I  thus  to  sing  her  praise; 

These  glories  now  are  turned  to  bays. 

John  Lyly  [iS54?-i6o6] 

'FAIR  IS  MY  LOVE  FOR  APRIL'S  IN  HER  FACE" 

From  "  Periraedes  "  ] ' 

Fair  is  my  love  for  April's  in  her  face, 
Her  lovely  breasts  September  claims  his  part, 

And  lordly  July  in  her  eyes  takes  place, 
But  cold  December  dwelleth  in  her  heart; 


Samela  521 

Blest  be  the  months  that  set  my  thoughts  on  fire, 
Accurst  that  month  that  hindereth  my  desire. 

Like  Phoebus'  fire,  so  sparkle  both  her  eyes, 
As  air  perfumed  with  amber  is  her  breath, 

Like  swelling  waves  her  lovely  breasts  do  rise. 
As  earth,  her  heart,  cold,  dateth  me  to  death: 

Aye  me,  poor  man,  that  on  the  earth  do  live. 

When  unkind  earth  death  and  despair  doth  give! 

In  pomp  sits  mercy  seated  in  her  face, 

Love  'twixt  her  breasts  his  trophies  doth  imprint. 

Her  eyes  shine  favor,  courtesy,  and  grace, 

But  touch  her  heart,  ah,  that  is  framed  of  flint! 

Therefore  my  harvest  in  the  grass  bears  grain ; 

The  rock  will  wear,  washed  with  a  winter's  rain. 

Robert  Greene  [is6o?-i592] 

SAMELA 

From  "  Menaphon  " 

Like  to  Diana  in  her  summer  weed. 
Girt  with  a  crimson  robe  of  brightest  dye. 

Goes  fair  Samela; 
Whiter  than  be  the  flocks  that  straggling  feed, 
When  washed  by  Arcthusa's  Fount  they  lie, 

Is  fair  Samela. 

As  fair  Aurora  in  her  morning-gray. 
Decked  with  the  ruddy  glister  of  her  love,  <jA 

Is  fail"  Samela; 
Like  lovely  Thetis  on  a  calmed  day, 
Whenas  her  brightness  Neptune's  fancy  move, 

Shines  fair  Samela. 

Her  tresses  gold,  her  eyes  like  glassy  streams, 
Her  teeth  are  pearl,  the  breasts  are  ivory 

Of  fair  Samela; 
Her  cheeks  like  rose  and  lily  yield  forth  gleams; 
Her  brows  bright  arches  framed  of  ebony: 

Thus  fair  Samela 


5^2  Poems  of  Love 

•.'1''   Passeth  fair  Venus  in  her  bravest  hue, 

And  Juno  in  the  show  of  majesty,  <  .  .  r  ii,  j .. 

For  she's  Samcla; 
Pallas,  in  wit, — all  three,  if  you  well  view, 
For  beauty,  wit,  and  matchless  dignity 

Yield  to  Samela.  ^"''^^^^ 

Robert  Greene  [i56bf-i 502] 

DAMELUS'  SONG  OF  HIS   DIAPHENIA 

DiAPHENiA  like  the  daffadowndilly. 
White  as  the  sun,  fair  as  the  lily. 

Heigh  ho,  how  I  do  love  thee ! 
I  do  love  thee  as  my  lambs 
Are  beloved  of  their  dams; — 

Plow  blest  were  I  if  thou  would'st  prove  me. 

Diaphenia  like  the  spreading  roses. 
That  in  thy  sweets  a,ll  sweets  encloses. 

Fair  sweet,  how  I  do  love  thee! 
I  do  love  thee  as  each  flower 
Loves  the  sun's  life-giving  power; 

For  dead,  thy  breath  to  life  might  move  me. 

Diaphenia  like  to  all  things  blessed, 
^Vhen  all  thy  praises  are  expressed, 

Dear  joy,  how  I  do  love  thee! 
As  the  birds  do  love  the  spring,  ,1  1 

Or  the  bees  their  careful  king: 

Then  in  requite,  sweet  virgin,  love  me!   '•  ' 

Henry  Constable  [i 562-1 613] 


MADRIGAL  ^o  ,m, 

taa)  ToH 
My  love  in  her  attire  doth  show  her  wit, 

It  doth  so  well  become  her; 
For  every  season  she  hath  dressings  fit, 
For  Winter,  Spring,  and  Summer. 


"  There  is  a  Lady  Sweet  and   Kind  "     523 

No  beauty  she  dolli  miss 

When  all  her  robes  arc  on: 
But  Beauty's  self  she  is  .-^^ 

When  all  her  robes  are  gone. 

Unkno'wn 


CHLORIS   IN  THE   SNOW  '^ 

I  SAW  fair  Chloris  walk  alone, 
When  feathered  rain  came  swiftly  down, 
As  Jove  descending  from  his  Tower 
To  court  her  in  a  silver  shower: 
The  wanton  snow  flew  to  her  breast, 
Like  pretty  birds  into  their  nest, 
But,  overcome  with  whiteness  there. 
For  grief  it  thawed  into  a  tear: 

Thence  falling  on  her  garment's  hem. 
To  deck  her,  froze  into  a  gem. 


Unknown 


"THERE  IS  A  LADY   SWEET  AND   KIND" 

There  is  a  lady  sweet  and  kind, 
Was  never  face  so  pleased  my  mind; 
I  did  but  see  her  passing  by, 
And  yet  I  love  her  till  I  die. 

Her  gesture,  motion,  and  her  smiles, 
Her  wit,  her  voice  my  heart  beguiles. 
Beguiles  my  heart,  I  know  not  why, 
And  yet  I  love  her  till  I  die. 

Cupid  is  winged  and  doth  range. 
Her  country  so  my  love  doth  change: 
But  change  she  earth,  or  change  she  sky, 
Yet  I  will  love  her  till  I  die. 

Unknown 


524  Poems  of  Love 


CHERRY-RIPE 

There  is  a  garden  in  her  face 

Where  roses  and  white  liHes  blow; 
A  heavenly  paradise  is  that  place, 
Wherein  all  pleasant  fruits  do  flow: 

There  cherries  grow  which  none  may  buy 
Till  "Cherry-ripe"  themselves  do  cry. 

Those  cherries  fairly  do  enclose 
Of  orient  pearl  a  double  row, 
Which  when  her  lovely  laughter  shows, 
They  look  like  rose-buds  filled  with  snow; 
Yet  them  nor  peer  nor  prince  can  buy 
Till  '"Cherry-ripe"  themselves  do  cry. 

Her  eyes  like  angels  watch  them  still; 

Her  brows  like  bended  bows  do  stand, 
Threatening  with  piercing  frowns  to  kill 
All  that  attempt  with  eye  or  hand 
Those  sacred  cherries  to  come  nigh, 
Till  "Cherry-ripe"  themselves  do  cry. 

Thomas  Campion  [    ?    -i6ig] 

AMARILLIS 

I  CARE  not  for  these  ladies, 

That  must  be  wooed  and  prayed: 

Give  me  kind  Amarillis, 

The  wanton  countrymaid. 

Nature  art  disdaineth, 

Her  beauty  is  her  own. 

Her  when  we  court  and  kiss. 

She  cries.  Forsooth,  let  go! 

But  when  we  come  where  comfort  is, 

She  never  will  say  No. 

If  I  love  Amarillis, 
She  gives  me  fruit  and  flowers: 
But  if  we  love  these  ladies. 
We  must  give  golden  showers. 


Elizabeth  of  Bohemia  525 

Give  them  gold,  that  sell  love, 
Give  me  the  Nut-brown  lass. 
Who,  when  we  court  and  kiss, 
She  cries,  Forsooth,  let  go: 
But  when  we  come  where  comfort  is, 
She  never  will  say  No. 

These  ladies  must  have  pillows, 

And  beds  by  strangers  wrought; 

Give  me  a  bower  of  willows, 

Of  moss  and  leaves  unbought, 

And  fresh  Amarillis, 

With  milk  and  honey  fed; 

Who,  when  we  court  and  kiss. 

She  cries,  Forsooth,  let  go: 

But  when  we  come  where  comfort  is, 

She  never  will  say  No ! 

Thomas  Campion  [    ?    -1619] 


ELIZABETH  OF  BOHEMIA 

You  meaner  beauties  of  the  night. 

That  poorly  satisfy  our  eyes 
More  by  your  number  than  your  light. 

You  common  people  of  the  skies; 

What  are  you  when  the  moon  shall  rise? 

You  curious  chanters  of  the  wood, 

"    That  warble  forth  Dame  Nature's  lays. 

Thinking  your  passions  understood 

By  your  weak  accents;  what 's  your  praise 
When  Philomel  her  voice  shall  raise? 

You  violets  that  first  appear. 

By  your  pur^  purple  mantles  known  ;,H 

Like  the  proud  virgins  of  the  year,  ' 

As  if  the  spring  were  all  your  own;  i,]i 

What  are  you  when  the  rose  is  blown? 


^26  Poems  of  Love 

So,  when  my  mistress  shall  be  seen 
In  form  and  beauty  of  her  mind, 

By  virtue  first,  then  choice,  a  Queen, 
Tell  me,  if  she  were  not  designed 
Th '  eclipse  and  glory  of  her  kind. 

Henry  Wotlon  [1568-1639] 


HER  TRIUMPH 

From  "  A  Celebration  of  Charis" 

See  the  Chariot  at  hand  here  of  Love, 

Wherein  my  Lady  rideth! 
Each  that  draws  is  a  swan  or  a  dove, 

And  well  the  car  Love  guideth.  ,^_,^ 

As  she  goes,  all  hearts  do  duty 
I  Unto  her  beauty; 

And,  enamored,  do  wish,  so  they  might 

But  enjoy  such  a  sight. 
That  they  still  were  to  run  by  her  side, 
Through  swords,  through  seas,  whither  she  would  ride 

/vwilvidj-' 

Do  but  look  on  her  eyes,  they  do  light 

All  that  Love's  world  compriseth! 
Do  but  look  on  her  hair,  it  is  bright 

As  Love 's  star  when  it  riseth ! 
Do  but  mark,  her  forehead's  smoother 

Than  words  that  soothe  her! 
And  from  her  arched  brows  such  a  grace 

Sheds  itself  through  the  face,    . 
As  alone  there  triumphs  to  the  life 
All  the  gain,  all  the  good,  of  the  elements'  strife. 

ai  ntyriV/ 
Have  you  seen  but  a  bright  lily  grow 
Before  rude  hands  have  touched  it? 
Have  you  marked  but  the  fall  o'  the  snow  /U. 

Before  the  soil  hath  smutched  it?  '^  "ii'iJ. 

Have  you  felt  the  wool  of  beaver. 

Or  swan's  down  ever?       .-    ,   ^...  jT,..'// 


A   Welcome  527 

Or  have  smelt  o'  the  bud  o'  the  brier? 

Or  the  nard  in  the  fire? 
Or  have  tasted  the  bag  o'  the  bee? 
O  so  white,  O  so  soft,  O  so  sweet  is  she! 

Ben  JoHSon  [iS73?-i637] 


OF  PHYLLIS 

In  petticoat  of  green. 
Her  hair  about  her  eyne, 
Phyllis  beneath  an  oak 
Sat  milking  her  fair  flock: 
Among  that  sweet-strained  moisture,  rare  dehght, 
Her  hand  seemed  milk  in  milk,  it  was  so  white. 

William  Drummond  [1585-1649] 


A  WELCOME 

Welcome,  welcome,  do  I  sing. 
Far  more  welcome  than  the  spring; 
He  that  parteth  from  you  never 
Shall  enjoy  a  spring  forever. 

He  that  to  the  voice  is  near. 
Breaking  from  your  ivory  pale, 

Need  not  walk  abroad  to  hear 
The  delightful  nightingale. 

He  that  looks  still  on  your  eyes, 
Though  the  winter  have  begun 

To  benumb  our  arteries, 

Shall  not  want  the  summer's  sun. 

He  that  still  may  see  your  cheeks, 
Where  all  rareness  still  reposes, 

Is  a  fool  if  e'er  he  seeks  (<l 

Other  lilies,  other  roses- 


528  Poems   of  Love 

He  to  whom  your  soft  lip  yields, 
And  perceives  your  breath  in  kissing, 

All  the  odors  of  the  fields 
Never,  never  shall  be  missing. 

He  that  question  would  anew 

What  fair  Eden  was  of  old, 
Let  him  rightly  study  you, 

And  a  brief  of  that  behold. 

Welcome,  welcome,  then  I  sing. 
Far  more  welcome  than  the  spring;  ,:  , 
He  that  parteth  from  you  never, 
Shall  enjoy  a  spring  forever. 

William  Browne  [1591-1643?] 


THE   COMPLETE  LOVER 

For  her  gait,  if  she  be  walking; 
Be  she  sitting,  I  desire  her 
For  her  state's  sake;  and  admire  her 
For  her  wit  if  she  be  talking; 

Gait  and  state  and  wit  approve  her; 

For  which  all  and  each  I  love  her. 

Be  she  sullen,  I  commend  her 
For  a  modest.    Be  she  merry, 
For  a  kind  one  her  prefer  I. 
Briefly,  everything  doth  lend  her 

So  much  grace,  and  so  approve  her, 

That  for  everything  I  love  her. 

William  Browne  [1591-1643?] 


RUBIES  AND  PEARLS 

Some  asked  me  where  the  rubies -grew, 

And  nothing  I  did  say. 
But  with  my  finger  pointed  to 

The  lips  of  Julia.        ,  :  ■  ; ;' 


To  Cynthia   '  529 

Some  asked  how  pearls  did  grow,  and  where; 

Then  spoke  I  to  my  girl, 
To  part  her  lips,  and  showed  them  there 

The  quarrelets  of  pearl. 

Robert  Herrick  [isgi-1674] 


UPON  JULIA'S   CLOTHES 


Whenas  in  silks  my  Julia  goes, 
Then,  then,  methinks,  how  sweetly  flows 
The  liquefaction  of  her  clothes! 
Next,  when  I  cast  mine  eyes  and  see 
That  brave  vibration  each  way  free, 
— O  how  that  glittering  taketh  me! 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


TO  CYNTHIA  ON  CONCEALMENT  OF  HER 
BEAUTY 

Do  not  conceal  those  radiant  eyes, 
The  starlight  of  serenest  skies; 
Lest,  wanting  of  their  heavenly  light, 
They  turn  to  chaos'  endless  night! 

Do  not  conceal  those  tresses  fair, 
The  silken  snares  of  thy  curled  hair; 
Lest,  finding  neither  gold  nor  ore, 
The  curious  silk-worm  work  no  more. 

Do  not  conceal  those  breasts  of  thine, 
More  snow-white  than  the  Apennine; 
Lest,  if  these  be  like  cold  and  frost, 
The  lily  be  for  ever  lost. 

Do  not  conceal  that  fragrant  scent. 
Thy  breath,  which  to  all  flowers  hath  lent 
Perfumes;  lest,  if  being  suppressed, 
No  spices  grow  in  all  the  rest. 


53 o  Poems  of  Love 

Do  not  conceal  thy  heavenly  voice,  q^ 

Which  makes  the  hearts  of  gods  rejoice; 
Lest,  music  hearing  no  such  thing. 
The  nightingale  forget  to  sing. 

Do  not  conceal,  nor  yet  eclipse. 
Thy  pearly  teeth  with  coral  lips; 
Lest  that  the  seas  cease  to  bring  forth 
Gems  which  from  thee  have  all  their  worth. 

Do  not  conceal  no  beauty,  grace, 
That's  either  in  thy  mind  or  face; 
Lest  virtue  overcome  by  vice 
Make  men  believe  no  Paradise. 

Francis  Kynaston  [1587-1642] 

SONG 

Ask  me  no  more  where  Jove  bestows, 
^,         When  June  is  past,  the  fading  rose; 
For  in  your  beauty 's  orient  deep 
These  flowers,  as  in  their  causes,  sleep. 

Ask  me  no  more  whither  do  stray 
The  golden  atoms  of  the  day; 
For  in  pure  love  heaven  did  prepare 
Those  powders  to  enrich  your  hair. 

Ask  me  no  more  whither  doth  haste 
The  nightingale  when  May  is  past; 
For  in  your  sweet  dividing  throat 
She  winters  and  keeps  warm  her  note. 

Ask  me  no  more  where  those  stars  'light 
That  downwards  fall  in  dead  of  night; 
For  in  your  eyes  they  sit,  and  there 
Fixed  become  as  in  their  sphere. 

Ask  me  no  more  if  east  or  west 
The  Phoenix  builds  her  spicy  nest; 
For  unto  you  at  last  she  flies. 
And  in  your  fragrant  bosom  dies. 

Thomas  Carew  [1598?-! 639?] 


Castara      ' '  53 1 

'  .     A  DEVOUT  LOVER    -^.vrH 

I  HAVE  a  mistress,  for  perfections  rare      ^ 

In  every  eye,  but  in  my  thoughts  most  fair. 

Like  tapers  on  the  altar  shine  her  eyes; 

Her  breath  is  the  perfume  of  sacrifice; 

And  wheresoe'er  my  fancy  would  begin, 

Still  her  perfection  lets  religion  in. 

We  sit  and  talk,  and  kiss  away  the  hours 

As  chastely  as  the  morning  dews  kiss  flowers: 

I  touch  her,  like  my  beads,  with  devout  care. 

And  come  unto  my  courtship  as  m.y  prayer. 

Thomas  Randolph  [1005-1635] 

ON  A   GIRDLE        ,,,  ^nA 

That  which  her  slender  waist  confinied         * 
Shall  now  my  joyful  temples  bind; 
No  monarch  but  would  give  his  crown 
His  arms  might  do  what  this  has  done,  j 

It  was  my  Heaven 's  extremest  sphere, 
The  pale  which  held  that  lovely  deer: 
My  joy,,  my  grief,  my  hope,  my  love. 
Did  all  within  this  circle  move. 

A  narrow  compass!  and  yet  there 
Dwelt  all  that's  good,  and  all  that 's  fair! 
Give  me  but  what  this  ribbon  bound. 
Take  all  the  rest  the  sun  goes  round ! 

Edmund  Waller  [1606- 1687] 

CASTARA 

Like  the  violet,  which  alone 

Prospers  in  some  happy  shade,       ;.^ 
My  Castara  lives  unknown, 
To  no  looser  eye  betrayed : 

For  she's  to  herself  untrue 
oi-jodi]  Who  delights  i'  the  public  view. 


532  Poems  of  Love 

Such  is  her  beauty  as  no  arts 

Have  enriched  with  borrowed  grace. 
Her  high  birth  no  pride  imparts, 
For  she  blushes  in  her  place. 

Folly  boasts  a  glorious  blood; 
She  is  noblest,  being  good. 

Cautious,  she  knew  never  yet 

What  a  wanton  courtship  meant; 
Nor  speaks  loud  to  boast  her  wit, 
In  her  silence,  eloquent. 

Of  herself  survey  she  takes, 

But  'tween  men  no  difference  makes. 

She  obeys  with  speedy  will 

Her  grave  parents'  wise  commands; 
And  so  innocent,  that  ill 

She  nor  acts,  nor  understands. 
Women's  feet  run  still  astray 
If  to  ill  they  know  the  way: 

She  sails  by  that  rock,  the  court. 

Where  oft  virtue  splits  her  mast; 
And  retiredness  thinks  the  port 
Where  her  fame  may  anchor  cast. 
Virtue  safely  cannot  sit 
Where  vice  is  enthroned  for  wit. 

She  holds  that  day's  pleasure  best 
Where  sin  waits  not  on  delight; 
Without  mask,  or  ball,  or  feast. 
Sweetly  spends  a  winter's  night. 

O  'er  that  darkness  whence  is  thrust 
Prayer  and  sleep,  oft  governs  lust. 

She  her  throne  makes  reason  climb, 

While  wild  passions  captive  lie;     ;,[ 
And,  each  article  of  time, 

Her  pure  thoughts  to  heaven  fly; 
All  her  vows  religious  be, 
And  she  vows  her  love  to  me. 

William  Habington  [1605-1654] 


Chloe   Divine  533 


TO  ARAMANTHA 

THAT    SHE   WOULD   DISHEVEL   HER   HAIR 

Aramantha,  sweet  and  fair, 
Ah,  braid  no  more  that  shining  hair! 
As  my  curious  hand  or  eye 
Hovering  round  thee,  let  it  fly. 

Let  it  fly  as  unconfined 
As  its  calm  ravisher  the  wind, 
Who  hath  left  his  darling,  th'  east, 
To  wanton  in  that  spicy  nest. 

Every  tress  must  be  confessed; 
But  neatly  tangled  at  the  best; 
Like  a  clew  of  golden  thread 
Most  excellently  ravelled. 

Do  not,  then,  wind  up  that  light 
In  ribbons,  and  o'er-cloud  in  night. 
Like  the  sun  in's  early  ray; 
But  shake  your  head  and  scatter  day. 

Richard  Lovelace  [i 618-1 658] 

CHLOE  DIVINE 

Chloe's  a  Nymph  in  flowery  groves, 

A  Nereid  in  the  streams; 
Saint-like  she  in  the  temple  moves, 

A  woman  in  my  dreams. 

Love  steals  artillery  from  her  eyes. 

The  Graces  point  her  charms; 
Orpheus  is  rivalled  in  her  voice, 

And  Venus  in  her  arms. 

Never  so  happily  in  one 

Did  heaven  and  earth  combine; 
And  yet  'tis  flesh  and  blood  alone 

That  makes  her  so  divine. 

Thomas  D'Urfey  [1653-1723] 


534  Poems  of  Love 


MY  PEGGY 

My  Peggy  is  a  young  thing, 
Just  entered  in  her  teens, 
Fair  as  the  day,  and  sweet  as  May, 
Fair  as  the  day,  and  always  gay: 

My  Peggy  is  a  young  thing. 

And  I'm  na  very  auld. 
Yet  weel  I  Hke  to  meet  her  at 
The  wauking  o'  the  fauld. 

My  Peggy  speaks  sae  sweetly 

Whene'er  we  meet  alane, 

I  wish  nae  mair  to  lay  my  care, 

I  wish  nae  mair  o'  a'  that's  rare: 

My  Peggy  speaks  sae  sweetly, 

To  a'  the  lave  I'm  cauld; 

But  she  gars  a'  my  spirits  glow 

At  wauking  o'  the  fauld.    :■-'- 
, ,  ■  j 

My  Peggy  smiles  sae  kindly 
Whene'er  I  whisper  love, 
That  I  look  douu  on  a'  the  toun. 
That  I  look  doun  upon  a  croun: 

My  Peggy  smiles  sae  kindly, 

It  makes  me  blithe  and  bauld. 
And  naething  gi'es  me  sic  delight 
As  waulking  o'  the  fauld. 

My  Peggy  sings  sae  saftly, 
When  on  my  pipe  I  play; 
By  a'  the  rest  it  is  confessed, 
By  a'  the  rest  that  she  sings  best: 
My  Peggy  sings  sae  saftly, 

And  in  her  sangs  are  tauld, 
Wi'  innocence  the  wale  o'  sense, 
At  wauking  o'  the  fauld. 

Allan  Ramsay  [1686-175? 


Tell   Me,    My   Heart"  535 


SONG 

From  "  Acis  and  Galatea  " 

O  RUDDIER  than  the  cherry! 

O  sweeter  than  the  berry!  ; 

O  nymph  more  bright 

Than  moonshine  night, 
Like  kidlings  bhthe  and  merry! 
Ripe  as  the  melting  luster; 

Yet  hard  to  tame 

As  raging  flame, 
And  fierce  as  storms  that  bluster! 

John  Gay  [1685-1732] 

"TELL  ME,   MY   HEART,   IF  THIS   BE  LOVE" 

When  Delia  on  the  plain  appears, 
Awed  by  a  thousand  tender  fears 
I  would  approach,  but  dare  not  move: 
Tell  me,  my  heart,  if  this  be  love? 

Whene'er  she  speaks,  my  ravished  ear 
No  other  voice  than  hers  can  heari 
No  other  wit  but  hers  approve:  c 

Tell  me,  my  heart,  if  this  be  love? 

If  she  some  other  youth  commend, 
Though  I  was  once  his  fondest  friend, 
His  instant  enemy  I  prove: 
Tell  me,  my  heart,  if  this  be  love?'')'/ 

When  she  is  absent,  I  no  more 
Delight  in  all  that  pleased  before — 
The  clearest  spring,  or  shadiest  grove: 
Tell  me,  my  heart,  if  this  be  love? 

When  fond  of  power,  of  beauty  vain, 
Her  nets  she  spread  for  every  swain, 
I  strove  to  hate,  but  vainly  strove: 
Tell  me,  my  heart,  if  this  be  love? 

vii..'\'uv,  K  George  Lyttlclon  [1709-1773] 


536  Poems  of  Love 


THE  FAIR  THIEF 

Before  the  urchin  well  could  go, 
She  stole  the  whiteness  of  the  snow; 
And  more,  that  whiteness  to  adorn, 
She  stole  the  blushes  of  the  morn; 
Stole  all  the  sweetness  ether  sheds 
On  primrose  buds  and  violet  beds. 

Still  to  reveal  her  artful  wiles 
She  stole  the  Graces'  silken  smiles; 
She  stole  Aurora's  balmy  breath; 
And  pilfered  orient  pearl  for  teeth; 
The  cherry,  dipped  in  morning  dew, 
Gave  moisture  to  her  lips,  and  hue. 

These  were  her  infant  spoils,  a  store; 
And  she,  in  time,  still  pilfered  more! 
At  twelve,  she  stole  from  Cyprus'  queen 
Her  air  and  love-commanding  mien; 
Stole  Juno's  dignity;  and  stole 
From  Pallas  sense  to  charm  the  soul. 

Apollo's  wit  was  next  her  prey; 
Her  next,  the  beam  that  lights  the  day; 
She  sang; — amazed,  the  Sirens  heard,' 
And  to  assert  their  voice  appeared. 
She  played; — the  Muses  from  their  hill, 
Wondered  who  thus  had  stole  their  skill. 

Great  Jove  approved  her  crimes  and  art; 
And,  t'other  day,  she  stole  my  heart! 
If  lovers,  Cupid,  are  thy  care. 
Exert  thy  vengeance  on  this  Fair: 
To  trial  bring  her  stolen  charms. 
And  let  her  prison  be  my  arms!  " 

.'■  Charles  Wyndham  [17 10-1763] 


Song  537 


AMORET 

If  rightly  tuneful  bards  decide, 

If  it  be  fixed  in  Love's  decrees, 
That  Beauty  ought  not  to  be  tried 

But  by  its  native  power  to  please, 
Then  tell  me,  youths  and  lovers,  tell — 
What  fair  can  Amoret  excel? 

Behold  that  bright  unsullied  smile. 
And  wisdom  speaking  in  her  mien: 

Yet — she  so  artless  all  the  whUe, 
So  little  studious  to  be  seen — 

We  naught  but  instant  gladness  know, 

Nor  think  to  whom  the  gift  we  owe. 

But  neither  music,  nor  the  powers 
Of  youth  and  mirth  and  frolic  cheer, 

Add  half  the  sunshine  to  the  hours, 
Or  make  life's  prospect  half  so  clear, 

As  memory  brings  it  to  the  eye 

From  scenes  where  Amoret  was  by. 

This,  sure,  is  Beauty's  happiest  part; 

This  gives  the  most  unbounded  sway; 
This  shall  enchant  the  subject  heart 

When  rose  and  lily  fade  away; 
And  she  be  still,  in  spite  of  Time, 
Sweet  Amoret,  in  all  her  prime. 

Mark  Akenside  [ 1 7  2 1 - 1 7  7 o] 


SONG 

The  shape  alone  let  others  prize, 
The  features  of  the  fair: 

I  look  for  spirit  in  her  eyes. 
And  meaning  in  her  air. 


•il 


5^,8  Poems  of  Love 

A  damask  cheek,  an  ivory  arm, 
Shall  ne'er  my  wishes  win: 

Give  me  an  animated  form, 
That  speaks  a  mind  within. 

A  face  where  awful  honor  shines,  , 
Where  «ense  and  sweetness  movi 

And  angel  innocence  refines 
The  tenderness  of  love. 


These  are  the  soul  of  beauty''s  frame; 

Without  whose  vital  aid 
Unfinished  all  her  features  seem, 

And  all  her  roses  dead. 

But  ah !  where  both  their  charms  unite, 

How  perfect  is  the  view, 
With  every  image  of  delight, 

With  graces  ever  new: 

Of  power  to  charm  the  greatest  woe, 

The  wUdest  rage  control, 
Diffusing  mildness  o'er  the  brow, 

And  rapture  through  the  soul. 

Their  power  but  faintly  to  express 

All  language  must  despair; 
But  go,  behold  Arpasia's  face. 

And  read  it  perfect  there. 

Mark  A kenside  [1721-1770] 


KATE  OF  ABERDEEN 

The  silver  moon's  enamored  beam 

Steals  softly  through  the  night. 
To  wanton  with  the  winding  stream. 

And  kiss  reflected  light. 
To  beds  of  state  go  balmy  sleep 

('Tis  where  you've  seldom  been), 
May's  vigil  while  the  shepherds  keep 

With  Kate  of  Aberdeen. 


Song  539 


Upon  the  green  the  virgins  wait,    ■.:'\ 

In  rosy  chaplets  gay, 
Till  morn  unbar  her  golden  gate, 

And  give  the  promised  IMay. 
JNIethinks  I  hear  the  maids  declare,  r-r/ 

The  promised  Ma\'  when  seen,     ■      ., 
Not  half  so  fragrant,  half  so  fair,-,  _  y 

As  Kate  of  Aberdeen. 

Strike  up  the  tabor's  boldest  notes, 

We'll  rouse  the  nodding  grove; 
The  nested  birds  shall  raise  their  throats. 

And  hail  the  maid  of  love; 
And  see — the  matin  lark  mistakes, 

He  quits  the  tufted  green: 
Fond  bird!  'tis  not  the  morning  breaks, — 

'Tis  Kate  of  Aberdeen. 

Now  lightsome  o'er  the  level  mead, 

Where  midnight  fairies  rove. 
Like  them  the  jocund  dance  we'll  lead. 

Or  tune  the  reed  to  love: 
For  see  the  rosy  May  draws  nigh, 

She  claims  a  virgin  Queen; 
And  hark,  the  happy  shepherds  cry, 

'Tis  Kate  of  Aberdeen. 

John  Cunningham  [1729-1773] 


SONG 

Who  has  robbed  the  ocean  cave, 

To  tinge  thy  lips  with  coral  hue? 
Who  from  India's  distant  wave 

For  thee  those  pearly  treasures  drew? 
Who  from  yonder  orient  sky 
Stole  the  morning  of  thine  eye? 

A  thousand  charms,  thy  form  to  deck, 
From  sea,  and  earth,  and  air  are  torn; 

Roses  bloom  upon  thy  check, 

On  thy  breath  their  fragrance  borne. 


540  Poems  of  Love 

Guard  thy  bosom  from  the  day, 
Lest  thy  snows  should  melt  away. 

But  one  charm  remains  behind, 

Which  mute  earth  can  ne'er  impart; 
Nor  in  ocean  wilt  thou  find, 
Nor  in  the  circling  air,  a  heart. 
Fairest!  wouldst  thou  perfect  be. 
Take,  oh,  take  that  heart  from  me. 

John  Shaw  [1559-1625] 


CHLOE 

It  was  the  charming  month  of  May, 
When  all  the  flowers  were  fresh  and  gay; 
One  morning,  by  the  break  of  day. 

The  youthful,  charming  Chloe 

From  peaceful  slumber  she  arose. 

Girt  on  her  mantle  and  her  hose. 

And  o'er  the  flowery  mead  she  goes. 

The  youthful,  charming  Chloe. 

Lovely  was  she  by  the  dawn. 

Youthful  Chloe,  charming  Chloe, 
Tripping  o'er  the  pearly  lawn. 
The  youthful,  charming  Chloe. 

The  feathered  people  you  might  see. 
Perched  all  around  on  every  tree. 
In  notes  of  sweetest  melody 

They  hail  the  charming  Chloe; 
Till,  painting  gay  the  eastern  skies, 
The  glorious  sun  began  to  rise, 
Out-rivalled  by  the  radiant  eyes 
Of  youthful,  charming  Chloe. 
Lovely  was  she  by  the  dawn, 

Youthful  Chloe,  charming  Chloe, 
Tripping  o'er  the  pearly  lawn. 
The  youthful,  charming  Chloe. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


The  Lover's  Choice  541 


'O  MALLY'S  MEEK,  MALLY'S   SWEET" 

As  I  was  walking  up  the  street, 

A  barefit  maid  I  chanced  to  meet; 
But  O  the  road  was  very  hard 
For  that  fair  maiden's  tender  feet. 
O  Mally's  meek,  Mally's  sweet, 
Mally's  modest  and  discreet, 
Mally's  rare,  Mally's  fair, 
Mally's  every  way  complete. 

It  were  more  meet  that  those  fine  feet 

Were  wcel  laced  up  in  silken  shoon, 
And  'twere  more  fit  that  she  should  sit 

Within  yon  chariot  gilt  aboon. 

Her  yellow  hair,  beyond  compare. 

Comes  trinkhng  down  her  swan-white  neck, 
And  her  two  eyes,  like  stars  in  skies. 
Would  keep  a  sinking  ship  frae  wreck. 
O  Mally's  meek,  IVIally's  sweet, 
Mally's  modest  and  discreet, 
Mally's  rare,  Mally's  fair, 
Mally's  every  way  complete. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


THE  LOVER'S   CHOICE 

You,  Damon,  covet  to  possess 
The  nymph  that  sparkles  in  her  dress; 
Would  rustling  silks  and  hoops  invade, 
And  clasp  an  armful  of  brocade. 

Such  raise  the  price  of  your  delight 
Who  purchase  both  their  red  and  white, 
And,  pirate-like,  surprise  your  heart 
With  colors  of  adulterate  art. 


542  "5    Poems  of  Love 

Me,  Damon,  me  the  maid  enchants 
«frp  Whose  cheeks  the  hand  of  nature  paints; 
A  modest  bkish  adorns  her  face, 
Her  air  an  unaffected  grace.  1  zK 

No  art  she  knows,  or  seeks  to  know;  ■" 
No  charm  to  wealthy  pride  will  owe; 
No  gems,  no  gold  she  needs  to  wear|; 
She  shines  intrinsically  fair. 

Thomas  Bedingfield  [   ?    -1613I 


RONDEAU  REDOUBLfi 

My  day  and  night  are  in  my  lady's  hand;  '  "■ 
I  have  no  other  sunrise  than  her  sight;  ' 

For  me  her  favor  glorifies  the  land ;  ' '  "^^ 

Her  anger  darkens  all  the  cheerful  light.-' 
Her  face  is  fairer  than  the  hawthorn  white. 

When  all  a-(lower  in  May  the  hedgerows  stand; 
While  she  is  kind,  I  know  of  no  affright; 

IVIy  day  and  night  are  in  my  lady's  hand. 

All  heaven  in  her  glorious  eyes  is  spanned; 

Her  smile  is  softer  than  the  summer's  night, 
Gladder  than  daybreak  on  the  Faery  strand; 

I  have  no  other  sunrise  than  her  sight. 

Her  silver  speech  is  like  the  singing  flight 
Of  runnels  rippling  o'er  the  jewelled  sand; 

Her  kiss  a  dream  of  delicate  delight; 
For  me  her  favor  glorifies  the  land. 

What  if  the  Winter  chase  the  Summer  bland! 

The  gold  sun  in  her  hair  burns  ever  bright. 
If  she  be  sad,  straightway  all  joy  is  banned; 

Her  anger  darkens  all  the  cheerful  light. 

Come  weal  or  woe,  I  am  my  lady's  knight 
And  in  her  service  every  ill  withstand; 

Love  is  my  Lord  in  all  the  world's  despite 
And  holdeth  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand 

My  day  and  night. 
Jolui  Payne  [11.  1770-1S00] 


"  My  Love  She's  But  a  Lassie  Yet"    ^43 

"MY  LOVE  SHE'S  BUT  A  LASSIE  YET" 

My  love  she's  but  a  lassie  yet,  ji^'i  J^^A 

A  lightsome  lovely  lassie  yet;  ""  '  ■'^'''    ' 

It  scarce  wad  do 

To  sit  an'  woo 
Down  by  the  stream  sac  glassy  yet.  '  'voH 

But  there's  a  braw  time  coming  yet, 
When  we  may  gang  a-roaming  yet; 

An'  hint  wi'  glee 

O'  joys  to  be,  s'-'f'^ 

When  fa's  the  modest  gloaming  yet. 

She's  neither  proud  nor  saucy  yet. 
She's  neither  plump  nor  gaucy  yet; 
'  But  just  a  jinking, 

''  Bonny  bUnking, 

Hilty-skilty  lassie  yet. 

But  O,  her  artless  smile's  mair  sweet 
Than  hinny  or  than  marmalete; 

An'  right  or  wrang, 

Ere  it  be  lang, 
I'll  bring  her  to  a  parley  yet. 

I'm  jealous  o'  what  blesses  her, 
The  very  breeze  that  kisses  her. 

The  flowery  beds 

On  which  she  treads, 
Though  wae  for  ane  that  misses  her. 

Then  O,  to  meet  my  lassie  yet, 
Up  in  yon  glen  sae  grassy  yet; 

For  all  I  see 

Are  naught  to  me, 
Save  her  that's  but  a  lassie  yet. 

James  Hogg  [1770-1835] 


544 


Poems  of  Love 


JESSIE,  THE  FLOWER  O'  DUNBLANE 


The  sun  has  gane  down  o'er  the  lofty  Benlomond 
And  left  the  red  clouds  to  preside  o'er  the  scene, 

While  lanely  I  stray,  in  the  calm  simmer  gloamin', 
To  muse  on  sweet  Jessie,  the  Flower  o'  Dunblane. 

How  sweet  is  the  brier,  wi'  its  saft  fauldin'  blossom, 
And  sweet  is  the  birk,  wi'  its  mantle  o'  green; 

Yet  sweeter  and  fairer,  and  dear  to  this  bosom, 
Is  lovely  young  Jessie,  the  Flower  o'  Dunblane. 

She's  modest  as  ony,  and  blithe  as  she's  bonnie; 

For  guileless  simplicity  marks  her  its  ain; 
And  far  be  the  villain,  divested  of  feeling, 

Wha'd  blight  in  its  bloom  the  sweet  Flower  o'  Dunblane, 

Sing  on,  thou  sweet  mavis,  thy  hymn  to  the  e'ening! 

Thou'rt  dear  to  the  echoes  of  Calderwood  glen; 
Sae  dear  to  this  bosom,  sae  artless  and  winning, 

Is  charming  young  Jessie,  the  Flower  o'  Dunblane. 

How  lost  were  my  days  till  I  met  wi'  my  Jessie! 

The  sports  o'  the  city  seemed  foolish  and  vain; 
I  ne'er  saw  a  nymph  I  would  ca'  my  dear  lassie 

Till  charmed  wi'  sweet  Jessie,  the  Flower  o'  Dunblane. 

Though  mine  were  the  station  o'  loftiest  grandeur, 

Amidst  its  profusion  I'd  languish  in  pain. 
And  reckon  as  naething  the  height  o'  its  splendor. 

If  wanting  sweet  Jessie,  the  Flower  o'  Dunblane. 

Robert  Tannahill  [1774-1810] 


MARGARET  AND   DORA 

Margaret's  beauteous — Grecian  arts 
Ne'er  drew  form  completer, 

Yet  why,  in  my  hearts  of  hearts. 
Hold  I  Dora's  sweeter? 


Dagonet's   Canzonet  545 

Dora's  eyes  of  heavenly  blue 

Pass  all  painting's  reach, 
Ringdoves'  notes  are  discord  to 

The  music  of  her  speech. 

Artists!  Margaret's  smile  receive, 

And  on  canvas  show  it; 
But  for  perfect  worship  leave 

Dora  to  her  poet. 

Thomas  Campbell  [i 777-1844] 


DAGONET'S  CANZONET 

A  QUEEN  lived  in  the  South; 
And  music  was  her  mouth, 
And  sunshine  was  her  hair, 
By  day,  and  all  the  night 
The  drowsy  embers  there 
Remembered  still  the  light; 
My  soul,  was  she  not  fair! 

But  for  her  eyes — they  made 
An  iron  man  afraid; 
Like  sky-blue  pools  they  were, 
Watching  the  sky  that  knew 
Itself  transmuted  there 
Light  blue,  or  deeper  blue; 
My  soul,  ivas  she  not  fair! 

The  lifting  of  her  hands 
Made  laughter  in  the  lands 
Where  the  sun  is,  in  the  South: 
But  my  soul  learnt  sorrow  there 
In  the  secrets  of  her  mouth. 
Her  eyes,  her  hands,  her  hair: 
O  soul,  was  she  not  fair! 

Ernest  Rhys  [1859- 


546  Poems  of  Lbve 


STANZAS   FOR   MUSIC 

There  be  none  of  Beauty's  daughters 

With  a  magic  like  thee; 
And  like  music  on  the  waters 

Is  thy  sweet  voice  to  me: 
When,  as  if  its  sound  were  causing 
The  charmed  ocean's  pausing, 
The  waves  He  still  and  gleaming, 
And  the  lulled  winds  seem  dreaming. 

And  the  midnight  moon  is  weaving 

Her  bright  chain  o'er  the  deep, 
Whose  breast  is  gently  heaving. 

As  an  infant's  asleep: 
So  the  spirit  bows  before  thee, 
To  listen  and  adore  thee; 
With  a  full  but  soft  emotion, 
Like  the  swell  of  Summer's  ocean. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [178S-1824I 


"FLOWERS  I  WOULD   BRING" 

Flowers  I  would  bring  if  flowers  could  make  thee  fairci 

And  music,  if  the  Muse  were  dear  to  thee; 

(For  loving  these  would  make  thee  love  the  bearer) 

But  sweetest  songs  forget  their  melody. 

And  loveliest  flowers  would  but  conceal  the  wearer: — 

A  rose  I  marked,  and  might  have  plucked;  but  she 

Blushed  as  she  bent,  imploring  me  to  spare  her, 

Nor  spoil  her  beauty  by  such  rivalry. 

Alas!  and  with  what  gifts  shall  I  pursue  thee. 

What  offerings  bring,  what  treasures  lay  before  thee; 

When  earth  with  all  her  floral  train  doth  woo  thee, 

And  all  old  poets  and  old  songs  adore  thee; 

And  love  to  thee  is  naught ;  from  passionate  mood 

Secured  by  joy's  complacent  plenitude! 

Aubrey  Thomas  de  Vere  [1814-1902] 


"It  Is   Not   Beauty   i    Demand"      547 


'IT  IS  NOT  BEAUTY   I   DEMAND" 

It  is  not  Beauly  I  demand, 

A  crystal  brow,  the  moon's  despair, 

Nor  the  snow's  daughter,  a  white  hand,  ,- 
Nor  mermaid's  yellow  pride  of  hair: 

Tell  me  not  of  your  starry  eyes, 
Your  lips  that  seem  on  roses  fed. 

Your  breasts,  where  Cupid  tunibling  lies 
Nor  sleeps  for  kissing  of  his  bed: — 

A  bloomy  pair  of  vermeil  cheeks 
Like  Hebe's  in  her  ruddiest  hours, 

A  breath  that  softer  music  speaks 

Than  summer  winds  a-wooing  flowers,— 

These  are  but  gauds:  nay,  what  are  lips? 

Coral  beneath  the  ocean-stream, 
Whose  brink  when  your  adventurer  sips 

Full  oft  he  perishcth  on  them. 

And  what  are  cheeks  but  ensigns  oft 
That  wave  hot  youth  to  fields  of  blood? 

Did  Helen's  breast,  though  ne'er  so  soft. 
Do  Greece  or  Ilium  any  good? 

Eyes  can  with  baleful  ardor  burn ; 

Poison  can  breathe,  that  erst  perfumed; 
There's  many  a  white  hand  holds  an  urn 

With  lovers'  hearts  to  dust  consumed. 

For  crystal  brows— there's  naught  within: 
They  are  but  empty  cells  for  pride; 

He  who  the  Siren's  hair  would  win 
Is  mostly  strangled  in  the  tide. 

Give  me,  instead  of  Beauty's  bust, 

A  tender  heart,  a  loyal  mind 
Which  with  temptation  I  could  trust, 

Yet  never  linked  with  error  find, — 


548  Poems  of  Love 

One  in  whose  gentle  bosom  I 

Could  pour  my  secret  heart  of  woes, 

Like  the  care-burthened  honey-fly 

That  hides  his  murmurs  in  the  rose,— 

My  earthly  Comforter!  whose  love 

So  indefeasible  might  be 
That,  when  my  spirit  won  above, 

Hers  could  not  stay,  for  sympathy. 

George  Darky  [i  795-1846] 


SONG 

She  is  not  fair  to  outward  view 

As  many  maidens  be, 
Her  loveliness  I  never  knew 

Until  she  smiled  on  me; 
Oh!  then  I  saw  her  eye  was  bright, 
A  well  of  love,  a  spring  of  light. 

But  now  her  looks  are  coy  and  cold, 

To  mine  they  ne'er  reply, 
And  yet  I  cease  not  to  behold 

The  love-light  in  her  eye: 
Her  very  frowns  are  fairer  far 
Than  smiles  of  other  maidens  are. 

Hartley  Coleridge  [1706-1849] 


SONG 

A  VIOLET  in  her  lovely  hair, 
A  rose  upon  her  bosom  fair! 

But  O,  her  eyes 
A  lovelier  violet  disclose, 
And  her  ripe  lips  the  sweetest  rose 

That's  'neath  the  skies. 

A  lute  beneath  her  graceful  hand 
Breathes  music  forth  at  her  command: 


549 


Eileen  Aroon 

But  still  her  tongue 
Far  richer  music  calls  to  birth 
Than  all  the  minstrel  power  on  earth 

Can  give  to  song. 

And  thus  she  moves  in  tender  light, 
The  purest  ray,  where  all  is  bright, 

Serene,  and  sweet; 
And  sheds  a  graceful  influence  round, 
That  hallows  e'en  the  very  ground 

Beneath  her  feet! 

Charles  Swain  [1801-1874] 

EILEEN  AROON 

When  like  the  early  rose, 

Eileen  Aroon! 
Beauty  in  childhood  blows, 

Eileen  Aroon! 
When,  like  a  diadem, 
Buds  blush  around  the  stem, 
Which  is  the  fairest  gem?  — 

Eileen  Aroon! 

Is  it  the  laughing  eye, 

Eileen  Aroon! 
Is  it  the  timid  sigh, 

Eileen  Aroon! 
Is  it  the  tender  tone, 
Soft  as  the  stringed  harp's  moan? 
O,  it  is  truth  alone, — 

Eileen  Aroon! 

When  like  the  rising  day, 

Eileen  Aroon! 
Love  sends  his  early  ray, 

Eileen  Aroon! 
What  makes  his  dawning  glow, 
Changeless  through  joy  or  woe? 
Only  the  constant  know: — 

Eileen  Aroon! 


550  Poems  of  Love 

I  know  a  valley  fair,  i. 

Eileen  Aroon!       -  tbI 
I  knew  a  cottage  there, 

Eileen  Aroon! 
Far  in  that  valley's  shade 
I  knew  a  gentle  maid, 
Flower  of  a  hazel  glade, — 

Eileen  Aroon! 

Who  in  the  song  so  sweet? 

Eileen  Aroon! 
( i  Who  in  the  dance  so  fleet? 

Eileen  Aroon! 
Dear  were  her  charms  to  me; 
Dearer  her  laughter  free. 
Dearest  her  constancy, — 

Eileen  Aroon! 

Were  she  no  longer  true, 

Eileen  Aroon! 
What  should  her  lover  do?     , , 

Eileen  Aroon! 
Fly  with  his  broken  chain 
Far  o  'er  the  sounding  main, 
Never  to  love  again, — 

Eileen  Aroon! 

Youth  must  with  time  decay, 

Eileen  Aroon! 
Beauty  must  fade  away, 

Eileen  Aroon! 
Castles  are  sacked  in  war. 
Chieftains  are  scattered  far, 
Truth  is  a  fixed  star, —  ,. 

Eileen  Aroon ! 

Gerald  Griffin  [1803- 1840] 
ANNIE  LAURIE 

Maxwelton  braes  are  bonnie 

Where  early  fa's  the  dew, 
And  it's  there  that  Annie  Laurie 

Gie'd  me  her  promise  true — 


t) .  To   Helen  eci 

Gie'd  me  her  promise  true, 

Which  ne'er  forgot  will  be; 
And  for  bonnie  Annie  Laurie 

I  'd  lay  me  doun  and  dee. 

Her  brow  is  like  the  snaw-drift; 

Her  throat  is  like  the  swan; 
Her  face  it  is  the  fairest 

That  e'er  the  sun  shone  on — 
That  e'er  the  sun  shone  on — 

And  dark  blue  is  her  ee; 
And  for  bonnie  Annie  Laurie 

I'd  lay  me  doun  and  dee. 

Like  dew  on  the  gowan  lying 

Is  the  f a '  o '  her  fairy  feet ; 
And  like  the  winds  in  summer  sighing, 

Her  voice  is  low  and  sweet — 
Her  voice  is  low  and  sweet — 

And  she's  a'  the  world  to  me; 
And  for  bonnie  Annie  Laurie 

I  'd  lay  me  doun  and  dee. 

WiUiam  Douglas  [i672?-i748] 

TO  HELEN 

Helen,  thy  beauty  is  to  me 

Like  those  Nicaean  barks  of  yore, 
That  gently,  o'er  a  perfumed  sea, 

The  weary,  wayworn  wanderer  bore 

To  his  own  native  shore. 

On  desperate  seas  long  wont  to  roam. 
Thy  hyacinth  hair,  thy  classic  face, 

Thy  Naiad  airs,  have  brought  me  home 
To  the  glory  that  was  Greece 
And  the  grandeur  that  was  Rome. 

Lo!  in  yon  brilliant  window-niche 

How'  statue-like  I  see  thee  stand,  * 

The  agate  lamp  within  thy  hand! 

Ah,  Psyche,  from  the  regions  which 

Are  Holy  Land! 

Edgar  Allan  Poe  [180Q-1S4Q] 


^^2  Poems  of  Love 

"A  VOICE  BY  TPIE   CEDAR  TREE'^ 

From  "  Maud  " 


A  VOICE  by  the  cedar  tree, 

In  the  meadow  under  the  Hall! 

She  is  singing  an  air  that  is  known  to  mc, 

A  passionate  ballad  gallant  and  gay, 

A  martial  song  like  a  trumpet's  call! 

Singing  alone  in  the  morning  of  life, 

In  the  happy  morning  of  life  and  of  May, 

Singing  of  men  that  in  battle  array, 

Ready  in  heart  and  ready  in  hand, 

March  with  banner  and  bugle  and  fife 

To  the  death,  for  their  native  land. 


Maud  with  her  exquisite  face, 

And  wild  voice  pealing  up  to  the  sunny  sky, 

And  feet  like  sunny  gems  on  an  English  green, 

Maud  in  the  light  of  her  youth  and  her  grace, 

Singing  of  Death,  and  of  Honor  that  cannot  die. 

Till  I  well  could  weep  for  a  time  so  sordid  and  mean. 

And  myself  so  languid  and  base. 

Ill 

Silence,  beautiful  voice! 

Be  still,  for  you  only  trouble  the  mind 

With  a  joy  in  which  I  cannot  rejoice, 

A  glory  I  shall  not  find. 

Still!     I  will  hear  you  no  more. 

For  your  sweetness  hardly  leaves  me  a  choice 

But  to  move  to  the  meadow  and  fall  before 

Her  feet  on  the  meadow  grass,  and  adore. 

Not  her,  who  is  neither  courtly  nor  kind, 

Not  her,  not  her,  but  a  voice. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [i8og-i8g2] 


The  Henchman 


553 


SONG 

Nay  but  you,  who  do  not  love  her, 

Is  she  not  pure  gold,  my  mistress? 
Holds  earth  aught — speak  truth — above  her? 

Aught  like  this  tress,  see,  and  this  tress. 
And  this  last  fairest  tress  of  all, 
So  fair,  see,  ere  I  let  it  fall? 

Because  you  spend  your  lives  in  praising; 

To  praise,  you  search  the  wide  world  over: 
Then  why  not  witness,  calmly  gazing, 

If  earth  holds  aught — speak  truth — above  her? 
Above  this  tress,  and  this,  I  touch 
But  cannot  praise,  I  love  so  much! 

Robert  Browning  [i8i2-i88g 


THE  HENCHMAN 

My  lady  walks  her  morning  round, 
My  lady's  page  her  fleet  greyhound. 
My  lady's  hair  the  fond  winds  stir, 
And  all  the  birds  make  songs  for  her. 

Her  thrushes  sing  in  Rathburn  bowers. 
And  Rathburn  side  is  gay  with  flowers: 
But  ne'er  like  hers,  in  flower  or  bird. 
Was  beauty  seen  or  music  heard. 

The  distance  of  the  stars  is  hers; 
The  least  of  all  her  worshipers. 
The  dust  beneath  her  dainty  heel, 
She  knows  not  that  I  see  or  feel. 

Oh,  proud  and  calm! — she  cannot  know 
Where'er  she  goes  with  her  I  go; 
Oh.  cold  and  fair! — she  cannot  guess 
I  kneel  to  share  her  hound's  caress! 

Gay  knights  beside  her  hunt  and  hawk, 
rrj. .,  J^  rob  their  ears  of  her  sweet  talk; 


554  Poems  of  Love 

Her  suitors  come  from  east  and  west, 
I  steal  her  smiles  from  every  guest. 

Unheard  of  her,  in  loving  words, 

I  greet  her  with  the  song  of  birds; 

I  reach  her  with  her  green-armed  bowers, 

I  kiss  her  with  the  lips  of  flowers.  ,     ^ 

^  t  bnA 

The  hound  and  I  are  on  her  trail,         ''^   ^ 
The  wind  and  I  uphft  her  veil;  ,.  ...jr 

As  if  the  calm,  cold  moon  she  were, 
And  I  the  tide,  I  follow  her. 

As  unrebuked  as  they,  I  share  c/odA 

The  license  of  the  sun  and  air,  ^...rr 

And  in  a  common  homage  hide 
My  worship  from  her  scorn  and  pride. 

World-wide  apart,  and  yet  so  near, 
I  breathe  her  charmed  atmosphere. 
Wherein  to  her  my  service  brings 
The  reverence  due  to  holy  things. 

Her  maiden  pride,  her  haughty  name, 
My  dumb  devotion  shall  not  shame; 
The  love  that  no  return  doth  crave 
To  knightly  levels  lifts  the  slave. 

No  lance  have  I,  in  joust  or  fight. 
To  sphnter  in  my  lady's  sight; 
But,  at  her  feet,  how  blest  were  I 
For  any  need  of  hers  to  die! 

John  Greenleaf  Whittier  [i  807-1 


LOVELY  MARY  DONNELLY 

Oh,  lovely  Mary  Donnelly,  it's  you  I  love  the  best! 

If  fifty  girls  were  round  you  I'd  hardly  see  the  rest. 

Be  what  it  may  the  time  of  day,  the  place  be  where  it  will. 

Sweet  looks  of  Mary  Donnelly,  they  bloom  before  me  still. 


Lovely    Mary    Donnelly  555 

Her  eyes  like  mountain  water  that's  flowing  on  a  rock, 
How  clear  the)'  are,  how  dark  they  are!  they  give  me  many 

a  shock. 
Red  rowans  warm  in  sunshine  and  wetted  with  a  shower, 
Could  iic'er  express  the  charming  lip  that  has  me  in  its 

power. 

Her  nose  is  straight  and  handsome,  her  eyebrows  lifted  up, 
Her  chin  is  very  neat  and  pert,  and  smooth  like  a  china  cup. 
Her  hair's  the  brag  of  Ireland,  so  weighty  and  so  fine; 
It's  rolling  down  upon  her  neck,  and  gathered  in  a  twine. ' 

The  dance  o'  last  Whit-Monday  night  exceeded  all  before; 
No  pretty  girl  for  miles  about  was  missing  from  the  floor; 
But  Mary  kept  the  belt  of  love,  and  O  but  she  was  gay! 
She  danced  a  jig,  she  sung  a  song,  that  took  my  heart  away. 

When  she  stood  up  for  dancing,  her  steps  were  so  complete. 

The  music  nearly  killed  itself  to  listen  to  her  feet; 

The  fiddler  moaned  his  blindness,  he  heard  her  so  much 

praised, 
,But  blessed  his  luck  he  wasn't  deaf  when  once  her  voice  she 

raised. 

And  evermore  I'm  whistling  or  lilting  what  you  sung, 
Your  smile  is  always  in  my  heart,  your  name  beside  my 

tongue; 
But  you've  as  many  sweethearts  as  you'd  count  on  both 

your  hands. 
And  for  myself  there's  not  a  thumb  or  little  finger  stands. 

Oh,  you're  the  flower  o'  womankind  in  country  or  in  town; 

The  higher  I  exalt  you,  the  lower  I'm  cast  down. 

If  some  great  lord  should  come  this  way,  and  see  your  beauty 

bright, 
And  you  to  be  his  lady,  I'd  own  it  was  but  right. 

O  might  wc  live  together  in  a  lofty  palace  hall,  I 

Where  joyful  music  rises,  and  where  scarlet  curtains  fall! 
O  might  we  live  together  in  a  cottage  mean  and  small, 
With  sods  of  grass  the  only  roof,  and  mud  the  only  wall! 


^^6  Poems  of  Love 

O  lovely  Mary  Donnelly,  your  beauty's  my  distress:  ,y{ 

It's  far  too  beauteous  to  be  mine,  but  I'll  never  wish  it  less.  .  ■ 
The  proudest  place  would  fit  your  face,  and  I  am  poor  and 
low;  ,^; 

But  blessings  be  about  you,  dear,  wherever  you  may  go!     ,n 

William  AUingham  [1824-1889] 


LOVE  IN  THE   VALLEY 

Under  yonder  beech-tree  single  on  the  green-sward, 

Couched  with  her  arms  behind  her  golden  head, 
Knees  and  tresses  folded  to  slip  and  ripple  idly, 

Lies  my  young  love  sleeping  in  the  shade. 
Had  I  the  heart  to  slide  an  arm  beneath  her, 

Press  her  parting  lips  as  her  waist  I  gather  slow,         ■ 
Waking  in  amazement  she  could  not  but  embrace  me: 

Then  would  she  hold  me  and  never  let  me  go? 

Shy  as  the  squirrel  and  wayward  as  the  swallow, 

Swift  as  the  swallow  along  the  river's  light 
Circleting  the  surface  to  meet  his  mirrored  winglets, 

Fleeter  she  seems  in  her  stay  than  in  her  flight. 
Shy  as  the  squirrel  that  leaps  among  the  pine-tops. 

Wayward  as  the  swallow  overhead  at  set  of  sun. 
She  whom  I  love  is  hard  to  catch  and  conquer. 

Hard,  but  O  the  glory  of  the  winning  were  she  won! 

When  her  mother  tends  her  before  the  laughing  mirror, 

Tying  up  her  laces,  looping  up  her  hair. 
Often  she  thinks,  were  this  wild  thing  wedded. 

More  love  should  I  have,  and  much  less  care.  i 

When  her  mother  tends  her  before  the  lighted  mirror,    • 

Loosening  her  laces,  combing  down  her  curls. 
Often  she  thinks,  were  this  wild  thing  wedded, 

I  should  miss  but  one  for  many  boys  and  girls.   ,,-  ,,n/ 

Heartless  she  is  as  the  shadow  in  the  meadows,       '  '     ,' 
Flying  to  the  hills  on  a  blue  and  breezy  noon. 

No,  she  is  athirst  and  drinking  up  her  wonder: 

Earth  to  her  is  young  as  the  slip  of  the  new  moon.      ' 


Love  in   the  Valley  ^^y 

Deals  she  an  unkindness,  'tis  but  her  rapid  measure, 
Even  as  in  a  dance;  and  her  smile  can  heal  no  less: 

Like  the  swinging  May-cloud  that  pelts  the  flowers  with 
hailstones 
Off  a  sunny  border,  she  was  made  to  bruise  and  bless. 

Lovely  arc  the  curves  of  the  white  owl  sweeping 

Wavy  in  the  dusk  lit  by  one  large  star. 
Lone  on  the  fir-branch,  his  rattle-note  unvaried, 

Brooding  o'er  the  gloom,  spins  the  brown  eve-jar. 
Darker  grows  the  valley,  more  and  more  forgetting: 

So  were  it  with  me  if  forgetting  could  be  willed. 
Tell  the  grassy  hollow  that  holds  the  bubbling  well-spring. 

Tell  it  to  forget  the  source  that  keeps  it  filled. 

Stepping  down  the  hill  with  her  fair  companions, 

Arm  in  arm,  all  against  the  raying  West, 
Boldly  she  sings,  to  the  merry  tune  she  marches; 

Brave  in  her  shape,  and  sweeter  unpossessed. 
Sweeter,  for  she  is  what  my  heart  first  awaking 

Whispered  the  world  was;  morning  light  is  she. 
Love  that  so  desires  would  fain  keep  her  changeless; 

Fain  would  fling  the  net,  and  fain  have  her  free. 

Happy  happy  time,  when  the  white  star  hovers 

Low  over  dim  fields  fresh  with  bloomy  dew. 
Near  the  face  of  dawn,  that  draws  athwart  the  darkness. 

Threading  it  with  color,  like  yewberries  the  yew. 
Thicker  crowd  the  shades  as  the  grave  East  deepens 

Cilowing,  and  with  crimson  a  long  cloud  swells. 
ALaiden  still  the  morn  is;  and  strange  she  is,  and  secret; 

Strange  her  eyes;  her  cheeks  are  cold  as  cold  sea-shells. 

Sunrays,  leaning  on  our  southern  hills  and  lighting 

Wild  cloud-mountains  that  drag  the  hills  along. 
Oft  ends  the  day  of  your  shifting  brilliant  laughter 

Chill  as  a  dull  face  frowning  on  a  song. 
Ay,  but  shows  the  South-west  a  ripple-feathered  bosom 

Blown  to  silver  while  the  clouds  are  shaken  and  ascend 
Scaling  the  mid-heavens  as  they  stream,  there  comes  a  sunset 

Rich,  deep  like  love  in  beauty  without  end. 


558  Poems  of  Love 

When  at  dav/n  she  sighs,  and  hke  an  infant  to  the  window 

Turns  grave  eyes  craving  light,  released  from  dreams, 
Beautiful  she  looks,  like  a  white  water-lily  -  -i 

Bursting  out  of  bud  in  havens  of  the  streams. 
When  from  bed  she  rises  clothed  from  neck  to  ankle 

In  her  long  nightgown  sweet  as  boughs  of  May, 
Beautiful  she  looks,  like  a  tall  garden-lily 

Pure  from  the  night,  and  splendid  for  the  day. 

Mother  of  the  dews,  dark  eye-lashed  twilight, 

Low-lidded  twilight,  o'er  the  valley's  brim. 
Rounding  on  thy  breast  sings  the  dew-delighted  skylark, 

Clear  as  though  the  dewdrops  had  their  voice  in  him. 
Hidden  where  the  rose-flush  drinks  the  rayless  planet, 

Fountain-full  he  pours  the  spraying  iountain-showers. 
Let  me  hear  her  laughter,  I  would  have  her  ever 

Cool  as  dew  in  twilight,  the  lark  above  the  flowers. 

All  the  girls  are  out  with  their  baskets  for  the  primrose; 

Up  lanes,  woods  through,  they  troop  in  joyful  bands. 
My  sweet  leads:  she  knows  not  why,  but  now  she  loiters, 

Eyes  the  bent  anemones,  and  hangs  her  hands. 
Such  a  look  will  tell  that  the  violets  are  peeping. 

Coming  the  rose:  and  unaware  a  cry 
Springs  in  lier  bosom  for  odors  and  for  color, 

Covert  and  the  nightingale;  she  knows  not  why. 

Kerchiefed  head  and  chin  she  darts  between  her  tulips, 

Streaming  like  a  willow  gray  in  arrowy  rain: 
Some  bend  beaten  cheek  to  gravel,  and  their  angel  ■/: 

She  will  be;  she  lifts  them,  and  on  she  speeds  again. 
Black  the  driving  rain  cloud  breasts  the  iron  gateway: 

She  is  forth  to  cheer  a  neighbor  lacking  mirth. 
So  when  sky  and  grass  met  roUing  dumb  for  thunder'  ''•' 

Saw  I  once  a  white  dove,  sole  light  of  earth.  "^''  "'^ 

Prim  little  scholars  are  the  flowers  of  her  garden, 
Trained  to  stand  in  rows,  and  asking  if  they  please. 

I  might  love  them  well  but  for  loving  more  the  wild  ones: 
O  my  wild  ones!  they  tell  me  more  than  these. 


Love  in  the  Valley  ^tg 

You,  my  wild  one,  you  tell  of  honied  field-rose, 
Violet,  blushing  eglantine  in  life;  and  even  as  they, 

They  by  the  wayside  are  earnest  of  your  goodness, 
You  are  of  life's,  on  the  banks  that  line  the  way. 

Peering  at  her  chamber  the  white  crowns  the  red  rose, 

Jasmine  winds  the  porch  with  stars  two  and  three. 
Parted  is  the  window;  she  sleeps;  the  starry  jasmine 

Breathes  a  falling  breath  that  carries  thoughts  of  me. 
Sweeter  unpossessed,  have  I  said  of  her  my  sweetest? 

Not  while  she  sleeps:  while  she  sleeps  the  jasmine  breathes, 
Luring  her  to  love:  she  sleeps;  the  starry  jasmine 

Bears  me  to  her  pillow  under  white  rose-wreaths. 

Yellow  with  birdfoot-trcfoil  are  the  grass-glades; 

Yellow  with  cinquefoil  of  the  dew-gray  leaf; 
Yellow  with  stonecrop;  the  moss-mounds  are  yellow; 

Blue-necked  the  wheat  sways,  yellowing  to  the  sheaf. 
Green-yellow  bursts  from  the  copse  the  laughing  yaiBe;  ,  (^ 

Sharp  as  a  sickle  is  the  edge  of  shade  and  shine:  ^ 

Earth  in  her  heart  laughs  looking  at  the  heavens,  ,  .-^ 

Thinking  of  the  harvest :  I  look  and  thinli  of  mine. 

This  I  may  know:  her  dressing  and  undressing        -h'riO 

Such  a  change  of  light  shows  as  when  the  skies  in  sport 
Shift  from  cloud  to  moonlight ;  or  edging  over  thunder 

Slips  a  ray  of  sun;  or  sweeping  into  port 
White  sails  furl;  or  on  the  ocean  borders  ' 

White  sails  lean  along  the  waves  leaping  green. 
Visions  of  her  shower  before  me,  but  from  eyesight 

Guarded  she  would  be  like  the  sun  were  she  seen. 

Front  door  and  back  of  the  mossed  old  farmhouse 

Open  with  the  morn,  and  in  a  breezy  link 
Freshly  sparkles  garden  to  stripe-shadowed  orchard, 

Green  across  a  rill  where  on  sand  the  minnows  wink. 
Busy  in  the  grass  the  early  sun  of  summer 

Swarms,  and  the  blackbird's  mellow  fluting  notes 
Call  my  darling  up  with  round  and  roguish  challenge: 

Quaintest,  richest  carol  of  all  the  singing  throats! 


f6o  Poems  of   Love 

Cool  was  the  woodside;  cool  as  her  white  dairy 

Keeping  sweet  the  cream-pan;  and  there  the  boys  from 
school, 
Cricketing  below,  rushed  brown  and  red  with  sunshine; 

O  the  dark  translucence  of  the  deep-eyed  cool! 
Spying  from  the  farm,  herself  she  fetched  a  pitcher 

Full  of  milk,  and  tilted  for  each  in  turn  the  beak. 
Then  a  little  fellow,  mouth  up  and  on  tiptoe,  ^.q 

Said,  "  I  will  kiss  you  " :  she  laughed  and  leaned  her  cheek. 

Doves  of  the  fir-wood  walling  high  our  red  roof 

Through  the  long  noon  coo,  crooning  through  the  coo. 
Loose  droop  the  leaves,  and  down  the  sleepy  roadway 

Sometimes  pipes  a  chaffinch;  loose  droops  the  blue. 
Cows  flap  a  slow  tail  knee-deep  in  the  river. 

Breathless,  given  up  to  sun  and  gnat  and  fly. 
Nowhere  is  she  seen;  and  if  I  see  her  nowhere. 

Lightning  may  come,  straight  rains  and  tiger  sky. 

O  the  golden  sheaf,  the  rustling  treasure-armful! 

O  the  nutbrown  tresses  nodding  interlaced! 
O  the  treasure-tresses  one  another  over 

Nodding!    O  the  girdle  slack  about  the  waist! 
Slain  are  the  poppies  that  shot  their  random  scarlet 

Quick  amid  the  wheat-ears:  wound  about  the  waist, 
Gathered,  see  these  brides  of  Earth  one  blush  of  ripeness! 

O  the  nutbrown  tresses  nodding  interlaced. 

Large  and  smoky  red  the  sun's  cold  disk  drops. 

Clipped  by  naked  hills,  on  violet  shaded  snow: 
Eastward  large  and  still  lights  up  a  bower  of  moonrise, 

Whence  at  her  leisure  steps  the  moon  aglow. 
Nightlong  on  black  print-branches  our  beech-tree 

Gazes  in  this  whiteness:  nightlong  could  I. 
Here  may  life  on  death  or  death  on  life  be  painted. 

Let  me  clasp  her  soul  to  know  she  cannot  die! 

Gossips  count  her  faults;  they  scour  a  narrow  chamber 
Where  there  is  no  window,  read  not  heaven  or  her. 

"When  she  was  a  tiny,"  one  aged  woman  quavers. 
Plucks  at  my  heart  and  leads  me  by  the  ear.  _ 


Love  in  the  Valley  561 

Faults  she  had  once  as  she  learned  to  run  and  tumbled: 
Faults  of  feature  some  see,  beauty  not  complete. 

Yet,  good  gossips,  beauty  that  makes  holy 

Earth  and  air,  may  have  faults  from  head  to  feet. 

Hither  she  comes;  she  comes  to  me;  she  hngers, 

Deepens  her  brown  eyebrows,  while  in  new  surprise 
High  rise  the  lashes  in  wonder  of  a  stranger; 

Yet  am  I  the  light  and  living  of  her  eyes. 
Something  friends  have  told  her  fills  her  heart  to  brimming, 

Nets  her  in  her  blushes,  and  wounds  her,  and  tames.— 
Sure  of  her  haven,  O  like  a  dove  alighting. 

Arms  up,  she  dropped:  our  souls  were  in  our  names. 

Soon  will  she  lie  like  a  white  frost  sunrise. 

Yellow  oats  and  brown  wheat,  barley  pale  as  rye. 
Long  since  your  sheaves  have  yielded  to  the  thresher, 

Felt  the  girdle  loosened,  seen  the  tresses  fly. 
Soon  will  she  lie  Jike  a  blood-red  sunset. 

Swift  with  the  to-morrow,  green-winged  Spring! 
Sing  from  the  South-west,  bring  her  back  the  truants. 

Nightingale  and  swallow,  song  and  dipping  wing. 

Soft  new  beech-leaves,  up  to  beamy  April 

Spreading  bough  on  bough  a  primrose  mountain,  you, 
Lucid  in  the  moon,  raise  lilies  to  the  skyfields. 

Youngest  green  transfused  in  silver  shining  through: 
Fairer  than  the  lily,  than  the  wild  white  cherry: 

Fair  as  in  image  my  seraph  love  appears 
Borne  to  me  by  dreams  when  dawn  is  at  my  eyelids: 

Fair  as  in  the  flesh  she  swims  to  me  on  tears. 

Could  I  find  a  place  to  be  alone  with  heaven, 

I  would  speak  my  heart  out :  heaven  is  my  need. 
Every  woodland  tree  is  flushing  like  the  dogwood, 

Flashing  like  the  whitebcam,  swaying  like  the  reed. 
Flushing  like  the  dogwood  crimson  in  October; 

Streaming  like  the  flag-reed  South-west  blown;   '; 
Flashing  as  in  gusts  the  sudden-lighted  whitebeam: 

All  seem  to  know  what  is  for  heaven  alone. 

George  Meredith  [iSaS-igog] 


562  Poems  of  Love 


MARIAN 

She  can  be  as  wise  as  we, 

And  wiser  when  she  wishes; 
She  can  knit  with  cunning  wit, 

And  dress  the  homely  dishes.  ;''iii 

She  can  flourish  staff  or  pen,  ' 

And  deal  a  wound  that  lingers; 
She  can  talk  the  talk  of  men, 

And  touch  with  thrilling  fingers. 

Match  her  ye  across  the  sea. 

Natures  fond  and  fiery; 
Ye  who  zest  the  turtle's  nest 

With  the  eagle's  eyrie. 
Soft  and  loving  is  her  soul, 

Swift  and  lofty  soaring; 
Mixing  with  its  dove-like  dole 

Passionate  adoring. 

Such  a  she  who'll  match  with  me? 

In  flying  or  pursuing, 
Subtle  wiles  are  in  her  smiles 

To  set  the  world  a-wooing.  ,•:■ 

She  is  steadfast  as  a  star. 

And  yet  the  maddest  maiden: 
She  can  wage  a  gallant  war, 

And  give  the  peace  of  Eden.  .^ 

George  Meredith  [i 828-1909] 


PRAISE  OF  MY  LADY 

My  lady  seems  of  ivory- 
Forehead,  straight  nose,  and  cheeks  that  be 
Hollowed  a  little  mournfully. 

Beata  niea  Domina  ! 

Her  forehead,  overshadowed  much 
By  bows  of  hair,  has  a  wave  such 
As  God  was  good  to  make  for  me. 
Beata  mea  Domina  ! 


Praise  of  My   Lady  ^6^ 

Not  greatly  long  my  lady's  hair, 
Nor  yet  with  yellow  color  fair, 
But  thick  and  crisped  wonderfully: 
Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

Heavy  to  make  the  pale  face  sad, 
And  dark,  but  dead  as  though  it  had 
Been  forged  by  God  most  wonderfully 
Beata  mca  Domiua  ! 

Of  some  strange  metal,  thread  by  thread, 
To  stand  out  from  my  lady's  head, 
Not  moving  much  to  tangle  me. 
Beata  mea  Domina ! 

Beneath  her  brows  the  lids  fall  slow, 
The  lashes  a  clear  shadow  throw 
Where  I  would  wish  my  lips  to  be. 
Beata  mca  Domina  ! 

Her  great  eyes,  standing  far  apart,  i 

Draw  up  some  memory  from  her  heart, 
And  gaze  out  very  mournfully; 
Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

So  beautiful  and  kind  they  are. 
But  most  times  looking  out  afar. 
Waiting  for  something,  not  for  me. 
Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

I  wonder  if  the  lashes  long 
Are  those  that  do  her  bright  eyes  wrong, 
For  always  half  tears  seem  to  be 
Beata  mea  Domina ! 

Lurking  below  the  underlid,  , 

Darkening  the  place  where  they  lie  hid: 
If  they  should  rise  and  flow  for  me! 
Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

Her  full  lips  being  made  to  kiss. 
Curled  up  and  pensive  each  one  is; 
This  makes  me  faint  to  stand  and  see. 
Beata  in^a, Domina ! 


564  Poems  of  Love 

Her  lips  are  not  contented  now, 
Because  the  hours  pass  so  slow 
Towards  a  sweet  time:  (pray  for  me), 
Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

Nay,  hold  thy  peace!  for  who  can  tell? 
But  this  at  least  I  know  full  well, 
Her  lips  are  parted  longingly, 

Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

So  passionate  and  swift  to  move. 
To  pluck  at  any  flying  love, 
That  I  grow  faint  to  stand  and  see. 
Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

Yea!  there  beneath  them  is  her  chin;, 
So  fine  and  round,  it  were  a  sin 
To  feel  no  weaker  when  I  see 

Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

God's  dealings;  for  with  so  much  care 
And  troublous,  faint  lines  wrought  in  there, 
He  finishes  her  face  for  me. 

Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

Of  her  long  neck  what  shall  I  say? 
What  things  about  her  body's  sway, 
Like  a  knight's  pennon  or  slim  tree 
Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

Set  gently  waving  in  the  wind; 
Or  her  long  hands  that  I  may  find 
On  some  day  sweet  to  move  o'er  me? 
Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

God  pity  me  though,  if  I  missed 

The  telling,  how  along  her  wrist 

The  veins  creep,  dying  languidly 

Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

Inside  her  tender  palm  and  thin. 
Now  give  me  pardon,  dear,  wherein 
My  voice  is  weak  and  vexes  thee. 
Beata  mea  Domina  1 


Madonna  Mia  565 

All  men  that  see  her  any  time, 
I  charge  you  straightly  in  this  rhyme, 
What,  and  wherever  you  may  be, 
Beata  mea  Domina  ! 

To  kneel  before  her;  as  for  me 

I  choke  and  grow  quite  faint  to  see 

My  lady  moving  graciously. 

Beata  mea  Domina ! 

William  Morris  [1834-1896I 


MADONNA    MIA 

Under  green  apple  boughs 
That  never  a  storm  will  rouse, 
My  lady  hath  her  house 

Between  two  bowers; 
In  either  of  the  twain 
Red  roses  full  of  rain; 
She  hath  for  bondwomen 

All  kind  of  flowers. 

She  hath  no  handmaid  fair 
To  draw  her  curled  gold  hair 
Through  rings  of  gold  that  bear 

Her  whole  hair's  weight ; 
She  hath  no  maids  to  stand 
Gold-clothed  on  either  hand; 
In  all  that  great  green  land 

None  is  so  great. 

She  hath  no  more  to  wear 
But  one  white  hood  of  vair 
Drawn  over  eyes  and  hair, 

Wrought  with  strange  gold, 
Made  for  some  great  queen's  head. 
Some  fair  great  queen  since  dead; 
And  one  strait  gown  of  red 

Against  the  cold. 


566  Poems  of  Love 

Beneath  her  eyeHds  deep 
Love  lying  seems  asleep, 
Love,  swift  to  wake,  to  weep, 

To  laugh,  to  gaze; 
Her  breasts  are  like  white  birds. 
And  all  her  gracious  words 
As  water-grass  to  herds 

In  the  June-days. 

To  her  all  dews  that  fall 
And  rains  arc  musical; 
lier  flowers  are  fed  from  all, 

Her  joys  from  these; 
In  the  dccp-feathered  firs 
Their  gift  of  joy  is  hers, 
In  the  least  breath  that  stirs 

Across  the  trees. 

She  grows  with  greenest  leaves, 
Ripens  with  reddest  sheaves, 
Forgets,  remembers,  grieves, 

And  is  not  sad; 
The  quiet  lands  and  skies 
Leave  light  upon  her  eyes; 
None  knows  her,  weak  or  wise,- 

Or  tired  or  glad. 

None  knows,  none  understands. 
What  flowers  are  like  her  hands; 
•  Though  you  should  search  all  lands 

Wherein  time  grows, 
What  snows  are  like  her  feet. 
Though  his  eyes  burn  with  heat 
Through  gazing  on  my  sweet, — 

Yet  no  man  knows. 

Only  this  thing  is  said ; 
That  white  and  gold  and  red, 
God's  three  chief  words,  man's  bread 
And  oil  and  wine, 


"Meet  We  No  Angels,   Pansie  ?  "     567 

Were  given  her  for  dowers, 
And  kingdom  of  all  hours, 
And  grace  of  goodly  flowers 
And  various  -vine. 

This  is  my  lady's  praise: 
God  after  many  days 
Wrought  her  in  unknown  ways, 

In  sunset  lands; 
This  is  my  lady's  birth; 
God  gave  her  might  and  mirth. 
And  laid  his  whole  sweet  earth 

Between  her  hands. 

Under  deep  ap[)lc  boughs 
My  lady  hath  lier  house; 
She  v/ears  upon  her  brows 

The  flower  thereof; 
All  saying  but  what  God  saith 
To  her  is  as  vain  breath; 
She  is  more  strong  than  death, 

Being  strong  as  love. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1909] 


"MEET  WE  NO  ANGELS,   PANSIE?" 

Came,  on  a  Sabbath  morn,  my  sweet. 

In  white,  to  find  her  lover; 
The  grass  grew  proud  beneath  her  feet. 

The  green  elm-leaves  above  her: — 
Meet  we  no  angels,  Pansie? 

She  said,  "We  meet  no  angels  now"; 

And  soft  lights  streamed  upon  her; 
And  with  white  hand  she  touched  a  bough; 

She  did  it  that  great  honor: — 
What!  meet  no  angels,  Pansie? 


568  Poems  of  Love 

O  sweet  brown  hat,  brown  hair,  brown  eyes, 

Down-dropped  brown  eyes,  so  tender! 
Then  what  said  I? — gallant  replies 
Seem  flattery,  and  offend  her:— 
But, — meet  we  no  angels,  Pansie? 

Thomas  Ashe  [1836-1889' 

TO  DAPHNE 

Like  apple-blossoms,  white  and  red; 

Like  hues  of  dawn,  which  fly  too  soon; 
Like  bloom  of  peach,  so  softly  spread; 

Like  thorn  of  May  and  rose  of  June — ■ 
Oh,  sweet!  oh,  fair!  beyond  compare. 

Are  Daphne's  cheeks. 
Are  Daphne's  blushing  cheeks,  I  swear. 

That  pretty  rose,  which  comes  and  goes 

Like  April  sunshine  in  the  sky, 
I  can  command  it  when  I  choose — 

See  how  it  rises  if  I  cry: 
Oh,  sweet!  oh,  fair!  beyond  compare, 

Are  Daphne's  cheeks. 
Are  Daphne's  blushing  cheeks,  I  swear. 

Ah!  when  it  lies  round  lips  and  eyes, 

And  fades  away,  again  to  spring. 
No  lover,  sure,  could  ask  for  more 

Than  still  to  cry,  and  still  to  sing: 
Oh,  sweet!  oh,  fair!  beyond  compare, 

Arc  Daphne's  cheeks. 
Are  Daphne's  blushing  cheeks,  I  swear. 

Waller  Besant  [1836-igoi] 


"GIRL  OF  THE  RED   MOUTH" 

Girl  of  the  red  mouth. 
Love  me!     Love  me! 

Girl  of  the  red  mouth, 
Love  me! 


The   Daughter  of  Mendoza  569 

'Tis  by  its  curve,  I  know, 
Love  fashioneth  his  bow. 
And  bends  it — ah,  even  so! 

Oh,  girl  of  the  red  mouth,  love  me! 

Girl  of  the  blue  eye. 

Love  me!     Love  me! 
Girl  of  the  dew  eye, 

Love  me! 
Worlds  hang  for  lamps  on  high ; 
And  thought's  world  lives  in  thy 
Lustrous  and  tender  eye — 

Oh,  girl  of  the  blue  eye,  love  me! 

Girl  of  the  swan's  neck, 

Love  me!    Love  me! 
Girl  of  the  swan's  neck, 

Love  me! 
As  a  marble  Greek  doth  grow 
To  his  steed's  back  of  snow, 
Thy  white  neck  sits  thy  shoulder  so, — 

Oh,  girl  of  the  swan's  neck,  love  me! 

Girl  of  the  low  voice. 

Love  me!     Love  me! 
Girl  of  the  sweet  voice. 

Love  me! 
Like  the  echo  of  a  bell, — 
Like  the  bubbling  of  a  well, — 
Sweeter!  Love  within  doth  dwell, — ■ 

Oh,  girl  of  the  low  voice,  love  me! 

Martin  MacDermoU  [1823-1905] 


THE  DAUGHTER  OF  MENDOZA 

O  LEND  to  me,  sweet  nightingale, 
Your  music  by  the  fountain, 

And  lend  to  me  your  cadences, 
O  river  of  the  mountain! 


570  Poems   of  Love 

That  I  may  sing  my  gay  brunette, 
A  diamond  spark  in  coral  set, 
Gem  for  a  prince's  coronet — 
The  daughter  of  Mendoza. 

How  brilliant  is  the  morning  star, 

The  evening  star  how  tender, — 
The  Hght  of  both  is  in  her  eyes, 

Their  softness  and  their  splendor. 
But  for  the  lash  that  shades  their  light 
They  were  too  dazzling  for  the  sight, 
And  when  she  shuts  them,  all  is  night — 

The  daughter  of  Mendoza. 

O  ever  bright  and  beauteous  one. 

Bewildering  and  beguiling. 
The  lute  is  in  thy  silvery  tones, 

The  rainbow  in  thy  smiling; 
And  thine,  is,  too,  o'er  hill  and  dell. 
The  bounding  of  the  young  gazelle. 
The  arrow's  flight  and  ocean's  swell — 

Sweet  daughter  of  Mendoza! 

What  though,  perchance,  we  no  more  meet, — 

What  though  too  soon  we  sever? 
Thy  form  will  float  like  emerald  light 

Before  my  vision  ever. 
For  who  can  see  and  then  forget 
The  glories  of  my  gay  brunette — 
Thou  art  too  bright  a  star  to  set. 

Sweet  daughter  of  Mendoza! 

Mirabeau  Bonaparte  Lamar  [1798-1859] 

'  IF  SHE  BE  MADE  OF  WHITE  AND  RED  " 

If  she  be  made  of  white  and  red. 
As  all  transcendent  beauty  shows; 
If  heaven  be  blue  above  her  head, 
And  earth  be  golden,  as  she  goes: 
Nay,  then  thy  deftest  words  restrain; 
Tell  not  that  beauty,  it  is  vain. 


"When   First    i    Saw   Her"  ^yi 

If  she  be  filled  with  love  and  scorn, 
As  all  divinest  natures  are; 
If  'twixt  her  Hps  such  words  are  born, 
As  can  but  Heaven  or  Hell  confer: 
Bid  Love  be  still,  nor  ever  speak, 
Lest  he  his  own  rejection  seek. 

Herbert  P.  Home  [1864- 


THE  LOVER'S   SONG 

Lend  me  thy  fillet.  Love! 

I  would  no  longer  see: 
Cover  mine  eyelids  close  awhile. 

And  make  me  blind  like  thee. 

Then  might  I  pass  her  sunny  face, 

And  know  not  it  was  fair; 
Then  might  I  hear  her  voice,  nor  guess 

Her  starry  eyes  were  there. 

Ah!  banished  so  from  stars  and  sun — 

Why  need  it  be  my  fate? 
If  only  she  might  dream  me  good 

And  wise,  and  be  my  mate! 

Lend  her  thy  fillet,  Love! 

Let  her  no  longer  see:      ,,-i't  jlirlV/ 
If  there  is  hope  for  me  at  all, 

She  must  be  blind  like  thee. 

Edward  Rowland  Sill  [1841-1887J 


"  WHEN   FIRST  I   SAW  HER  " 

When  first  I  saw  her,  at  the  stroke 
The  heart  of  nature  in  mc  spoke; 
The  very  landscape  smiled  more  sweet, 
Lit  by  her  eyes,  pressed  by  her  feet; 
She  made  the  stars  of  heaven  more  bright 
By  sleeping  under  them  at  night; 
And  fairer  made  the  ilov/ers  of  May 
By  being  lovelier  than  they. 


572 


Poems  of  Love 

O,  soft,  soft,  where  the  sunshine  spread. 
Dark  in  the  grass  I. laid  my  head; 
And  let  the  lights  of  earth  depart 
To  find  her  image  in  my  heart; 
Then  through  my  being  came  and  went 
Tones  of  some  heavenly  instrument, 
As  if  where  its  blind  motions  roll 
The  world  should  wake  and  be  a  soul. 

George  Edward  Woodberry  [i&ss- 


MY  APRIL  LADY 

When  down  the  stair  at  morning 

The  sunbeams  round  her  float, 
Sweet  rivulets  of  laughter 

Are  rippling  in  her  throat; 
The  gladness  of  her  greeting 

Is  gold  without  alloy; 
And  in  the  morning  sunlight 

I  think  her  name  is  Joy. 

When  in  the  evening  twilight 

The  quiet  book-room  lies, 
We  read  the  sad  old  ballads, 

While  from  her  hidden  eyes 
The  tears  are  falling,  falling, 

That  give  her  heart  relief; 
And  in  the  evening  twilight, 

I  think  her  name  is  Grief. 

My  little  April  lady. 

Of  sunshine  and  of  showers 
She  weaves  the  old  spring  magic. 

And  breaks  my  heart  in  flowers! 
But  when  her  moods  are  ended, 

She  nestles  like  a  dove; 
Then,  by  the  pain  and  rapture, 

\  know  her  name  is  Love. 

Henry  Van  Dyke  [1852- 


The   Milkmaid  573 


THE  MILKMAID 

A  NEW  SONG  TO  AN  OLD  TUNE 

Across  the  grass  I  see  her  pass; 

She  comes  with  tripping  pace, — 
A  maid  I  know, — and  March  winds  blow 
Her  hair  across  her  face; — 
With  a  hey,  Dolly!  ho,  Dolly! 

Dolly  shall  be  mine, 
Before  the  spray  is  white  with  May, 
Or  blooms  the  eglantine. 

The  March  winds  blow.     I  watch  her  go: 

Her  eye  is  brown  and  clear; 
Her  cheek  is  brown,  and  soft  as  down, 
(To  those  who  see  it  near!)  — 
With  a  hey,  Dolly!  ho,  Dolly! 

Dolly  shall  be  mine, 
Before  the  spray  is  white  with  May, 
Or  blooms  the  eglantine. 

What  has  she  not  that  those  have  got, — 

The  dames  that  walk  in  silk! 
If  she  undo  her  kerchief  blue. 
Her  neck  is  white  as  milk. 
With  a  hey,  Dolly!  ho,  Dolly! 

Dolly  shall  be  mine. 
Before  the  spray  is  white  with  May, 
Or  blooms  the  eglantine. 

Let  those  who  will  be  proud  and  chill! 

For  me,  from  June  to  June, 
My  Dolly's  words  are  sweet  as  curds — 
Her  laugh  is  like  a  tune; — 
With  a  hey,  Dolly!  ho,  Dolly! 

Dolly  shall  be  mine. 
Before  the  spray  is  white  with  May, 
Or  blooms  the  eglantine. 


574  Poems  of"  Love 

Break,  break  to  hear,  O  crocus-spear! 

O  tall  Lent-lilies  flame! 
There'll  be  a  bride  at  Easter-tide, 
And  Dolly  is  her  name. 

With  a  hey,  Dolly!  ho,  Dolly! 

Dolly  shall  be  mine. 
Before  the  spray  is  white  with  May, 
Or  blooms  the  eglantine. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840" 

SONG 

This  peach  is  pink  with  such  a  pink 

As  suits  the  peach  divinely; 
The  cunning  color  rarely  spread 

Fades  to  the  yellow  finely; 
But  where  to  spy  the  truest  pink 
Is  in  my  Love's  soft  cheek,  I  think. 

The  snowdrop,  child  of  windy  March, 
Doth  glory  in  her  whiteness; 

Her  golden  neighbors,  crocuses, 
Unenvious  praise  her  brightness! 

But  I  do  know  where,  out  of  sight, 

My  sweetheart  keeps  a  warmer  white. 

Norman  Gale  [1S62- 

IN  FEBRUARY 

My  Lady's  birthday  crowns  the  growing  year; 
A  flower  of  Spring  before  the  Spring  is  here; 
To  sing  of  her  and  this  fair  day  to  keep 
The  very  Loves  forsake  their  Winter  sleep; 
Where'er  she  goes  their  circling  wings  they  spread, 
And  shower  celestial  roses  o'er  her  head. 
I,  too,  would  chant  her  worth  and  dare  to  raise 
A  hymn  to  what's  beyond  immortal  praise. 
Go,  little  verse,  and  lay  in  vesture  meet 
Of  poesy,  my  homage  at  her  feet. 

Henry  Simpson  [1868- 


Ballade  of  My    Lady's    Beauty        575 

"LOVE,  I  MARVEL  WHAT  YOU  ARE" 

Love,  I  marvel  what  you  are! 
Heaven  in  a  pearl  of  dew. 
Lilies  hearted  with  a  star — 
All  are  you. 

Spring  along  your  forehead  shines 
And  the  summer  blooms  your  breast. 
Graces  of  autumnal  vines 
Round  you  rest. 

Birds  about  a  limpid  rose 
Making  song  and  light  of  wing 
While  the  warm  wind  sunny  blows, — 
So  you  sing. 

Darling,  if  the  little  dust, 
That  I  know  is  merely  I, 
Have  availed  to  win  your  trust, 
Let  me  die. 

TriimbuU  Stickney  [1S74-1904] 

BALLADE   OF  MY  LADY'S  BEAUT\^^^ 

Squire  Adam  had  two  wives,  they  say. 

Two  wives  had  he  for  his  dehght ; 
He  kissed  and  clypt  them  all  the  day. 

And  clypt  and  kissed  them  all  the  nights 

Now  Eve  like  ocean  foam  was  white. 
And  Lilith,  roses  dipped  in  wine, 

But  though  they  were  a  goodly  sight, 
No  lady  is  so  fair  as  mine. 

To  Venus  some  folk  tribute  pay, 

And  Queen  of  Beauty  she  is  hight. 
And  Sainte  Marie  the  world  doth  sway, 

In  cerule  napery  bedight. 

My  wonderment  these  twain  invite, 
Their  comeliness  it  is  divine;  ,  y 

And  yet  I  say  in  their  despite, 
No  lady  is  so  fair  as  mine. 


576  Poems  of  Love 

Dame  Helen  caused  a  grievous  fray, 

For  love  of  her  brave  men  did  fight, 
The  eyes  of  her  made  sages  fey 

And  put  their  hearts  in  woeful  plight. 

To  her  no  rhymes  will  I  indite, 
For  her  no  garlands  will  I  twine; 

Though  she  be  made  of  flowers  and  light, 
No  lady  is  so  fair  as  mine. 

l'envoi   ■ 

Prince  Eros,  Lord  of  lovely  might, 
Who  on  Olympus  doth  recline, 

Do  I  not  tell  the  truth  aright? 
No  lady  is  so  fair  as  mine. 

Joyce  Kilmer  [1886- 

URSULA 

I  SEE  her  in  the  festal  warmth  to-night, 
Her  rest  all  grace,  her  motion  all  delight. 
Endowed  with  all  the  woman's  arts  that  please. 
In  her  soft  gown  she  seems  a  thing  of  ease. 
Whom  sorrow  may  not  reach  or  evil  blight. 

To-morrow  she  will  toil  from  floor  to  floor 
To  smile  upon  the  un  replying  poor, 
To  stay  the  tears  of  widows,  and  to  be 
Confessor  to  men's  erring  hearts  ...  ah  me! 
She  knows  not  I  am  beggar  at  her  door. 

Robert  Underwood  Johnson  [1853- 


VILLANELLE  OF  HIS  LADY'S  TREASURES 

I  TOOK  her  dainty  eyes,  as  well 

As  silken  tendrils  of  her  hair: 
And  so  I  made  a  Villanelle! 

I  took  her  voice,  a  silver  bell, 

As  clear  as  song,  as  soft  as  prayer; 
I  took  her  dainty  eyes  as  well. 


Song  577 


It  may  be,  said  I,  who  can  tell, 

These  things  shall  be  my  less  despair?  , 
And  so  I  made  a  Villanelle!  /  /. 

I  took  her  whiteness  virginal 

And  from  her  cheeks  two  roses  rare: 
I  took  her  dainty  eyes  as  well. 

I  said:  "It  may  be  possible 

Her  image  from  my  heart  to  tear!" 
And  so  I  made  a  Villanelle! 

I  stole  her  laugh,  most  musical: 

I  wrought  it  in  with  artful  care; 
I  took  her  dainty  eyes  as  well; 
And  so  I  made  a  Villanelle. 

Ernest  Dowson  [1867-1900] 

SONG 

Love,  by  that  loosened  hair 
Well  now  I  know 
Where  the  lost  Lilith  went 
So  long  ago. 

Love,  by  those  starry  eyes 
I  understand 

How  the  sea  maidens  lure 
Mortals  from  land. 

Love,  by  that  welling  laugh 
Joy  claims  his  own 
Sea-born  and  wind-wayward 
Child  of  the  sun. 

Bliss  Carman  [1861- 

SONG 

O,  LIKE  a  queen's  her  happy  tread, 
And  like  a  queen's  her  golden  head! 
But  O,  at  last,  when  all  is  said, 
Her  woman's  heart  for  me! 


57^  Poems  of  I>ove 

We  wandered  where  the  river  gleamed 
'Neath  oaks  that  mused  and  pines  that  dreamed, 
A  wild  thing  of  the  woods  she  seemed, 
So  proud,  and  pure,  and  free! 

All  heaven  drew  nigh  to  hear  her  sing, 
When  from  her  lips  her  soul  took  wing; 
The  oaks  forgot  their  pondering. 
The  pines  their  reverie. 

And  O,  her  happy,  queenly  tread. 
And  O,  her  queenly  golden  head! 
But  O,  her  heart,  when  all  is  said. 
Her  woman's  heart  for  me! 

William  Watson  [1858- 

ANY  LOVER,  ANY  LASS 

Why  are  her  eyes  so  bright,  so  bright, 

Why  do  her  lips  control 
The  kisses  of  a  summer  night. 

When  I  would  love  her  soul? 

God  set  her  brave  eyes  wide  apart 

And  painted  them  with  fire; 
They  stir  the  ashes  of  my  heart 

To  embers  of  desire. 

Her  lips  so  tenderly  are  wrought 

In  so  divine  a  shape. 
That  I  am  servant  to  my  thought 

And  can  no  wise  escape. 

Her  body  is  a  flower,  her  hair 

About  her  neck  doth  play; 
I  find  her  colors  everywhere, 

They  are  the  pride  of  day. 

Her  little  hands  are  soft,  and  when 

I  see  her  fingers  move 
I  know  in  very  truth  that  men 

Have  died  for  less  than  love. 


Songs  Ascending  579 

Ah,  dear,  live,  lovely  thing!  my  eyes 

Have  sought  her  like  a  prayer; 
It  is  my  better  self  that  cries 

"Would  she  were  not  so  fair!" 

Would  I  might  forfeit  ecstasy 

And  find  a  calmer  place, 
Where  I  might  undesirous  see 

Her  too  desired  face: 

Nor  find  her  eyes  so  bright,  so  bright, 

Nor  hear  her  lips  unroll 
Dream  after  dream  the  lifelong  night. 

When  I  would  love  her  soul. 

Richard  Middldon  [1882-1911] 

SONGS  ASCENDING 

Love  has  been  sung  a  thousand  ways — 

So  let  it  be; 
The  songs  ascending  in  your  praise 
Through  all  my  days 

Are  three. 

Your  cloud-white  body  first  I  sing; 

Your  love  was  heaven's  blue, 
And  I,  a  bird,  flew  carolling 
In  ring  on  ring 

Of  you. 

Your  nearness  is  the  second  song; 

When  God  began  to  be. 
And  bound  you  strongly,  right  or  wrong, 
With  his  own  thong. 

To  me. 

But  oh,  the  song,  eternal,  high. 

That  tops  these  two! — • 
You  live  forever,  you  who  die, 
I  am  not  I 

But  you. 

Witter  Bynncr  [1881- 


^So  Poems  of  Love 


SONG 

"Oh!  Love,"  they  said,  "is  King  of  Kings, 

And  Triumph  is  his  crown. 
Earth  fades  in  flame  before  his  wings. 

And  Sun  and  Moon  bow  down." — 
But  that,  I  knew,  would  never  do; 

And  Heaven  is  all  too  high. 
So  whenever  I  meet  a  Queen,  I  said, 

I  will  not  catch  her  eye. 

"Oh!  Love,"  they  said,  and  "Love,"  they  said, 

"The  gift  of  Love  is  this; 
A  crown  of  thorns  about  thy  head, 

And  vinegar  to  thy  kiss!" — 
But  Tragedy  is  not  for  me; 

And  I'm  content  to  be  gay. 
So  whenever  I  spied  a  Tragic  Lady, 

I  went  another  way. 

And  so  I  never  feared  to  see 

You  wander  down  the  street, 
Or  come  across  the  fields  to  me 

On  ordinary  feet. 
For  what  they'd  never  told  me  of. 

And  what  I  never  knew; 
It  was  that  all  the  time,  my  love. 

Love  would  be  merely  you. 

Rupcrl  Brooke  [1887-1915] 

SONG 

How  do  I  love  you? 

I  do  not  know. 
Only  because  of  you 

Gladly  I  go. 

Only  because  of  you 

Labor  is  sweet. 
And  all  the  song  of  you 

Sings  in  my  feet. 


After  Two  Years  581 

Only  the  thought  of  you 

Trembles  and  lies 
Just  where  the  world  begins— 

Under  my  eyes. 

Irene  Rutherf'jrd  McLeod  [x8 


TO  ...  IN  CHURCH 

If  I  was  drawn  here  from  a  distant  place, 
'Twas  not  to  pray  nor  hear  our  friend's  address, 
But,  gazing  once  more  on  your  winsome  face, 
To  worship  there  Ideal  Loveliness. 
On  that  pure  shrine  that  has  too  long  ignored 
The  gifts  that  once  I  brought  so  frequently 
I  lay  this  votive  offering,  to  record 
How  sweet  your  quiet  beauty  seemed  to  me. 
Enchanting  girl,  my  faith  is  not  a  thing 
By  futile  prayers  and  vapid  psalm-singing 
To  vent  in  crowded  nave  and  public  pew. 
My  creed  is  simple:  that  the  world  is  fair, 
And  beauty  the  best  thing  to  worship  there, 
And  I  confess  it  by  adoring  you. 

Alan  Sceger  [1888-1916] 


AFTER  TWO  YEARS 

She  is  all  so  slight 
And  tender  and  white 

As  a  May  morning. 
She  walks  without  hood 
At  dusk.    It  is  good 

To  hear  her  sing. 

It  is  God's  will 

That  I  shall  love  her  still 

As  He  loves  Mary. 
And  night  and  day 
I  will  go  forth  to  pray 

That  she  love  me. 


^82  Poems  of  Love 


She  is  as  gold 

Lovely,  and  far  more  cold. 

Do  thou  pray  with  me, 
For  if  I  win  grace 
To  kiss  twice  her  face 

God  has  done  well  to  me. 

Richard  A  klington 


PRAISE  '  ^\ 

Dear,  they  are  praising  your  beauty, 
The  grass  and  the  sky:  '>r,Y  <■  t 

The  sky  in  a  silence  of  wonder,  ^Rrfi  nO 

The  grass  in  a  sigh.  '1" 

..1  I 
I  too  would  sing  for  your  praising,  ,i  ] 

Dearest,  had  I  ■;! 

Speech  as  the  whispering  grass,  ,  ;i 

Or  the  silent  sky.  mov  oT 

..,.•>  -j\r 

These  have  an  art  for  the  praising  .  ^ 

Beauty  so  high. 

Sweet,  you  are  praised  in  a  silence, 

Sung  in  a  sigh. 

Scumas  O'Sullivan  [1S79- 


PLAINTS  AND  PROTESTATIONS 

"FORGET  NOT  YET" 

THE   LOVER   BESEECHETH  HIS   MISTRESS  NOT  TO   FORGET  HIS 
STEADFAST   FAITH   AND   TRUE   INTENT 

Forget  not  yet  the  tried  intent 
Of  such  a  truth  as  I  have  meant; 
My  great  travail  so  gladly  spent, 
Forget  not  yet! 

Forget  not  yet  when  first  began 
The  weary  life  ye  know,  since  when 
The  suit,  the  service,  none  tell  can; 
Forget  not  yet! 

Forget  not  yet  the  great  assays, 
The  cruel  wrong,  the  scornful  ways, 
The  painful  patience  in  delays, 
Forget  liot  yet ! 

Forget  not!     O,  forget  not  this! — 
How  long  ago  hath  been,  and  is, 
The  mind  that  never  meant  amiss — 
Forget  not  yet! 

Forget  not  then  thine  own  approved. 
The  which  so  long  hath  thee  so  loved. 
Whose  steadfast  faith  yet  never  moved: 
Forget  not  this! 

Thomas  Wyalt  [1503?- 154 2] 

FAWNIA 

From  "  Pandosto  " 

Ah!  were  she  pitiful  as  she  is  fair, 
Or  but  as  mild  as  she  is  seeming  so, 
Then  were  my  hopes  greater  than  my  despair. 
Then  all  the  world  were  heaven,  nothing  woe. 
583 


584  Poems  of  Love 

Ah!  were  her  heart  relenting  as  her  hand, 
That  seems  to  melt  even  with  the  mildest  touch, 
Then  knew  I  where  to  seat  me  in  a  land 
Under  wide  heavens,  but  yet  there  is  not  such. 
So  as  she  shows  she  seems  the  budding  rose, 
Yet  sweeter  far  than  is  an  earthly  flower; 
Sovereign  of  beauty,  like  the  spray  she  grows; 
Compassed  she  is  with  thorns  and  cankered  flower. 
Yet  were  she  willing  to  be  plucked  and  worn, 
She  would  be  gathered,  though  she  grew  on  thorn. 

Ah!  when  she  sings,  all  music  else  be  still, 
For  none  must  be  compared  to  her  note; 
Ne'er  breathed  such  glee  from  Philomela's  bill, 
Nor  from  the  morning-singer's  swelling  throat. 
Ah!  when  she  riseth  from  her  blissful  bed 
She  comforts  all  the  world  as  doth  the  sun, 
And  at  her  sight  the  night's  foul  vapor's  fled; 
When  she  is  set  the  gladsome  day  is  done. 
O  glorious  sun,  imagine  me  the  west. 
Shine  in  my  arms,  and  set  thou  in  my  breast! 

Robert  Greene  [1560?-!  59 2] 


THE  PASSIONATE  SHEPHERD  TO  HIS  LOVE 

Come  live  with  me  and  be  my  Love, 
And  we  will  all  the  pleasures  prove 
That  hills  and  valleys,  dales  and  fields, 
Or  woods  or  steepy  mountain  yields. 

And  we  will  sit  upon  the  rocks. 
And  see  the  shepherds  feed  their  flocks 
By  shallow  rivers,  to  whose  falls 
Melodious  birds  sing  madrigals. 

And  I  will  make  thee  beds  of  roses 
And  a  thousand  fragrant  posies; 
A  cap  of  flowers,  and  a  kirtle 
Embroidered  all  with  leaves  of  myrtle. 


The  Nymph's   Reply  rgr 

A  gown  made  of  the  finest  wool 
Which  from  our  pretty  lambs  we  pull; 
Fair-lined  slippers  for  the  cold, 
With  buckles  of  the  purest  gold. 

A  belt  of  straw  and  ivy-buds 
With  coral  clasps  and  amber  studs: 
And  if  these  pleasures  may  thee  move, 
Come  live  with  me  and  be  my  Love. 

The  shepherd  swains  shall  dance  and  sing 
For  thy  delight  each  May  morning: 
If  these  delights  thy  mind  may  move, 
Then  live  with  me  and  be  my  Love. 

Christopher  Marlowe  [1564-1593] 


THE  NYMPH'S  REPLY  TO  THE   PASSIONATE 
SHEPHERD 

If  all  the  world  and  love  were  young. 
And  truth  in  every  shepherd's  tongue. 
These  pretty  pleasures  might  me  move 
To  live  with  thee,  and  be  thy  Love. 

But  Time  drives  flocks  from  field  to  fold; 
When  rivers  rage  and  rocks  grow  cold; 
And  Philomel  becometh  dumb; 
The  rest  complains  of  cares  to  come. 

The  flowers  do  fade,  and  wanton  flclds 
To  wayward  W^inter  reckoning  yields: 
A  honey  tongue,  a  heart  of  gall, 
Is  fancy's  spring,  but  sorrow's  fall. 

Thy  gowns,  thy  shoes,  thy  beds  of  roses, 
Thy  cap,  thy  kirtle,  and  thy  posies, 
Soon  break,  soon  wither, — soon  forgotten, 
In  folly  ripe,  in  reason  rotten. 


586  Poems  of  Love 

Thy  belt  of  straw  and  ivy-buds, 
Thy  coral  clasps  and  amber  studs, — 
All  these  in  rae  no  means  can  move 
To  come  to  thee  and  be  thy  Love. 

But  could  youth  last,  and  love  still  breed, 
Had  joys  no  date,  nor  age  no  need, 
Then  these  delights  my  mind  might  move 
To  live  with  thee  and  be  thy  Love. 

Walter  Raleigh  [15 52?-! 6 18] 

"WRONG   NOT,   SWEET  EMPRESS  OF  MY 
HEART  " 

Wrong  not,  sweet  empress  of  my  heart, 

The  merit  of  true  passion. 
With  thinking  that  he  feels  no  smart, 

That  sues  for  no  compassion. 

Silence  in  love  bewrays  more  woe 
Than  words,  though  ne'er  so  witty: 
'  A  beggar  that  is  dumb,  you  know, 
May  challenge  double  pity. 

Then  wrong  not,  dearest  to  my  heart, 
My  true,  though  secret  passion; 

He  smarteth  most  that  hides  his  smart. 
And  sues  for  no  compassion.     '  ^'■^"  ''' 

Walter  Raleigh  [tis2?-i6i8] 

TO  HIS   COY  LOVE 

I  PRAY  thee,  leave,  love  me  no  more. 

Call  home  the  heart  you  gave  me! 
I  but  in  vain  that  saint  adore 

That  can  but  will  not  save  me. 
These  poor  half-kisses  kill  me  quite— 

Was  ever  man  thus  served:  '■  ' 

Amidst  an  ocean  of  delight 

For  pleasure  to  be  starved! 


587 


Her  Sacred   Bower 

Show  me  no  more  those  snowy  breasts 

With  azure  riverets  branched, 
Where,  whilst  mine  eye  with  plenty  feasts, 

Yet  is  my  thirst  not  stanched; 
O  Tantalus,  thy  pains  ne'er  tell! 

By  me  thou  art  prevented: 
'Tis  nothing  to  be  plagued  in  Hell, 

But  thus  in  Heaven  tormented. 


Clip  me  no  more  in  those  dear  arms, 

Nor  thy  life 's  comfort  call  me, 
O  these  are  but  too  powerful  charms, 

And  do  but  more  enthral  me! 
But  see  how  patient  I  am  grown 

In  all  this  coil  about  thee: 
Come,  nice  thing,  let  my  heart  alone, 

I  cannot  live  without  thee! 

Michael  Drayton  [1563-1631] 


HER  SACRED   BOWER 

Where  she  her  sacred  bower  adorns. 

The  rivers  clearly  flow, 
The  groves  and  meadows  swell  with  flowers, 

The  winds  all  gently  blow. 
Her  sun-hke  beauty  shines  so  fair, 

Her  spring  can  never  fade: 
Who  then  can  blame  the  hfe  that  strives 

To  harbor  in  her  shade? 

Her  grace  I  sought,  her  love  I  wooed; 

Her  love  thought  to  obtain; 
No  time,  no  toil,  no  vow,  no  faith. 

Her  wished  grace  can  gain. 
Yet  truth  can  tell  my  heart  is  hers 
,,    And  her  will  I  adore; 
And  from  that  love  when  I  depart, 

Let  heaven  view  me  no  more! 


^8  Poems  of  Love 

Her  roses  with  my  prayers  shall  spring; 

And  when  her  trees  I  praise, 
Their  boughs  shall  blossom,  mellow  fruit 

Shall  strew  her  pleasant  ways. 
The  words  of  hearty  zeal  have  power 

High  wonders  to  effect; 
O,  vdiy  should  then  her  princely  car 

My  words  or  zeal  neglect? 

If  she  my  faith  misdeems,  or  worth, 

Woe  worth  my  hapless  fate! 
For  though  time  can  my  truth  reveal, 

That  time  will  come  too  late. 
And  who  can  glory  in  the  worth 

That  cannot  yield  him  grace? 
Content  in  everything  is  not, 

Nor  joy  in  every  place. 

But  from  her  Bower  of  Joy  since  I 

Must  now  excluded  be, 
And  she  will  not  relieve  my  cares, 

Which  none  can  help  but  she; 
My  comfort  in  her  love  shall  dwell, 

Her  love  lodge  in  my  breast, 
And  though  not  in  her  bower,  yet  I 

Shall  in  her  temple  rest. 

Thomas  Campion  [    ?    -i6ig] 

TO  LESBIA* 

AFTER  CATULLUS 

My  sweetest  Lesbia,  let  us  hve  and  love. 

And  though  the  sager  sort  our  deeds  reprove. 

Let  us  not  weigh  them.    Heaven's  great  lamps  do  dive 

Into  their  west,  and  straight  again  revive: 

But  soon  as  once  set  is  our  little  light. 

Then  must  we  sleep  one  ever-during  night. 

If  all  would  lead  their  lives  in  love  like  me,   ' 
Then  bloody  swords  and  armor  should  not  be; 
No  drum  nor  trumpet  peaceful  sleeps  should  move, 
Unless  alarm  came  from  the  Camp  of  Love : 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3827. 


"There  Is  None,  O  None  But  You  "      rSo 

But  fools  do  live  and  waste  their  little  light, 
And  seek  with  pain  their  ever-during  night. 

When  timely  death  my  hfe  and  fortune  ends, 

Let  not  my  hearse  be  vexed  with  mourning  friends; 

But  let  all  lovers,  rich  in  triumph,  come 

And  with  sweet  pastimes  grace  my  happy  tomb: 

And,  Lcsbia,  close  up  thou  my  little  light, 

Aiid  crown  with  love  my  ever-during  night. 

Thomas  Campion  [    ?    -1619] 


"LOVE  ME  OR  NOT" 

Love  me  or  not,  love  her  I  must  or  die; 
Leave  her  or  not,  follow  her  needs  must  I. 
O  that  her  grace  would  my  wished  comforts  give! 
How  rich  in  her,  how  happy  should  I  live! 

All  my  desire,  all  my  delight  should  be 
Her  to  enjoy,  her  to  unite  to  me; 
Envy  should  cease,  her  would  I  love  alone: 
Who  loves  by  looks,  is  seldom  true  to  one. 

Could  I  enchant,  and  that  it  lawful  were, 
Her  would  I  charm  softly  that  none  should  hear; 
But  love  enforced  rarely  yields  firm  content: 
So  would  I  love  that  neither  should  repent. 

Thovias  Campion  [   ?    -1619] 


THERE  IS   NONE,   O   NONE  BUT  YOU" 

There  is  none,  O  none  but  you, 
That  from  me  estrange  the  sight, 

Whom  mine  eyes  affect  to  view, 
And  chained  ears  hear  with  delight. 

Other  beauties  others  move: 

In  you  I  all  graces  find; 
Such  is  the  effect  of  Love, 

To  make  them  happy  that  are  kind. 


590  Poems  of  Love 

Women  in  frail  beauty  trust, 

Only  seem  you  fair  to  me: 
Still  prove  truly  kind  and  just, 

For  that  may  not  dissembled  be. 

Sweet,  afford  me  then  your  sight, 

That,  surveying  all  your  looks, 
Endless  volumes  I  may  write, 

And  fill  the  world  with  envied  books: 

Which,  when  after-ages  view, 

All  shall  wonder  and  despair, — 
Woman,  to  find  a  man  so  true, 

Or  man,  a  woman  half  so  fair! 

Thomas  Campion  [    ?    -i6ig] 


OF   CORINNA'S   SINGING 

When  to  her  lute  Corinna  sings. 

Her  voice  revives  the  leaden  strings. 

And  doth  in  highest  notes  appear. 

As  any  challenged  echo  clear: 

But  when  she  doth  of  mourning  speak, 

E  'en  with  her  sighs,  the  strings  do  break. 

And  as  her  lute  doth  live  or  die, 

Led  by  her  passion,  so  must  I! 

For  when  of  pleasure  she  doth  sing. 

My  thoughts  enjoy  a  sudden  spring: 

But  if  she  doth  of  sorrow  speak, 

E'en  from  my  heart  the  strings  do  break. 

Thomas  Campion  [   ?    -1619] 


"WERE  MY  HEART  AS   SOME   MEN'S  ARE" 

Were  my  heart  as  some  men's  are,  thy  errors  would  not 

move  me; 
But  thy  faults  I  curious  find,  and  speak  because  I  love  thee: 
Patience  is  a  thing  divine,  and  far,  I  grant,  above  me. 


To  Cel 


la 


591 


Foes  sometimes  befriend  us  more,  our  blacker  deeds  ob- 
jecting, 

Than  the  obsequious  bosom-guest  with  false  respect  af- 
fecting: 

Friendship  is  the  Glass  of  Truth,  our  hidden  stains  detecting. 

When  I  use  of  eyes  enjoy,  and  inward  light  of  reason, 
Thy  observer  will  I  be  and  censor,  but  in  season: 
Hidden  mischief  to  conceal  in  State  and  Love  is  treason. 

Thomas  Campion  [   ?    -16 19] 

"  KIND  ARE  HER  ANSWERS  " 

Kind  are  her  answers, 
But  her  performance  keeps  no  day; 
Breaks  time,  as  dancers 
From  their  own  music  when  they  stray. 
All  her  free  favors 

And  smooth  words  wing  my  hopes  in  vain. 
O,  did  ever  voice  so  sweet  but  only  feign? 
Can  true  love  yield  such  delay, 
Converting  joy  to  pain? 

Lost  is  our  freedom 
When  we  submit  to  women  so: 
Why  do  we  need  'em 
When,  in  their  best,  they  work  our  woe? 
There  is  no  wisdom 
Can  alter  ends  by  fate  prefixed. 
O,  why  is  the  good  of  man  with  evil  mixed? 
Never  were  days  yet  called  two 
But  one  night  went  betwixt. 

Thomas  Campion  [   ?    -16 19] 

TO   CELIA 

From  "  The  Forest  " 

Drink  to  me  only  with  thine  eyes, 

And  I  will  pledge  with  mine; 
Or  leave  a  kiss  but  in  the  cup 

And  I'll  not  look  for  wine. 


rQ2  Poems  of  Love 


The  thirst  that  from  the  soul  doth  rise  y-l 

Doth  ask  a  drink  divine; 
But  might  I  of  Jove's  nectar  sup, 

I  would  not  change  for  thine. 


I  sent  thee  late  a  rosy  wreath, 

Not  so  much  honoring  thee  ' 

As  giving  it  a  hope  that  there 

It  could  not  withered  be; 
But  thou  thereon  didst  only  breathe, 

And  sent'st  it  back  to  me; 
Since  when  it  grows,  and  smells,  I  swear, 

Not  of  itself  but  thee! 

Ben  Jonson  Usii^'^^n] 

SONG 

From  "  The  Forest  " 

O,  DO  not  wanton  with  those  eyes. 

Lest  I  be  sick  with  seeing; 
Nor  cast  them  down,  but  let  them  rise, 

Lest  shame  destroy  their  being. 

O,  be  not  angry  with  those  fires, 

For  then  their  threats  will  kill  me; 
Nor  look  too  kind  on  my  desires. 

For  then  my  hopes  will  spill  me. 

O,  do  not  steep  them  in  thy  tears. 

For  so  will  sorrow  slay  me; 
Nor  spread  them  as  distract  with  fears; 

Mine  own  enough  betray  mc. 

Ben  Jonson  [i573?-i637] 

SONG 

Go  and  catch  a  falling  star, 

Get  with  child  a  mandrake  root, 

Tell  me  where  all  past  years  are. 
Or  who  cleft  the  Devil's  foot; 


The   Message  ^^-^ 


Teach  me  to  hear  mermaid's  singing, 
Or  to  keep  off  envy's  stinging, 

And  find 

What  wind 
Serves  to  advance  an  honest  mind. 

If  thou  be'st  born  to  strange  sights, 

Things  invisible  go  see, 
Ride  ten  thousand  days'  and  nights 

Till  Age  snow  white  hairs  on  thee; 
Thou,  when  thou  return 'st,  wilt  tell  me 
All  strange  wonders  that  befell  thee, 
And  swear 
No  where 
Lives  a  woman  true  and  fair. 

If  thou  find'st  one,  let  me  know; 
Such  a  pilgrimage  were  sweet. 
Yet  do  not;  I  would  not  go. 

Though  at  next  door  we  might  meet. 
Though  she  were  true  when  you  met  her, 
And  last  till  you  write  your  letter, 
Yet  she 
Will  be 
False,  ere  I  come,  to  two  or  three. 

John  Donne  [1573-1631] 

THE   MESSAGE 

Send  home  my  long-strayed  eyes  to  me, 
Which,  O!  too  long  have  dwelt  on  thee: 
But  if  from  you  they've  learned  such  ill. 

To  sweetly  smile, 

And  then  beguile, 
Keep  the  deceivers,  keep  them  still. 

Send  home  my  harmless  heart  again. 
Which  no  unworthy  thought  could  stain: 
But  if  it  has  been  taught  by  thine 

To  forfeit  both 

Its  word  and  oath. 
Keep  it,  for  then  'tis  none  of  mine. 


594 


Poems  of  Love 

Yet  send  me  back  my  heart  and  eyes, 

For  I'll  know  all  thy  falsities; 

That  I  one  day  may  laugh,  when  thou 

Shalt  grieve  and  mourn — 

Of  one  the  scorn, 
Who  proves  as  false  as  thou  art  now. 

John  Donne  [1573-1631] 

SONG 

Ladies,  though  to  your  conquering  eyes 

Love  owes  his  chiefest  victories, 

And  borrows  those  bright  arms  from  you 

With  which  he  does  the  world  subdue. 

Yet  you  yourselves  are  not  above 

The  empire  nor  the  griefs  of  love. 

Then  rack  not  lovers  with  disdain. 
Lest  Love  on  you  revenge  their  pain: 
You  are  not  free  because  you're  fair: 
The  Boy  did  not  his  Mother  spare. 
Beauty's  but  an  offensive  dart: 
It  is  no  armor  for  the  heart. 

George  Etherege  [1635?-!  691] 


TO  A  LADY  ASKING  HIM   HOW  LONG   HE 
WOULD   LOVE  HER 

It  is  not,  Celia,  in  our  power 

To  say  how  long  our  love  will  last ; 

It  may  be  we  within  this  hour 

May  lose  those  joys  we  now  do  taste: 

The  Blessed,  that  immortal  be, 

From  change  in  love  are  only  free. 

Then  since  wc  mortal  lovers  are, 
Ask  not  how  long  our  love  will  last; 

But  while  it  does,  let  us  take  care 
Each  minute  be  with  pleasure  passed: 

Were  it  not  madness  to  deny 

To  live  because  we're  sure  to  die? 

George  Ellierege  [i63s?-i69i] 


To   Anthea  595 


TO  ^NONE 

What  conscience,  say,  is  it  in  thee, 

When  I  a  heart  had  one, 
To  take  away  that  heart  from  me, 

And  to  retain  thy  own? 

For  shame  or  pity  now  incHne 

To  play  a  loving  part; 
Either  to  send  me  kindly  thine, 

Or  give  me  back  my  heart. 

Covet  not  both;  but  if  thou  dost 

Resolve  to  part  with  neither, 
Why,  yet  to  show  that  thou  art  just. 

Take  me  and  mine  together! 

Robert  Herrick  [isgi-1674] 


TO  ANTHEA,  WHO  MAY  COMMAND  HIM 
ANYTHING 

Bid  me  to  live,  and  I  will  live 

Thy  Protestant  to  be; 
Or  bid  me  love,  and  I  will  give 

A  loving  heart  to  thee. 

A  heart  as  soft,  a  heart  as  kind, 

A  heart  as  sound  and  free 
As  in  the  whole  world  thou  canst  find, 

That  heart  I'll  give  to  thee. 

Bid  that  heart  stay,  and  it  will  stay 

To  honor  thy  decree; 
Or  bid  it  languish  quite  away. 

And  't  shall  do  so  for  thee. 

Bid  me  to  weep,  and  I  will  weep, 

While  I  have  eyes  to  see; 
And  having  none,  yet  will  I  keep 

A  heart  to  weep  for  thee. 


596  Poems  of  Love 

Bid  me  despair,  and  I'll  despair, 

Under  that  cypress  tree; 
Or  bid  me  die,  and  I  will  dare 

E'en  death,  to  die  for  thee. 

Thou  art  my  life,  my  love,  my  heart. 

The  very  eyes  of  me ; 
And  hast  command  of  every  part, 

To  live  and  die  for  thee. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


THE  BRACELET:  TO  JULIA 

Why  I  tie  about  thy  wrist, 
Julia,  this  silken  twist; 
For  what  other  reason  is't 
But  to  show  thee  how,  in  part. 
Thou  my  pretty  captive  art? 
But  thy  bond-slave  is  my  heart: 
'Tis  but  silk  that  bindeth  thee, 
Snap  the  thread  and  thou  art  free; 
But  'tis  otherwise  with  me: 
I  am  bound  and  fast  bound,  so 
That  from  thee  I  cannot  go; 
If  I  could,  I  would  not  so. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


TO  THE  WESTERN  WIND 

Sweet  western  wind,  whose  luck  it  is. 

Made  rival  with  the  air. 
To  give  Perenna's  lip  a  kiss. 

And  fan  her  wanton  hair: 

Bring  me  but  one,  I'll  promise  thee, 

Instead  of  common  showers, 
Thy  wings  shall  be  embalmed  by  me. 

And  all  beset  with  flowers. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


Persuasions  to   Enjoy  cgj 


TO  MY  INCONSTANT  MISTRESS 

When  thou,  poor  Excommunicate 

From  all  the  joys  of  Love,  shalt  see 
The  fuU  reward  and  glorious  fate 

Which  my  strong  faith  shall  purchase  me, 

Then  curse  thine  own  Inconstancy. 

A  fairer  hand  than  thine  shall  cure 

That  heart  which  thy  false  oaths  did  wound; 

And  to  my  sotd  a  soul  more  pure 

Than  thine  shall  by  Love's  hand  be  bound, 
And  both  with  equal  glory  crowned. 

Then  shalt  thou  weep,  entreat,  complain 

To  Love,  as  I  did  once  to  thee: 
When  all  thy  tears  shall  be  as  vain 

As  mine  were  then:  for  thou  shalt  be 

Damned  for  thy  false  Apostasy. 

Tliomas  Carew  [1598?-  1639?] 


PERSUASIONS  TO  ENJOY 

If  the  quick  spirits  in  your  eye 

Now  languish  and  anon  must  die; 

If  every  sweet  and  every  grace 

Must  fly  from  that  forsaken  face: 
Then,  Celia,  let  us  reap  our  joys 
Ere  Time  such  goodly  fruit  destroys. 

Or,  if  that  golden  fleece  must  grow 

For  ever  free  from  aged  snow; 

If  those  bright  suns  must  know  no  shade, 

Nor  your  fresh  beauties  ever  fade: 
Then  fear  not,  Celia,  to  bestow 
What,  still  being  gathered,  still  must  grow. 

Thus  either  Tim.e  his  sickle  brings 
In  vain,  or  else  in  vain  his  wings. 

Thomas  Carew  [is98?-i6j9?] 


598  Poems  of  Love 


MEDIOCRITY  IN  LOVE  REJECTED 

Give  me  more  love,  or  more  disdain: 

The  torrid,  or  the  frozen  zone 
Bring  equal  ease  unto  my  pain; 

The  temperate  affords  me  none: 
Either  extreme,  of  love  or  hate, 
Is  sweeter  than  a  calm  estate. 

Give  me  a  storm;  if  it  be  love,  ;  .n  i. 

Like  Danae  in  that  golden  shower;  oJ  bnA 
I  swim  in  pleasure;  if  it  prove  '' 

Disdain,  that  torrent  will  devour 
My  vulture-hopes;  and  he's  possessed 
Of  heaven,  that's  but  from  hell  released.    '  ^ 

Then  crown  my  joys,  or  cure  my  pain: 
Give  me  more  love,  or  more  disdain. 

Thomas  Careio  [i598?-i6j9?] 


THE  MESSAGE 

Ye  little  birds  that  sit  and  sing 

Amidst  the  shady  valleys, 
And  see  how  Phillis  sweetly  walks 

Within  her  garden-alleys; 
Go,  pretty  birds,  about  her  bower; 
Sing,  pretty  birds,  she  may  not  lower; 
Ah  me!  methinks  I  see  her  frown! 
Ye  pretty  wantons,  warble. 

Go  tell  her  through  your  chirping  bills, 

As  you  by  me  are  bidden, 
To  her  is  only  known  my  love. 

Which  from  the  world  is  hidden.     ,,. 
Go,  pretty  birds,  and  tell  her  so. 
See  that  your  notes  strain  not  too  low, 
For  still  methinks  I  see  her  frown; 
Ye  pretty  wantons,  warble. 


l"i 


"How  Can  the   Heart   Forget   Her"      599 

Go  lune  your  voices'  harmony 

And  sing,  I  am  her  lover; 
Strain  loud  and  sweet,  that  every  note 

With  sweet  content  may  move  her: 

And  she  that  hath  the  sweetest  voice, 

Tell  her  I  wiH  not  change  my  choice: 

— Yet  still  methinks  I  see  her  frown! 

Ye  pretty  wantons,  warble. 

O  fly!  make  haste!  sec,  see,  she  falls 

Into  a  pretty  slumber! 
Sing  round  about  her  rosy  bed 

That  waking  she  may  wonder: 
Say  to  her,  'tis  her  lover  true 
That  sendeth  love  to  you,  to  you! 
And  when  you  hear  her  kind  reply, 
Return  with  pleasant  warblings. 

Thomas  Heywood  [    ?    -1650?] 


'HOW   CAN  THE   HEART   FORGET  HER" 

At  her  fair  hands  how  have  I  grace  entreated 

With  prayers  oft  repeated! 

Yet  stiU  my  love  is  thwarted : 

Heart,  let  her  go,  for  she'll  not  be  converted — 

Say,  shall  she  go? 

O  no,  no,  no,  no,  no! 
She  is  most  fair,  though  she  be  marble-hearted. 

How  often  have  my  sighs  declared  my  anguish, 

Wherein  I  daily  languish ! 

Yet  still  she  doth  procure  it: 

Heart,  let  her  go,  for  I  cannot  endure  it — 

Say,  shall  she  go? 

O  no,  no,  no,  no,  no! 
She  gave  the  wound,  and  she  alone  must  cure  it. 

But  shall  I  still  a  true  affection  owe  her, 
Which  prayers,  sighs,  tears  do  show  her, 


5oo  Poems  of  Love  .  \ 

And  shall  she  still  disdain  me? 

Heart,  let  her  go,  if  they  no  grace  can  gain  me — 

Say,  shall  she  go? 

O  no,  no,  no,  no,  no! 
She  made  me  hers,  and  hers  she  will  retain  me. 

But  if  the  love  that  hath  and  still  doth  burn  me 

No  love  at  length  return  me, 

Out  of  my  thoughts  I'll  set  her: 

Heart,  let  her  go,  O  heart  I  pray  thee,  let  her! 

Say,  shall  she  go? 

O  no,  no,  no,  no,  no! 
Fixed  in  the  heart,  how  can  the  heart  forget  her? 

Francis  Davison  [fl.  1602] 

TO  ROSES  IN  THE  BOSOM  OF   CASTARA 

Ye  blushing  virgins  happy  are 

In  the  chaste  nunnery  of  her  breasts — 

For  he'd  profane  so  chaste  a  fair, 

Whoe'er  should  call  them  Cupid's  nests. 

Transplanted  thus  how  bright  ye  grow! 

How  rich  a  perfume  do  ye  yield! 
In  some  close  garden  cowslips  so 

Are  sweeter  than  in  the  open  field. 

In  those  white  cloisters  live  secure  , 

From  the  rude  blasts  of  wanton  breath! — 

Each  hour  more  innocent  and  pure. 
Till  you  shall  wither  into  death. 

Then  that  which  living  gave  you  room, 

Your  glorious  sepulcher  shall  be. 
There  wants  no  marble  for  a  tomb 

Whose  breast  hath  marble  been  to  me. 

William  Hahington  [1605-165 4] 

TO   FLAVIA 

'Tis  not  your  beauty  can  engage 

My  wary  heart; 
The  sun,  in  all  his  pride  and  rage. 

Has  not  that  art; 


"  When,  Dearest,  I  But  Think  of  Thee  "   6oi 

And  yet  he  shines  as  bright  as  you, 
If  brightness  could  our  souls  subdue. 

'Tis  not  the  pretty  things  you  say, 

Nor  those  you  write. 
Which  can  make  Thyrsis'  heart  your  prey: 

For  that  delight, 
The  graces  of  a  well-taught  mind, 
In  some  of  our  own  sex  we  find. 

No,  Flavia,  'tis  your  love  I  fear; 

Love's  surest  darts, 
Those  which  so  seldom  fail  him,  are 

Headed  with  hearts: 
Their  very  shadows  make  us  yield; 
Dissemble  well,  and  win  the  field! 

Edmund  Waller  [1606-1687] 


"LOVE  NOT  ME  FOR   COMELY  GRACE" 

Love  not  me  for  comely  grace, 
For  my  pleasing  eye  or  face; 
Nor  for  any  outward  part. 
No,  nor  for  a  constant  heart: 

For  these  may  fail  or  turn  to  ill, 
So  thou  and  I  shall  sever. 
Keep,  therefore,  a  true  woman's  eye, 
And  love  me  still,  but  know  not  why; 
So  hast  thou  the  same  reason  still 
To  doat  upon  me  ever. 

Unkiwwn 


"WHEN,  DEAREST,  I  BUT  THINK  OF  THEE" 

When,  dearest,  I  but  think  of  thee, 
Methinks  all  things  that  lovely  be 

Are  present,  and  my  soul  delighted: 
For  beauties  that  from  worth  arise 
Are  like  the  grace  of  deities,  "  -' 

Still  present  with  us,  though  unsighted. 


6oi  Poems  of  Love 

Thus  while  I  sit  and  sigh  the  day 
With  all  his  borrowed  lights  away, 

Till  night's  black  wings  do  overtake  me, 
•  Thinking  on  thee,  thy  beauties  then, 
As  sudden  lights  do  sleepy  men. 

So  they  by  their  bright  rays  awake  me. 

Thus  absence  dies,  and  dying  proves 
No  absence  can  subsist  with  loves 

That  do  partake  of  fair, perfection: 
Since  in  the  darkest  night  they  may 
By  love's  quick  motion  find  a  way 

To  see  each  other  by  reflection. 

The  waving  sea  can  with  each  flood  ^ 

,  J,      Bathe  some  high  promont  that  hath  stood 
Far  from  the  main  up  in  the  river: 
O  think  not  then  but  love  can  do 
As  much!  for  that's  an  ocean  too,  .  .  ii 

Which  flows  not  every  day,  but  ever! 

John  Suckling  [1609-164: 


A  DOUBT  OF  MARTYRDOM 

O  FOR  some  honest  lover's  ghost. 
Some  kind  unbodied  post 

Sent  from  the  shades  below  J- y{  5^/^ 
I  strangely  long  to  know     :  ,  ,- 
Whether  the  noble  chaplets  wear 
»,!'.,      Those  that  their  mistress'  scorn  did  bear 
Or  those  that  were  used  kindly. 

'^    "    For  whatsoe'er  they  tell  us  here 
To  make  those  sufferings  dear, 
'Twill  there,  I  fear,  be  found 
That  to  the  being  crowned 
To  have  loved  alone  will  not  sufTice, 
Unless  we  also  have  been  wise 

And  have  our  loves  enjoyed.        ;^ 


6o3 


To  Chloe 

What  posture  can  we  think  him  in 
That,  here  unloved,  again 
Departs,  ancl's  thither  gone 
Where  each  sits  by  his  own? 
Or  how  can  that  Elysium  be 
Where  I  my  mistress  still  must  see 
Circled  in  other's  arms? 

For  there  the  judges  all  are  just, 
And  Sophonisba  must 

Be  his  whom  she  held  dear. 
Not  his  who  loved  her  here. 
The  sweet  Philoclea,  since  she  died, 
Lies  by  her  Pirocles  his  side, 
Not  by  Amphialus. 


Some  bays,  perchance,  or  myrtle  bough 
For  difference  crowns  the  brow 
Of  those  kind  souls  that  were 
The  noble  martyrs  here: 
And  if  that  be  the  only  odds 
(As  who  can  tell?),  ye  kinder  gods, 
Give  me  the  woman  here! 

Johti  Suckling  [1609- 164  2] 


TO   CHLOE 

WHO   FOR   HIS   SAKE   VvISHED   HERSELF   YOUNGER 

Chloe,  why  wish  you  that  your  years 
Would  backwards  run,  till  they  met  mine? 

That  perfect  likeness,  which  endears 
Things  unto  things,  might  us  combine. 

Our  ages  so  in  date  agree, 

That  twins  do  differ  more  than  we. 

There  are  two  births;  the  one  when  light 
First  strikes  the  new  awakened  sense; 

The  other  when  two  souls  unite. 

And  we  must  count  our  life  from  thence: 


6o4  Poems  of  Love 

When  you  loved  me  and  I  loved  you 
Then  both  of  us  were  born  anew. 

Love  then  to  us  new  souls  did  give 

And  in  those  souls  did  plant  new  powers; 

Since  when  another  life  we  live, 
The  breath  we  breathe  is  his,  not  ours: 

Love  makes  those  young  whom  age  doth  chill. 

And  whom  he  finds  young  keeps  young  still. 

Love,  like  that  angel  that  shall  call 

Our  bodies  from  the  silent  grave, 
Unto  one  age  doth  raise  us  all; 

None  too  much,  none  too  little  have; 
Nay,  that  the  difference  may  be  none. 
He  makes  two  not  alike,  but  one. 

And  now  since  you  and  I  are  such, 

Tell  me  what's  yours,  and  what  is  mine? 

Our  eyes,  our  ears,  our  taste,  smell,  touch. 
Do,  like  our  souls,  in  one  combine; 

So,  by  this,  I  as  well  may  be 

Too  old  for  you,  as  you  for  me. 

William  Cartwrighl  [1611-1643] 


'I'LL  NEVER  LOVE   THEE   MORE" 

My  dear  and  only  Love,  I  pray 

This  little  world  of  thee  "  ^^^^ 

Be  governed  by  no  other  sway 

Than  purest  monarchy; 
For  if  confusion  have  a  part, 

Which  virtuous  souls  abhor, 
And  hold  a  synod  in  thy  heart, 

I'll  never  love  thee  more. 

Like  Alexander  I  will  reign. 

And  I  will  reign  alone; 
My  thoughts  did  evermore  disdain 

A  rival  on  my  throne. 


To  Althea,   From    Prison  6oc 

He  either  fears  his  fate  too  much, 

Or  his  deserts  are  small, 
That  dares  not  put  it  to  the  touch 

To  gain  or  lose  it  all. 

But  I  must  rule  and  govern  still, 

And  always  give  the  law, 
And  have  each  subject  at  my  will 

And  all  to  stand  in  awe. 
But  'gainst  my  batteries  if  I  find 

Thou  kick,  or  vex  me  sore, 
As  that  thou  set  me  up  a  blind, 

I'll  never  love  thee  more! 

Or  in  the  empire  of  thy  heart, 

Where  I  should  solely  be, 
If  others  do  pretend  a  part 

And  dare  to  vie  with  me, 
Or  if  committees  thou  erect. 

And  go  on  such  a  score, 
I'll  laugh  and  sing  at  thy  neglect, 

And  never  love  thee  more. 

But  if  thou  wilt  be  faithful,  then, 

And  constant  of  thy  word, 
I'll  make  thee  glorious  by  my  pen 

And  famous  by  my  sword; 
I'll  serve  thee  in  such  noble  ways 

Were  never  heard  before; 
I'll  crown  and  deck  thee  all  with  bays, 

And  love  thee  evermore. 

James  Graham  [i 6 12-1650] 


TO  ALTHEA,   FROM   PRISON 

When  Love  with  unconfmed  wings 
Hovers  within  my  gates. 

And  my  divine  Althea  brings 
To  whisper  at  the  grates; 


6o6  Poems  of  Love 

When  I  lie  tangled  in  her  hair 

And  fettered  to  her  eye, 
The  birds  that  wanton  in  the  air 

Know  no  such  Uberty. 

When  flowing  cups  run  swiftly  round 

With  no  allaying  Thames, 
Our  careless  heads  with  roses  bound, 

Our  hearts  with  loyal  flames; 
When  thirsty  grief  in  wine  we  steep, 

When  healths  and  draughts  go  free — 
Fishes  that  tipple  in  the  deep 

Know  no  such  liberty. 

When,  like  committed  linnets,  I 

With  shriller  throat  shall  sing 
The  sweetness,  mercy,  majesty, 

And  glories  of  my  King; 
When  I  shall  voice  aloud  how  good 

He  is,  how  great  should  be. 
Enlarged  winds,  that  curl  the  flood, 

Know  no  such  liberty. 

Stone  walls  do  not  a  prison  make,:'  :''ci 

Nor  iron  bars  a  cage;  bfiA 

Minds  innocent  and  quiet  take  H'T 

That  for  an  hermitage; 
If  I  have  freedom  in  my  love  if 

And  in  my  soul  am  free. 
Angels  alone,  that  soar  above,  'T 

Enjoy  such  liberty. 
'"'■-"  Richard  Lovelac?  [  1 6 1 8- 1 65 8] 


WHY  I  LOVE  HER 

'Tis  not  her  birth,  her  friends,  nor  yet  her  treasure, 
Nor  do  I  covet  her  for  sensual  pleasureji  ^ 
Nor  for  that  old  morality  ■■  /!ii  ImL 

Do  I  love  her,  'cause  she  loves  mejrf//  oT 


To   His  Coy   Mistress  607 

Sure  h.e  that  loves  his  lady  'cause  she's  fair, 
Delights  his  eye,  so  loves  himself,  not  her. 
Something  there  is  moves  me  to  love,  and  I 
Do  know  I  love,  but  know  not  how,  nor  why. 

Alexander  Brome  [1620-1666] 

TO  HIS   COY  MISTRESS 

Had  we  but  world  enough,  and  time. 
This  coyness.  Lady,  were  no  crime. 
We  would  sit  down  and  think  which  way 
To  walk  and  pass  our  long  love's  day. 
Thou  by  the  Indian  Ganges'  side 
Shouldst  rubies  find:  I  by  the  tide 
Of  Humber  would  complain.    I  would 
Love  you  ten  years  before  the  Flood, 
And  you  should,  if  you  please,  refuse 
Till  the  conversion  of  the  Jews. 
]\Iy  vegetable  love  should  grow 
Vaster  than  empires,  and  more  slow; 
An  hundred  years  should  go  to  praise 
Thine  eyes  and  on  thy  forehead  gaze; 
Two  hundred  to  adore  each  breast, 
But  thirty  thousand  to  the  rest ; 
An  age  at  least  to  every  part, 
And  the  last  age  should  show  your  heart. 
For,  Lady,  you  deserve  this  state, 
Nor  would  I  love  at  lower  rate. 

But  at  my  back  I  always  hear 
Time's  winged  chariot  hurrying  near; 
And  yonder  all  before  us  lie 
Deserts  of  vast  eternity. 
Thy  beauty  shall  no  more  be  found, 
Nor,  in  thy  marble  vault,  shall  sound 
My  echoing  song:  then  worms  shall  try 
That  long  preserved  virginity, 
And  your  quaint  honor  turn  to  dust, 
And  into  ashes  all  my  lust: 
The  grave's  a  fine  and  private  place. 
But  none,  I  think,  do  there  embrace. 


6o8  Poems  of  Love 

Now  therefore,  while  the  youthful  hue 
Sits  on  thy  skin  like  morning  dew, 
And  while  thy  willing  soul  transpires 
At  every  pore  with  instant  fires, 
Now  let  us  sport  us  while  we  may, 
And  now,  like  amorous  birds  of  prey, 
Rather  at  once  our  time  devour 
Than  languish  in  his  slow-chapt  power. 
Let  us  roll  all  our  strength  and  all 
Our  sweetness  up  into  one  ball. 
And  tear  our  pleasures  with  rough  strife 
Through  the  iron  gates  of  life: 
'  Thus,  though  we  cannot  make  our  sun ' ' 
Stand  still,  yet  we  will  make  him  run. 

Andrew  Marvell  [i 621-1678] 


A  DEPOSITION  FROM   BEAUTY 

Though  when  I  loved  thee  thou  wert  fair, 

Thou  art  no  longer  so; 
These  glories  all  the  pride  they  wear 

Unto  opinion  owe.  ' 

Beauties,  like  stars,  in  borrowed  luster  shine; 
And  'twas  my  love  that  gave  thee  thine. 

The  flames  that  dwelt  within  thine  eye 

Do  now  with  mine  expire; 
Thy  brightest  graces  fade  and  die 

At  once  with  my  desire. 
Love's  fires  thus  mutual  influence  return; 

Thine  cease  to  shine,  when  mine  to  burn. 

.Diiiioi  ■>(,i  yiorri  ofi  iinilr.  y^'i-'iiod  vrl'l" 

Then,  proud  Celihda,  hope  no  more 

To  be  implored  or  wooed. 
Since  by  thy  scorn  thou  dost  restore 

Thy  wealth  my  love  bestowed: 
And  thy  despised  disdain  too  late  shall  find 
That  none  are  fair  but  who  are  kind. 

Thomas  Stanley  [1625-1678] 


To  Celia  609 


"LOVE  IN  THY  YOUTH,   FAIR  MAID" 

Love  in  thy  youth,  fair  maid,  be  wise, 

Old  Time  will  make  thee  colder. 
And  though  each  morning  new  arise, 

Yet  we  each  day  grow  older. 

Thou  as  heaven  art  fair  and  young, 
Thine  eyes  like  twin  stars  shining; 

But  ere  another  day  be  sprung, 
All  these  will  be  declining; 

Then  winter  comes  with  all  his  fears, 

And  all  thy  sweets  shall  borrow; 
Too  late  then  wilt  thou  shower  thy  tears. 

And  I,  too  late,  shall  sorrow. 

Unknowfi 

TO  CELIA 

When,  Ceha,  must  my  old  day  set. 

And  my  young  morning  rise 
In  beams  of  joy  so  bright  as  3'et 

Ne'er  blessed  a  lover's  eyes? 
My  state  is  more  advanced  than  when 

I  first  attempted  thee: 
I  sued  to  be  a  servant  then. 

But  now  to  be  made  free. 

I've  served  my  time  faithful  and  true, 

Expecting  to  be  placed 
In  happy  freedom,  as  my  due. 

To  all  the  joys  thou  hast: 
111  husbandry  in  love  is  such 

A  scandal  to  love's  power, 
We  ought  not  to  misspend  so  much 

As  one  poor  short-lived  hour. 

Yet  think  not,  sweet,  I  'm  weary  grown, 

That  I  pretend  such  haste; 
Since  none  to  surfeit  e'er  was  known 

Before  he  had  a  taste: 


6io  Poems  of  Love 

My  infant  love  could  humbly  wait 
When,  young,  it  scarce  knew  how 

To  plead;  but  grown  to  man's  estate, 
He  is  impatient  now. 

Charles  Cotton  [1630  -1687] 


TO   CELIA 

Not,  Celia,  that  I  juster  am 

Or  better  than  the  rest! 
For  I  would  change  each  hour,  like  them, 

Were  not  my  heart  at  rest. 

But  I  am  tied  to  very  thee 

By  every  thought  I  have; 
Thy  face  I  only  care  to  see, 

Thy  heart  I  only  crave. 

All  that  in  woman  is  adored 

In  thy  dear  self  I  find — 
For  the  whole  sex  can  but  afford 

The  handsome  and  the  kind. 

Why  then  should  I  seek  further  store. 

And  still  make  love  anew? 
When  change  itself  can  give  no  more, 

'Tis  easy  to  be  true! 

Charles  Sed ley  [1639  -1701] 


A  SONG 

My  dear  mistress  has  a  heart 

Soft  as  those  kind  looks  she  gave  me ; 
When  with  love's  resistless  art, 

And  her  eyes,  she  did  enslave  me. 
But  her  constancy's  so  weak, 

She's  so  wild  and  apt  to  wander, 
That  my  jealous  heart  would  break 

Should  we  live  one  day  asunder. 


Constancy  6ii 

Melting  joys  about  her  move, 

Killing  pleasures,  wounding  blisses; 
She  can  dress  her  eyes  in  love, 

And  her  lips  can  arm  with  kisses. 
Angels  listen  when  she  speaks;  leriT- 

She's  my  delight,  all  mankind's  wonder; 
But  my  jealous  heart  would  break 

Should  we  live  one  day  asunder. 
W^-  John  Wilmot  [1647-1680] 

LOVE  AND   LIFE 

All  my  past  life  is  mine  no  more; 

The  flying  hours  are  gone, 
Like  transitory  dreams  given  o'er, 
Whose  images  are  kept  in  store 

By  memory  alone. 

The  time  that  is  to  come  is  not; 

How  can  it  then  be  mine? 
foScii- V       The  present  moment's  all  my  lot; 
And  that,  as  fast  as  it  is  got, 

Phillis,  is  only  thine. 

Then  talk  not  of  inconstancy, 

False  hearts,  and  broken  vows; 
If  I  by  miracle  can  be 
This  live-long  minute  true  to  thee, 
'Tis  all  that  Heaven  allows. 

John  Wilmot  [1647-1680] 

CONSTANCY 

I  CANNOT  change  as  others  do, 

Though  you  unjustly  scorn ; 
Since  that  poor  swain  that  sighs  for  you 

For  you  alone  was  born. 
No,  Phillis,  no;  your  heart  to  move 

A  surer  way  I'll  try; 
And,  to  revenge  my  slighted  love, 

Will  still  love  on  and  die. 


6i2  Poems  of  Love 

When  killed  with  grief  Amyntas  lies, 

And  you  to  mind  shall  call 
The  sighs  that  now  unpitied  rise,  ,    ; 

The  tears  that  vainly  fall — 
That  welcome  hour,  that  ends  this  smart, 

Will  then  begin  your  pain; 
For  such  a  faithful  tender  heart 

Can  never  break  in  vain. 

John  Wilmot  [164  7- 1680] 

SONG 

Too  late,  alas!  I  must  confess, 
You  need  not  arts  to  move  me; 

Such  charms  by  nature  you  possess, 
'Twere  madness  not  to  love  ye. 

Then  spare  a  heart  you  may  surprise, 
And  give  my  tongue  the  glory 

To  boast,  though  my  unfaithful  eyes 
Betray  a  tender  story. 

John  Wilmot  [1647-1680] 

SONG 

Come,  Celia,  let's  agree  at  last 

To  love  and  live  in  quiet; 
Let's  tie  the  knot  so  very  fast 

That  time  shall  ne'er  untie  it. 
Love's  dearest  joys  they  never  prove. 

Who  free  from  quarrels  live; 
'Tis  sure  a  godlike  part  of  love 

Each  other  to  forgive. 

When  least  I  seemed  concerned  I  took 

No  pleasure,  nor  had  rest; 
And  when  I  feigned  an  angry  look, 

Alas!     I  loved  you  best. 
Say  but  the  same  to  me,  you'll  find 

How  blest  will  be  our  fate; 
Sure  to  be  grateful,  to  be  kind, 

Can  never  be  too  late. 

John  Sheffield  [1648-1721] 


"False  Though  She   Be"  613 


THE   ENCHANTMENT 

I  DID  but  look  and  love  awhile, 
'Twas  but  for  one  half -hour; 
Then  to  resist  I  had  no  will, 
And  now  I  have  no  power. 

To  sigh  and  wish  is  all  my  ease; 

Sighs  which  do  heat  impart 
Enough  to  melt  the  coldest  ice, 

Yet  cannot  warm  your  heart. 

O  would  your  pity  give  my  heart 

One  corner  of  your  breast, 
'Twould  learn  of  yours  the  winning  art. 

And  quickly  steal  the  rest. 

Thomas  Olway  [1652-1685] 

SONG 

Only  tell  her  that  1  love: 

Leave  the  rest  to  her  and  Fate: 
Some  kind  planet  from  above 
May  perhaps  her  pity  move: 

Lovers  on  their  stars  must  wait. — 
Only  tell  her  that  I  love! 

Why,  O  why  should  I  despair! 

Mercy's  pictured  in  her  eye: 
If  she  once  vouchsafe  to  hear, 
Welcome  Hope  and  farewell  Fear! 

She's  too  good  to  let  me  die. — 
Why,  O  why  should  I  despair? 

John  C litis  [166 1- 1 707] 

"FALSE  THOUGH   SHE   BE" 

False  though  she  be  to  me  and  love, 

I'll  ne'er  pursue  revenge; 
For  still  the  charmer  I  approve, 

Though  I  deplore  her  change. 


6 14  Poems  of  Love 

In  hours  of  bliss  we  oft  have  met: 
They  could  not  always  last ; 

And  though  the  present  I  regret, 
I'm  grateful  for  the  past. 

William  Congreve  [1670-17 29] 


TO   SILVIA 

From  "The  Caut'ous  Lovers" 

Silvia,  let  us  from  the  crowd  retire, 

For  what  to  you  and  me 
(Who  but  each  other  do  desire) 

Is  all  that  here  we  see? 

Apart  we'U  live,  though  not  alone; 

For  who  alone  can  call 
Those  who  in  deserts  live  with  one 

If  in  that  one  they've  all? 

The  world  a  vast  meander  is, 

Where  hearts  confusedly  stray; 
Where  few  do  hit,  whilst  thousands  miss. 

The  happy  mutual  way. 

A  nne  Finch  [  ?    -1720] 

"WHY,  LOVELY  CHARMER" 

Why,  lovely  charmer,  tell  me  why. 
So  very  kind,  and  yet  so  shy? 
Why  does  that  cold,  forbidding  air 
Give  damps  of  sorrow  and  despair? 
Or  why  that  smile  my  soul  subdue, 
And  kindle  up  my  flames  anew? 

In  vain  you  strive  with  all  your  art. 
By  turns  to' fire  and  freeze  my  heart; 
When  I  behold  a  face  so  fair, 
So  sweet  a  look,  so  soft  an  air, 
My  ravished  soul  is  charmed  all  o'er, 
I  cannot  love  thee  less  or  more. 

Unknown 


A  Song  To  Amoret  615 


AGAINST  INDIFFERENCE 

More  love  or  more  disdain  I  crave; 

Sweet,  be  not  still  indifferent: 
O  send  me  quickly  to  my  grave, 

Or  else  afford  me  more  content! 
Or  love  or  hate  me  more  or  less, 
For  love  abhors  all  lukewarmness. 

Give  me  a  tempest  if  'twill  drive 
Me  to  the  place  where  I  would  be; 

Or  if  you'll  have  me  still  alive, 
Confess  you  will  be  kind  to  me. 

Give  hopes  of  bliss  or  dig  my  grave: 

More  love  or  more  disdain  I  crave. 

Charles  Wehhe  [c.  1678] 


A  SONG  TO  AMORET 

If  I  were  dead,  and.  In  my  place. 
Some  fresher  youth  designed 

To  warm  thee,  with  new  fires;  and  grace 
Those  arms  I  left  behind : 

Were  he  as  faithful  as  the  Sun, 
That's  wedded  to  the  Sphere; 

His  blood  as  chaste  and  temperate  run, 
As  April's  mildest  tear; 

Or  were  he  rich;  and,  with  his  heap 
And  spacious  share  of  earth, 

Could  make  divine  affection  cheap, 
And  court  his  golden  birth; 

For  all  these  arts,  I'd  not  believe 
(No!  though  he  should  be  thine!), 

The  mighty  Amorist  could  give 
So  rich  a  heart  as  mine! 


6i6  Poems  of  Love 

Fortune  and  beauty  thou  might'st  find, 

And  greater  men  than  I; 
But  my  true  resolved  mind 

They  never  shall  come  nigh. 

For  I  not  for  an  hour  did  love, 

Or  for  a  day  desire, 
But  with  my  soul  had  from  above 

This  endless  holy  fire. 

Henry  Vaughan  [1622-1695] 


THE  LASS  OF  RICHMOND   HILL 

On  Richmond  Hill  there  lives  a  lass 
More  bright  than  May-day  morn, 

Whose  charms  all  other  maids  surpass, — 
A  rose  without  a  thorn. 

This  lass  so  neat,  with  smiles  so  sweet, 

Has  won  my  right  good- will; 
I'd  crowns  resign  to  call  her  mine. 

Sweet  lass  of  Richmond  Hill. 

Ye  zephyrs  gay,  that  fan  the  air. 
And  wanton  through  the  grove, 

O,  whisper  to  my  charming  fair, 
I  die  for  her  I  love. 

How  happy  will  the  shepherd  be 

Who  calls  this  nymph  his  own! 
O,  may  her  choice  be  fixed  on  me! 

Mine's  fixed  on  her  alone. 

James  Uplon  [1670-1740] 

SONG 

Let  my  voice  ring  out  and  over  the  earth, 

Through  all  the  grief  and  strife, 
With  a  golden  joy  in  a  silver  mirth: 

Thank  God  for  life! 


Amynta  617 


Let  my  voice  swell  out  through  the  great  abyss  ^ 

To  the  azure  dome  above, 
With  a  chord  of  faith  in  the  harp  of  bliss: 

Thank  God  for  Love ! 

Let  my  voice  thrill  out  beneath  and  above, 

The  whole  world  through: 
O  my  Love  and  Life,  O  my  Life  and  Love, 

Thank  God  for  you ! 

James  Thomson  [183 4-1 88 2] 

GIFTS 

Give  a  man  a  horse  he  can  ride, 

Give  a  man  a  boat  he  can  sail; 
And  his  rank  and  wealth,  his  strength  and  health, 

On  sea  nor  shore  shall  fail. 

Give  a  man  a  pipe  he  can  smoke, 

Give  a  man  a  book  he  can  read: 
And  his  home  is  bright  with  a  calm  delight, 

Though  the  room  be  poor  indeed. 

Give  a  man  a  girl  he  can  love. 

As  I,  O  my  love,  love  thee; 
And  his  heart  is  great  with  the  pulse  of  Fate, 

At  home,  on  land,  on  sea. 

James  Thomson  (1834-1882] 

AMYNTA 

My  sheep  I  neglected,  I  broke  my  sheep-crook. 
And  all  the  gay  haunts  of  my  youth  I  forsook; 
No  more  for  Amynta  fresh  garlands  I  wove; 
For  ambition,  I  said  would  soon  cure  me  of  love. 

Oh,  what  had  my  youth  with  ambition  to  do? 
Why  left  I  Amynta?    Why  broke  I  my  vow? 
Oh,  give  me  my  sheep,  and  my  sheep-hook  restore. 
And  I'll  wander  from  love  and  Amynta  no  more. 


6i8  Poems  of  Love 

Through  regions  remote  in  vain  do  I  rove, 
And  bid  the  wide  ocean  secure  me  from  love! 
O  fool!  to  imagine  that  aught  could  subdue 
A  love  so  well  founded,  a  passion  so  true! 

Alas!  'tis  too  late  at  thy  fate  to  repine; 
Poor  shepherd,  Amynta  can  never  be  thine: 
Thy  tears  are  all  fruitless,  thy  wishes  are  vain, 
The  moments  neglected  return  not  again. 

Gilbert  Elliot  [17  2  2-1 7  7  7] 


"O  NANCY!  WILT  THOU  GO  WITH  ME" 

O  Nancy,  wilt  thou  go  with  me. 

Nor  sigh  to  leave  the  flaunting  town: 
Can  silent  glens  have  charms  for  thee, 

The  lowly  cot,  the  russet  gown? 
No  longer  dressed  in  silken  sheen. 

No  longer  decked  with  jewels  rare, 
Say,  canst  thou  quit  each  courtly  scene 

Where  thou  wert  fairest  of  the  fair? 

O  Nancy!  when  thou'rt  far  away, 

Wilt  thou  not  cast  a  wish  behind? 
Say,  canst  thou  face  the  parching  ray. 

Nor  shrink  before  the  wintry  wind? 
O!  can  that  soft  and  gentle  mien 

Extremes  of  hardship  learn  to  bear, 
Nor,  sad,  regret  each  courtly  scene 

Where  thou  wert  fairest  of  the  fair? 

O  Nancy!  canst  thou  love  so  true. 

Through  perils  keen  with  me  to  go. 
Or  when  thy  swain  mishap  shall  rue. 

To  share  with  him  the  pang  of  woe? 
Say,  should  disease  or  pain  befall. 

Wilt  thou  assume  the  nurse's  care; 
Nor  wistful  those  gay  scenes  recall 

Where  thou  wert  fairest  of  the  fair? 


Cavalier's   Song  5jq 


And  when  at  last  thy  love  shall  die, 

Wilt  thou  receive  his  parting  breath? 
Wilt  thou  repress  each  struggling  sigh, 

And  cheer  with  smiles  the  bed  of  death? 
And  wilt  thou  o'er  his  breathless  clay 

Strew  flowers  and  drop  the  tender  tear? 
Nor  then  regret  those  scenes  so  gay 

Where  thou  wert  fairest  of  the  fair? 

Thomas  Percy  [1729-1811] 

CAVALIER'S  SONG 

If  doughty  deeds  my  lady  please, 
Right  soon  I'll  mount  my  steed; 
And  strong  his  arm  and  fast  his  seat, 

That  bears  frae  me  the  meed. 
I'll  wear  thy  colors  in  my  cap. 

Thy  picture  in  my  heart; 
And  he  that  bends  not  to  thine  eye 
Shall  rue  it  to  his  smart! 
Then  tell  me  how  to  woo  thee.  Love; 

0  tell  me  how  to  w'oo  thee! 
For  thy  dear  sake  nae  care  I'll  take, 
Though  ne'er  another  trow  me. 

If  gay  attire  delight  thine  eye 

I'll  dight  me  in  array; 
I'll  tend  thy  chamber  door  all  night. 

And  squire  thee  all  the  day. 
If  sweetest  sounds  can  win  thine  ear. 

These  sounds  I'll  strive  to  catch; 
Thy  voice  I'll  steal  to  woo  thyscl', 
That  voice  that  nane  can  match. 

Then  tell  me  how  to  woo  thee,  Love; 

0  tell  me  how  to  woo  thee! 
For  thy  dear  sake  nae  care  I'll  take 
Though  ne'er  another  trow  me. 

But  if  fond  love  thy  heart  can  gain, 

I  never  broke  a  vow; 
Nae  maiden  lays  her  skaith  to  me, 

I  never  loved  but  you. 


620  Poems  of  Love 

For  you  alone  I  ride  the  ring, 

For  you  I  wear  the  blue; 
For  you  alone  I  strive  to  sing, 
O  tell  me  how  to  woo! 

Then  tell  me  how  to  woo  thee,  Love; 

O  tell  me  how  to  woo  thee! 
For  thy  dear  sake  nae  care  I'll  take 
Though  ne'er  another  trow  me. 

Robert  CunnJnghame-Graham  [    ?    -1707?] 

"MY  HEART  IS   A  LUTE" 

Alas,  that  my  heart  is  a  lute. 

Whereon  you  have  learned  to  play! 

For  a  many  years  it  was  mute, 

Until  one  summer's  day 
You  took  it,  and  touched  it,  and  made  it  thrill, 
And  it  thrills  and  throbs,  and  quivers  still! 

I  had  known  you,  dear,  so  long! 

Yet  my  heart  did  not  tell  me  why 

It  should  burst  one  morn  into  song. 

And  wake  to  new  life  with  a  cry. 
Like  a  babe  that  sees  the  light  of  the  sun, 
And  for  whom  this  great  world  has  just  begun. 

Your  lute  is  enshrined,  cased  in. 

Kept  close  with  love's  magic  key, 

So  no  hand  but  yours  can  win 

And  wake  it  to  minstrelsy; 
Yet  leave  it  not  silent  too  long,  nor  alone. 
Lest  the  strings  should  break,  and  the  music  be  done. 
Anne  Barnard  [i 750-1825] 

SONG 

From  "  The  Duenna  " 

Had  I  a  heart  for  falsehood  framed, 

I  ne'er  could  injure  you; 
For  though  your  tongue  no  promise  claimed, 

Your  charms  would  make  me  true: 


"O  Were  My  Love  Yon  Lilac  Fair"  621 

Then,  lady,  dread  not  here  deceit, 

Nor  fear  to  suffer  wrong. 
For  friends  in  all  the  aged  you'll  meet, 

And  lovers  in  the  young. 

But  when  they  find  that  you  have  blessed 

Another  with  your  heart, 
They'll  bid  aspiring  passion  rest, 

And  act  a  brother's  part: 
Then,  lady,  dread  not  here  deceit 

Nor  fear  to  suffer  wrong; 
For  friends  in  all  the  aged  you'll  meet. 

And  brothers  in  the  young. 

Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan  [1751-1816] 

MEETING 

My  Damon  was  the  first  to  wake 

The  gentle  flame  that  cannot  die; 
My  Damon  is  the  last  to  take 

The  faithful  bosom's  softest  sigh: 
The  life  between  is  nothing  worth, 

O  cast  it  from  thy  thought  away! 
Think  of  the  day  that  gave  it  birth, 

And  this  its  sweet  returning  day. 

Buried  be  all  that  has  been  done, 

Or  say  that  naught  is  done  amiss; 
For  who  the  dangerous  path  can  shun 

In  such  bewildering  world  as  this? 
But  love  can  every  fault  forgive. 

Or  with  a  tender  look  reprove; 
And  now  let  naught  in  memory  live 

But  that  we  meet,  and  that  we  love. 

George  Crabbe  [1754-18.52] 

"O  WERE   MY  LOVE  YON  LILAC   FAIR" 

O  WERE  my  Love  yon  lilac  fair, 
Wi '  purple  blossoms  to  the  spring, 

And  I  a  bird  to  shelter  there, 
When  wearied  on  my  little  wing; 


622  Poems  of  Love 

How  I  wad  mourn  when  it  was  torn 
By  autumn  wild  and  winter  rude! 

But  I  wad  sing  on  wanton  wing 

When  youthfu'  May  its  bloom  renewed. 

O  gin  my  Love  were  yon  red  rose 

That  grows  upon  the  castle  wa', 
And  I  mysel  a  drap  o'  dew, 

Into  her  bonnie  breast  to  fa'; 
O  there,  beyond  expression  blest, 

I  'd  feast  on  beauty  a'  the  night ; 
Sealed  on  her  silk-saft  faulds  to  rest, 

Till  fleyed  awa'  by  Phoebus'  light. 

Robert  Burns  [i7S9-i7q6] 

"BONNIE  WEE  THING" 

Bonnie  wee  thing!  cannie  wee  thing! 

Lovely  wee  thing!  wert  thou  mine, 
I  wad  wear  thee  in  my  bosom, 

Lest  my  jewel  I  should  tine. 
Wishfully  I  look,  and  languish 

In  that  bonnie  face  o'  thine; 
And  my  heart  it  stounds  wi'  anguish, 

Lest  my  wee  thing  be  na  mine. 

Wit  and  grace,  and  love  and  beauty, 

In  ae  constellation  shine; 
To  adore  thee  is  my  duty. 

Goddess  o'  this  soul  o'  mine! 
Bonnie  wee  thing,  cannie  wee  thing, 

Lovely  wee  thing,  wert  thou  mine, 
I  wad  wear  thee  in  my  bosom. 

Lest  my  jewel  I  should  tine. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 

ROSE   AYLMER 

Ah,  what  avails  the  sceptered  race! 

Ah,  what  the  form  divine! 
What  every  virtue,  every  grace! 

Rose  Aylmer,  all  were  thine. 


*'  Take   Back  the  Virgin   Page  "       623 

Rose  Aylmer,  whom  these  wakeful  eyes 

May  weep,  but  never  see, 
A  night  of  memories  and  sighs 

I  consecrate  to  thee. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 


"TAKE  BACK  THE  VIRGIN  PAGE" 

WRITTEN  ON  RETURNING  A  BLANK  BOOK 

Take  back  the  Virgin  Page 

White  and  unwritten  still; 
Some  hand  more  calm  and  sage 

The  leaf  must  fill. 
Thoughts  came  as  pure  as  light — 

Pure  as  even  you  require: 
But  oh!  each  word  I  write 

Love  turns  to  fire. 

Yet  let  me  keep  the  book : 

Oft  shall  my  heart  renew, 
When  on  its  leaves  I  look, 

Dear  thoughts  of  you. 
Like  you,  'tis  fair  and  bright; 

Like  you,  too  bright  and  fair 
To  let  wild  passion  write 

One  wrong  wish  there. 

Haply,  when  from  those  eyes 

Far,  far  away  I  roam. 
Should  calmer  thoughts  arise 

Towards  you  and  home; 
Fancy  may  trace  some  line 

Worthy  those  eyes  to  meet, 
Thoughts  that  not  burn,  but  shine, 

Pure,  calm,  and  sweet. 

And  as  o'er  ocean  far 

Seamen  their  records  keep, 
Led  by  some  hidden  star 


624  Poems  of  Love 

Through  the  cold  deep; 
So  may  the  words  I  write 

Tell  through  what  storms  I  stray, 
You  still  the  unseen  light 

Guiding  my  way. 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 


"BELIEVE   ME,   IF   ALL   THOSE   ENDEARING 
YOUNG   CHARMS" 

Believe  me,  if  all  those  endearing  young  charms, 

Which  I  gaze  on  so  fondly  to-day. 
Were  to  change  by  to-morrow,  and  fleet  in  my  arms, 

Like  fairy-gifts  fading  away. 
Thou  wouldst  still  be  adored,  as  this  moment  thou  art, 

Let  thy  loveliness  fade  as  it  will. 
And  around  the  dear  ruin  each  wish  of  my  heart 

Would  entwine  itself  verdantly  still. 

It  is  not  while  beauty  and  youth  are  thine  own, 

And  thy  cheeks  unprofaned  by  a  tear, 
That  the  fervor  and  faith  of  a  soul  may  be  known, 

To  which  time  will  but  make  thee  more  dear! 
No,  the  heart  that  has  truly  loved  never  forgets, 

But  as  truly  loves  on  to  the  close. 
As  the  sunflower  turns  to  her  god  when  he  sets 

The  same  look  which  she  turned  when  he  rose! 

Thomas  Moore  [i 779-1852] 

THE   NUN 

If  you  become  a  nun,  dear, 

A  friar  I  will  be; 
In  any  cell  you  run,  dear. 

Pray  look  behind  for  me. 
The  roses  all  turn  pale,  too; 
The  doves  all  take  the  veil,  too; 

The  blind  will  see  the  show; 
What!  you  become  a  nun,  my  dear, 

I'll  not  believe  it,  no! 


To  625 

If  you  become  a  nun,  dear, 

The  bishop  Love  will  be: 
The  Cupids  every  one,  dear, 

Will  chant,  "We  trust  in  thee!" 
The  incense  will  go  sighing. 
The  candles  fall  a-dying. 

The  water  turn  to  wine: 
What!  you  go  take  the  vows,  my  dear? 

You  may— but  they'll  be  mine. 

Leigh  Hunt  J^i  784-1859] 


ONLY  OF  THEE  AND  ME 

Only  of  thee  and  me  the  night  wind  sings. 
Only  of  us  the  sailors  speak  at  sea, 

The  earth  is  filled  with  wondered  whisperings 
Only  of  thee  and  me. 

Only  of  thee  and  me  the  breakers  chant, 
Only  of  us  the  stir  in  bush  and  tree; 

The  rain  and  sunshine  tell  the  eager  plant 
Only  of  thee  and  me. 

Only  of  thee  and  me,  till  all  shall  fade; 

Only  of  us  the  whole  world's  thoughts  can  be- 
For  we  are  Love,  and  God  Himself  is  made 

Only  of  thee  and  me. 

Louis  Unlcrmeyer  [1885- 


TO 


One  word  is  too  often  profaned 

For  me  to  profane  it, 
One  feeling  too  falsely  disdained 

For  thee  to  disdain  it. 
One  hope  is  too  like  despair 

For  prudence  to  smother. 
And  Pity  from  thee  more  dear 

Than  that  from  another. 


626  Poems   of  Love 

I  can  give  not  what  men  call  love; 

But  wilt  thou  accept  not 
The  worship  the  heart  lifts  above 

And  the  Heavens  reject  not: 
The  desire  of  the  moth  for  the  star, 

Of  the  night  for  the  morrow, 
The  devotion  to  something  afar 

From  the  sphere  of  our  sorrow? 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [i  792-1822] 

FROM  THE  ARABIC 

My  faint  spirit  was  sitting  in  the  light 
Of  thy  looks,  my  love; 
It  panted  for  thee  like  the  hind  at  noon 
For  the  brooks,  my  love. 
Thy  barb,  whose  hoofs  outspeed  the  tempest's  flight, 
Bore  thee  far  from  me; 
My  heart,  for  my  weak  feet  were  weary  soon, 
Did  companion  thee. 

Ah!  fleeter  far  than  fleetest  storm  or  steed, 
Or  the  death  they  bear. 
The  heart  which  tender  thought  clothes  like  a  dove 
With  the  wings  of  care; 
In  the  battle,  in  the  darkness,  in  the  need, 

Shall  mine  cling  to  thee,  „ 

Nor  claim  one  smile  for  all  the  comfort,  love, 
It  may  bring  to  thee. 

Percy  ByssJie  Shelley  [i  792-1822] 

THE  WANDERING  KNIGHT'S  SONG 

My  ornaments  are  arms, 

My  pastime  is  in  war, 
My  bed  is  cold  upon  the  wold. 

My  lamp  yon  star. 

My  journeyings  are  long, 

My  slumbers  short  and  broken; 

From  hill  to  hill  I  wander  still, 
Kissing  thy  token. 


The  Secret   Love  ,  627 

I  ride  from  land  to  land, 

I  sail  from  sea  to  sea; 
Some  day  more  kind  I  fate  may  find, 

Some  night,  kiss  thee. 

John  Gibson  Lorkliart  [1704-1854] 

SONG 

Love's  on  the  highroad. 
Love's  in  the  byroad — 

Love's  on  the  meadow,  and  Love's  in  the  mart! 
And  down  every  byway 
Where  I've  taken  my  way 

I've  met  Love  a-smiling— for  Love's  in  my  heart! 

Dana  Burnett  [1888- 

THE  SECRET  LOVE 

You  and  I  have  found  the  secret  way. 
None  can  bar  our  love  or  say  us  nay: 
All  the  world  may  stare  and  never  know 
You  and  I  are  twined  together  so. 

You  and  I  for  all  his  vaunted  width 
Know  the  giant  Space  is  but  a  myth; 
Over  miles  and  miles  of  pure  deceit 
You  and  I  have  found  our  lips  can  meet. 

You  and  I  have  laughed  the  leagues  apart 
In  the  soft  dehght  of  heart  to  heart. 
If  there's  a  gulf  to  meet  or  limit  set. 
You  and  I  have  never  found  it  yet. 

You  and  I  have  trod  the  backward  way 
To  the  happy  heart  of  yesterday, 
To  the  love  we  felt  in  ages  past. 
You  and  I  have  found  it  still  to  last. 

You  and  I  have  found  the  joy  had  birth 
In  the  angel  childhood  of  the  earth. 
Hid  within  the  heart  of  man  and  maid. 
You  and  I  of  Time  are  not  afraid. 


628  .    Poems  of  Love 

You  and  I  can  mock  his  fabled  wing, 
For  a  kiss  is  an  immortal  thing. 
And  the  throb  wherein  those  old  lips  met 
Is  a  living  music  in  us  yet. 

A.  E.  {George  William  Russell)  [1867- 

THE   FLOWER  OF  BEAUTY 

Sweet  in  her  green  dell  the  flower  of  beauty  slumbers, 
Lulled  by  the  faint  breezes  sighing  through  her  hair; 

Sleeps  she,  and  hears  not  the  melancholy  numbers 

Breathed  to  my  sad  lute  amid  the  lonely  air?  ' 

Down  from  the  high  cliffs  the  rivulet  is  teeming 

To  wind  round  the  willow-banks  that  lure  him  from 
above: 

Oh  that,  in  tears  from  my  rocky  prison  streaming, 
I  too  could  glide  to  the  bov^'er  of  my  love! 

Ah,  where  the  woodbines  with  sleepy  arms  have  wound 
her, 

Opes  she  her  eyelids  at  the  dream  of  my  lay. 
Listening  like  the  dove,  while  the  fountains  echo  round  her, 

To  her  lost  mate's  call  in  the  forest  far  away? 

Come,  then,  my  bird!  for  the  peace  thou  ever  bearest, 
Still  Heaven's  messenger  of  comfort  be  to  me; 

Come!  this  fond  bosom,  my  faithfulest,  my  fairest, 

Bleeds  with  its  death-wound, — but  deeper  yet  for  thee, 

George  Darley  [i 795-1 846] 

MY  SHARE  OF  THE  WORLD 

I  AM  jealous:  I  am  true: 
Sick  at  heart  for  love  of  you, 

O  my  share  of  the  world ! 
I  am  cold,  O,  cold  as  stone 
To  all  men  save  you  alone. 

Seven  times  slower  creeps  the  day  , , 
When  your  face  is  far  away, 
O  my  share  of  the  world ! 


My   Share  of  the   World  629 

Seven  times  darker  falls  the  night. 
When  )^ou  gladden  not  my  sight. 

Measureless  my  joy  and  pride 
Would  you  choose  me  for  your  bride, 

O  my  share  of  the  world! 
For  your  face  is  my  delight, 
Morn  and  even,  noon  and  night. 

To  the  dance  and  to  the  wake 
Still  I  go  but  for  your  sake, 
O  my  share  of  the  world! 
Just  to  see  your  face  awhile, 
Meet  your  eyes  and  win  your  smile. 

And  the  gay  word  on  my  lip 
Never  lets  my  secret  slip 

To  my  share  of  the  world ! 
Light  my  feet  trip  over  the  green — 
But  my  heart  cries  in  the  keen! 

My  poor  mother  sighs  anew 
When  my  looks  go  after  you, 

O  my  share  of  the  world! 
And  my  father's  brow  grows  black 
When  you  smile  and  turn  your  back, 

I  would  part  with  wealth  and  ease, 
I  would  go  beyond  the  seas, 

For  my  share  of  the  world! 
I  would  leave  my  hearth  and  home 
If  he  only  whispered  "Come!" 

Houseless  under  sun  and  dew, 
I  would  beg  my  bread  with  you, 

O  my  share  of  the  world ! 
Houseless  in  the  snow  and  storm. 
Your  heart's  love  would  keep  me  warm. 

I  would  pray  and  I  would  crave 
To  be  with  you  in  the  grave, 
O  my  share  of  the  world! 


630  \  '-■       Poems  of  Love 

I  would  go  through  fire  and  flood, 
I  would  give  up  all  but  God 
For  my  share  of  the  world! 

Alice  Furlong  [1S75- 


SONG 

A  LAKE  and  a  fairy  boat 

To  sail  in  the  moonlight  clear, — 
And  merrily  we  would  float 

From  the  dragons  that  watch  us  here! 

Thy  gown  should  be  snow-white  silk, 

And  strings  of  orient  pearls, 
Like  gossamers  dipped  in  milk, 

Should  twine  with  thy  raven  curls. 

Red  rubies  should  deck  thy  hands, 

And  diamonds  be  thy  dower — 
But  fairies  have  broke  their  wands. 

And  wishing  has  lost  its  power! 

Thomas  Hood  [i 799-1845] 


'SMILE  AND   NEVER  HEED   ME" 

Though,  when  other  maids  stand  by, 
I  may  deign  thee  no  reply, 
Turn  not  then  away,  and  sigh, — 

Smile,  and  never  heed  me! 
If  our  love,  indeed,  be  such 
As  must  thrill  at  every  touch. 
Why  should  others  learn  as  much? — 

Smile,  and  never  heed  me! 

Even  if,  with  maiden  pride, 
I  should  bid  thee  quit  my  side, 
Take  this  lesson  for  thy  guide, — 
Smile,  and  never  heed  me! 


Maiden   Eyes  631 

But  when  stars  and  twilight  meet, 

And  the  dew  is  falling  sweet, 

And  thou  hcar'st  my  coming  feet, — 

Then — thou  then — mayst  heed  me!   ■ 

Charles  Swain  [1801-187 4] 


ARE   THEY  NOT  ALL  MINISTERING   SPIRITS? 

We  see  them  not — we  cannot  hear 

The  music  of  their  wing —  ' 

Yet  know  we  that  they  sojourn  near, 
The  Angels  of  the  spring! 

They  glide  along  this  lovely  ground 

When  the  first  violet  grows; 
Their  graceful  hands  have  just  unbound 

The  zone  of  yonder  rose. 

I  gather  it  for  thy  dear  breast, 

From  stain  and  sha,dow  free: 
That  which  an  Angel's  touch  hath  blest 

Is  meet,  my  love,  for  thee! 

Robert  Stephen  Hawker  [1803-18  7  5] 


MAIDEN  EYES 

You  never  bade  me  hope,  'tis  true; 

I  asked  you  not  to  swear: 
But  I  looked  in  those  eyes  of  blue, 

And  read  a  promise  there. 

The  vow  should  bind,  with  maiden  sighs 

That  maiden  lips  have  spoken: 
But  that  which  looks  from  maiden  eyes 

Should  last  of  all  be  broken. 

Gerald  Griffin  [i 803-1840] 


6^2  Poems  of  Love 


HALLOWED  PLACES 

I  PASS  my  days  among  the  quiet  places 

Made  sacred  by  your  feet. 
The  air  is  cool  in  the  fresh  woodland  spaces, 

The  meadows  very  sweet. 

The  sunset  fills  the  wide  sky  with  its  splendor, 

The  glad  birds  greet  the  night; 
I  stop  and  listen  for  a  voice  strong,  tender, 

I  wait  those  dear  eyes'  light. 

You  are  the  heart  of  every  gleam  of  glory. 

Your  presence  fills  the  air. 
About  you  gathers  all  the  fair  year's  story; 

I  read  you  everywhere. 

Alice  Freeman  Palmer  [1855-1902] 


THE  LADY'S   "YES" 

"Yes,"  I  answered  you  last  night; 

"No,"  this  morning,  sir,  I  say: 
Colors  seen  by  candle-light 

Will  not  look  the  same  by  day. 

When  the  viols  played  their  best. 
Lamps  above,  and  laughs  below, 

Love  me  sounded  like  a  jest, 
Fit  for  yes  or  fit  for  no. 

Call  me  false  or  call  me  free. 
Vow,  whatever  light  may  shine,— 

No  man  on  your  face  shall  see 
Any  grief  for  change  on  mine. 

Yet  the  sin  is  on  us  both; 

Time  to  dance  is  not  to  woo; 
Wooing  light  makes  fickle  troth, 

Scorn  of  me  recoils  on  you. 


Song  633 

Learn  to  win  a  lady's  faith 

Nobly,  as  the  thing  is  high, 
Bravely,  as  for  hfe  and  death, 

With  a  loyal  gravity. 

Lead  her  from  the  festive  boards. 

Point  her  to  the  starry  skies, 
Guard  her,  by  your  truthful  words. 

Pure  from  courtship's  flatteries. 

By  your  truth  she  shall  be  true. 

Ever  true,  as  wives  of  yore; 
And  her  yes,  once  said  to  you, 

Shall  be  Yes  for  evermore. 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [i  806-1 861] 


SONG 

From  "  The  Miller's  Daughter  " 

It  is  the  miller's  daughter. 

And  she  is  grown  so  dear,  so  dear, 
That  I  would  be  the  jewel 

That  trembles  in  her  ear; 
For  hid  in  ringlets  day  and  night, 
I'd  touch  her  neck  so  warm  and  white. 

And  I  would  be  the  girdle 

About  her  dainty,  dainty  waist, 

And  her  heart  would  beat  against  me, 
In  sorrow  and  in  rest; 

And  I  should  know  if  it  beat  right, 

I'd  clasp  it  round  so  close  and  tight. 

And  I  would  be  the  necklace, 
And  all  day  long  to  fall  and  rise 

Upon  her  balmy  bosom 

With  her  laughter  or  her  sighs; 


634  Poems  of  Love 

And  I  would  lie  so  light,  so  light, 

I  scarce  should  be  unclasped  at  night. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1800-1892] 

LILIAN 

Airy,  fairy  Lilian, 

Flitting,  fairy  Lilian, 
When  I  ask  her  if  she  love  me, 
Clasps  her  tiny  hand  above  me, 

Laughing  all  she  can; 
She'll  not  tell  me  if  she  love  me. 

Cruel  little  Lilian. 

When  my  passion  seeks 

Pleasance  in  love-sighs, 
She,  looking  through  and  through  me, 
Thoroughly  to  undo  me. 

Smiling,  never  speaks: 
So  innocent-arch,  so  cunning-simple, 
From  beneath  her  gathered  wimple 

Glancing  with  black-beaded  eyes, 
Till  the  lightning  laughters  dimple      ' 

The  baby-roses  in  her  cheeks; 

Then  away  she  flies. 

Prithee  weep,  May  Lilian! 

Gaiety  without  eclipse 
Wearieth  me,  May  Lilian : 
Through  my  very  heart  it  thriUeth, 

When  from  crimson-threaded  lips 
Silver-treble  laughter  thrUleth: 
Prithee  weep,  May  Lilian! 

Praying  all  I  can, 
If  prayers  will  not  hush  thee. 

Airy  Lilian, 
Like  a  rose-leaf  I  will  crush  thee, 

Fairy  Lilian. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809- 189 2] 


Ronsard  to  His   Mistress  63  c 


BUGLE  SONG 

From  "  The  Princess  " 

The  splendor  falls  on  castle  walls 

And  snowy  summits  old  in  story: 
The  long  light  shakes  across  the  lakes, 
And  the  wild  cataract  leaps  in  glory. 
Blow,  bugle,  blow,  set  the  wild  echoes  flying, 
Blow,  bugle;  answer,  echoes,  dying,  dying,  dying. 

O  hark,  0  hear!  how  thin  and  clear, 

And  thinner,  clearer,  farther  going! 
O  sweet  and  far  from  cliff  and  scar 
The  horns  of  Elfland  faintly  blowing! 
Blow,  let  us  hear  the  purple  glens  replying: 
Blow,  bugle;  answer,  echoes,  dying,  dying,  dying. 

O  love,  they  die  in  yon  rich  sky, 

They  faint  on  hill  or  field  or  river: 
Our  echoes  roll  from  soul  to  soul. 
And  grow  for  ever  and  for  ever. 
Blow,  bugle,  blow,  set  the  wild  echoes  flying, 
And  answer,  echoes,  answer,  dying,  dying,  dying. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809- 189 2] 


RONSARD   TO  HIS   MISTRESS 

"  Quand  vous  serez  Urn  vieille,  le  sojr  a  la  chandelle 
Assise  auprcs  tin  feu  Jevisant  elfilant, 
Direz.  chanlant  mcs  vers  en  vous  esmervetllant, 

Ronsard  m'a  celebrc  du  temps  guej'elois  belle." 

Some  winter  night,  shut  snugly  in  / 

Beside  the  fagot  in  the  hall, 
I  think  I  see  you  sit  and  spin, 

Surrounded  by  your  maidens  aU. 
Old  tales  are  told,  old  songs  are  sung, 

Old  days  come  back  to  memory; 
You  say,  "When  I  was  fair  and  young,  ; 

A  poet  sang  of  me!  " 


636  Poems  of  Love 

There's  not  a  maiden  in  your  hall, 

Though  tired  and  sleepy  ever  so, 
But  wakes,  as  you  my  name  recall, 

And  longs  the  history  to  know. 
And,  as  the  piteous  tale  is  said. 

Of  lady  cold  and  lover  true. 
Each,  musing,  carries  it  to  bed. 

And  sighs  and  envies  you ! 

"Our  lady's  old  and  feeble  now," 

They'll  say:  "she  once  was  fresh  and  fair, 
And  yet  she  spurned  her  lover's  vow, 

And  heartless  left  him  to  despair: 
The  lover  lies  in  silent  earth. 

No  kindly  mate  the  lady  cheers; 
She  sits  beside  a  lonely  hearth, 

With  threescore  and  ten  years!" 

Ah!  dreary  thoughts  and  dreams  are  those, 

But  wherefore  yield  me  to  despair. 
While  yet  the  poet 's  bosom  glows, 

While  yet  the  dame  is  peerless  fair! 
Sweet  lady  mine!  while  yet  'tis  time 

Requite  my  passion  and  my  truth, 
And  gather  in  their  blushing  prime 

The  roses  of  your  youth ! 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1861 


"WHEN  YOU  ARE  OLD" 

When  you  are  old  and  gray  and  full  of  sleep. 
And  nodding  by  the  fire,  take  down  this  book. 
And  slowly  read  and  dream  of  the  soft  look 
Your  eyes  had  once,  and  of  their  shadows  deep; 

How  many  loved  your  moments  of  glad  grace. 
And  loved  your  beauty  with  love  false  or  true; 
But  one  man  loved  the  pilgrim  soul  in  you. 
And  loved  the  sorrows  of  your  changing  face. 


Love  in  a  Life  637 

And  bending  down  beside  the  glowing  bars 
Murmur,  a  little  sadly,  how  love  fled 
And  paced  upon  the  mountains  overhead 
And  hid  his  face  amid  a  crowd  of  stars. 

William  Butler  Yeats  [1865- 

SONG 

From  "  Pippa  Passes  " 

You'll  love  me  yet! — and  I  can  tarry 

Your  love's  protracted  growing: 
June  reared  that  bunch  of  flowers  you  carry, 

From  seeds  of  April 's  sowing. 

I  plant  a  heartfuU  now:  some  seed 

At  least  is  sure  to  strike, 
And  yield— what  you'll  not  pluck  indeed, 

Not  love,  but,  may  be,  like. 

You'll  look  at  least  on  love's  remains, 

A  grave's  one  violet: 
Y'our  look? — that  pays  a  thousand  pains. 

WTiat's  death?    You'll  love  me  yet! 

Robert  Browning  [181 2-1889] 

LOVE  IN  A  LIFE 

Room  after  room, 

I  hunt  the  house  through 

We  inhabit  together. 

Heart,  fear  nothing,  for,  heart,  thou  shalt  find  her — 

Next  time,  herself! — not  the  trouble  behind  her 

Left  in  the  curtain,  the  couch's  perfume! 

As  she  brushed  it,  the  cornice-wreath  blossomed  anew: 

Yon  looking-glass  gleamed  at  the  wave  of  her  feather. 

Yet  the  day  wears, 

And  door  succeeds  door; 

I  try  the  fresh  fortune — 

Range  the  wide  house  from  the  wing  to  the  center. 


638  Poems  of  Love 

Still  the  same  chance!  she  goes  out  as  I  enter. 
Spend  my  whole  day  in  the  quest, — who  cares? 
But  'tis  twilight,  you  see, — with  such  suites  to  explore, 
Such  closets  to  search,  such  alcoves  to  importune! 

Robert  Browning  [1812-18S9] 

LIFE  IN  A  LOVE 

Escape  me? 
Never — 
Beloved! 
While  I  am  I,  and  you  are  you, 

So  long  as  the  world  contains  us  both, 
Me  the  loving  and  you  the  loth, 
While  the  one  eludes,  must  the  other  pursue. 
My  hfe  is  a  fault  at  last,  I  fear: 

It  seems  too  much  like  a  fate,  indeed! 
Though  I  do  my  best  I  shall  scarce  succeed. 
But  what  if  I  fail  of  my  purpose  here? 
It  is  but  to  keep  the  nerves  at  strain. 

To  dry  one's  eyes  and  laugh  at  a  fall. 
And,  baffled,  get  up  and  begin  again, — • 

So  the  chase  takes  up  one's  life,  that's  all. 
,  While,  look  but  once  from  your  farthest  bound 
■    At  me  so  deep  in  the  dust  and  dark, 
No  sooner  the  old  hope  drops  to  ground 

Than  a  new  one,  straight  to  the  self-same  mark, 

I  shape  me —  ;'ioo>I 

Ever  ;fi"rf  I 

Removed!  '"  '^W 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1889] 

THE  WELCOME 

Come  in  the  evening,  or  come  in  the  morning; 

Come  when  you're  looked  for,  or  come  without  warning: 

Kisses  and  welcome  you'll  find  here  before  you, 

And  the  ofte.ner  you  come  here  the  more  I'll  adore  you! 

Light  is  my  heart  since  the  day  we  were  plighted; 

Red  is  my  cheek  that  they  told  me  was  blighted;  ! 


Urania  639 


The  green  of  the  trees  looks  far  greener  than  ever, 
And  the  linnets  are  singing," True  lovers  don't  sever!" 

I'll  pull  you  sweet  flowers,  to  wear  if  you  choose  them, — ■ 
Or,  after  you've  kissed  them,  they'll  lie  on  my  bosom; 
I'll  fetch  from  the  mountain  its  breeze  to  inspire  you; 
I'll  fetch  from  my  fancy  a  tale  that  won't  tire  you. 
Oh!  your  step's  like  the  rain  to  the  summer- vexed  farmer. 
Or  saber  and  shield  to  a  knight  without  armor; 
I'll  sing  you  sweet  songs  till  the  stars  rise  above  me. 
Then,  wandering,  I'U  wish  you  in  silence  to  love  me. 

We'll  look  through  the  trees  at  the  cliff  and  the  eyrie; 
We'U  tread  round  the  rath  on  the  track  of  the  fairy; 
We'll  look  on  the  stars,  and  we'll  list  to  the  river, 
Till  you  ask  of  your  darling  what  gift  you  can  give  her: 
Oh!  she'll  whisper  you — "Love,  as  unchangeably  beaming, 
And  trust,  when  in  secret,  most  tunefully  streaming; 
Till  the  starlight  of  heaven  above  us  shall  quiver. 

As  our  souls  flow  in  one  down  eternity's  river." 

■  /'. 

So  come  in  the  evening,  or  come  in  the  morning;      ,, 
Come  when  you're  looked  for,  or  come  without  warning: 
Kisses  and  welcome  you'll  find  here  before  you. 
And  the  oftener  you  come  here  the  more  I'U  adore  you! 
Light  is  my  heart  since  the  day  we  were  plighted; 
Red  is  my  cheek  that  they  told  me  was  blighted; 
The  green  of  the  trees  looks  far  greener  than  ever. 
And  the  linnets  are  singing,  "True  lovers  don't  sever!" 

Thomas  Osborne  Davis  [1814-1845] 

URANIA 

She  smiles  and  smiles,  and  will  not  sigh, 
While  we  for  hopeless  passion  die; 
Yet  she  could  love,  those  eyes  declare, 
;  Were  but  men  nobler  than  they  are. 

Eagerly  once  her  gracious  ken 
Was  turned  upon  the  sons  of  men; 


640  Poems  of  Love 

But  light  the  serious  visage  grew — 

She  looked,  and  smiled,  and  saw  them  through. 

Our  petty  souls,  our  strutting  wits, 
Our  labored,  puny  passion-fits — 
Ah,  may  she  scorn  them  still,  till  we 
Scorn  them  as  bitterly  as  she! 

Yet  show  her  once,  ye  heavenly  Powers, 
One  of  some  worthier  race  than  ours! 
One  for  whose  sake  she  once  might  prove 
How  deeply  she  who  scorns  can  love. 

His  eyes  be  like  the  starry  lights; 
His  voice  like  sounds  of  summer  nights; 
,  In  all  his  lovely  mien  let  pierce 
The  magic  of  the  universe! 

And  she  to  him  will  reach  her  hand, 

And  gazing  in  his  eyes  will  stand. 

And  know  her  friend,  and  weep  for  glee, 


And  cry.  Long,  long  I've  looked  for  thee! 


liioa  luo 


Then  wiU  she  weep — with  smiles,  till  then 
Coldly  she  mocks  the  sons  of  men. 
Till  then  her  lovely  eyes  maintain 
Their  pure,  unwavering,  deep  disdain. 

Matthew  Arnold  [1822-1888]  i^ 

THREE   SHADOWS 

I  LOOKED  and  saw  your  eyes  in  the  shadow  of  your  hair, 
As  a  traveler  sees  the  stream  in  the  shadow  of  the  wood; — 

And  I  said,  "  My  faint  heart  sighs,  ah  me!  to  linger  there, 
To  drink  deep  and  to  dream  in  that  sweet  solitude." 

I  looked  and  saw  your  heart  in  the  shadow  of  your  eyes, 

As  a  seeker  sees  the  gold  in  the  shadow  of  the  stream; 
And  I  said,  "Ah,  me!  what  art  should  win  the  immortal 
prize. 
Whose  want  must  make  life  cold  and  Heaven  a  hollow 
dreara?" 


A   Match  641 

I  looked  and  saw  your  love  in  the  shadow  of  your  heart, 
As  a  diver  sees  the  pearl  in  the  shadow  of  the  sea; 

And  I  murmured,  not  above  my  breath,  but  all  apart, — 
"Ah!  you  can  love,  true  girl,  and  is  your  love  for  me?" 
Dante  Gabriel  Rossctti  [1828-1882] 


SINCE  WE   PARTED 

Since  we  parted  yester  eve, 

I  do  love  thee,  love,  believe. 

Twelve  times  dearer,  twelve  hours  longer, — 

One  dream  deeper,  one  night  stronger, 

One  sun  surer, — thus  much  more 

Than  I  loved  thee,  love,  before. 

Edward  Robert  Bidwer  Lytton  [1831-1 

A  MATCH 

If  love  were  what  the  rose  is, 

And  I  were  like  the  leaf. 
Our  lives  would  grow  together 
In  sad  or  singing  weather, 
Blown  fields  or  flowerful  closes, 

Green  pleasure  or  gray  grief; 
If  love  were  what  the  rose  is. 

And  I  were  like  the  leaf. 

If  I  were  what  the  words  are. 
And  love  were  like  the  tune. 

With  double  sound  and  single 

Dehght  our  lips  would  mingle. 

With  kisses  glad  as  birds  are 
That  get  sweet  rain  at  noon; 

If  I  were  what  the  words  are. 
And  love  v;ere  like  the  tune. 

If  you  were  hfe,  my  darling, 

And  I  your  love  were  death, 
We'd  shine  and  snow  together 
Ere  March  made  sweet  the  weather 


642  Poems  ot   Love 

With  daffodil  and  starling 
And  hours  of  fruitful  breath; 

If  you  were  life,  my  darling, 
And  I  your  love  were  death. 

If  you  were  thrall  to  sorrow, 

And  I  were  page  to  joy, 
We'd  play  for  lives  and  seasons 
With  loving  looks  and  treasons 
And  tears  of  night  and  morrow 

And  laughs  of  maid  and  boy;     ,,• :' 
If  you  were  thrall  to  sorrow, 

And  I  were  page  to  joy. 

If  you  were  April's  lady. 

And  I  were  lord  in  May, 
We'd  throw  with  leaves  for  hours 
And  draw  for  days  with  flowers. 
Till  day  like  night  were  shady 

And  night  were  bright  like  day; 
If  you  were  April's  lady. 

And  I  were  lord  in  May. 

If  you  were  queen  of  pleasure. 

And  I  were  king  of  pain. 
We'd  hunt  down  love  together. 
Pluck  out  his  flying-feather. 
And  teach  his  feet  a  measure. 

And  find  his  mouth  a  rein; 
If  you  were  queen  of  pleasure. 

And  I  were  king  of  pain. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1909] 


A   BALLAD   OF   LIFE 

I  FOUND  in  dreams  a  place  of  wind  and  flowers, 
Full  of  sweet  trees  and  color  of  glad  grass. 
In  midst  whereof  there  was 

A  lady  clothed  like  summer  with  sweet  hours. 


A   Ballad  of  Life  6^^ 

Her  beauty,  fervent  as  a  fiery  moon 
Made  my  blood  burn  and  swoon 

Like  a  flame  rained  upon. 
Sorrow  had  filled  her  shaken  eyelids'  blue, 
And  her  mouth's  sad  red  heavy  rose  all  through 

Seemed  sad  with  glad  things  gone. 

She  held  a  little  cithern  by  the  strings. 

Shaped  heartwise,  strung  with  subtle-colored  hair 
Of  some  dead  lute  player 

That  in  dead  years  had  done  delicious  things. 

The  seven  strings  were  named  accordingly; 
The  first  string  charity, 
The  second  tenderness, 

The  rest  were  pleasure,  sorrow,  sleep,  and  sin, 

And  loving  kindness,  that  is  pity's  kin 
And  is  most  pitiless. 

There  were  three  men  with  her,  each  garmented 
With  gold,  and  shod  with  gold  upon  the  feet; 
And  with  plucked  ears  of  wheat. 

The  first  man's  hair  was  wound  upon  his  head: 

His  face  was  red,  and  his  mouth  curled  and  sad; 
All  his  gold  garment  had 
Pale  stains  of  dust  and  rust. 

A  riven  hood  was  pulled  across  his  eyes; 

The  token  of  him  being  upon  this  wise 
Made  for  a  sign  of  Lust. 

The  next  was  Shame,  with  hollow  heavy  face 
Colored  like  green  wood  when  flame  kindles  it. 
Lie  hath  such  feeble  feet 

They  may  not  well  endure  in  any  place. 

His  face  was  full  of  gray  old  miseries. 
And  all  his  blood's  increase 
Was  even  increase  of  pain. 

The  last  was  Fear,  that  is  akin  to  Death; 

He  is  Shame's  friend,  and  always  as  Shame  saith 
Fear  answers  him  again. 


644  Poems  of  Love 

My  soul  said  in  me:  This  is  marvelous, 
Seeing  the  air's  face  is  not  so  delicate 
Nor  the  sun's  grace  so  great, 

If  sin  and  she  be  kin  or  amorous. 

And  seeing  where  maidens  served  her  on  their  knees, 
I  bade  one  crave  of  these 
To  know  the  cause  thereof. 

Then  Fear  said:  I  am  Pity  that  was  dead. 

And  Shame  said:  I  am  Sorrow  comforted. 
And  Lust  said:  I  am  Love. 

Thereat  her  hands  began  a  lute-playing 

And  her  sweet  mouth  a  song  in  a  strange  tongue; 
And  all  the  while  she  sung 

There  was  no  sound  but  long  tears  following 

Long  tears  upon  men's  faces,  waxen  white 
With  extreme  sad  delight. 

But  those  three  following  men 

Became  as  men  raised  up  among  the  dead; 

Great  glad  mouths  open,  and  fair  cheeks  made  red 
With  child's  blood  come  again. 

Then  I  said:  Now  assuredly  I  see 
My  lady  is  perfect,  and  transfigureth 
All  sin  and  sorrow  and  death, 
Making  them  fair  as  her  own  eyelids  be, 
Or  lips  wherein  my  whole  soul's  life  abides; 
Or  as  her  sweet  white  sides 
And  bosom  carved  to  kiss. 
Now  therefore,  if  her  pity  further  me, 
Doubtless  for  her  sake  all  my  days  shall  be 
As  righteous  as  she  is. 

Forth,  ballad,  and  take  roses  in  both  arms, 
Even  till  the  top  rose  touch  thee  in  the  throat 

Where  the  least  thornprick  harms; 

And  girdled  in  thy  golden  singing-coat, 

Come  thou  before  my  lady  and  say  this: 


A  Leave-taking  ^^^r 


Borgia,  thy  gold  hair's  color  burns  in  me, 

Thy  mouth  makes  beat  my  blood  in  feverish  rhymes; 
Therefore  so  many  as  these  roses  be, 

Kiss  me  so  many  times. 
Then  it  may  be,  seeing  how  sweet  she  is, 
That  she  will  stoop  herself  none  otherwise 

Than  a  blown  vine-branch  doth. 
And  kiss  thee  with  soft  laughter  on  thine  eyes, 

Ballad,  and  on  thy  mouth. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1909] 


A  LEAVE-TAKING 

Let  us  go  hence,  my  songs;  she  will  not  hear. 
Let  us  go  hence  together  without  fear; 
Keep  silence  now,  for  singing  tim.e  is  over, 
And  over  all  old  things  and  all  things  dear. 
She  loves  not  you  nor  me  as  all  we  love  her. 
Yea,  though  we  sang  as  angels  in  her  ear, 
She  would  not  hear. 

Let  us  rise  up  and  part;  she  will  not  know. 
Let  us  go  seaward  as  the  great  winds  go. 
Full  of  blown  sand  and  foam;  what  help  is  there? 
There  is  no  help,  for  all  these  things  arc  so, 
And  all  the  world  is  bitter  as  a  tear, 
And  how  these  things  are,  though  ye  strove  to  show, 
She  would  not  know. 

Let  us  go  home  and  hence;  she  will  not  weep. 
We  gave  love  many  dreams  and  days  to  keep, 
Flowers  without  scent,  and  fruits  that  would  not  grow, 
Saying,  "If  thou  wilt,  thrust  in  thy  sickle  and  reap." 
All  is  reaped  now;  no  grass  is  left  to  mow; 
And  we  that  sowed,  though  all  we  fell  on  sleep, 
She  would  not  weep. 


646  Poems  of  Love 

Let  us  go  hence  and  rest;  she  will  not  love. 
She  shall  not  hear  us  if  we  sing  hereof,  i  ! 

Nor  see  love's  ways  how  sore  they  are  and  steep. 
Come  hence,  let  be,  lie  still;  it  is  enough. 
Love  is  a  barren  sea,  bitter  and  deep; 
And  though  she  saw  all  heaven  in  flower  above, 
She  would  not  love. 

Let  us  give  up,  go  down;  she  will  not  care. 
Though  all  the  stars  made  gold  of  all  the  air, 
And  the  sea  moving  saw  before  it  move 
One  moon-flower  making  all  the  foam-flowers  fair; 
Though  all  those  waves  went  over  us,  and  drove 
Deep  down  the  stifling  lips  and  drowning  hair, 
She  would  not  care. 

Let  us  go  hence,  go  hence;  she  will  not  see. 
Sing  all  once  more  together;  surely  she, 
She  too,  remembering  days  and  words  that  were, 
Will  turn  a  Uttle  towards  us,  sighing;  but  we, 
We  are  hence,  we  are  gone,  as  though  we  had  not  been  there. 
Nay,  and  though  all  men  seeing  had  pity  on  me, 
She  would  not  see. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [i 837-1969] 


A  LYRIC 

There's  nae  lark  loves  the  lift,  my  dear. 
There's  nae  ship  loves  the  sea, 

There's  nae  bee  loves  the  heather-bells. 

That  loves  as  I  love  thee,  my  love, 
That  loves  as  I  love  thee. 

The  whin  shines  fair  upon  the  fell, 

The  blithe  broom  on  the  lea: 
The  muirside  wind  is  merry  at  heart: 

It's  a'  for  love  of  thee,  my  love. 

It's  a'  for  love  of  thee.- 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [183  7-1 909] 


A    Love  Symphony  647 


MAUREEN 

O,  YOU  plant  the  pain  in  my  heart  with  your  wistful  eyes, 

Girl  of  my  choice,  Maureen! 
Will  you  drive  me  mad  for  the  kisses  your  shy,  sweet  mouth 
denies, 

Maureen? 

Like  a  walking  ghost  I  am,  and  no  words  to  woo, 
White  rose  of  the  West,  Maureen: 

For  it's  pale  you  are,  and  the  fear  that's  on  you  is  over  me 
too, 

Maureen ! 

Sure  it's  one  complaint  that's  on  us,  asthore,  this  day, 

Bride  of  my  dreams,  Maureen: 
The  smart  of  the  bee  that  stung  us  his  honey  must  cure, 
they  say, 

Maureen ! 

I'll  coax  the  light  to  your  eyes,  and  the  rose  to  your  face, 
Mavourneen,  my  own  Maureen! 

When  I  feel  the  warmth  of  your  breast,  and  your  nest  is  my 
arm's  embrace, 

Maureen! 

O  where  was  the  King  o'  the  World  that  day — only  me? 

My  one  true  love,  Maureen! 
And  you  the  Queen  with  me  there,  and  your  throne  in  my 
heart,  machree, 
Maureen! 

John  Todhunter  [1839- 


A  LOVE   SYMPHONY 

Along  the  garden  ways  just  now 
I  heard  the  flowers  speak; 

The  white  rose  told  me  of  your  brow, 
The  red  rose  of  your  cheek; 


648  Poems  of  Love 

The  lily  of  your  bended  head, 

The  bindweed  of  your  hair; 
Each  looked  its  loveliest  and  said 

You  were  more  fair. 

I  went  into  the  wood  anon, 

And  heard  the  wild  birds  sing. 
How  sweet  you  were,  they  warbled  on, 

Piped,  trilled,  the  selfsame  thing. 
Thrush,  blackbird,  linnet,  without  pause 

The  burden  did  repeat, 
And  still  began  again  because 

You  were  more  sweet. 

And  then  I  went  down  to  the  sea, 

And  heard  it  murmuring  too. 
Part  of  an  ancient  mystery, 

All  made  of  me  and  you : 
How  many  a  thousand  years  ago 

I  loved,  and  you  were  sweet — 
Longer  I  could  not  stay,  and  so 

I  fled  back  to  your  feet. 

Arthur  0' Shaiighnessy  [1844- 1881] 


LOVE  ON  THE   MOUNTAIN 

My  love  comes  down  from  the  mountain 

Through  the  mists  of  dawn; 
I  look,  and  the  star  of  the  morning 

From  the  sky  is  gone. 

My  love  comes  down  from  the  mountain, 

At  dawn,  dewj'  sweet; 
Did  you  step  from  the  star  to  the  mountain, 

O  little  white  feet? 

O  whence  came  your  twining  tresses 

And  your  shining  eyes. 
But  out  of  the  gold  of  the  morning 

And  the  blue  of  the  skies? 


My   Queen  "       649 

The  misty  mouiUain  is  Ijurning 

In  the  sun's  rc-d  lire, 
And  the  heart  in  my  breast  is  burning 

And  lost  in  desire. 

I  follow  you  into  the  valley 

But  no  word  can  I  say; 
To  the  East  or  the  West  I  will  follow 

Till  the  dusk  of  my  day. 

Thomas  Boyd  [1S67- 


KATE  TEMPLE'S  SONG 

Only  a  touch,  and  nothing  more: 

Ah!  but  never  so  touched  before! 

Touch  of  lip,  was  it?    Touch  of  hand? 

Either  is  easy  to  understand. 

Earth  may  be  smitten  with  fire  or  frost — 

Never  the  touch  of  true  love  lost. 

Only  a  word,  was  it?    Scarce  a  word! 
Musical  whisper,  softly  heard, 
Syllabled  nothing — just  a  breath— 
'Twill  outlast  life  and  'twill  laugh  at  death. 
Love  with  so  little  can  do  so  much — 
Only  a  word,  sweet!    Only  a  touch! 

Mortimer  Collins  [182 7-1 876] 


MY  QUEEN 

When  and  how  shall  I  earliest  meet  her? 

What  are  the  words  she  first  will  say? 
By  what  name  shall  I  learn  to  greet  her? 

I  know  not  now;  it  will  come  some  day! 
With  the  selfsame  sunlight  shining  upon  her, 

Shining  down  on  her  ringlets'  sheen, 
She  is  standing  somewhere — she  I  shall  honor 

She  that  I  wait  for,  my  queen,  my  queen! 


650  Poems  of  Love 

Whether  her  hair  be  golden  or  raven, 

Whether  her  eyes  be  hazel  or  blue, 
I  know  not  now;  but  'twill  be  engraven 

Some  day  hence  as  my  loveliest  hue. 
Many  a  girl  I  have  loved  for  a  minute. 

Worshipped  many  a  face  I  have  seen: 
Ever  and  aye  there  was  something  in  it, 

Something  that  could  not  be  hers,  my  queen! 

I  will  not  dream  of  her  tall  and  stately, 

She  that  I  love  may  be  fairy  light; 
I  will  not  say  she  must  move  sedately, — 

Whatever  she  does  it  will  then  be  right. 
She  may  be  humble  or  proud,  my  lady. 

Or  that  sweet  calm  which  is  just  between; 
And  whenever  she  comes  she  will  find  me  ready 

To  do  her  homage,  my  queen,  my  queen! 

But  she  must  be  courteous,  she  must  be  holy, 

Pure  in  her  spirit,  this  maiden  I  love; 
Whether  her  birth  be  noble  or  lowly 

I  care  no  more  than  the  spirits  above. 
But  I'll  give  my  heart  to  my  lady's  keeping, 

And  ever  her  strength  on  mine  shall  lean; 
And  the  stars  may  fall,  and  the  saints  be  weeping 

Ere  I  cease  to  love  her,  my  queen,  my  queen! 

Unknown 


"DARLING,  TELL   ME  YES^' 

One  little  minute  more,  Maud, 

One  little  whisper  more; 
I  have  a  word  to  speak,  Maud, 

I  never  breathed  before. 
What  can  it  be  but  love,  Maud; 

And  do  I  rightly  guess 
'Tis  pleasant  to  your  ear,  Maud? 

O  darling!  tell  me  yes  !  . 


651 


"  Do   I    Love  Thee  ?  " 

The  burden  of  my  heart,  Maud, 

There's  Httle  need  to  tell; 
There's  little  need  to  say,  Maud, 

I've  loved  you  long  and  well. 
There's  language  in  a  sigh,  Maud, 

One's  meaning  to  express. 
And  yours — was  it  for  mc,  Maud? 

O  darling!  tell  me  yes  ! 

My  eyes  have  told  my  love,  Maud, 

And  on  my  burning  cheek, 
You've  read  the  tender  thought,  Maud, 

My  lips  refused  to  speak. 
I  gave  you  all  my  heart,  Maud, 

'Tis  needless  to  confess; 
And  did  you  give  me  yours,  Maud? 

O  darling!  tell  me  yes  ! 


'Tis  sad  to  starve  a  love,  Maud, 

So  worshipful  and  true; 
I  know  a  httle  cot,  Maud, 

Quite  large  enough  for  two; 
And  you  will  be  my  wife,  Maud? 

So  may  you  ever  bless 
Through  all  your  sunny  life,  Maud, 

The  day  you  answered  yes  ! 

John  Godfrey  Saxe  [1816-1887I 


"DO  I  LOVE  THEE?" 

Do  I  love  thee?    Ask  the  bee 
If  she  loves  the  flowery  lea, 
WTiere  the  honeysuckle  blows 
And  the  fragrant  clover  grows. 
As  she  answers,  Yes  or  No, 
Darling!  take  my  answer  so. 

Do  I  love  thee?    Ask  the  bird 
When  her  matin  song  is  heard, 


6c2  Poems  of  L 


ove 


If  she  loves  the  sky  so  fair, 

Fleecy  cloud  and  liquid  air. 

As  she  answers,  Yes  or  No, 
Darhng!  take  my  answer  so. 

Do  I  love  thee?    Ask  the  flower 

If  she  loves  the  vernal  shower, 

Or  the  kisses  of  the  sun. 

Or  the  dew,  when  day  is  done. 
As  she  answers,  Yes  or  No, 
Darling!  take  my  answer  so, 

John  Godfrey  Saxe  [i 8 16-1887] 

"O  WORLD,   BE   NOBLER" 

O  WORLD,  be  nobler,  for  her  sake! 

If  she  but  knew  thee  what  thou  art. 
What  wrongs  are  borne,  what  deeds  are  done 
In  thee,  beneath  thy  daily  sun, 

Know'st  thou  not  that  her  tender  heart 
For  pain  and  very  shame  would  break? 
O  World,  be  nobler,  for  her  sake! 

Laurence  Binyon  [1869- 

"IN  THE   DARK,   IN  THE   DEW" 

In  the  dark,  in  the  dew, 
I  am  smiling  back  at  you; 
But  you  cannot  see  the  smile. 
And  you're  thinking  all  the  while 
How  I  turn  my  face  from  you, 
In  the  dark,  in  the  dew. 

In  the  dark,  in  the  dew, 

All  my  love  goes  out  to  you. 

Flutters  like  a  bird  in  pain. 

Dies  and  comes  to  life  again; 

While  you  whisper,  "Sweetest,  hark; 

Someone's  sighing  in  the  dark, 

In  the  dark,  in  the  dew!" 


Nanny  6  S3 


In  the  dark,  in  the  dew, 

All  my  heart  cries  out  to  you, 

As  I  cast  it  at  your  feet, 

Sweet  indeed,  but  not  too  sweet; 

Wondering  will  you  hear  it  beat. 

Beat  for  you,  and  bleed  for  you, 

In  the  dark,  in  the  dew! 

Mary  Newmarch  Prcscotl 


NANNY 

Oh,  for  an  hour  when  the  day  is  breaking, 
Down  by  the  shore  where  the  tide  is  making. 
Fair  as  a  white  cloud,  thou,  love,  near  me, 
None  but  the  waves  and  thyself  to  hear  me! 
Oh,  to  my  breast  how  these  arms  would  press  thee! 
Wildly  my  heart  in  its  joy  would  bless  thee! 
Oh,  how  the  soul  thou  has  won  would  woo  thee, 
Girl  of  the  snow  neck,  closer  to  me! 

Oh,  for  an  hour  as  the  day  advances, 

Out  where  the  breeze  on  the  broom-bush  dances. 

Watching  the  lark,  with  the  sun-ray  o'er  us. 

Winging  the  notes  of  his  Heaven-taught  chorus! 

Oh,  to  be  there,  and  my  love  before  me, 

Soft  as  a  moonbeam  smiling  o'er  me! 

Thou  would'st  but  love,  and  I  would  woo  thee, 

Girl  of  the  dark  eye,  closer  to  me! 

Oh,  for  an  hour  where  the  sun  first  found  us. 
Out  in  the  eve  with  its  red  sheets  round  us, 
Brushing  the  dew  from  the  gale's  soft  winglets. 
Pearly  and  sweet,  with  thy  long  dark  ringlets! 
Oh,  to  be  there  on  the  sward  beside  thee, 
Telling  my  tale,  though  I  know  you'd  chide  me! 
Sweet  were  thy  voice,  though  it  should  undo  me, — 
Girl  of  the  dark  locks,  closer  to  me! 

Oh,  for  an  hour  by  night  or  by  day,  love, 
Just  as  the  Heavens  and  thou  might  say,  love! 


654  Poems  of  Love 

Far  from  the  stare  of  the  cold-eyed  ma^ny, 
Bound  in  the  breath  of  my  dove-souled  Nanny! 
Oh,  for  the  pure  chains  that  have  bound  me, 
Warm  from  thy  red  hps  circhng  round  me! 
Oh,  in  my  soul,  as  the  light  above  me, 
Queen  of  the  pure  hearts,  do  I  love  thee! 

Francis  Davis  [1810-1S85] 


A  TRIFLE 

I  KNOW  not  why,  but  even  to  me 

My  songs  seem  sweet  when  read  to  thee. 

Perhaps  in  this  the  pleasure  lies— ^f-'  X^  nwoQ 
I  read  my  thoughts  within  thine  eyes,  '     "'f^'^ 

And  so  dare  fancy  that  my  art 
May  sink  as  deeply  as  thy  heart. 


Perhaps  I  love  to  make  my  words 
Sing  round  thee  like  so  many  birds. 

Or,  maybe,  they  are  only  sweet  :  ! 

As  they  seem  offerings  at  thy  feet. 

Or  haply,  Lily,  when  I  speak, 

I  think,  perchance,  they  touch  thy  cheek, 

Or  with  a  yet  more  precious  bliss,  ^i'  fto'd 

Die  on  thy  red  lips  in  a  kiss.  ^'f  uodT 


Each  reason  here — I  cannot  tell — 
Or  alZ  perhaps  may  solve  the  spell. 


lo  hiO 


;u  J;;U 


But  if  she  watch  when  I  am  by, 

Lily  may  deeper  see  than  I.  '   '     '•' 

Henry  Timrod  [1829-1867] 

aniJlaT 
ROMANCE 

I  WILL  make  you  brooches  and  toys  for  your  delight 
Of  bird-song  at  morning  and  star-shine  at  night. 
I  will  make  a  palace  fit  for  you  and  me,  •"  ^ 

Of  green  days  in  forests  and  blue  days  at  sea.     '^l 


"  Or  Ever  the  Knightly  Years  Were  Gone  "  6^^ 

I  will  make  my  kitchen,  and  you  shall  keep  your  room, 
Where  white  flows  the  river  and  bright  blows  the  broom, 
And  you  shall  wash  your  linen  and  keep  your  body  white 
In  rainfall  at  morning  and  dewfall  at  night. 

And  this  shall  be  for  music  when  no  one  else  is  near 
The  fine  song  for  singing,  the  rare  song  to  hear! 
That  only  I  remember,  that  only  you  admire. 
Of  the  broad  road  that  stretches  and  the  roadside  fire. 
Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1894] 

"OR  EVER  THE  KNIGHTLY  YEARS  WERE  GONE" 

Or  ever  the  knightly  years  were  gone 

With  the  old  world  to  the  grave, 
I  was  a  King  in  Babylon 

And  you  were  a  Christian  Slave. 

I  saw,  I  took,  I  cast  you  by, 

I  bent  and  broke  your  pride. 
You  loved  me  well,  or  I  heard  them  lie, 

But  your  longing  was  denied. 
Surely  I  knew  that  by  and  by 

You  cursed  your  gods  and  died. 

And  a  myriad  suns  have  set  and  shone 

Since  then  upon  the  grave 
Decreed  by  the  King  in  Babylon 

To  her  that  had  been  his  Slave. 

The  pride  I  trampled  is  now  my  scathe, 

For  it  tramples  me  again. 
The  old  resentment  lasts  like  death,  y. 

For  you  love,  yet  you  refrain. 
I  break  my  heart  on  your  hard  unfaith, 

And  I  break  my  heart  in  vain. 

Yet  not  for  an  hour  do  I  wish  undone 

The  deed  beyond  the  grave,  ,    ;: 

WUien  I  was  a  King  in  Babylon 
And  you  were  a  Virgin  Slave. 

William  Ernest  He?iley  [1849-1903] 


656  Poems  of  Love 

RUS  IN  URBE  ,.^r(W 

Poets  are  singing  the  whole  world  over 

Of  May  in  melody,  joys  for  June; 
Dusting  their  feet  in  the  careless  clover, 

And  fining  their  hearts  with  the  blackbird's  tune. 
The  "brown  bright  nightingale"  strikes  with  pity 

The  sensitive  heart  of  a  count  or  clown; 
But  where  is  the  song  for  our  leafy  city, 

And  where  the  rhymes  for  our  lovely  town? 

"O  for  the  Thames,  and  its  rippling  reaches, 

Where  almond  rushes,  and  breezes  sport! 
Take  me  a  walk  under  Burnham  Beeches; 

Give  me  a  dinner  at  Hampton  Court!" 
Poets,  be  still,  though  your  hearts  I  harden; 

We've  flowers  by  day  and  have  scents  at  dark, 
The  limes  are  in  leaf  in  the  cockney  garden, 

And  lilacs  blossom  in  Regent's  Park. 

"Come  for  a  blow,"  says  a  reckless  fellow. 

Burned  red  and  brown  by  passionate  sun; 
"  Come  to  the  downs,  where  the  gorse  is  yellow; 

The  season  of  kisses  has  just  begun ! 
Come  to  the  fields  where  bluebells  shiver. 

Hear  cuckoo's  carol,  or  plaint  of  dove; 
Come  for  a  row  on  the  silent  river; 

Come  to  the  meadows  and  learn  to  love!  " 

Yes,  I  will  come  when  this  wealth  is  over 

Of  softened  color  and  perfect  tone — 
The  lilac's  better  than  fields  of  clover; 

I'll  come  when  blossoming  May  has  flown. 
When  dust  and  dirt  of  a  trampled  city 

Have  dragged  the  yellow  laburnum  down, 
I'll  take  my  holiday — more's  the  pity — 

And  turn  my  back  upon  London  town. 

Margaret!  am  I  so  wrong  to  love  it, 

This  misty  town  that  your  face  shines  through? 
A  crown  of  blossom  is  waved  above  it ; 

But  heart  and  life  of  the  whirl — 'tis  you  1 


A  White   Rose  657 

Margaret!  pearl!  I  have  sought  and  found  you; 

And,  though  the  pa^hs  of  the  wind  are  free, 
I'll  follow  the  ways  of  the  world  around  you,       „ 

And  build  my  nest  on  the  nearest  tree! 

Clement  Scot!  [1841-1904] 

MY  RO.\D 

There's  a  road  to  heaven,  a  road  to  hell, 
A  road  for  tlie  sick  and  one  for  the  well; 
There's  a  road  for  the  false  and  a  road  for  tlie  true, 
But  the  road  for  me  is  the  road  to  you. 

There's  a  road  through  prairie  and  forest  and  glen, 
A  road  to  each  place  in  human  ken; 
There's  a  road  over  earth  and  a  road  over  sea. 
But  the  road  to  you  is  the  road  for  me. 

There's  a  road  for  animal,  bird,  and  beast, 
A  road  for  the  greatest,  a  road  for  the  least; 
There's  a  road  that  is  old  and  a  road  that  is  new, 
But  the  road  for  me  is  the  road  to  you. 

There's  a  road  for  the  heart  and  a  road  for  the  soul. 
There's  a  road  for  a  part  and  a  road  for  the  whole; 
There's  a  road  for  love, — which  few  ever  see, — 
'Tis  the  road  to  you  and  the  road  for  me. 

Oliver  Opdykc  [1878- 

A  WHITE  ROSE 

The  red  rose  whispers  of  passion. 
And  the  white  rose  breathes  of  love; 

Oh,  the  red  rose  is  a  falcon, 
And  the  white  rose  is  a  dove. 

But  I  send  you  a  cream  white  rosebud 

With  a  flush  on  its  petal  tips; 
For  the  love  that  is  purest  and  sweetest 

Has  a  kiss  of  desire  on  the  lips. 

John  Boyle  O'Reilly  [1844-1800] 


658  Poems  of  Love 


"SOME  DAY  OF  DAYS" 

Some  day,  some  day  of  days,  threading  the  street 

With  idle,  heedless  pace, 

Uiilooking  for  such  grace 

I  shall  behold  your  face! 
Some  day,  some  day  of  days,  thus  may  we  meet. 

Perchance  the  sun  may  shine  from  skies  of  May, 

Or  winter's  icy  chill 

Touch  whitely  vale  and  hill. 

What  matter?     I  shall  thrill 
Through  every  vein  with  summer  on  that  day.     .i-r 

Once  more  life's  perfect  youth  will  all  come  back, 

And  for  a  moment  there 

I  shall  stand  fresh  and  fair, 

And  drop  the  garment  care;  ■ '!T 

Once  more  my  perfect  youth  will  nothing  lack. 

I  shut  my  eyes  now,  thinking  how  'twill  be — 

How  face  to  face  each  soul 

Will  sHp  its  long  control. 

Forget  the  dismal  dole 
Of  dreary  Fate's  dark,  separating  sea; 

And  glance  to  glance,  and  hand  to  hand  in  greeting, 

The  past  with  all  its  fears. 

Its  silences  and  tears. 

Its  lonely,  yearning  years. 
Shall  vanish  in  the  moment  of  that  meeting. 

Nora  Perry  [183  2- 1896] 

THE  TELEPHONE 

"When  I  was  just  as  far  as  I  could  walk 

From  here  to-day. 

There  was  an  hour 

All  still 

When  leaning  with  my  head  against  a  flower 


Where   Love   Is  ,6,5^ 

I  heard  you  talk. 

Don't  say  I  didn't,  for  I  heard  you  say — 

You  spoke  from  that  flower  on  the  window  sill — 

Do  you  remember  what  it  was  you  said?" 

"First  tell  me  what  it  was  you  thought  you  heard." 

"Having  found  the  flower  and  driven  a  bee  away, 

I  leaned  my  head. 

And  holding  by  the  stalk, 

I  Kstened  and  I  thought  I  caught  the  word — 

What  was  it?    Did  you  call  me  by  my  name? 

Or  did  you  say — 

Someone  said  'Come' — I  heard  it  as  I  bowed." 

"I  may  have  thought  as  much,  but  not  aloud." 

"Well,  so  I  came." 

Robert  Frost  [1875- 

WHERE  LOVE  IS 

By  the  rosy  cliffs  of  Devon,  on  a  green  hill's  crest, 

I  would  build  me  a  house  as  a  swallow  builds  its  nest; 

I  would  curtain  it  with  roses,  and  the  wind  should  breathe 

to  me 
The  sweetness  of  the  roses  and  the  saltness  of  the  sea. 

Where  the  Tuscan  olives  whiten  in  the  hot  blue  day, 
I  would  hide  me  from  the  heat  in  a  little  hut  of  gray. 
While  the  singing  of  the  husbandmen  should  scale  my  lat- 
tice green 
From  the  golden  rows  of  barley  that  the  poppies  blaze  be- 
tween. 

Narrow  is  the  street,  Dear,  and  dingy  are  the  walls 
Wherein  you  wait  my  coming  as  the  twilight  falls. 
All  day  with  dreams  I  gild  the  grime  till  at  your  step  I  start — 
Ah  Love,  my  country  in  your  arms — my  home  upon  your 

heart ! 

Amtlia  Josephine  Burr  [1878- 


66o  Poems  of  Love 


THAT  DAY  YOU   CAME     ''^  ^'""^^ 

Such  special  sweetness  was  about 

That  day  God  sent  you  here, 
I  knew  the  lavender  was  out, 

And  it  was  mid  of  j^ear. 

Their  common  way  the  great  winds  blew.  ;i  ; 

The  ships  sailed  out  to  sea;  in  A 

Yet  ere  that  day  was  spent  I  knew  '■  ' 

Mine  own  had  come  to  me. 

As  after  song  some  snatch  of  tune  '.uii 

Lurks  still  in  grass  or  bough, 
So,  somewhat  of  the  end  o'  June 

Lurks  in  each  weather  now. 

The  young  year  sets  the  buds  astir. 

The  old  year  strips  the  trees; 
But  ever  in  my  lavender 

I  hear  the  brawling  bees. 

Lizclte  Woodworth  Reese  [1856 


AMANTIUM  IR^ 

When  this,  our  rose,  is  faded, 

And  these,  our  days,  are  done,  :  r  ,  ^ 

In  lands  profoundly  shaded  .     .       ,  '^'  „'  ,,,t 

^  ,  ,  ■  ;^rf:5  -flj    Mid// 

From  tempest  and  from  sun: 

Ah,  once  more  come  together,  .^ 

Shall  we  forgive  the  past. 

And  safe  from  worldly  weather 

■tlU:.  Possess  our  souls  at  last?        '^ -?  v/n-nuM 

';],'.  i;,Or  in  our  place  of  shadows  .„(,  jry^ 

Shall  still  we  stretch  an  hand 
To  green,  remembered  meadows, 
Of  that  old  pleasant  land? 


In  a   Rose  Garden  66l,} 

And  vainly  there  foregathered, 

Shall  we  regret  the  sun? 
The  rose  of  love,  ungathered? 

The  bay,  we  have  not  won? 

Ah,  child!  the  world's  dark  marges 

May  lead  to  Nevermore, 
The  stately  funeral  barges 

Sail  for  an  unknown  shore, 
And  love  we  vow  to-morrow, 

And  pride  we  serve  to-day: 
What  if  they  both  should  borrow 

Sad  hues  of  yesterday? 

Our  pride!    Ah,  should  we  miss  it, 

Or  will  it  serve  at  last? 
Our  anger,  if  we  kiss  it, 

Is  like  a  sorrow  past. 
While  roses  deck  the  garden. 

While  yet  the  sun  is  high, 
Doff  sorry  pride  for  pardon. 

Or  ever  love  go  by. 

Ernest  Dowson  [1S67-1900] 


IN  A  ROSE   GARDEN 

A  HUNDRED  years  from  now,  dear  heart, 

We  shall  not  care  at  all. 
It  will  not  matter  then  a  whit. 

The  honey  or  the  gall. 
The  summer  days  that  we  have  known 
Will  all  forgotten  be  and  flown; 
The  garden  will  be  overgrown 

Where  now  the  roses  faU. 

A  hundred  years  from  now,  dear  heart, 

We  shall  not  mind  the  pain; 
The  throbbing  crimson  tide  of  life 

Will  not  have  left  a  stain. 


662  Poems  of  Love 

The  song  we  sing  together,  dear, 
The  dream  we  dream  together  here, 
Will  mean  no  more  than  means  a  tear 
Amid  a  summer  rain. 

A  hundred  years  from  now,  dear  heart. 

The  grief  will  all  be  o'er; 
The  sea  of  care  will  surge  in  vain 

Upon  a  careless  shore. 
These  glasses  we  turn  down  to-day 
Here  at  the  parting  of  the  way — 
We  shall  be  wineless  then  as  they, 

And  shall  not  mind  it  more. 

A  hundred  years  from  now,  dear  heart, 
We'll  neither  know  nor  care 

What  came  of  all  life's  bitterness, 
Or  followed  love's  despair. 

Then  fill  the  glasses  up  again, 

And  kiss  me  through  the  rose-leaf  rain; 

We'll  build  one  castle  more  in  Spain, 
And  dream  one  more  dream  there. 

John  Bcunell  [1865- 


"GOD  BLESS  YOU,  DEAR,  TO-DAY" 

If  there  be  graveyards  in  the  heart         < 

From  which  no  roses  spring,  ' ' 

A  place  of  wrecks  and  old  gray  tombs 

From  which  no  birds  take  wing, 
Where  linger  buried  hopes  and  dreams 

Like  ghosts  among  the  graves. 
Why,  buried  hopes  are  dismal  things, 

And  lonely  ghosts  are  knaves! 

If  there  come  dreary  winter  d?ys,         !  /. 

When  summer  roses  fall 
And  lie,  forgot,  in  withered  drifts 

Along  the  garden  wall; 


To-day  663 

If  all  the  vvrealhs  a  lover  weaves 

Turn  thorns  upon  the  brow, — 
Then  out  upon  the  silly  fool 

Who  makes  not  merry  now! 

For  if  we  cannot  keep  the  past, 

Why  care  for  what's  to  come? 
The  instant's  prick  is  all  that  stings, 

And  then  the  place  is  numb.        .      i 
If  Life's  a  lie,  and  Love's  a  cheat. 

As  I  have  heard  men  say. 
Then  here's  a  health  to  fond  deceit — 

God  bless  you,  dear,  to-day! 

■>        John  Bennetl  [1865- 

TO-DAY 

I  BRING  you  all  my  olden  days, 

IMy  childhood's  morning  glow; 
I  love  you  down  the  meadow  ways 

Where  early  blossoms  blow: 
And  up  deep  lanes  of  long-gone-by, 

Shining  with  dew-drops  yet, — 
I  wander  still,  till  you  and  I 

Over  the  world  are  met. 

I  bring  you  all  my  lonely  days, 

My  heart  that  hungered  so; 
I  love  you  through  the  wistful  haze  { 

Of  autumns  burning  low; 
And  on  pale  seas,  beneath  wan  sky, 

By  weary  tides  beset, 
I  voyage  still,  till  you  and  I 

Over  the  world  are  met. 

I  bring  you  all  my  happy  days, — 

Armfuls  of  flowers — oh, 
I  love  you  as  the  sunlight  stays 

On  mountains  heaped  with  snow: 
And  where  the  dearest  dream-buds  lie, 

With  tears  and  dew-drops  wet, 
I  toss  to-day;  for  you  and  I  ' 

Over  the  world  are  met! 

Benjamin  R.  C.  Low  [1880- 


664  Poems  of  Love 


TO  ARCADY 

Across  the  hills  of  Arcady 

Into  the  Land  of  Song — 
Ah,  dear,  if  you  will  go  with  me 

The  way  will  not  be  long! 

It  will  not  lead  through  solitudes 

Of  wind-blown  woods  or  sea; 
Dear,  no!  the  city's  weariest  moods 

May  scarce  veil  Arcady. 

'Tis  in  no  imfamiliar  land 

Lit  by  some  distant  star. 
No!     Arcady  is  where  you  stand, 

And  Song  is  where  you  are! 

So  walk  but  hand  in  hand  with  me — 

No  road  can  lead  us  wrong; 
These  are  the  hills  of  Arcady — 

Here  is  the  Land  of  Song! 

Charles  Buxton  Going  [1863- 

'"^'';WILD  WISHES 

I  WISH,  because  the  sweetness  of  your  passing 
Makes  all  the  earth  a  garden  where  you  tread, 

That  I  might  be  the  meanest  of  your  roses, 
To  pave  your  path  with  petals  passion-red ! 

I  wish,  because  the  softness  of  your  breathing 
Stirs  the  white  jasmine  at  your  window  frame, 

That  I  might  be  the  fragrance  of  a  flower. 

To  stir  the  night  breeze  with  your  dearest  name! 

I  wish,  because  the  glory  of  your  dreaming 

Strews  all  the  field  of  heaven  Vv'ith  throbbing  stars, 

That  I  might  storm  the  portals  of  your  slumber. 
And  soar  with  you  beyond  night's  golden  bars! 


"  Because  of  You  "  665 

I  wish  to  be  the  day  you  die,  Beloved, 

Though  at  its  close  my  foolish  heart  must  break! 

But  most  of  all,  I  wish,  my  dearest  darling, 
To  be  the  Blessed  Morning  when  you  wake! 
Ethel  M.  Hewitt  [i8     - 


"BECAUSE  OF  YOU" 

Sweet  have  I  known  the  blossoms  of  the  morning 

Tenderly  tinted  to  their  hearts  of  dew: 
But  now  my  flowers  have  found  a  fuller  fragrance, 
Because  of  you. 

Long  have  I  worshiped  in  my  soul's  enshrining 

High  visions  of  the  noble  and  the  true — 
Now  all  my  aims  and  all  my  prayers  are  purer, 
Because  of  you. 

Wise  have  I  seen  the  uses  of  life's  labor; 

To  all  its  puzzles  found  some  answering  clue. 
But  now  my  life  has  learned  a  nobler  meaning, 
Because  of  you. 

In  the  past  days  I  chafed  at  pain  and  waiting, 

Grasping  at  gladness  as  the  children  do; 
Now  it  is  sweet  to  wait  and  joy  to  suffer. 
Because  of  you. 

In  the  long  years  of  silences  that  part  us 

Dimmed  by  my  tears  and  darkened  to  my  view. 
Close  shall  I  hold  my  memories  and  my  madness, 
Because  of  you. 

Whether  our  lips  shall  touch  or  hands  shall  hunger, 

Whether  our  love  be  fed  or  joys  be  few, 
Life  will  be  sweeter  and  more  worth  the  living. 
Because  of  you. 

Sophia  Almon  Hcnsley  [1866- 


666  Foems  of  Love 


THEN 

I  GIVE  thee  treasures  hour  by  hour, 
That  old-time  princes  asked  in  vain. 

And  pined  for  in  their  useless  power, 
Or  died  of  passion's  eager  pain. 

I  give  thee  love  as  God  gives  light, 

Aside  from  merit,  or  from  prayer, 
Rejoicing  in  its  own  delight, 

And  freer  than  the  lavish  air. 

I  give  thee  prayers,  like  jewels  strung 
On  golden  threads  of  hope  and  fear; 

And  tenderer  thoughts  than  ever  hung 
In  a  sad  angel's  pitying  tear. 

As  earth  pours  freely  to  the  sea 

Her  thousand  streams  of  wealth  untold, 

So  flows  my  silent  life  to  thee. 
Glad  that  its  very  sands  are  gold. 

What  care  I  for  thy  carelessness? 

I  give  from  depths  that  overflow, 
Regardless  that  their  power  to  bless 

Thy  spirit  cannot  sound  or  know. 

Far  lingering  on  a  distant  dawn. 

My  triumph  shines,  more  sweet  than  late; 
When,  from  these  mortal  mists  withdrawn, 

Thy  heart  shall  know  me — I  can  wait. 

Rose  Terry  Cooke  [1827-1892] 

THE  MISSIVE 

I  THAT  tremble  at  your  feet 

Am  a  rose; 
Nothing  dewier  or  more  sweet 
Buds  or  blows; 
He  that  plucked  me,  he  that  threw  me 
Breathed  in  fire  his  whole  soul  through  me. 


The  Serf's  Secret  667 

How  the  cold  air  is  infused 

With  the  scent! 
See,  this  satin  leaf  is  bruised — 
Bruised  and  bent, 
Lift  me,  lift  the  wounded  blossom, 
Soothe  it  at  your  rosier  bosom! 

Frown  not  with  averted  eyes! 

Joy's  a  fiower 
That  is  born  a  god,  and  dies 
In  an  hour. 
Take  me,  for  the  Summer  closes. 
And  your  life  is  but  a  rose's. 

Edmund  Gosse  [1849- 

PLYMOUTH  HARBOR 

Oh,  what  know  they  of  harbors 

Who  toss  not  on  the  sea! 
They  tell  of  fairer  havens 

But  none  so  fair  there  be 

As  Plymouth  town  outstretching 

Her  quiet  arms  to  me; 
Her  breast 's  broad  welcome  spreading 

From  Mewstone  to  Penlee. 

Ah,  with  this  home-thought,  darhng, 
Come  crowding  thoughts  of  thee. 

Oh,  what  know  they  of  harbors 
Who  toss  not  on  the  sea! 

Afrs.  Ernest  Radford  [1858- 

THE   SERF'S   SECRET 

I  KNOW  a  secret,  such  a  one 
The  hawthorn  blossoms  spider-spun, 
The  dew-damp  daisies  in  the  grass 
Laugh  up  to  greet  me  as  I  pass 
To  meet  the  upland  sun. 


668  Poems  of  Love 

It  is  that  I  would  rather  be 
The  Uttle  page,  on  bended  knee, 
Who  stoops  to  gather  up  her  train 
Beneath  the  porch-lamp's  ruby  rain 
Than  hold  a  realm  in  fee. 

It  is  that  in  her  scornful  eye, 
Too  hid  for  courtly  sneer  to  spy, 
I  saw,  one  day,  a  look  which  said 
That  I,  and  only  I,  might  shed 
Love-light  across  her  sky. 

I  know  a  secret,  such  a  one 
The  hawthorn  blossoms  spider-spun, 
The  dew-damp  daisies  in  the  grass 
Laugh  up  to  greet  me  as  I  pass 
To  meet  the  upland  sun. 

William  Vaughn  Moody  [i  869-1910] 

"O,  INEXPRESSIBLE  AS  SWEET" 

O,  INEXPRESSIBLE  as  swcet. 

Love  takes  my  voice  away; 
I  cannot  tell  thee  when  we  meet 

What  most  I  long  to  say. 

But  hadst  thou  hearing  in  thy  heart 

To  know  what  beats  in  mine. 
Then  shouldst  thou  walk,  where'er  thou  art. 

In  melodies  divine. 

So  warbling  birds  lift  higher  notes 

Than  to  our  ears  belong; 
The  music  fills  their  throbbing  throats, 

But  silence  steals  the  song. 

George  Edward  Woodberry  [1855- 

THE   CYCLAMEN 

Over  the  plains  where  Persian  hosts 
Laid  down  their  lives  for  glory 

Flutter  the  cyclamens,  like  ghosts 
That  witness  to  their  story. 


The  West-Country   Lover  669 

Oh,  fair!     Oh,  white!     Oh,  pure  as  snow! 
.n3:Jo,t  On  countless  graves  how  sweet  they  grow! 

Or  crimson,  like  the  cruel  wounds 
From  which  the  life-blood,  flowing, 

Poured  out  where  now  on  grassy  mounds 
The  low,  soft  winds  are  blowing: 

Oh,  fair!  Oh,  red!  Like  blood  of  slain; 

Not  even  time  can  cleanse  that  stain. 

But  when  my  dear  these  blossoms  holds. 

All  loveliness  her  dower. 
All  woe  and  joy  the  past  enfolds 

In  her  find  fullest  flower. 
Oh,  fair!     Oh,  pure!     Oh,  white  and  red! 
If  she  but  live,  what  are  the  dead ! 

Arlo  Bates  [1850- 

THE   WEST-COUNTRY  LOVER 

Then,  lady,  at  last  thou  art  sick  of  m.y  sighing? 

Good-bye! 

So  long  as  I  sue,  thou  wilt  still  be  denying? 

Good-bye ! 

Ah,  well!  shall  I  vow  then  to  serve  thee  forever, 

And  swear  no  unkindness  our  kinship  can  sever? 

Nay,  nay,  dear  my  lass!  here's  an  end  of  endeavor. 

Good-bye! 

Yet  let  no  sweet  ruth  for  my  misery  grieve  thee. 

Good-bye ! 

The  man  who  has  loved  knows  as  well  how  to  leave  thee. 

Good-bye ! 

The  gorse  is  enkindled,  there's  bloom  on  the  heather. 

And  love  is  my  joy,  and  so  too  is  fair  weather; 

I  still  ride  abroad,  though  we  ride  not  together. 

Good-bye ! 

My  horse  is  my  mate;  let  the  wind  be  my  master. 
Good-bye ! 

Though  Care  may  pursue,  yet  my  hound  follows  faster. 
Good-bye ! 


670  Poems  of  Love 

The  red  deer's  a-tremble  in  coverts  unbroken. 

He  hears  the  hoof -thunder;  he  scents  the  death-token. 

Shall  I  mope  at  home,  under  vows  never  spoken? 

Good-bye! 

The  brown  earth's  my  book,  and  I  ride  forth  to  read  it. 

Good-bye! 

The  stream  runneth  fast,  but  my  will  shall  outspeed  it. 

Good-bye! 

I  love  thee,  dear  lass,  but  I  hate  the  hag  Sorrow. 

As  sun  follows  rain,  and  to-night  has  its  morrow, 

So  I'll  taste  of  joy,  though  I  steal,  beg,  or  borrow! 

Good-bye! 

Alice  Broivn  [1857- 

"BE  YE  IN  LOVE  WITH  ATRIL-TIDE" 

Be  ye  in  love  with  April-tide? 
I'  faith,  in  love  am  I! 
For  now  'tis  sun,  and  now  'tis  shower, 
And  now  'tis  frost  and  now  'tis  flower, 
And  now  'tis  Laura  laughing-eyed. 
And  now  'tis  Laura  shy! 

Ye  doubtful  days,  O  slower  glide! 

Still  smile  and  frown,  O  sky! 
Some  beauty  unforeseen  I  trace 
In  every  change  of  Laura's  face; — 
Be  ye  in  love  with  April-tide? 
I'  faith,  in  love  am  I! 

Clinton  Scollard  [1860- 

UNITY 

Heart  of  my  heart,  the  world  is  young: 

Love  lies  hidden  in  every  rose! 
Every  song  that  the  skylark  sung 

Once,  we  thought,  must  come  to  a  close: 
Now  we  know  the  spirit  of  song. 

Song  that  is  merged  in  the  chant  of  the  whole, 
Hand  in  hand  as  we  wander  along. 

What  should  we  doubt  of  the  years  that  roll? 


The  Queen  671 

Heart  of  my  heart,  we  can  not  die! 

Love  triumphant  in  flower  and  tree, 
Every  life  that  laughs  at  the  sky 

Tells  us  nothing  can  cease  to  be; 
One,  we  are  one  with  a  song  to-day, 

One  with  the  clover  that  scents  the  wold, 
One  with  the  Unknown,  far  away. 

One  with  the  stars,  when  earth  grows  old. 

Heart  of  my  heart,  we  are  one  with  the  wind. 

One  with  the  clouds  that  are  whirled  o'er  the  lea, 
One  in  many,  O  broken  and  blind. 

One  as  the  waves  are  at  one  with  the  sea! 
Ay!  Vi'hen  life  seems  scattered  apart. 

Darkens,  ends  as  a  tale  that  is  told, 
One,  we  are  one,  O  heart  of  my  heart. 

One,  still  one,  while  the  world  grows  old. 

Alfred  Noyes  [i88o- 

THE  QUEEN 

He  loves  not  well  whose  love  is  bold ! 

I  would  not  have  thee  come  too  nigh: 
The  sun's  gold  would  not  seem  pure  gold 

Unless  the  sun  were  in  the  sky: 
To  take  him  thence  and  chain  him  near 
Would  make  his  glory  disappear. 

He  keeps  his  state, — keep  thou  in  thine. 

And  shine  upon  me  Irom  afar! 
So  shall  I  bask  in  light  divine, 

That  falls  from  love's  own  guiding  star; 
So  shall  thy  eminence  be  high. 
And  so  my  passion  shall  not  die; 

But  all  my  life  shall  reach  its  hands 

Of  lofty  longing  toward  thy  face, 
And  be  as  one  who,  speechless,  stands 

In  rapture  at  some  perfect  grace! 
My  love,  my  hope,  my  all  shall  be 
To  look  to  heaven  and  look  to  thee! 


672  Poems  of  Love 

Thy  eyes  shall  be  the  heavenly  lights, 
Thy  voice  the  gentle  summer  breeze, — 

What  time  it  sways,  on  moonlit  nights. 
The  murmuring  tops  of  leafy  trees; 

And  I  shall  touch  thy  beauteous  form 

In  June's  red  roses,  rich  and  warm. 

But  thou  thyself  shall  come  not  down 
From  that  pure  region  far  above; 

But  keep  thy  throne  and  wear  thy  crown, 
Queen  of  my  heart  and  queen  of  love! 

A  monarch  in  thy  realm  complete, 

And  I  a  monarch — at  thy  feet! 

William  Winter  [i 836-1 91 7] 

A  LOVER'S  ENVY 

I  ENVY  every  flower  that  blows 
Beside  the  pathway  where  she  goes. 

And  every  bird  that  sings  to  her, 
And  every  breeze  that  brings  to  her 
The  fragrance  of  the  rose. 

I  envy  every  poet's  rhyme 

That  moves  her  heart  at  eventime, 

And  every  tree  that  wears  for  her 
Its  brightest  bloom,  and  bears  for  her 
The  fruitage  of  its  prime. 

I  envy  every  Southern  night 

That  paves  her  path  with  moonbeams  white, 
And  silvers  all  the  leaves  for  her. 
And  in  their  shadow  weaves  for  her 
A  dream  of  dear  delight. 

I  envy  none  whose  love  requires 
Of  her  a  gift,  a  task  that  tires: 
I  only  long  to  live  to  her, 
I  only  ask  to  give  to  her 

All  that  her  heart  desires. 

Henry  Van  Dyke  [1852- 


"My  Heart  Shall  Be  Thy  Garden"      673 


STAR  SONG 

When  sunset  flows  into  golden  glows 
And  the  breath  of  the  night  is  new, 

Love,  find  afar  eve's  eager  star — 

That  is  my  thought  of  you.  1 

O  tear-wet  eye  that  scans  the  sky 

Your  lonely  lattice  through: 
Choose  any  one,  from  sun  to  sun — 

That  is  my  thought  of  you. 

And  when  you  wake  at  the  morning's  break 

To  rival  rose  and  dew, 
The  star  that  slays  till  the  leaping  rays — 

That  is  my  thought  of  you. 

Ay,  though  by  day  they  seem  away 

Beyond  or  cloud  or  blue, 
From  dawn  to  night  unquenched  their  light — 

As  are  my  thoughts  of  you; 

Robert  Underwood  Johnson  [1853- 


"MY  HEART  SHALL   BE  THY   GARDEN" 

]\Iy  heart  shall  be  thy  garden.    Come,  my  own, 

Lito  thy  garden;  thine  be  happy  hours 

Among  my  fairest  thoughts,  my  tallest  flowers. 
From  root  to  crowning  petal,  thine  alone. 
Thine  is  the  place  from  where  the  seeds  are  sown 

Up  to  the  sky  inclosed,  with  all  its  showers. 

But  ah,  the  birds,  the  birds!    Who  shall  build  bowers 
To  keep  these  thine?    O  friend,  the  birds  have  flown. 

For  as  these  come  and  go,  and  quit  our  pine 
To  follow  the  sweet  season,  or,  new-comers, 
Sing  one  song  only  from  our  alder-trees, 
My  heart  has  thoughts,  which,  though  thine  eyes  hold  mine, 
Flit  to  the  silent  world  and  other  summers, 
With  wings  that  dip  beyond  the  silver  seas. 

Alice  Meynell  [1853- 


674  Poems  of  Love  S    yM  " 


AT  NIGHT 

Home,  home  from  the  horizon  far  and  clear, 

Hither  the  soft  wings  sweep; 
Flocks  of  the  memories  of  the  day  draw  near 

The  dovecote  doors  of  sleep. 

Oh  which  are  they  that  come  through  sweetest  light 

Of  all  these  homing  birds? 
Which  with  the  straightest  and  the  swiftest  flight? 

Your  words  to  me,  your  words! 

Alice  Mcyncll  [1853- 

SONG 

Song  is  so  old, 

Love  is  so  new — ■ 
Let  me  be  still 

And  kneel  to  you. 

Let  me  be  still 

And  breathe  no  word, 
Save  what  my  warm  blood 

Sings  unlieard. 

Let  my  warm  blood 

Sing  low  of  you — 
Song  is  so  fair, 

Love  is  so  new! 

Hermann  Hagcdorii  [1882- 

"ALL  LAST  NIGHT" 

All  last  night  I  had  quiet 

In  a  fragrant  dream  and  warm: 

She  had  become  my  Sabbath, 
And  round  my  neck,  her  arm. 

I  knew  the  warmth  in  my  dreaming; 

The  fragrance,  I  suppose. 
Was  her  hair  about  me. 

Or  else  she  wore  a  rose. 


The   Last  Word  675 

Her  hair,  I  think;  for  likest 

Woodruffe  'twas,  when  Spring 
Loitering  down  wet  woodways 

Treads  it  sauntering. 

No  light,  nor  any  speaking; 

Fragrant  only  and  warm. 
Enough  to  know  my  lodging, 

The  white  Sabbath  of  her  arm. 

Lascdlcs  Ahcrcrombic  fiSSi- 


THE  LAST  WORD 

When  I  have  folded  up  this  tent 
And  laid  the  soiled  thing  by, 

I  shall  go  forth  'neath  different  stars, 
Under  an  unknown  sky. 

And  yet  whatever  house  I  find 

Beneath  the  grass  or  snow 
Will  ne'er  be  tenantless  of  love 

Or  lack  the  face  I  know. 

O  lips — wild  roses  wet  with  rain! 
Blown  hair  of  drifted  brown! 

0  passionate  eyes!    O  panting  heart — 
When  in  that  colder  town 

1  lie,  the  one  inhabitant. 

My  hands  across  my  breast, 
How  warm  through  all  eternity 
The  summer  of  my  rest ! 

To  each  frail  root  beneath  the  ground 
That  thrusts  its  flower  above, 

I  shall  impart  a  fiercer  sap — 
I  who  have  known  your  love! 

And  growing  things  will  lean  to  me 
To  learn  what  love  hath  won, 

Till  I  shall  whisper  to  the  dust 
That  secret  of  the  Sun. 


676  Poems  of  Love 

Yea,  though  my  spirit  never  wake 

To  hear  the  voice  I  knew, 
Even  an  endless  sleep  would  be 

Stirred  by  the  dreams  of  You! 

Frederic  Lawrence  Knoivlcs  [1860-1905] 


"HEART  OF  MY  HEART" 

Heart  of  my  heart,  my  life,  my  light! 

If  you  were  lost  what  should  I  do? 
I  dare  not  let  you  from  my  sight 

Lest  Death  should  fall  in  love  with  you. 

Such  countless  terrors  lie  in  wait! 

The  gods  know  well  how  dear  you  are! 
What  if  they  left  me  desolate 

And  plucked  and  set  you  for  their  star! 

Then  hold  me  close,  the  gods  are  strong, 

And  perfect  joy  so  rare  a  flower 
No  man  may  hope  to  keep  it  long — 

And  I  m.ay  lose  you  any  hour. 

Then  kiss  me  close,  my  star,  my  flower! 

So  shall  the  future  grant  me  this: 
That  there  was  not  a  single  hour 

We  might  have  kissed,  and  did  not  kiss! 

Unknown 


MY  LADDIE 

Oh,  my  laddie,  my  laddie, 
I  lo'e  your  very  plaidie, 
I  lo'e  your  very  bonnet 
Wi'  the  silver  buckle  on  it, 
I  lo'e  your  collie  Harry, 
I  lo'e  the  kent  ye  carry; 
But  oh!  it's  past  my  power  to  tell 
How  much,  how  much  I  lo'e  yoursel! 


The  Shaded   Pool  677, 

Oh,  my  dearie,  my  dearie, 

I  could  luik  an'  never  weary 

At  your  een  sae  blue  an'  laughin', 

That  a  heart  o'  stane  wad  saften, 

While  your  mouth  sae  proud  an'  curly 

Gars  my  heart  gang  tirlie-wirhe; 

But  oh!  yoursel,  your  very  scl, 

I  lo'e  ten  thousand  times  as  well! 

Oh!  my  darlin',  my  darlin', 

Let's  flit  whaur  flits  the  starlin', 

Let's  loll  upo'  the  heather 

A'  this  bonny,  bonny  weather; 

Ye  shall  fauld  me  in  your  plaidie, 

My  luve,  my  luve,  my  laddie; 
An'  close,  an'  close  into  your  ear 
I'll  tell  ye  how  I  lo'e  ye,  dear. 

Amelie  Rives  [1863- 

THE  SHADED  POOL 

A  LAUGHING  knot  of  village  maids 
Goes  gaily  tripping  to  the  brook. 
For  water-nymphs  they  mean  to  be, 
And  seek  some  still,  secluded  nook. 
Here  Laura  goes,  my  own  delight. 
And  Colin's  love,  the  madcap  Jane, 
And  half  a  score  of  goddesses 
Trip  over  daisies  in  the  plain: 
Already  now  they  loose  their  hair 
And  peep  from  out  the  tangled  gold, 
Or  speed  the  flying  foot  to  reach 
The  brook  that's  only  summer-cold; 
The  lovely  locks  stream  out  behind 
The  shepherdesses  on  the  wing, 
And  Laura's  is  the  wealth  I  love, 
And  Laura's  is  the  gold  I  sing. 

A-row  upon  the  bank  they  pant, 
And  all  unlace  the  country  shoe; 
Their  fingers  tug  the  garter-knots 
To  loose  the  hose  of  varied  hue. 


678  Poems  of  Love 

The  flashing  knee  at  last  appears,  '  ' 

The  lower  curves  of  youth  and  grace, 

Whereat  the  girls  intently  scan 

The  mazy  thickets  of  the  place. 

But  who's  to  see  except  the  thrush 

Upon  the  wild  crab-apple  tree? 

Within  his  branchy  haunt  he  sits — 

A  very  Peeping  Tom  is  he! 

Now  music  bubbles  in  his  throat, 

And  now  he  pipes  the  scene  in  song — 

The  virgins  slipping  from  their  robes, 

The  cheated  stockings  lean  and  long, 

The  swift-descending  petticoat, 

The  breasts  that  heave  because  they  ran, 

The  rounded  arms,  the  brilliant  limbs, 

The  pretty  necklaces  of  tan. 

Did  ever  amorous  God  in  Greece, 

In  search  of  some  young  mouth  to  kiss. 

By  any  river  chance  upon 

A  sylvan  scene  as  bright  as  this? 

But  though  each  maid  is  pure  and  fair. 

For  one  alone  my  heart  I  bring, 

And  Laura's  is  the  shape  I  love, 

And  Laura's  is  the  snow  I  sing. 

And  now  upon  the  brook's  green  brink, 
A  milk-white  bevy,  lo,  they  stand, 
Half  shy,  half  frightened,  reaching  back 
The  beauty  of  a  poising  hand! 
How  musical  their  little  screams 
When  ripples  kiss  their  shrinking  feet 
And  then  the  brook  embraces  all 
Till  gold  and  white  and  water  meet! 
Within  the  streamlet's  soft  cool  arms 
Delight  and  love  and  gracefulness 
Sport  till  a  flock  of  tiny  waves 
Swamps  all  the  beds  of  floating  cress; 
And  on  his  shining  face  are  seen 
Great  yellow  hlies  drifting  down 
Beyond  the  ringing  apple-tree, 
Beyond  the  empty  homespun  gown. 


Good-night  679 

Did  ever  Orpheus  with  his  lute, 
When  making  melody  of  old, 
E'er  find  a  stream  in  Attica 
So  ripely  full  of  pink  and  gold? 

At  last  they  climb  the  sloping  bank 
And  shake  upon  the  thirsty  soil      ''' 
A  treasury  of  diamond-drops 
Not  gained  by  aught  of  grimy  toil. 
Again  the  garters  clasp  the  hose. 
Again  the  velvet  knee  is  hid, 
Again  the  breathless  babble  tells 
0.  What  Colin  said,  what  Colin  did. 
In  grace  upon  the  grass  they  lie 
And  spread  their  tresses  to  the  sun, 
And  rival,  musical  as  they. 
The  blackbird's  alto  shake  and  run. 
Did  ever  Love,  on  hunting  bent. 
Come  idly  humming  through  the  hay, 
And,  to  his  sudden  joyfulness. 
Find  fairer  game  at  close  of  day? 
Though  every  maid's  a  lily-rose, 
And  meet  to  sway  a  sceptred  king. 
Yet  Laura's  is  the  face  I  love, 
And  Laura's  are  the  lips  I  sing. 

Norman  Gale  [1862- 

GOOD-NIGHT 

GoOD-NiGHT.     Good-night.    Ah,  good  the  night 
That  wraps  thee  in  its  silver  light. 
Good-night.    No  night  is  good  for  me 
That  does  not  hold  a  thought  of  thee. 
Good-night. 

Good-night.    Be  every  night  as  sweet 
As  that  which  made  our  love  complete, 
Till  that  last  night  when  death  shall  be 
One  brief  "Good-night,"  for  thee  and  me. 
Good-night. 

S.  Weir  Mitchell  [1S29-1914] 


68o  Poems  of  Love 


THE  MYSTIC  r 

By  seven  vineyards  on  one  hill     '^  "^^^^ 

We  walked.    The  native  wine 
In  clusters  grew  beside  us  two, 

For  your  lips  and  for  mine, 

When,  "Hark!"  you  said,— "Was  that  a  bell 
Or  a  bubbling  spring  we  heard?" 

But  I  was  wise  and  closed  my  eyes 
And  listened  to  a  bird; 

For  as  summer  leaves  are  bent  and  shake 

With  singers  passing  through, 
So  moves  in  me  continually 

The  winged  breath  of  you. 

You  tasted  from  a  single  vine 

And  took  from  that  your  fill — 
But  I  inclined  to  every  kind, 

All  seven  on  one  hill. 

Witter  Bynner  [1881- 


"I  AM  THE  WIND" 

I  AM  the  wind  that  wavers. 

You  are  the  certain  land; 
I  am  the  shadow  that  passes 

Over  the  sand.  j 

I  am  the  leaf  that  quivers, 

You  the  unshaken  tree; 
You  are  the  stars  that  are  steadfast, 

I  am  the  sea. 

i-booO 
You  are  the  light  eternal,  ,,j|j  g^ 

Like  a  torch  I  shall  die.  .  .  .    ,jj  jj^'p 
You  are  the  surge  of  deep  music,. ,.f  ^^q 
I — but  a  cry! 

Zoe  Akins  [18S6- 


"This   Is    My    Love  for  You"       68 1 

"I  LOVE  MY  LIFE,  BUT  NOT  TOO  WELL" 

I  LOVE  my  life,  but  not  too  well 

To  give  it  to  thee  like  a  llower. 
So  it  may  pleasure  thee  to  dwell 

Deep  in  its  perfume  but  an  hour. 
I  love  my  life,  but  not  too  well. 

I  love  my  life,  but  not  too  well 

To  sing  it  note  by  note  away, 
So  to  thy  soul  the  song  may  tell 

The  beauty  of  the  desolate  day. 
I  love  my  life,  but  not  too  well. 

I  love  my  life,  but  not  too  well 
To  cast  it  like  a  cloak  on  thine, 

Against  the  storms  that  sound  and  swell 
Between  thy  lonely  heart  and  mine. 

I  love  my  life,  but  not  too  well. 

Harriet  Monroe  [1860- 

"THIS  IS  ISIY  LOVE  FOR  YOU" 

I  HAVE  brought  the  wine 
And  the  folded  raiment  fine, 
Pilgrim  staff  and  shoe — 
This  is  my  love  for  you. 

I  will  smooth  your  bed. 
Lay  away  your  coverlid, 
Sing  the  whole  day  through. 
This  is  my  love  for  you. 

Mayhap  in  the  night, 

When  the  dark  beats  back  the  light, 

I  shall  struggle  too  .  .  . 

This  is  my  love  for  you. 

In  your  dream,  once  more, 
Will  a  star  lead  to  my  door? 
To  stars  and  dreams  be  true! 
This  is  my  love  for  you  .  .  . 

Grace  Fallow  Norton  [18 


70J  1" 

MY  LADY'S  LIPS 

LIPS   AND   EYES 

From  "  Blurt,  Master  Constable" 

Love  for  such  a  cherry  hp 

Would  be  glad  to  pawn  his  arrows; 
Venus  here  to  take  a  sip 

Would  sell  her  doves  and  team  of  sparrows. 
But  they  shall  not  so; 

Hey  nonny,  nonny  no! 
None  but  I  this  lip  must  owe; 
Hey  nonny,  nonny  no! 

Did  Jove  see  this  wanton  eye, 

Ganymede  must  wait  no  longer; 
Phcebe  here  one  night  did  lie, 

Would  change  her  face  and  look  much  younger. 
But  they  shall  not  so; 

Hey  nonny,  nonny  no! 
None  but  I  this  lip  must  owe; 
Hey  nonny,  nonny  no! 

Thomas  Middleton  [1570?-! 627] 


THE   KISS 

From  "  Cynthia's  Revels  " 

O  THAT  joy  so  soon  should  waste! 

Or  so  sweet  a  bliss 

As  a  kiss 
Might  not  for  ever  last ! 
So  sugared,  so  melting,  so  soft,  so  delicious, 

The  dew  that  lies  on  roses, 

When  the  morn  herself  discloses, 
Is  not  so  precious. 

682 


A  Stolen    Kiss  683 

O,  rather  than  I  would  it  smother, 
Were  I  to  taste  such  another, 

It  should  be  my  wishing 

That  I  might  die  with  kissing. 

Ben  Jonson  [iS7,3?-i63  7] 

"TAKE,  O  TAKE  THOSE  LIPS  AWAY" 

Take,  O  take  those  lips  away, 
That  so  sweetly  were  forsworn. 

And  those  eyes,  the  break  of  day,       ' 
Lights  that  do  mislead  the  morn; 

But  my  kisses  bring  again,  I 

Seals  of  love,  but  sealed  in  vain. 

Hide,  0  hide  those  hills  of  snow, 
Which  thy  frozen  bosom  bears. 
On  whose  tops  the  pinks  that  grow 

Are  of  those  that  April  wears! 
But  first  set  my  poor  heart  free, 
Bound  in  those  icy  chains  by  thee. 
The  first  stanza  from  "  Measure  for  Measure,"  by 

W'lUiam  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 
The  second  stanza  from  '  The  Bloody  Brothers  "  by 

John  Fletcher  [i 579-1 625] 

A  STOLEN  KISS 

Now  gentle  sleep  hath  closed  up  those  eyes 
Which,  waking,  kept  my  boldest  thoughts  in  awe; 
And  free  access  unto  that  sweet  lip  lies, 
From  which  I  long  the  rosy  breath  to  draw. 
Methinks  no  wrong  it  were,  if  I  should  steal 
From  those  two  melting  rubies  one  poor  kiss; 
None  sees  the  theft  that  would  the  theft  reveal, 
Nor  rob  I  her  of  aught  that  she  can  miss; 
Nay,  should  I  twenty  kisses  take  away. 
There  would  be  little  sign  I  would  do  so; 
Why  then  should  I  this  robbery  delay? 
O,  she  may  wake,  and  therewith  angry  grow! 
Well  if  she  do,  I'll  back  restore  that  one. 
And  twenty  hundred  thousand  more  for  loan. 

George  Wither  [i  588-1 667I 


684  Poems  of  Love 


SONG 

My  Love  bound  me  with  a  kiss 

That  I  should  no  longer  stay; 
When  I  felt  so  sweet  a  bliss 

I  had  less  pov/er  to  part  away:  ,  ,, 

Alas!  that  women  do  not  know 
Kisses  make  men  loath  to  go. 

Yes,  she  knows  it  but  too  well, 

For  I  heard  when  Venus '  dove 
In  her  ear  did  softly  tell 

That  kisses  were  the  seals  of  love: 
O  muse  not  then  though  it  be  so, 
Kisses  make  men  loath  to  go. 

Wherefore  did  she  thus  inflame 

My  desires,  heat  my  blood, 
Instantly  to  quench  the  same 

And  starve  whom  she  had  given  food? 
Ay,  ay,  the  common  sense  can  show,      -Al 
Kisses  make  men  loath  to  go. 

Had  she  bid  me  go  at  first 

I  would  ne'er  have  grieved  my  heart 
Hope  delayed  had  been  the  worst; 

But  ah  to  kiss  and  then  to  part! 
How  deep  it  struck,  speak,  gods!  you  know 
Kisses  make  men  loath  to  go. 

Unknown 

TO  ELECTRA 

I  DARE  not  ask  a  kiss,  y^ 

I  dare  not  beg  a  smile, 
Lest  having  that,  or  this, 

I  might  grow  proud  the  while. 

No,  no,  the  utmost  share 

Of  my  desire  shall  be 
Only  to  kiss  that  air 

That  lately  kissed  thee. 

Robert  H err kk  [1591-1674] 


A  Riddle  685 


"COME,   CHLOE,   AND   GIVE   ME  SWEET 
KISSES" 

Come,  Chloe,  and  give  me  sweet  kisses, 

For  sweeter  sure  never  girl  gave; 
But  why  in  the  midst  of  my  blisses, 

Do  you  ask  me  how  many  I'd  have? 
I'm  not  to  be  stinted  in  pleasure, 

Then,  prithee,  my  charmer,  be  kind. 
For  whilst  I  love  thee  above  measure, 

To  numbers  I'll  ne'er  be  confined. 

Count  the  bees  that  on  Hybla  are  playing, 

Count  the  flowers  that  enamel  its  fields, 
Count  the  flocks  that  on  Tempe  are  straying, 

Or  the  grain  that  rich  Sicily  yields, 
Go  number  the  stars  in  the  heaven. 

Count  how  many  sands  on  the  shore, 
When  so  many  kisses  you've  given, 

I  still  shall  be  craving  for  more. 

To  a  heart  full  of  love,  let  me  hold  thee, 

To  a  heart  that,  dear  Chloe,  is  thine; 
In  my  arms  I'll  for  ever  enfold  thee. 

And  twist  round  thy  limbs  like  a  vine. 
What  joy  can  be  greater  than  this  is? 

My  life  on  thy  lips  shall  be  spent ! 
But  the  wretch  that  can  number  his  kisses. 

With  few  wfll  be  ever  content. 

Charles  Hanbury  Williams  [1708-1759] 

A  RIDDLE 

I  AM  just  two  and  two,  I  am  warm,  I  am  cold. 
And  the  parent  of  numbers  that  cannot  be  told, 
I  am  lawful,  unlawful — a  duty,  a  fault — 
I  am.  often  sold  dear,  good  for  nothing  when  bought ; 
An  extraordinary  boon,  and  a  matter  of  course, 
And  yielded  with  pleasure  when  taken  by  force. 

William  Cowper  [ 1 73 1- 1 800] 


686  Poems  of  Love 


TO  A  KISS  yj- 

Soft  child  of  love,  thou  balmy  bliss, 
Inform  me,  O  delicious  kiss, 
Why  thou  so  suddenly  art  gone, 
Lost  in  the  moment  thou  art  won? 

Yet  go!    For  wherefore  should  I  sigh? 
On  Delia's  lips,  with  raptured  eye, 
On  Delia's  blushing  lips  I  see 
A  thousand  full  as  sweet  as  thee. 

John  Wolcot  [ 1 738-1819] 

SONG 

Often  I  have  heard  it  said 
That  her  lips  are  ruby-red. 
Little  heed  I  what  they  say, 
I  have  seen  as  red  as  they. 
Ere  she  smiled  on  other  men, 
Real  rubies  were  they  then. 

When  she  kissed  me  once  in  play. 

Rubies  were  less  bright  than  they. 

And  less  bright  than  those  which  shone 

In  the  palace  of  the  Sun. 

Will  they  be  as  bright  again? 

Not  if  kissed  by  other  men. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [i 775-1 864] 


THE  FIRST  KISS  OF  LOVE 

'A  ^dpftiTO^  5i  xop5a?s 

'Epura  iMvvov  rix^^ — AnACREON 

Away  with  your  fictions  of  flimsy  romance, 

Those  tissues  of  falsehood  which  folly  has  wove! 

Give  me  the  mild  beam  of  the  soul-breathing  glance, 
Or  the  rapture  which  dwells  on  the  first  kiss  of  love. 


"Jenny    Kissed   Me"  687 

Ye  rhymers,  whose  bosoms  with  phantasy  glow, 
Whose  pastoral  passions  are  made  for  the  grove; 

From  what  blest  inspiration  your  sonnets  would  flov/, 
Could  you  ever  have  tasted  the  first  kiss  of  love! 

If  Apollo  should  e'er  his  assistance  refuse, 
Or  the  Nine  be  disposed  from  your  service  to  rove, 

Invoke  them  no  more,  bid  adieu  to  the  muse, 
And  try  the  effect  of  the  first  kiss  of  love. 

I  hate  you,  ye  cold  compositions  of  art! 

Though  prudes  may  condemn  me,  and  bigots  reprove, 
I  court  the  effusions  that  spring  from  the  heart, 

Which  throbs  with  delight  to  the  first  kiss  of  love. 

Your  shepherds,  your  flocks,  those  fantastical  themes, 
Perhaps  may  amuse,  yet  they  never  can  move: 

Arcadia  displays  but  a  region  of  dreams; 
What  are  visions  like  these  to  the  first  kiss  of  love? 

Oh!  cease  to  affirm  that  man,  since  his  birth, 

From  Adam  till  now,  has  with  wretchedness  strove; 

Some  portion  of  Paradise  still  is  on  earth, 
And  Eden  revives  in  the  first  kiss  of  love. 

When  age  chills  the  blood,  when  our  pleasures  are  past — 
For  years  fleet  away  with  the  wings  of  the  dove — 

The  dearest  remembrance  will  still  be  the  last. 
Our  sweetest  memorial  the  first  kiss  of  love. 

George  Cordon  Byron  [i 788-1 824] 


"JENNY  KISSED   ME" 

Jenny  kissed  me  when  we  met. 

Jumping  from  the  chair  she  sat  in; 
Time,  you  thief,  who  love  to  get 

Sweets  into  your  list,  put  that  in! 
Say  I'm  weary,  say  I'm  sad, 

Say  that  health  and  wealth  have  missed  me, 
Say  I'm  growing  old,  but  add, 
Jenny  kissed  me. 

Leigh  Hunt  [1784-1850] 


688  Poems  of  Love 


"I   FEAR  THY  KISSES,   GENTLE  MAIDEN" 

I  FEAR  thy  kisses,  gentle  maiden; 
Thou  needest  not  fear  mine; 
My  spirit  is  too  deeply  laden 
Ever  to  burthen  thine. 

I  fear  thy  mien,  thy  tones,  thy  motion; 
Thou  needest  not  fear  mine; 
Innocent  is  the  heart's  devotion 
With  which  I  worship  thine. 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [1792-1822] 


LOVE'S  PHILOSOPHY 

The  fountains  mingle  with  the  river, 

And  the  rivers  with  the  ocean. 
The  winds  of  heaven  mix  forever 

With  a  sweet  emotion; 
Nothing  in  the  world  is  single; 

All  things  by  a  law  divine 
In  one  another's  being  mingle; — 

Why  not  I  with  thine? 

See  the  mountains  kiss  high  heaven, 

And  the  waves  clasp  one  another; 
No  sister  flower  would  be  forgiven 

If  it  disdained  its  brother; 
And  the  sunlight  clasps  the  earth. 

And  the  moonbeams  kiss  the  sea; 
What  arc  all  these  kissings  worth, 

If  thou  kiss  not  me? 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [1792-1822] 

SONG 

From  "  In  a  Gondola" 

The  moth's  kiss,  first! 

Kiss  me  as  if  you  made  believe 

You  were  not  sure,  this  eve, 


The  First  Kiss  689 

How  my  face,  your  flower,  had  pursed 
Its  petals  up;  so,  here  and  there 
You  brush  it,  till  I  grow  aware 
Who  wants  me,  and  wide  ope  I  burst. 

The  bee's  kiss,  now! 
Kiss  me  as  if  you  entered  gay 
My  heart  at  some  noonday, 
A  bud  that  dares  not  disallow 
The  claim,  so  all  is  rendered  up. 
And  passively  its  shattered  cup 
Over  your  head  to  sleep  I  bow. 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1889] 


SUMMUM   BONUM 

All  the  breath  and  the  bloom  of  the  year  in  the  bag  of  one 
bee: 
All  the  wonder  and  wealth  of  the  mine  in  the  heart  of  one 
gem: 
In  the  core  of  one  pearl  all  the  shade  and  the  shine  of  the  sea: 
Breath  and  bloom,  shade  and  shine, — wonder,  wealth, 
and — how  far  above  them — 

Truth,  that's  brighter  than  gem. 
Trust,  that's  purer  than  pearl, — 
Brightest  truth,  purest  trust  in  the  universe — all  were  for  me 
In  the  kiss  of  one  girl. 

Robert  Broivning  [181 2-1889] 


THE  FIRST  KISS 

If  only  in  dreams  may  man  be  fully  blest, 

Is  heaven  a  dream?    Is  she  I  clasped  a  dream? 
Or  stood  she  here  even  now  where  dewdrops  gleam 

And  miles  of  furze  shine  golden  down  the  West? 

I  seem  to  clasp  her  still — still  on  my  breast 
Her  bosom  beats, — I  see  the  blue  eyes  beam: — 
I  think  she  kissed  these  lips,  for  now  they  seem 

Scarce  mine:  so  hallowed  of  the  lips  they  pressed! 


690  Poems  of  Love 

Yon  thicket's  breath — can  that  be  eglantine? 

Those  birds — can  they  be  morning's  choristers? 

Can  this  be  earth?    Can  these  be  banks  of  furze? 
Like  burning  bushes  fired  of  God  they  shine ! 
I  seem  to  know  them,  though  this  body  of  mine 

Passed  into  spirit  at  the  touch  of  hers! 

Theodore  Watts-Diinton  [1836-1914] 


TO   MY  LOVE 

Kiss  me  softly  and  speak  to  me  low; 

Malice  has  ever  a  vigilant  ear; 

What  if  Malice  were  lurking  near? 
Kiss  me,  dear! 
Kiss  me  softly  and  speak  to  me  low. 

Kiss  me  softly  and  speak  to  me  low; 

Envy,  too,  has  a  watchful  ear; 

What  if  Envy  should  chance  to  hear? 
Kiss  me,  dear! 
Kiss  me  softly  and  speak  to  me  low. 

Kiss  me  softly  and  speak  to  me  low; 
Trust  me,  darling,  the  time  is  near 
When  lovers  may  love  with  never  a  fear; 
Kiss  me,  dear! 
Kiss  me  softly  and  speak  to  me  low. 

John  Godfrey  Saxe  [1816-1587J 

TO  LESBIA 

Give  me  kisses!    Do  not  stay, 
Counting  in  that  careful  way. 
All  the  coins  your  lips  can  print 
Never  will  exhaust  the  mint. 

Kiss  me,  then. 
Every  moment — and  again! 

Give  me  kisses!    Do  not  stop, 
Measuring  nectar  by  the  drop.  "-• 


Make  Believe 

Though  to  millions  they  amount, 
They  will  never  drain  the  fount. 

Kiss  me,  then, 
Every  moment — and  again! 

iJUV   V/Oi. 

Give  me  kisses!    All  is  waste 
Save  the  luxury  we  taste; 
And  for  kissing, — kisses  live 
Only  when  we  take  or  give. 

Kiss  me,  then, 
Every  moment — and  again! 

Give  me  kisses!    Though  their  worth 
Far  exceeds  the  gems  of  earth, 
Never  pearls  so  rich  and  pure 
Cost  so  little,  I  am  sure. 
Kiss  me,  then, 
Every  moment — and  again! 

Give  me  kisses!    Nay,  'tis  true 
I  am  just  as  rich  as  you; 
And  for  every  kiss  I  owe, 
I  can  pay  you  back,  you  know, 

•Kiss  me,  then, 
Every  moment — and  again! 

John  Godfrey  Saxe  [  1 8 1 6- 1 88  7] 

MAKE  BELIEVE    , 

Kiss  me,  though  you  make  believe; 

Kiss  me,  though  I  ahnost  know 
'You  are  kissing  to  deceive: 

Let  the  tide  one  moment  flow 
Backward  ere  it  rise  and  break, 
Only  for  poor  pity's  sake! 

Give  me  of  your  flowers  one  leaf, 
Give  me  of  your  smiles  one  smile, 

Backward  roll  this  tide  of  grief 
Just  a  moment,  though,  the  while. 


691 


692  Poems  of  Love 

I  should  feel  and  almost  know 
You  are  trifling  with  my  woe. 

Whisper  to  me  sweet  and  low; 

Tell  me  how  you  sit  and  weave 
Dreams  about  me,  though  I  know 

It  is  only  make  believe! 
Just  a  moment,  though  'tis  plain 
You  are  jesting  with  my  pain. 

Alice  Cary  [i 820-1 87 1] 

KISSING'S  NO   SIN 

Some  say  that  kissing's  a  sin; 

But  I  think  it's  nane  ava, 
For  kissing  has  wonn'd  in  this  warld 

Since  ever  that  there  was  twa. 

O,  if  it  wasna  lawfu' 

Lawyers  wadna  allow  it; 
If  it  wasna  holy, 

Ministers  wadna  do  it. 

If  it  wasna  modest, 

Maidens  wadna  tak'  it; 
If  it  wasna  plenty, 

Puir  folk  wadna  get  it. 

Unknown 


TO  ANNE 

How  many  kisses  do  I  ask? 
Now  you  set  me  to  my  task. 
First,  sweet  Anne,  will  you  tell  me 
How  many  waves  are  in  the  sea? 
How  many  stars  are  in  the  sky? 
How  many  lovers  you  make  sigh? 
How  many  sands  are  on  the  shore? 
I  shall  want  just  one  kiss  more. 

William  Stirling-Maxwell  fi8i8- 


Phillis  and  Corydon  693 


SONG 

There  is  many  a  love  in  the  land,  my  love, 

But  never  a  love  like  this  is; 
Then  kill  me  dead  with  your  love,  my^iove, 

And  cover  me  up  with  kisses. 

So  kill  me  dead  and  cover  me  deep 

Where  never  a  soul  discovers; 
Deep  in  your  heart  to  sleep,  to  sleep, 

In  the  darlingest  tomb  of  lovers. 

Joaquin  Miller  [1841-1913] 


PHILLIS  AND   CORYDON 

Phillis  took  a  red  rose   from  the  tangles  of  her  hair, — ■ 
Time,  the  Golden  Age;  the  place,  Arcadia,  anywhere, — 

Phillis  laughed,  the  saucy  jade:  "Sir  Shepherd,  wilt  have 

this. 
Or" — Bashful  god  of  skipping  lambs  and  oaten  reeds! — "a 

kiss?" 

Bethink  thee,  gentle  Corydon!  A  rose  lasts  all  night  long, 
A  kiss  but  slips  from  olY  your  lips  like  a  thrush's  evening 
song. 

A  kiss  that  goes,  where  no  one  knows!    A  rose,  a  crimson 

rose! 
Corydon  made  his  choice  and  took — Well,  which  do  you 

suppose? 

Arthur  Colion  [i858- 


AT  HER  WINDOW 

"HARK,   HARK,  THE  LARK" 

From  "  Cymbeline" 

Hark,  hark!  the  lark  at  heaven's  gate  sings, 

And  Phcebus  'gins  arise, 
His  steeds  to  water  at  those  springs       t 

On  chaliced  flowers  that  lies; 
And  winking  Mary-buds  begin 

To  ope  their  golden  eyes: 
With  everything  that  pretty  bin, 

My  lady  sweet,  arise: 
■^-rA  ~-r'         Arise,  arise.  -"'Tttim 

William  Shakespeare  [i 564-1616] 

"SLEEP,   ANGRY  BEAUTY"  M 

Sleep,  angry  beauty,  sleep  and  fear  not  me! 

For  who  a  sleeping  lion  dares  provoke? 
It  shall  suffice  me  here  to  sit  and  see 

Those  lips  shut  up,  that  never  kindly  spoke: 
What  sight  can  more  content  a  lover's  mind 
Than  beauty  seeming  harmless,  if  not  kind? 

My  words  have  charmed  her,  for  secure  she  sleeps. 
Though  guilty  much  of  wrong  done  to  my  love; 

And  in  her  slumber,  see!  she  close-eyed  Vv^eeps: 
Dreams  often  more  than  waking  passions  move. 

Plead,  Sleep,  my  cause,  and  make  her  soft  like  thee: 

That  she  is  peace  may  wake  and  pity  me. 

Thomas  Campion  [    ?    -i6ig] 

MATIN   SONG 

Rise,  Lady  Mistress,  rise! 

The  night  hath  tedious  been; 
No  sleep  hath  fallen  into  mine  eyes 

Nor  slumbers  made  me  sin. 
694 


Morning  695 

Is  not  she  a  saint  then,  say, 
Thoughts  of  whom  keep  sin  away? 

Pvise,  Madam!  rise  and  give  me  light, 

Whom  darkness  still  will  cover, 
And  ignorance,  darker  than  night. 

Till  thou  smile  on  thy  lover.  ,7 

All  want  day  tiU  thy  beauty  rise; 
For  the  gray  morn  breaks  from  thine  eyes. 

Nathaniel  Field  [15S7-1633] 

THE  NIGHT-PIECE:  TO  JULIA 

Her  eyes  the  glow-worm  lend  thee, 
The  shooting  stars  attend  thee; 

And  the  elves  also, 

Whose  little  eyes  glow 
Like  the  sparks  of  fire,  befriend  thee. 

No  Will-o'-the-wisp  mislight  thee, 
Nor  snake  or  slow-worm  bite  thee; 

But  on,  on  thy  way 

Not  making  a  stay, 
Since  ghost  there's  none  to  affright  thee. 

Let  not  the  dark  thee  cumber: 

What  though  the  moon  does  slumber? 

The  stars  of  the  night 

Will  lend  thee  their  light 
Like  tapers  clear  without  number. 

Then,  Julia,  let  me  woo  thee. 
Thus,  thus  to  come  unto  me; 

And  when  I  shall  meet 

Tliy  silvery  feet, 
My  soul  I'll  pour  unto  thee. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674) 

MORNING 

The  lark  now  leaves  his  watery  nest, 
And  climbing  shakes  his  dewy  wings, 

He  takes  your  window  for  the  east, 
And  to  implore  your  light,  he  sings; 


696  Poems  of  Love 

Awake,  awake,  the  morn  will  never  rise, 
Till  she  can  dress  her  beauty  at  your  eyes. 

The  merchant  bows  unto  the  seaman's  star. 
The  ploughman  from  the  sun  his  season  takes; 

But  still  the  lover  wonders  what  they  are. 
Who  look  for  day  before  his  mistress  wakes; 

Awake,  awake,  break  through  your  veils  of  lawn! 

Then  draw  your  curtains  and  begin  the  dawn. 

William  D'Avenant  [1606-1668] 

MATIN-SONG 

From  "The  Rape  of  Lucrece" 

Pack,  clouds,  away,  and  welcome,  day, 

With  night  we  banish  sorrow. 
Sweet  air,  blow  soft;  mount,  lark,  aloft 

To  give  my  Love  good-morrow! 
Wings  from  the  wind  to  please  her  mind 

Notes  from  the  lark  I'll  borrow: 
Bird,  prune  thy  wing,  nightingale,  sing, 

To  give  my  Love  good-morrow; 

To  give  my  Love  good-morrow    • 
Notes  from  them  both  I'll  borrow. 

Wake  from  thy  nest,  Robin-red-breast,^ 

Sing,  birds,  in  every  furrow; 
And  from  each  hill,  let  music  shrill 
Give  my  fair  Love  good-morrow ! 
Blackbird  and  thrush  in  every  bush. 

Stare,  linnet,  and  cock-sparrow, 
You  pretty  elves,  amongst  yourselves 
Sing  my  fair  Love  good-morrow; 
To  give  my  Love  good-morrow 
Sing,  birds,  in  every  furrow! 

Thomas  Heywood    [    ?   -1650?] 

THE   ROSE 

Sweet,  serene,  sky-like  flower, 
Haste  to  adorn  the  bower; 
From  thy  long- cloudy  bed. 
Shoot  forth  thy  damask  head. 


Mary   Morison  697 

New-startled  blush  of  Flora,  '  1 

The  grief  of  pale  Aurora 
(Who  will  contest  no  more), 
Haste,  haste  to  strew  her  floor! 

Vermilion  ball  that's  given 
From  lip  to  lip  in  Heaven; 
Love's  couch's  coverled. 
Haste,  haste  to  make  her  bed. 

Dear  offspring  of  pleased  Venus 
And  jolly,  plump  Silenus, 
Haste,  haste  to  deck  the  hair 
Of  the  only  sweetly  fair! 

See!  rosy  is  her  bower. 
Her  floor  is  all  this  flower 
Her  bed  a  rosy  nest 
By  a  bed  of  roses  pressed. 

But  early  as  she  dresses. 
Why  fly  you  her  bright  tresses? 
Ah!  I  have  found,  I  fear, — 
Because  her  cheeks  are  near. 

Richard  Lovelace  [i 6 18-1658] 

SONG 

See,  see,  she  wakes!     Sabina  wakes! 

And  now  the  sun  begins  to  rise; 
Less  glorious  is  the  morn  that  breaks 

From  his  bright  beams,  than  her  fair  eyes. 

With  light  united,  day  they  give; 

But  different  fates  ere  night  fulfil; 
How  many  by  his  warmth  will  live! 

How  many  will  her  coldness  kill! 

William  Congreve  [1670-1729] 

MARY  MORISON 

O  Mary,  at  thy  window  be, 

It  is  the  wished,  the  trysted  hour! 

Those  smiles  and  glances  let  me  see. 
That  make  the  miser's  treasure  poor:  ' 


698 


Poems  of  Love 

How  blithely  wad  I  bide  the  stour 

A  weary  slave  frae  sun  to  sun, 
Could  I  the  rich  reward  secure, 

The  lovely  Mary  Morison! 

Yestreen,  when  to  the  trembling  string 

The  dance  gaed  through  the  lighted  ha', 
To  thee  my  fancy  took  its  wing, 

I  sat,  but  neither  heard  nor  saw: 
Though  this  was  fair,  and  that  was  braw, 

And  yon  the  toast  of  a'  the  town, 
I  sighed,  and  said  amang  them  a', 

"Ye  arena  Mary  Morison." 

O  Mary,  canst  thou  wreck  his  peace, 

Wha  for  thy  sake  wad  gladly  die? 
Or  canst  thou  break  that  heart  of  his, 

Whase  only  faut  is  loving  thee? 
If  love  for  love  thou  wiltna  gie, 

At  least  be  pity  to  me  shown; 
A  thought  ungentle  canna  be 

The  thought  o'  Mary  Morison. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 

WAKE,  LADY! 

Up!  quit  thy  bower!  late  wears  the  hour. 
Long  have  the  rooks  cawed  round  the  tower; 
O'er  flower  and  tree  loud  hums  the  bee. 
And  the  wild  kid  sports  merrily. 
The  sun  is  bright,  the  sky  is  clear: 
Wake,  lady,  wake!  and  hasten  here.  >i 

Up!  maiden  fair,  and  bind  thy  hair, 

And  rouse  thee  in  the  breezy  air! 

The  lulling  stream  that  soothed  thy  dream 

Is  dancing  in  the  sunny  beam. 

Waste  not  these  hours,  so  fresh  and  gay; 

Leave  thy  soft  couch,  and  haste  away! 

Up!     Time  will  tell  the  morning  bell 
Its  service-sound  has  chimed  well; 


"The  Young  May   Moon"  699 

The  aged  crone  keeps  house  alone, 
The  reapers  to  the  fields  are  gone.  u^l 

Lose  not  these  hours,  so  cool  and  gay: 
Lo!  while  thou  sleep 'st  they  haste  away! 

Joanna  Baillie  [i 762-1 851] 

THE  SLEEPING  BEAUTY       ''^^ 

Sleep  on,  and  dream  of  Heaven  awhile — 
Though  shut  so  close  thy  laughing  eyes, 
Thy  rosy  lips  still  wear  a  smile 
And  move,  and  breathe  delicious  sighs! 

Ah,  now  soft  blushes  tinge  her  cheeks 
And  mantle  o'er  her  neck  of  snow: 
Ah,  now  she  murmurs,  now  she  speaks 
What  most  I  wish — and  fear  to  know! 


iU 


She  starts,  she  trembles,  and  she  weeps! 

Her  fair  hands  folded  on  her  breast: 

— And  now,  how  like  a  saint  she  sleeps! 

A  seraph  in  the  realms  of  rest!  .  ,     ,^ 

lint  nC ) 

Sleep  on  secure!    Above  control 
Thy  thoughts  belong  to  Heaven  and  thee: 
And  may  the  secret  of  thy  soul 
Remain  within  its  sanctuary! 

Samuel  Rogers  [1763-1855] 

"THE  YOUNG  MAY   MOON" 

The  young  May  moon  is  beaming,  love, 
The  glow-worm's  lamp  is  gloaming,  love; 

How  sweet  to  rove 

Through  Morna's  grove, 
When  the  drowsy  world  is  dreaming,  love! 
Then  awake! — the  heavens  look  bright,  my  dear, 
'Tis  never  too  late  for  delight,  my  dear; 

And  the  best  of  all  ways 

To  lengthen  our  days 
Is  to  steal  a  few  hours  from  the  night,  my  dear! 


700  Poems  of  Love 

Now  all  the  world  is  sleeping,  love, 

But  the  Sage,  his  star- watch  keeping,  love, 

And  I,  whose  star 

More  glorious  far 
i         Is  the  eye  from  that  casement  peeping,  love. 
Then  awake! — till  rise  of  sun,  my  dear. 
The  Sage's  glass  we'll  shun,  my  dear, 

Or  in  watching  the  flight 

Of  bodies  of  light 
He  might  happen  to  take  thee  for  one,  my  dear! 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 

"ROW   GENTLY  HERE" 

Row  gently  here, 

My  gondolier. 
So  softly  wake  the  tide, 

That  not  an  ear. 

On  earth,  may  hear. 
But  hers  to  whom  we  glide. 
Had  Heaven  but  tongues  to  speak,  as  well 

As  starry  eyes  to  see. 
Oh  think  what  tales  'twould  have  to  tell 

Of  wandering  youths  like  m!^[,  uayic 

Now  rest  thee  here,      '  ■   ■'''T^ 
My  gondolier; 
Hush,  hush,  for  up  I  go. 
To  climb  yon  light 
Balcony's  height, 
While  thou  keep'st  watch  below. 
Ah!  did  we  ta^"^  for  Heaven  above 

But  half  such  pains  as  we 

Take,  day  and  night,  for  woman's  love. 

What  angels  we  should  be! 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 

MORNING  SERENADE 

Awake!  the  dawn  is  on  the  hills! 
Behold,  at  her  cool  throat  a  rose. 
Blue-eyed  and  beautiful  she  goes, 

Leaving  her  steps  in  daffodils. —        ■  ^^  ^^ 


Serenade  701 

Awake!  arise!  and  let  me  see    •  ■    ■•  .,/. 

Thine  eyes,  whose  deeps  epitomize 
All  dawns  that  were  or  are  to  be, 

O  love,  all  Heaven  in  thine  eyes! —  i,,/ 

Awake!  arise!  come  down  to  me! 

Behold!  the  dawn  is  up:  behold! 

How  all  the  birds  around  her  float, 

Wild  rills  of  music,  note  on  note, 
Spilling  the  air  with  mellow  gold. — 
Arise!  awake!  and,  drawing  near, 

Let  me  but  hear  thee  and  rejoice! 
Thou,  who  keep'st  captive,  sweet  and  clear, 

All  song,  O  love,  within  thy  voice! 
Arise!  awake!  and  let  me  hear! 

See,  where  she  comes,  with  limbs  of  day, 
The  dawn!  with  wild-rose  hands  and  feet. 
Within  whose  veins  the  sunbeams  beat, 

And  laughters  meet  of  wind  and  ray. 

Arise!  come  down!  and,  heart  to  heart. 
Love,  let  me  clasp  in  thee  all  these — 

The  sunbeam,  of  which  thou  art  part, 
And  all  the  rapture  of  the  breeze! — 

Arise!  come  down!  loved  that  thou  art! 

Madison  Cawein  [1865-1014] 

SERENADE 

Softly,  O  midnight  Hours! 

Move  softly  o'er  the  bowers 
Where  lies  in  happy  sleep  a  girl  so  fair! 

For  ye  have  power,  men  say. 

Our  hearts  in  sleep  to  sway. 
And  cage  cold  fancies  in  a  moonlight  snare. 

Round  ivory  neck  and  arm 

Enclasp  a  separate  charm; 
Hang  o'er  her  poised,  but  breathe  nor  sigh  nor  prayer: 

Silently  ye  may  smile, 

But  hold  your  breath  the  while, 
And  let  the  wind  sweep  back  your  cloudy  hair! 

Bend  down  your  glittering  urns, 
Ere  yet  the  dawn  returns, 


702  Poems  of  Love 


And  star  with  dew  the  lawn  her  feet  shall  tread; 

Upon  the  air  rain  balm, 

Bid  all  the  woods  be  calm, 
Ambrosial  dreams  with  healthful  slumbers  wed; 

That  so  the  Maiden  may 

With  smiles  your  care  repay,  , 

When  from  her  couch  she  hfts  her  golden  head; 

Waking  with  earhest  birds, 

Ere  yet  the  misty  herds 
Leave  warm  'mid  the  gray  grass  their  dusky  bed. 

Aiibrey  Thomas  De  Vere  [1814-1902] 

LINES  TO  AN  INDIAN  AIR 

I  ARISE  from  dreams  of  thee 

In  the  first  sweet  sleep  of  night,       "^ 

When  the  winds  are  breathing  low, 

And  the  stars  are  shining  bright. 

I  arise  from  dreams  of  thee, 

And  a  spirit  in  liiy  feet 

Has  led  me — who  knows  how? 

To  thy  chamber  window,  sweet! 

The  wandering  airs  they  faint 

On  the  dark,  the  silent  stream; 

The  champak  odors  fail 

Like  sweet  thoughts  in  a  dream ; 

The  nightingale's  complaint, 

It  dies  upon  her  heart, 

As  I  must  die  on  thine,  asriW 

O  beloved  as  thou  art!  [ 


•I  A 


0  hft  me  from  the  grass! 

1  die,  I  faint,  I  fail! 
Let  thy  love  in  kisses  rain 
On  my  lips  and  eyelids  pale. 
My  cheek  is  cold  and  white,  alas 
My  heart  beats  loud  and  fast ; 
Oh!  press  it  close  to  thine  again,  ^  "    ,^     , 
Where  it  must  break  at  last. 

Percy  By s she  Shelley  [i 792-1 82 2] 


■  i  Jua 


Serenade  703 


GOOD-NIGHT 

Good-night?  ah!  no;  the  hour  is  ill 
Which  severs  those  it  should  unite; 

Let  us  remain  together  still, 
Then  it  will  be  good  night. 

How  can  I  call  the  lone  night  good, 

Though  thy  sweet  wishes  wing  its  flight? 

Be  it  not  said,  thought,  understood, 
Then  it  will  be  good  night. 

To  hearts  which  near  each  other  move 
From  evening  close  to  morning  light. 

The  night  is  good;  because,  my  love. 
They  never  say  good-night. 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [1792-182 2] 

SERENADE 

From  "  Sylvia  " 

Awake  thee,  my  lady-love, 

Wake  thee  and  rise! 
The  sun  through  the  bower  peeps 

Into  thine  eyes! 

Behold  how  the  early  lark 

Springs  from  the  corn! 
Hark,  hark  how  the  flower-bird 

Winds  her  wee  horn! 

The  swallow's  glad  shriek  is  heard 

All  through  the  air; 
The  stock-dove  is  murmuring 

Loud  as  she  dare! 

Apollo's  winged  bugleman 

Cannot  contain, 
But  peals  his  loud  trumpet-call 

Once  and  again! 


704  Poems  of  Love 

Then  wake  thee,  my  lady-love — 

Bird  of  my  bower! 
The  sweetest  and  sleepiest 

Bird  at  this  hour! 

George  Darley  [1795-1846] 

SERENADE 

Ah,  sweet,  thou  little  knowest  how         <^l 

I  wake  and  passionate  watches  keep; 
And  yet,  while  I  address  thee  now, 

Methinks  thou  smilest  in  thy  sleep. 
'Tis  sweet  enough  to  make  me  weep. 

That  tender  thought  of  love  and  thee, 
That  while  the  world  is  hushed  so  deep, 

Thy  soul's  perhaps  awake  to  me! 

Sleep  on,  sleep  on,  sweet  bride  of  sleep! 

With  golden  visions  for  thy  dower, 
While  I  this  midnight  vigil  keep. 

And  bless  thee  in  thy  silent  bower; 
To  me  'tis  sweeter  than  the  power 

Of  sleep,  and  fairy  dreams  unfurled. 
That  I  alone,  at  this  still  hour. 

In  patient  love  outwatch  the  world. 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 

SERENADE 

Look  out  upon  the  stars,  my  love, 

And  shame  them  with  thine  eyes, 
On  which,  than  on  the  lights  above, 

There  hang  more  destinies. 
Night's  beauty  is  the  harmony 

Of  blending  shades  and  light : 
Then,  lady,  up, — look  out,  and  be 

A  sister  to  the  night! 

Sleep  not! — thine  image  wakes  for  aye 

Within  my  watching  breast; 
Sleep  not ! — from  her  soft  sleep  should  fly. 

Who  robs  all  hearts  of  rest. 


Serenade  705 

Nay,  lady,  from  thy  slumbers  break, 

And  make  this  darkness  gay. 
With  looks  whose  brightness  well  might  make 

Of  darker  nights  a  day. 

Edward  Coate  Pinkncy  [ i  So 2- 1 S  j 8] 


SERENADE 

Hide,  happy  damask,  from  the  stars, 

What  sleep  enfolds  behind  your  veil, 
But  open  to  the  fairy  cars 

On  which  the  dreams  of  midnight  sail; 
And  let  the  zephyrs  rise  and  fall 

About  her  in  the  curtained  gloom, 
And  then  return  to  tell  me  all 

The  silken  secrets  of  the  room. 

Ah!  dearest!  may  the  elves  that  sway 

Thy  fancies  come  from  emerald  plots, 
Where  they  have  dozed  and  dreamed  all  day 

In  hearts  of  blue  forget-me-nots. 
And  one  perhaps  shall  whisper  thus: 

Awake !  and  light  the  darkness.  Sweet! ' 
While  thou  art  reveling  with  us. 

He  watches  in  the  lonely  street. 

Henry  Timrod  [i 829-1 867] 

SERENADE 

From  "  The  Spanish  Student  " 

Stars  of  the  summer  night ! 

Far  in  yon  azure  deeps, 
Hide,  hide  your  golden  light! 

She  sleeps! 
My  lady  sleeps! 

Sleeps! 

Moon  of  the  summer  night! 

Far  down  yon  western  steeps, 
Sink,  sink  in  silver  light ! 


7o6  Poems  of  Love 

She  sleeps! 
My  lady  sleeps! 
Sleeps! 

Wind  of  the  summer  night! 

Where  yonder  woodbine  creeps, 
Fold,  fold  thy  pinions  light! 

She  sleeps! 
My  lady  sleeps! 

Sleeps! 

Dreams  of  the  summer  night! 

Tell  her,  her  lover  keeps 
Watch!  while  in  slumbers  light 

She  sleeps! 
My  lady  sleeps! 

Sleeps! 
Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807-188 2] 

"COME  INTO  THE   GARDEN,   MAUD" 

From  "  Maud  " 

Come  into  the  garden,  Maud, 

For  the  black  bat,  night,  has  flown, 

Come  into  the  garden,  Maud, 
I  am  here  at  the  gate  alone; 

And  the  woodbine  spices  are  wafted  abroad, 
And  the  musk  of  the  rose  is  blown. 

For  a  breeze  of  morning  moves, 
And  the  planet  of  Love  is  on  high. 

Beginning  to  faint  in  the  hght  that  she  loves 
On  a  bed  of  daffodil  sky, 

To  faint  in  the  light  of  the  sun  she  loves, 
To  faint  in  his  light,  and  to  die. 

All  night  have  the  roses  heard 

The  flute,  violin,  bassoon; 
All  night  has  the  casement  jessamine  stirred 

To  the  dancers  dancing  in  tune; 
Till  a  silence  fell  with  the  waking  bird, 

And  a  hush  with  the  setting  moon. 


"Come   Into  the   Garden,   Maud"    707 

I  said  to  the  lily,  "There  is  but  one 

With  whom  she  has  heart  to  be  gay. 
When  will  the  dancers  leave  her  alone? 

She  is  weary  of  dance  and  play." 
Now  half  to  the  setting  moon  are  gone, 

And  half  to  the  rising  day; 
Low  on  the  sand  and  loud  on  the  stone 

The  last  wheel  echoes  away.  ^^ 

I  said  to  the  rose,  "The  brief  night  goes 

In  babble  and  revel  and  wine. 
O  young  lord-lover,  what  sighs  are  those, 

For  one  that  will  never  be  thine?  '/r 

But  mine,  but  mine,"  so  I  sware  to  the  rose, 

"For  ever  and  ever,  mine." 

And  the  soul  of  the  rose  went  into  my  blood, 

As  the  music  clashed  in  the  hall: 
And  long  by  the  garden  lake  I  stood. 

For  I  heard  your  rivulet  fall 
From  the  lake  to  the  meadow  and  on  to  the  wood. 

Our  wood,  that  is  dearer  than  all; 

From  the  meadow  your  walks  have  left  so  sweet 

That  whenever  a  March-wind  sighs 
He  sets  the  jewel-print  of  your  feet 

In  violets  blue  as  your  eyes. 
To  the  woody  hollows  in  which  we  meet 

And  the  valleys  of  Paradise. 

The  slender  acacia  would  not  shake 

One  long  milk-bloom  on  the  tree; 
The  white  lake-blossom  fell  into  the  lake 

As  the  pimpernel  dozed  on  the  lea ; 
But  the  rose  was  awake  all  night  for  your  sake, 

Knowing  your  promise  to  mc ; 
The  lilies  and  roses  were  all  awake, 

They  sighed  for  the  dawn  and  thee. 


yoS  Poems  of  Love 

Queen  rose  of  the  rosebud  garden  of  girls,         ;  J 
Come  hither,  the  dances  are  done, 

In  gloss  of  satin  and  glimmer  of  pearls, 
Queen  lily  and  rose  in  one; 

Shine  out,  little  head,  sunning  over  with  curls. 
To  the  flowers,  and  be  their  sun. 

There  has  fallen  a  splendid  tear 

From  the  passion-flower  at  the  gate. 
She  is  coming,  my  dove,  my  dear; 

She  is  coming,  my  life,  my  fate; 
The  red  rose  cries,  "She  is  near,  she  is  near"; 

And  the  white  rose  weeps,  "She  is  late"; 
The  larkspur  listens,  "I  hear,  I  hear"; 

And  the  lily  whispers,  "I  wait."  '  ■ 

She  is  coming,  my  own,  my  sweet; 

Were  it  ever  so  airy  a  tread, 
My  heart  would  hear  her  and  beat, 

Were  it  earth  in  an  earthy  bed; 
My  dust  would  hear  her  and  beat. 

Had  I  lain  for  a  century  dead; 
Would  start  and  tremble  under  her  feet, 

And  blossom  in  purple  and  red. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 

AT  HER  WINDOW 

Ah,  Minstrel,  how  strange  is 

The  carol  you  sing  I 
Lei  Psyche,  who  ranges 

The  garden  of  spring. 
Remember  the  changes 

December  will  bring. 

/Beating  Heart !  we  come  again 
Where  my  Love  reposes: 
This  is  Mabel's  window-pane; 
These  are  Mabel's  roses. 

Is  she  nested?    Does  she  kneel 

In  the  twilight  stilly, 
Lily  clad  from  throat  to  heel, 

She,  my  virgin  Lily? 


Bedouin   Song  -709 

Soon  the  wan,  the  vv'istful  stars, 

Fading,  will  forsake  her; 
Elves  of  light,  on  beamy  bars. 

Whisper  then,  and  wake  her. 

Let  this  friendly  pebble  plead 

At  her  flowery  grating; 
If  she  hear  me  will  she  heed? 

Mabel,  I  am  waiting. 

Mabel  will  be  decked  anon, 

Zoned  in  bride's  apparel; 
Happy  zone!    Oh  hark  to  yon 

Passion-shaken  carol! 

Sing  thy  song,  thou  tranced  thrush, 

Pipe  thy  best,  thy  clearest; — 
Hush,  her  lattice  moves,  oh  hush — 

Dearest  Mabel ! — dearest.  .  .  . 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  [1821-1805] 


BEDOUIN   SONG 

From  the  Desert  I  come  to  thee 

On  a  stallion  shod  with  fire; 
And  the  winds  are  left  behind 

In  the  speed  of  my  desire. 
Under  thy  window  I  stand, 

And  the  midnight  hears  my  cry: 
I  love  thee,  I  love  bui;  thee. 
With  a  love  that  shall  not  die 
l^ill  the  sun  grows  cold, 
And  the  stars  are  old. 
And  the  leaves  of  the  Judgment 
Book  unfold  1 

Look  from  thy  window  and  see 
My  passion  and  my  pain; 

I  lie  on  the  sands  below, 
And  I  faint  in  thy  disdain. 


7IO  Poems   of  Love 

Let  the  night-winds  touch  thy  brow 
With  the  heat  of  my  burning  sigh, 
And  melt  thee  to  hear  the  vow 
Of  a  love  that  shall  not  die 
Till  the  sun  grows  cold, 
And  the  stars  are  old, 
And  the  leaves  of  the  Judgment 
Book  unfold  ! 

My  steps  are  nightly  driven, 
By  the  fever  in  my  breast, 
To  hear  from  thy  lattice  breathed 

The  word  that  shall  give  me  rest. 
Open  the  door  of  thy  heart, 

And  open  thy  chamber  door, 
And  my  kisses  shall  teach  thy  lips 
Tlie  love  that  shall  fade  no  more 
Till  the  sun  groups  cold, 
And  the  stars  are  old, 
And  the  leaves  of  the  Judgment 
Book  unfold  ! 

Bayard  Taylor  [i 825-1 878] 

NIGHT  AND  LOVE 

From  "  Ernest  Maltravers  " 

When  stars  are  in  the  quiet  skies, 

Then  most  I  pine  for  thee; 
Bend  on  me,  then,  thy  tender  eyes. 

As  stars  look  on  the  sea! 

For  thoughts,  like  waves  that  glide  by  night, 

Are  stillest  when  they  shine; 
Mine  earthly  love  lies  hushed  in  light 

Beneath  the  heaven  of  thine. 

There  is  an  hour  when  angels  keep 

Familiar  watch  o'er  men. 
When  coarser  souls  are  wrapped  in  sleep — 

Sweet  spirit,  meet  me  then ! 


Palabras   Carlnosas  71 1 

There  is  an  hour  when  holy  dreams 

Through  slumber  fairest  glide; 
And  in  that  mystic  hour  it  seems 

Thou  shouldst  be  by  my  side. 

My  thoughts  of  thee  too  sacred  are 

For  daylight's  common  beam: 
I  can  but  know  thee  as  my  star, 

My  angel  and  my  dream! 
Edward  George  Earle  Buliver  Lyllon  [i 803-1 873] 

NOCTURNE 

Up  to  her  chamber  window 

A  slight  wire  trellis  goes, 
And  up  this  Romeo's  ladder 

Clambers  a  bold  white  rose. 

I  lounge  in  the  ilex  shadows, 

I  see  the  lady  lean, 
Unclasping  her  silken  girdle, 

The  curtain's  folds  between. 

She  smiles  on  her  white-rose  lover, 

She  reaches  out  her  hand 
And  helps  him  in  at  the  window — 

I  see  it  where  I  stand! 

To  her  scarlet  lip  she  holds  him, 
And  kisses  him  many  a  time — 

Ah,  me!  it  was  he  that  won  her 
Because  he  dared  to  clirnb! 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [183 7-1 907] 

PALABRAS   CARINOSAS 

SPANISH    AIR 

Good-night!    I  have  to  say  good -night 
To  such  a  host  of  peerless  things! 
Good-night  unto  the  slender  hand 
All  queenly  with  its  weight  of  rings; 


712  Poems  of  Love 

Good-night  to  fond,  uplifted  eyes, 
Good-night  to  chestnut  braids  of  hair, 
Good-night  unto  the  perfect  mouth, 
And  all  the  sweetness  nestled  there — 
The  snowy  hand  detains  me,  then 
I'll  have  to  say  Good-night  again! 

But  there  will  come  a  time,  my  love, 

When,  if  I  read  our  stars  aright, 

I  shall  not  linger  by  this  porch 

With  my  farewells.    Till  then,  good-night! 

You  wish  the  time  were  now?    And  I. 

You  do  not  blush  to  wish  it  so? 

You  would  have  blushed  yourself  to  death 

To  own  so  much  a  year  ago — 

What,  both  these  snowy  hands!  ah,  then 
I'll  have  to  say  Good-night  again ! 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [183 7- 190 7] 


SERENADE 

The  western  wind  is  blowing  fair 

Across  the  dark  ^gean  sea. 
And  at  the  secret  marble  stair 

My  Tyrian  galley  waits  for  thee. 
Come  down!  the  purple  sail  is  spread. 

The  watchman  sleeps  within  the  town; 
O  leave  thy  lily-flowered  bed, 

O  Lady  mine,  come  down,  come  down! 
It''' 
She  will  not  come,  I  know  her  well. 

Of  lover's  vows  she  hath  no  care, 
And  little  good  a  man  can  tell 

Of  one  so  cruel  and  so  fair. 
True  love  is  but  a  woman's  toy. 

They  never  know  the  lover's  pain. 
And  I,  who  love  as  loves  a  boy. 

Must  love  in  vain,  must  love  in  vain. 


The   Little   Red   Lark  71  j 

O  noble  pilot,  tell  me  true, 

Is  that  the  sheen  of  golden  hair? 
Or  is  it  but  the  tangled  dew 

That  binds  the  passion-flowers  there? 
Good  sailor,  come  and  tell  me  now, 

Is  that  my  Lady's  lily  hand? 
Or  is  it  but  the  gleaming  prow. 

Or  is  it  but  the  silver  sand? 

No!  no!  'tis  not  the  tangled  dew, 

'Tis  not  the  silver-fretted  sand, 
It  is  my  own  dear  Lady  true 

With  golden  hair  and  lily  hand! 
O  noble  pilot,  steer  for  Troy! 

Good  sailor,  ply  the  laboring  oar! 
This  is  the  Queen  of  life  and  joy 

Whom  we  must  bear  from  Grecian  shore ! 

The  waning  sky  grows  faint  and  blue; 

It  wants  a,n  hour  still  of  day; 
Aboard!  aboard!  my  gallant  crew, 

O  Lady  mine,  away!  away! 
O  noble  pilot,  steer  for  Troy! 

Good  sailor,  ply  the  laboring  oar! 
O  loved  as  only  loves  a  boy! 

O  loved  for  ever,  evermore! 

Oscar  Wilde  [185 6-1 900] 

THE  LITTLE   RED   LARK 

O  SWAN  of  slenderness. 
Dove  of  tenderness. 

Jewel  of  joys,  arise! 
The  little  red  lark. 
Like  a  soaring  spiark 

Of  song,  to  his  sunburst  flies; 
But  till  thou  art  arisen, 
Earth  is  a  prison, 

Full  of  my  lonesome  sighs: 
Then  awake  and  discover, 
To  thy  fond  lover. 

The  morn  of  thy  matchless  eyes. 


714  Poems  of  Love     y- 

The  dawn  is  dark  to  me, 
Hark!  oh,  hark  to  me, 

Pulse  of  my  heart,  I  pray! 

And  out  of  thy  hiding 
With  blushes  gliding,  ,^ 

Dazzle  me  with  thy  day.  . 

Ah,  then  once  more  to  thee  .  ^  ^ 

Flying  I  '11  pour  to  thee 

Passion  so  sweet  and  gay, 
The  larks  shall  listen, 
And  dew-drops  glisten, 

Laughing  on  every  spray. 

Alfred  Perceval  Graves  [1S46- 

SERENADE 

By  day  my  timid  passions  stand 

Like  begging  children  at  your  gate, 
Each  with  a  mute,  appealing  hand 

To  ask  a  dole  of  Fate; 
But  when  night  comes,  released  from  doubt, 

Like  merry  minstrels  they  appear. 
The  stars  ring  out  their  hopeful  shout. 

Beloved,  can  you  hear? 

They  dare  not  sing  to  you  by  day 

Their  all-desirous  song,  or  take 
The  world  with  their  adventurous  lay 

For  your  enchanted  sake. 
But  when  the  night-wind  wakes  and  thrills 

The  shadows  that  the  night  unbars, 
Their  music  fills  the  dreamy  hills. 

And  folds  the  friendly  stars. 

Beloved,  can  you  hear?    They  sing 

Words  that  no  mortal  lips  can  sound; 
Love  through  the  world  has  taken  wing, 

My  passions  are  unbound. 
And  now,  and  now,  my  lips,  my  eyes. 

Are  stricken  dumb  with  hope  and  fear. 
It  is  my  burning  soul  that  cries, 

Beloved,  can  you  hear? 

Richard  Middleton  [1882-1911] 


THE  COMEDY  OF  LOVE 

A  LOVER'S  LULLABY 

Sing  lullaby,  as  women  do, 

Wherewith  they  bring  their  babes  to  rest; 
And  lullaby  can  I  sing  too, 

As  womanly  as  can  the  best. 
With  lullaby  they  still  the  child; 
And  if  I  be  not  much  beguiled, 
Full  many  a  wanton  babe  have  I, 
Which  must  be  stilled  with  lullaby. 

First  lullaby  my  youthful  years, 

It  is  now  time  to  go  to  bed: 
For  crooked  age  and  hoary  hairs 

Have  won  the  haven  within  my  head. 
With  lullaby,  then,  youth  be  still; 
With  lullaby  content  thy  will; 
Since  courage  quails  and  comes  behind, 
Go  sleep,  and  so  beguile  thy  mind! 

Next  lullaby  my  gazing  eyes, 

Which  wonted  were  to  glance  apace; 

For  every  glass  may  now  suffice 
To  show  the  furrows  in  thy  face. 

With  lullaby  then  wink  awhile; 

With  lullaby  your  looks  beguile; 

Let  no  fair  face,  nor  beauty  bright, 

Entice  you  eft  with  vain  delight. 

And  lullaby  my  wanton  will; 

Let  reason's  rule  now  reign  thy  thought; 
Since  all  too  late  I  find  by  skill 

How  dear  I  have  thy  fancies  bought; 
71S 


7i6  Poems  of  Love 

With  lullaby  now  take  thine  ease, 
With  lullaby  thy  doubts  appease; 
For  trust  to  this,  if  thou  be  still, 
My  body  shall  obey  thy  will. 

Thus  lullaby  my  youth,  mine  eyes. 
My  will,  my  ware,  and  all  that  was: 

I  can  no  more  delays  devise; 

But  welcome  pain,  let  pleasure  pass. 

With  lullaby  now  take  your  leave;      '-'^ 

With  lullaby  j'our  dreams  deceive; 

And  when  you  rise  with  waking  eye, 

Remember  then  this  lullaby. 

George  Gascoigne  [1525?- 157 7] 


PHILLIDA  AND   CORIDON 

In  the  merry  month  of  May, 
In  a  morn  by  break  of  day, 
Forth  I  walked  by  the  wood-side 
When  as  May  was  in  his  pride: 
There  I  spied  all  alone 
Phillida  and  Coridon. 
Much  ado  there  was,  God  wot ! 
He  would  love  and  she  would  not. 
She  said,  Never  man  was  true; 
He  said,  None  was  false  to  you. 
He  said.  He  had  loved  her  long; 
She  said.  Love  should  have  no  wrong. 
Condon  would  kiss  her  then: 
She  said,  Maids  must  kiss  no  men 
Till  they  did  for  good  and  all ; 
I'hen  she  made  the  shepherd  call 
All  the  heavens  to  witness  truth 
Never  loved  a  truer  youth. 
Thus  with  many  a  pretty  oath. 
Yea  and  nay,  and  faith  and  troth, 
Such  as  silly  shepherds  use 
When  they  will  not  Love  abuse, 


"It  Was  a   Lover  and   His   Lass"    717 

Love,  which  had  been  long  deluded, 
Was  with  kisses  sweet  concluded; 
And  Phillida,  with  garlands  gay. 
Was  made  the  Lady  of  the  May. 

Nicholas  Breton  [i545?-i626?] 

"CRABB£D   age  and   YOUTH" 

From  "  The  Passionate  Pilgrim  " 

Crabbed  Age  and  Youth 

Cannot  live  together: 

Youth  is  full  of  pleasance, 

Age  is  full  of  care; 

Youth  like  summer  morn, 

Age  like  winter  weather; 

Youth  like  summer  brave, 

Age  hke  winter  bare. 

Youth  is  full  of  sport, 

Age's  breath  is  short; 

Youth  is  nimble,  Age  is  lame; 

Youth  is  hot  and  bold, 

Age  is  weak  and  cold; 

Youth  is  wild,  and  Age  is  tame. 

Age,  I  do  abhor  thee; 

Youth,  I  do  adore  thee; 

0,  my  Love,  my  Love  is  young! 

Age,  I  do  defy  thee: 

O,  sweet  shepherd,  hie  thee! 

For  methinks  thou  stay'st  too  long. 

William  Shakespeare  [  1 5 64- 1 6 1 6] 

"IT  WAS  A   LOVER  AND   HIS  LASS" 

From  "  As  You  Like  It  " 

It  was  a  lover  and  his  lass, 

With  a  hey,  and  a  ho,  and  a  hey  nonino. 
That  o'er  the  green  corn-lield  did  pass. 

In  the  spring  time,  the  only  pretty  ring  time. 
When  birds  do  sing,  hey  ding  a  ding,  ding; 
Sweet  lovers  love  the  spring. 


yiS  Poems  of  Love 

Between  the  acres  of  the  rye, 

With  a  hey,  and  a  ho,  and  a  hey  nonino, 

These  pretty  country  folks  would  lie. 

In  the  spring  time,  the  only  pretty  ring  time, 

When  birds  do  sing,  hey  ding  a  ding,  ding; 

Sweet  lovers  love  the  spring. 

This  carol  they  began  that  hour. 

With  a  hey,  and  a  ho,  and  a  hey  nonino. 

How  that  life  was  but  a  flower 

In  the  spring  time,  the  only  pretty  ring  time, 

When  birds  do  sing,  hey  ding  a  ding,  ding; 

Sweet  lovers  love  the  spring. 

And,  therefore,  take  the  present  time 
With  a  hey,  and  a  ho,  and  a  hey  nonino, 

For  love  is  crowned  with  the  prime 

In  the  spring  time,  the  only  pretty  ring  time, 

When  birds  do  sing,  hey  ding  a  ding,  ding; 

Sweet  lovers  love  the  spring. 

William  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 


"I  LOVED   A  LASS" 

I  LOVED  a  lass,  a  fair  one, 

As  fair  as  e'er  was  seen; 
She  was  indeed  a  rare  one, 

Another  Sheba  Queen: 
But,  fool  as  then  I  was, 

I  thought  she  loved  me  too: 
But  now,  alas!  she's  left  me, 

Falero,  lero,  loo ! 

Her  hair  like  gold  did  glister, 
Each  eye  was  like  a  star. 

She  did  surpass  her  sister, 
Which  passed  aU  others  far; , 


"1    Loved  a   Lass"  719 

She  would  me  honey  call, 

She'd — O  she'd  kiss  me  too! 
But  now,  alasJ  she's  left  me, 

Falcro,  lero,  loo  ! 

Many  a  merry  meeting 

My  love  and  I  have  had ; 
She  was  my  onl)^  sweeting, 

She  made  my  heart  full  glad; 
The  tears  stood  in  her  eyes 

Like  to  the  morning  dew: 
But  now,  alas!  she's  left  me, 

Falcro,  lero,  loo  ! 

Her  cheeks  were  like  the  cherry, 

Her  skin  was  white  as  snow; 
When  she  was  blithe  and  merry 

She  angel-like  did  show; 
Her  waist  exceeding  small, 

The  fives  did  fit  her  shoe: 
But  now,  alas!  she's  left  me, 

Falcro,  lero,  loo  ! 

In  summer  time  or  winter 

She  had  her  heart's  desire; 
I  still  did  scorn  to  stint  her 

From  sugar,  sack,  or  fire; 
The  world  went  round  about. 

No  cares  we  ever  knew: 
But  now,  alas!  she's  left  me, 

Falcro,  lero,  loo ! 

To  maidens'  vows  and  swearing 

Henceforth  no  credit  give; 
You  may  give  them  the  hearing, 

But  never  them  believe; 
They  are  as  false  as  fair, 

Unconstant,  frail,  untrue: 
For  mine,  alas!  hath  left  me, 

Falcro,  lero,  loo  I 

George  Wither  [i 588-1667] 


720  Poems  of  Love 


TO  CHLORIS 

Ah,  Chloris!  that  I  now  could  sit 

As  unconcerned  as  when 
Your  infant  beauty  could  beget 

No  pleasure,  nor  no  pain! 
When  I  the  dawn  used  to  admire, 

And  praised  the  coming  day, 
I  little  thought  the  growing  fire 

Must  take  my  rest  away. 

Your  charms  in  harmless  childhood  lay 

Like  metals  in  the  mine; 
Age  from  no  face  took  more  away 

Than  youth  concealed  in  thine. 
But  as  your  charms  insensibly 

To  their  perfection  pressed, 
Fond  love  as  unperceived  did  fly, 

And  in  my  bosom  rest. 

My  passion  with  your  beauty  grew. 

And  Cupid  at  my  heart. 
Still  as  his  mother  favored  you. 

Threw  a  new  flaming  dart: 
Each  gloried  in  their  wanton  part; 

To  make  a  lover,  he 
Employed  the  utmost  of  his  art — ■ 

To  make  a  beauty,  she. 

Charles  Scdley  [i639?-i7oi] 

SONG 

The  merchant,  to  secure  his  treasure. 

Conveys  it  in  a  borrowed  name: 
Euphelia  serves  to  grace  my  measure; 

But  Chloe  is  my  real  flame. 

My  softest  verse,  my  darling  lyre, 

Upon  Euphelia's  toilet  lay; 
When  Chloe  noted  her  desire 

That  I  should  sing,  that  I  should  play. 


Fair  Hebe  721 

My  lyre  I  tune,  my  voice  I  raise; 

But  with  my  numbers  mix  my  sighs: 
And  while  I  sing  P^uphelia's  praise, 

I  fix  my  soul  on  Chloe's  eyes. 

Fair  Chloe  blushed:  Euphelia  frowned: 
I  sung,  and  gazed:  I  played,  and  trembled: 

And  Venus  to  the  Loves  around 

Remarked,  how  ill  we  all  dissembled. 

Matthew  Prior  ]  1664-17  21] 


PIOUS   SELINDA 

Pious  Selinda  goes  to  prayers, 

If  I  but  ask  her  favor; 
And  yet  the  silly  fool's  in  tears 

If  she  believes  I'll  leave  her; 
Would  I  were  free  from  this  restraint, 

Or  else  had  hopes  to  win  her: 
Would  she  could  make  of  me  a  saint, 

Or  I  of  her  a  sinner. 

William  Congreve  [1670-17 29] 


FAIR  HEBE 

F.'MR  Hebe  I  left,  with  a  cautious  design 

To  escape  from  her  charms,  and  to  drown  them  in  wine, 

I  tried  it;  but  found,  when  I  came  to  depart, 

The  wine  in  my  head,  and  still  love  in  my  heart. 

I  repaired  to  my  Reason,  entreated  her  aid; 
Who  paused  on  my  case  and  each  circumstance  weighed. 
Then  gravely  pronounced,  in  return  to  my  prayer. 
That  "Hebe  was  fairest  of  all  that  was  fair!" 

"That's  a  truth,"  replied  I,  "I've  no  need  to  be  taught; 
I  came  for  your  counsel  to  find  out  a  fault." 
"If  that's  all,"  quoth  Reason,  "return  as  you  came; 
To  find  fault  with  Hebe,  would  forfeit  my  name." 


722  Poems  of  Love 

What  hopes  then,  alas!  of  relief  from  my  pain, 

While,  like  lightning,  she  darts  through  each  throbbing  vein? 

My  Senses  surprised,  in  her  favor  took  arms; 

And  Reason  confirms  me  a  slave  to  her  charms. 

John  West  [i  693-1 766] 


A  MAIDEN'S  IDEAL  OF  A  HUSBAND 

From  "  The  Contrivances" 

Genteel  in  personage, 
Conduct,  and  equipage, 
Noble  by  heritage, 

Generous  and  free: 
Brave,  not  romantic; 
Learned,  not  pedantic; 
Frolic,  not  frantic; 

This  must  he  be. 

Honor  maintaining, 
Meanness  disdaining, 
Still  entertaining, 

Engaging  and  new. 
Neat,  but  not  finical; 
Sage,  but  not  cynical; 
Never  tyrannical, 

But  ever  true. 

Henry  Carey  [  ?  -1743] 


"PHILLADA  FLOUTS  ME' 

O  WHAT  a  plague  is  love! 
.  How  shall  I  bear  it? 
She  will  inconstant  prove, 

I  greatly  fear  it. 
She  so  torments  my  mind 

That  my  strength  faileth, 
And  wavers  with  the  wind 

As  a  ship  sailcth. 


"Phillada  Flouts   Me"  7^3 

Please  her  the  best  I  may, 
She  loves  still  to  gainsay; 
Alack  and  well-a-day! 
Phillada  flouts  me. 

At  the  fair  yesterday 

She  did  pJass  by  me; 
She  looked  another  way 

And  would  not  spy  me: 
I  wooed  her  for  to  dine, 

But  could  not  get  her; 
Will  had  her  to  the  wine — 

He  might  entreat  her. 
With  Daniel  she  did  dance, 
On  me  she  looked  askance: 

0  thrice  unhappy  chance! 
Phillada  flouts  me. 

Fair  maid,  be  not  so  coy, 
Bo  not  disdain  me! 

1  am  my  mother's  joy: 
Sweet,  entertain  me! 

She'll  give  me,  when  she  dies, 

AU  that  is  fitting: 
Her  poultry  and  her  bees. 

And  her  goose  sitting, 
A  pair  of  mattress  beds, 
And  a  bag  full  of  shreds; 
And  yet,  for  all  this  guedes, 

Phillada  flouts  me! 

She  hath  a  clout  of  mine 

Wrought  with  blue  Coventry, 
Which  she  keeps  for  a  sign 

Of  my  fidelity: 
But  i'  faith,  if  she  flinch 

She  shall  not  wear  it; 
To  Tib,  my  t'other  wench, 

I  mean  to  bear  it. 


724  Poems  of  Love 


And  yet  it  grieves  my  heart 
So  soon  from  her  to  part: 
Death  strike  me  with  his  dart!    '. 
Phillada  flouts  me. 

Thou  shalt  eat  crudded  cream 

Ah  the  year  laSting, 
And  drink  the  crystal  stream 

Pleasant  in  tasting; 
Whig  and  whey  whilst  thou  lust. 

And  bramble-berries, 
Pie-lid  and  pastry-crust, 

Pears,  plums,  and  cherries. 
Thy  raiment  shall  be  thin, 
Made  of  a  weevil's  skin — 
Yet  all's  not  worth  a  pin! 

Phillada  flouts  me. 

In  the  last  month  of  May 

I  made  her  posies; 
I  heard  her  often  say 

That  she  loved  roses. 
Cowslips  and  gillyflowers 

And  the  white  lily 
I  brought  to  deck  the  bowers 

For  my  sweet  Philly. 
But  she  did  all  disdain. 
And  threw  them  back  again; 
Therefore  'tis  flat  and  plain 

PhiUada  flouts  me. 

Fair  maiden,  have  a  care. 

And  in  time  take  me; 
I  can  have  those  as  fair 

If  you  forsake  me: 
For  DoU  the  dairy-maid 

Laughed  at  me  lately, 
And  wanton  Winifred 

Favors  me  greatly. 


Contentions  725 

One  throws  milk  on  my  clothes, 
T'other  plays  with  my  nose; 
What  wanting  signs  are  those? 
Phillada  flouts  me. 

I  cannot  work  nor  sleep 

At  all  in  season: 
Love  wounds  my  heart  so  deep 

Without  all  reason 
I  'gin  to  pine  away 

In  my  love's  shadow, 
Like  as  a  fat  beast  may, 

Penned  in  a  meadow, 
I  shall  be  dead,  I  fear. 
Within  this  thousand  year: 
And  all  for  that  my  dear 

Phillada  flouts  me. 

Unknow7i 

"WHEN  MOLLY  SMILES" 

When  Molly  smiles  beneath  her  cow, 
I  feel  my  heart — I  can't  tell  how; 
When  Molly  is  on  Sunday  dressed, 
On  Sundays  I  can  take  no  rest. 

What  can  I  do?    On  worky  days 
I  leave  my  work  on  her  to  gaze. 
What  shall  I  say?    At  sermons,  I 
Forget  the  text  when  Molly's  by. 

Good  master  curate,  teach  me  how 
To  mind  your  preaching  and  my  plow: 
And  if  for  this  you'll  raise  a  spell, 
A  good  fat  goose  shall  thank  you  well. 

Unknown 

CONTENTIONS 

It  was  a  lordling's  daughter,  the  fairest  one  of  three, 
That  liked  of  her  master  as  well  as  well  might  be; 
Till  looking  on  an  Englishman,  the  fair'st  that  eye  could  see 
Her  fancy  fell  a-turning. 


7^6  Poems  of  Love 

Long  was  the  combat  doubtful  that  love  with  love  did  fight , 
To  leave  the  master  loveless,  or  kill  the  gallant  knight: 
To  put  in  practice  either,  alas!  it  was  a  spite 
Unto  the  silly  damsel. 

But  one  must  be  refused:  more  mickle  was  the  pain, 
That  nothing  could  be  used  to  turn  them  both  to  gain; 
For  of  the  two  the  trusty  knight  was  wounded  with  disdain : 
Alas!  she  could  not  help  it. 

Thus  art  with  arms  contending  was  victor  of  the  day, 
Which  by  a  gift  of  learning  did  bear  the  maid  away; 
Then  lullaby,  the  learned  man  hath  got  the  lady  gay; 
For  now  my  song  is  ended. 

Unknown 

"I  ASKED   MY   FAIR,   ONE  HAPPY  DAY" 

AFTER    LESSING 

I  ASKED  my  fair,  one  happy  day, 
What  I  should  call  her  in  my  lay; 

By  what  sweet  name  from  Rome  or  Greece; 
Lalage,  Nea;ra,  Chloris, 
Sappho,  Lesbia,  or  Doris, 

Arethusa  or  Lucrece. 

"Ah!"  replied  my  gentle  fair, 
"Beloved,  what  are  names  but  air? 

Choose  thou  whatever  suits  the  line; 
Call  me  Sappho,  call  me  Chloris, 
Call  me  Lalage  or  Doris, 

Only — only  call  m_e  thine." 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [1772-1834] 

THE   EXCHANGE 

We  pledged  our  hearts,  my  love  and  I, —  ti 

I  in  my  arms  the  maiden  clasping:  ' 

I  could  not  tell  the  reason  why, 
But  oh!  I  trembled  like  an  aspen. 


*'  Green   Grow  the   Rashes,   O!  "      727 

Her  father's  love  she  bade  me  gain; 

I  went,  and  shook  Hke  any  reed! 
I  strove  to  act  the  man — in  vain! 

We  had  exchanged  our  hearts  indeed. 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [177 2-1834] 


"COMIN'   THROUGH  THE  RYE" 

Comin'  through  the  rye,  poor  body, 

Comin'  through  the  rye. 
She  draiglet  a'  her  petticoatie, 

Comin'  through  the  rye. 

Oh  Jenny's  a'  wat  poor  body, 

Jenny's  seldom  dry; 
She  draiglet  a'  her  petticoatie, 

Comin'  through  the  rye. 

Gin  a  body  meet  a  body, 

Comin'  through  the  rye, 
Gin  a  body  kiss  a  body. 

Need  a  body  cry? 

Gin  a  body  meet  a  body 

Comin'  through  the  glen. 
Gin  a  body  kiss  a  body. 

Need  the  warld  ken? 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


"GREEN   GROW  THE  RASHES,   O!" 

There's  naught  but  care  on  every  han'. 
In  every  hour  that  passes,  O! 
What  signifies  the  life  o'  man. 
An'  'twere  na  for  the  lasses,  O? 

Green  grow  the  rashes,  0! 

Green  grow  the  rashes,  O! 

The  sweetest  hours  that  e'er  I  spend, 

Are  spent  amang  the  lasses,  01 


728  Poems   of  Love 

The  warl'ly  race  may  riches  chase, 
An'  riches  still  may  fly  them,  O! 
An'  though  at  last  they  catch  them  fast, 
Their  hearts  can  ne'er  enjoy  them,  0! 

Gie  me  a  canny  hour  at  e'en; 
My  arms  about  my  dearie,  O! 
An'  warl'ly  cares,  an'  warl'ly  men. 
May  a'  gae  tapsalteerie,  0! 

For  you  sae  douce,  ye  sneer  at  this; 
Ye'er  naught  but  senseless  asses,  O! 
The  wisest  man  the  warl'  e'er  saw 
He  dearly  loved  the  lasses,  O! 

Auld  Nature  swears  the  lovely  dears 
Her  noblest  work  she  classes,  O! 
Her  'prentice  han'  she  tried  on  man. 
An'  then  she  made  the  lasses,  O! 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


DEFIANCE 

Catch  her  and  hold  her  if  you  can — 

See,  she  defies  you  with  her  fan, 

Shuts,  opens,  and  then  holds  it  spread 

In  threatening  guise  above  your  head. 

Ah!  why  did  you  not  start  before 

She  reached  the  porch  and  closed  the  door? 

Simpleton!  will  you  never  learn 

That  girls  and  time  will  not  return; 

Of  each  you  should  have  made  the  most; 

Once  gone,  they  are  forever  lost. 

In  vain  your  knuckles  knock  your  brow. 

In  vain  will  you  remember  how 

Like  a  slim  brook  the  gamesome  maid 

Sparkled,  and  ran  into  the  shade. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 


"The  Time   Tve   Lost  in  Wooing"  729 


OF   CLEMENTINA 

In  Clementina's  artless  mien 
Lucilla  asks  me  what  I  see, 
And  are  the  roses  of  sixteen 
Enough  for  me? 

Lucilla  asks,  if  that  be  all, 

Have  I  not  culled  as  sweet  before: 
Ah  yes,  Lucilla!  and  their  fall 
I  still  deplore. 

I  now  behold  another  scene, 

Where  Pleasure  beams  with  Heaven's  own  light, 
More  pure,  more  constant,  more  serene, 
And  not  less  bright. 

Faith,  on  whose  breast  the  Loves  repose, 

Whose  chain  of  flowers  no  force  can  sever, 
And  Modesty  who,  when  she  goes, 
Is  gone  for  ever. 

Waller  Savage  Landor  [17 75-1 864] 


"THE  TIME  I'VE  LOST  IN  WOOING" 

The  time  I've  lost  in  wooing. 
In  watching  and  pursuing 

The  light  that  lies 

In  woman's  eyes, 
Has  been  my  heart's  undoing. 
Though  Wisdom  oft  has  sought  me, 
I  scorned  the  lore  she  brought  me, — 

My  only  books 

Were  women's  looks. 
And  folly's  all  they  taught  me. 

Her  smile  when  Beauty  granted, 
I  hung  with  gaze  enchanted, 


730  Poems  of  Love 

Like  him  the  sprite 

Whom  maids  by  night 
Oft  meet  in  glen  that's  haunted. 
Like  him,  too,  Beauty  won  me; 
But  .when  the  spell  was  on  me, 

If  once  their  ray 

Was  turned  away, 
O!  winds  could  not  outrun  me. 

And  are  those  follies  going? 
And  is  my  proud  heart  growing 

Too  cold  or  wise 

For  brilliant  eyes 
Again  to  set  it  glowing? 
No — vain,  alas!  th'  endeavor 
From  bonds  so  sweet  to  sever; — 

Poor  Wisdom's  chance 

Against  a  glance 
Is  now  as  weak  as  ever. 

Thomas  Moore  [1770-1852] 


DEAR  FANNY 

"She  has  beauty,  but  you  must  keep  your  heart  cool; 

She  has  wit,  but  you  mustn't  be  caught  so": 
Thus  Reason  advises,  but  Reason's  a  fool. 

And  'tis  not  the  first  time  I  have  thought  so, 
Dear  Fanny, 

'Tis  not  the  first  time  I  have  thought  so. 

"She  is  lovely;  then  love  her,  nor  let  the  bliss  fly; 
'Tis  the  charm  of  youth's  vanishing  season"; 
Thus  Love  has  advised  me,  and  who  will  deny 
That  Love  reasons  better  than  Reason, 

Dear  Fanny 
Love  reasons  much  better  than  Reason. 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 


A  Certain  Young  Lady  73 1 


A  CERTAIN  YOUNG  LADY 

There's  a  certain  young  lady, 
Who's  just  in  her  hey-day, 

And  full  of  all  mischief,  I  ween; 
So  teasing!  so  pleasing! 
Capricious!  delicious! 
And  you  know  ver}'  well  whom  I  mean. 

With  an  eye  dark  as  night. 
Yet  than  noonday  more  bright. 
Was  ever  a  black  eye  so  keen? 
It  can  thrill  with  a  glance. 
With  a  beam  can  entrance. 
And  you  know  very  well  whom  I  mean. 

With  a  stately  step — such  as 
You'd  expect  in  a  duchess — 

And  a  brow  might  distinguish  a  queeri,i 
With  a  mighty  proud  air, 
That  says  "touch  mp  who  dare," 
And  you  know  very  well  whom  I  mean. 

With  a  toss  of  the  head 
That  strikes  one  quite  dead, 
But  a  smile  to  revive  one  again; 
That  toss  so  appalling! 
That  smile  so  enthralling! 
And  you  know  very  well  whom  I  mean. 

Confound  her!  dc'il  take  her! — 
A  cruel  heart-breaker — 

But  hold!  see  that  smile  so  serene. 
God  love  her!  God  bless  her! 
May  nothing  distress  her! 
You  know  very  well  whom  I  mean. 

Heaven  help  the  adorer 
Who  happens  to  bore  her, 


73^  Poems  of  Love 

The  lover  who  wakens  her  spleen; 

But  too  blest  for  a  sinner 

Is  he  who  shall  win  her, 
And  you  know  very  well  whom  I  mean. 

Washington  Irving  [i783-i8sg] 

"WHERE  BE  YOU   GOING,  YOU  DEVON 
MAID" 

Where  be  you  going,  you  Devon  maid? 

And  what  have  ye  there  in  the  basket? 
Ye  tight  little  fairy,  just  fresh  from  the  dairy, 

Will  ye  give  me  some  cream  if  I  ask  it? 

I  love  your  hills  and  I  love  your  dales, 

And  I  love  your  flocks  a-bleating; 
But  oh,  on  the  heather  to  lie  together, 

With  both  our  hearts  a-beating! 

I'll  put  your  basket  all  safe  in  a  nook; 

Your  shawl  I'll  hang  on  a  willow; 
And  we  will  sigh  i^i  the  daisy's  eye. 

And  kiss  on  a  grass-green  pillow. 

John  Keats  [1795-1821] 

LOVE  IN  A   COTTAGE 

They  may  talk  of  love  in  a  cottage. 

And  bowers  of  trellised  vine, — 
Of  nature  bewitchingly  simple, 

And  milkmaids  half  divine; 
They  may  talk  of  the  pleasure  of  sleeping 

In  the  shade  of  a  spreading  tree. 
And  a  walk  in  the  fields  at  morning, 

By  the  side  of  a  footstep  free! 

But  give  me  a  sly  flirtation 

By  the  light  of  a  chandelier, — 
With  music  to  play  in  the  pauses, 

And  nobody  very  near; 


Song  of  the   Milkmaid  733 

Or  a  seat  on  a  silken  sofa, 

With  a  glass  of  pure  old  wine, 
And  mamma  too  blind  to  discover 

The  small  white  hand  in  mine. 

Your  love  in  a  cottage  is  hungry, 

Your  vine  is  a  nest  for  flies, — • 
Your  milkmaid  shocks  the  Graces, 

And  simplicity  talks  of  pies! 
You  Ke  down  to  your  shady  slumber 

And  wake  with  a  bug  in  your  ear, 
And  your  damsel  that  walks  in  the  morning 

Is  shod  like  a  mountaineer. 

True  love  is  at  home  on  a  carpet. 

And  mightily  likes  his  ease; — 
And  true  love  has  an  eye  for  a  dinner, 

And  starves  beneath  shady  trees. 
His  wing  is  the  fan  of  a  lady. 

His  foot's  an  invisible  thing, 
And  his  arrow  is  tipped  with  a  jewel, 

And  shot  from  a  silver  string. 

Nathaniel  Parker  Willis  [1806-1867] 


SONG  OF  THE   MILKMAID 

From  "  Queen  Mary  " 

Shame  upon  you,  Robin, 

Shame  upon  you  now! 
Kiss  me  would  you?  with  my  hands 

Milking  the  cow? 

Daisies  grow  again. 

Kingcups  blow  again, 
And  you  came  and  kissed  me  milking  the  cow. 

Robin  came  behind  me, 

Kissed  me  well,  I  vow; 
Cuff  him  could  I?  with  my  hands 


734  Poems  of  Love 

Milking  the  cow? 
Swallows  fly  again, 
Cuckoos  cry  again, 
And  you  came  and  kissed  me  milking  the  cow. 

Come,  Robin,  Robin, 

Come  and  kiss  me  now; 
Help  it  can  I?  with  my  hands 

Milking  the  cow? 

Ringdoves  coo  again, 

All  things  woo  again, 
Come  behind  and  kiss  me  milking  the  cow! 

Alfred  Tennyson  [iSog-i 


"WOULDN'T  YOU  LIKE  TO   KNOW" 

I  KNOW  a  girl  with  teeth  of  pearl, 
And  shoulders  white  as  snow; 

She  lives, — ah  well, 

I  must  not  tell, — 
Wouldn't  you  like  to  know? 

Her  sunny  hair  is  wondrous  fair, 
And  wavy  in  its  flow; 
.     Who  made  it  less 
One  little  tress, — 
Wouldn't  you  like  to  know? 

Her  eyes  are  blue  (celestial  hue!) 

And  dazzling  in  their  glow; 
On  whom  they  beam 
With  melting  gleam, — 

Wouldn't  you  like  to  know? 

Her  lips  are  red  and  finely  wed, 
Like  roses  ere  they  blow; 

What  lover  sips 

Those  dewy  lips, — ■ 
Wouldn't  you  like  to  know? 


"Sing   Heigh-Ho!"  735 

Her  fingers  are  like  lilies  fair 
When  lilies  fairest  grow; 

Whose  hand  they  press 

With  fond  caress,— 
Wouldn't  you  like  to  know? 

Her  foot  is  small,  and  has  a  fall 
Like  snowflakes  on  the  snow; 

And  where  it  goes 

Beneath  the  rose, — 
Wouldn't  you  like  to  know? 

She  has  a  name,  the  sweetest  name 
That  language  can  bestow. 

'Twould  break  the  spell 

If  I  should  tell,— 
Wouldn't  you  like  to  know? 

J ohii  Godfrey  Saxe  [1S16-18S7] 

"SING  HEIGH-HO!" 

There  sits  a  bird  on  every  tree; 

Sing  heigh-ho  I 
There  sits  a  bird  on  every  tree, 
And  courts  his  love  as  I  do  thee; 

Sing  heigh-ho,  and  heigh-ho! 
Young  maids  must  marry. 

There  grows  a  flower  on  every  bough ; 

Sing  heigh-ho ! 
There  grows  a  flower  on  every  bough, 
Its  petals  kiss — I'll  show  you  how: 

Sing  heigh-ho,  and  heigh-ho! 
Young  maids  must  marry. 

From  sea  to  stream  the  salmon  roam; 

Sing  heigh-ho! 
From  sea  to  stream  the  salmon  roam; 
Each  finds  a  mate  and  leads  her  home; 

Sing  heigh-ho,  and  heigh-ho! 
Young  maids  must  marry. 


736  Poems  of  Love 

The  sun's  a  bridegroom,  earth  a  bride; 

Sing  heigh-ho ! 
They  court  from  morn  till  eventide: 
The  earth  shall  pass,  but  love  abide. 
Sing  heigh-ho,  and  heigh-ho! 
Young  maids  must  marry. 

Charles  Kingsley  [1819-1875] 

THE   GOLDEN  FISH 

Love  is  a  little  golden  fish, 

Wondrous  shy  .  .  .  ah,  wondrous  shy  ,  .  . 
You  may  catch  him  if  you  wish; 
He  might  make  a  dainty  dish  .  .  . 

But  I  .  .  . 

Ah,  I've  other  fish  to  fry! 

For  when  I  try  to  snare  this  prize, 

Earnestly  and  patiently. 
All  my  skill  the  rogue  defies, 
Lurking  safe  in  Aimee's  eyes  .  .  . 

So,  you  see, 

I  am  caught  and  Love  goes  free! 

George  Arnold  [1834-1865] 

THE   COURTIN' 

God  makes  sech  nights,  all  white  an'  still 

Fur  'z  you  can  look  or  listen, 
Moonshine  an'  snow  on  field  an'  hill, 

All  silence  an'  all  glisten. 

Zekle  crep'  up  quite  unbeknown 
An'  peeked  in  thru'  the  winder, 

An'  there  sot  Huldy  all  alone, 
'ith  no  one  nigh  to  hender. 

A  fireplace  filled  the  room's  one  side. 

With  half  a  cord  o'  wood  in — 
There  warn't  no  stoves  (tell  comfort  died) 

To  bake  ye  to  a  puddin'. 


The   Courtin'  737 

The  wa'nut  logs  shot  sparkles  out 

Towards  the  pooticst,  bless  her! 
An'  lectle  flames  danced  all  about 

The  chiny  on  the  dresser. 

Agin  the  chimbley  crook-necks  hung, 

An'  in  amongst  'em  rusted 
The  ole  queen's-arm  thet  gran'ther  Young 

Fetched  back  f  om  Concord  busted. 

The  very  room,  coz  she  was  in. 

Seemed  warm  f  om  floor  to  ceilin', 
An'  she  looked  full  ez  rosy  agin 

Ez  the  apples  she  was  peelin'. 

'Twas  kin'  o'  kingdom-come  to  look 

On  sech  a  blessed  cretur, 
A  dogrose  blushin'  to  a  brook 

Ain't  modcstcr  nor  sweeter. 

He  was  six  foot  o'  man,  A  i, 

Clear  grit  an'  hum.an  natur'; 
None  couldn't  quicker  pitch  a  ton, 

Nor  dror  a  furrer  straighter. 

He'd  sparJved  it  with  full  twenty  gals. 
He'd  squired  'em,  danced  'em,  druv  'em, 

P^ust  this  one,  an'  then  thet,  by  spells — 
All  is,  he  couldn't  love  'em. 

But  long  o'  her  his  veins  'ould  run 

All  crinkly  like  curled  maple. 
The  side  she  breshed  felt  full  0'  sun 

Ez  a  south  slope  in  Ap'il. 

She  thought  no  v'ice  hed  sech  a  swing 

Ez  hisn  in  the  choir; 
My!  when  he  made  Ole  Hundred  ring, 

She  knowed  the  Lord  was  nigher. 


73  8  Poems  of  Love 

An'  she'd  blush  scarlit,  right  in  prayer, 
When  her  new  meetin'-bunnet 

Felt  somehow  thru'  its  crown  a  pair 
O'  blue  eyes  sot  upun  it. 

Thet  night,  I  tell  ye,  she  looked  some  ! 

She  seemed  to've  gut  a  new  soul. 
For  she  felt  sartin-sure  he'd  come, 

Down  to  her  very  shoe-sole. 

She  heered  a  foot,  an'  knowed  it  tu, 
A-raspin'  on  the  scraper, — 

All  ways  to  once  her  feelin's  flew 
Like  sparks  in  burnt-up  paper. 

He  kin'  o'  I'itered  on  the  mat, 
Some  doubtfle  o'  the  sekle, 

His  heart  kep'  goin'  pitty-pat, 
But  hern  went  pity  Zekle. 

An'  yit  she  gin  her  cheer  a  jerk 
Ez  though  she  wished  him  furder, 

An'  on  her  apples  kep'  to  work, 
Parin'  awaj'^  like  murder. 

"You  want  to  see  my  Pa,  I  s'pose?" 
"Wal  ...  no  ...  I  come  dasignin'" 

"To  see  my  Ma?    She's  sprinklin'  clo'es 
Agin  to-morrer's  i'nin'."         » 

To  say  why  gals  acts  so  or  so. 
Or  don't,  'ould  be  presumin'; 

Mcbby  to  mean  yes  an'  say  no 
Comes  nateral  to  women. 

He  stood  a  spell  on  one  foot  fust, 
Then  stood  a  spell  on  t'other. 

An'  on  which  one  he  felt  the  wust 
He  couldn't  ha'  told  ye  nuther. 


L'eau   Dormante  739 

Says  he,  "I'd  better  call  ag'in"; 

Says  she,  "Think  likely,  Mister"; 
Thet  last  word  pricked  him  like  a  pin, 

An'  .  .  .     Wal,  he  up  an'  kissed  her. 

When  Ma  bimeby  upon  'em  slips, 

Huldy  sot  pale  ez  ashes. 
All  kin'  o'  smily  roun'  the  lips 

An'  teary  roun'  the  lashes. 

For  she  was  jes'  the  quiet  kind 

Whose  naturs  never  vary, 
Like  streams  that  keep  a  summer  mind 

Snow-hid  in  Jenooary. 

The  blood  clost  roun'  her  heart  felt  glued 

Too  tight  for  all  expressin', 
Tell  mother  see  how  metiers  stood 

And  gin  'em  both  her  blessin'. 

Then  her  red  come  back  like  the  tide 

Down  to  the  Bay  o'  Fundy, 
An'  all  I  know  is  they  was  cried 

In  mcetin'  come  nex'  Sunday. 

James  Russell  Lowell  [iSig-iSgi] 


L'EAU  DORMANTE 

Curled  up  and  sitting  on  her  feet. 

Within  the  window's  deep  embrasure, 
Is  Lydia;  and  across  the  street, 

A  lad,  with  eyes  of  roguish  azure, 
Watches  her  buried  in  her  book. 
In  vain  he  tries  to  win  a  look, 
And  from  the  trellis  over  there 
Blows  sundry  kisses  through  the  air. 
Which  miss  the  mark,  and  fall  unseen, 
Uncared  for.    Lydia  is  thirteen. 


740  Poems  of  Love 

My  lad,  if  you,  without  abuse, 

Will  take  advice  from  one  who's  wiser, 
And  put  his  wisdom  to  more  use 

Than  ever  yet  did  your  adviser; 
If  you  will  let,  as  none  will  do, 
Another's  heartbreak  serve  for  two, 
You'll  have  a  care,  some  four  years  hence, 
How  you  lounge  there  by  yonder  fence 
And  blow  those  kisses  through  that  screen — 
For  Lydia  will  be  seventeen. 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [1837-1907] 

A   PRIMROSE  DAME 

She  has  a  primrose  at  her  breast, 
I  almost  wish  I  were  a  Tory. 

I  like  the  Radicals  the  best; 

She  has  a  primrose  at  her  breast; 

Now  is  it  chance  she  so  is  dressed, 
Or  must  I  tell  a  story? 

She  has  a  primrose  at  her  breast, 
I  almost  wisn  I  were  a  Tory. 

Gleason  White  [1851-1898] 

IF 

Oh,  if  the  world  were  mine.  Love, 

I'd  give  the  world  for  thee! 

Alas!  there  is  no  sign.  Love, 
Of  that  contingency. 

Were  I  a  king, — which  isn't 

To  be  considered  now, — 

A  diadem  had  glistened 

Upon  that  lovely  brow. 

Had  fame  with  laurels  crowned  me, — 
She  hasn't,  up  to  date, — 

Nor  time  nor  change  had  found  me 
To  love  and  thee  ingrate. 


An   Irish   Love-Song  741 

If  Death  threw  down  his  gage,  Love, 

Though  life  is  dear  to  me, 
I'd  die,  e'en  of  old  age,  Love, 

To  win  a  smile  from  thee. 

But  being  poor,  we  part,  dear. 

And  love,  sweet  love,  must  die; 

Thou  wilt  not  break  thy  heart,  dear. 
No  more,  I  think,  shall  I! 

James  Jeffrey  Roche  [1847-1Q08] 

DON'T 

Your  eyes  were  made  for  laughter; 

Sorrow  befits  them  not; 
Would  you  be  blithe  hereafter, 

Avoid  the  lover's  lot. 

The  rose  and  lily  blended 

Possess  your  cheeks  so  fair; 
Care  never  was  intended 

To  leave  his  furrows  there. 

Your  heart  was  not  created 

To  fret  itself  away, 
By  being  unduly  mated 

To  common  human  clay. 

But  hearts  were  made  for  loving — 

Confound  philosophy! 
Forget  what  I've  been  proving, 

Sweet  PhylUs,  and  love  me! 

James  Jeffrey  Roche  [1847-1008] 

AN  IRISH  LOVE-SONG 

In  the  years  about  twenty 

(When  kisses  are  plenty) 
The  love  of  an  Irish  lass  fell  to  my  fate — 

So  winsome  and  sightly. 

So  saucy  and  sprightly, 
The  priest  was  a  prophet  that  christened  her  Kate. 


■'^42  Poems  of  Love 

Soft  gray  of  the  dawning,  ' 

Bright  blue  of  the  morning,  ' 
The  sweet  of  her  eye  there  was  nothing  to  mate; 

A  nose  like  a  fairy's, 

A  cheek  like  a  cherry's, 
And  a  smile — well,  her  smile  was  like — nothing  but  Kate 

To  see  her  was  passion. 

To  love  her,  the  fashion: 
What  wonder  my  heart  was  unwilling  to  wait! 

And,  daring  to  love  her, 

I  soon  did  discover 
A  Katherine  masking  in  mischievous  Kate. 

No  Katy  unruly 

But  Katherine,  truly — 
Fond,  serious,  patient,  and  even  sedate; 

With  a  glow  in  her  gladness 

That  banishes  sadness — • 
Yet  stay !    Should  I  credit  the  sunshine  to  Kate  ? 

Love  cannot  outlive  it, 

Wealth  cannot  o'ergive  it — 
The  sauc}^  surrender  she  made  at  the  gate. 

O  Time,  be  but  human, 

Spare  the  girl  in  the  woman! 
You  gave  me  my  Katherine — leave  me  my  Kate! 

Robert  Underwood  Johnson  [1853- 


GROWING  OLD 

Sweet  sixteen  is  shy  and  cold. 
Calls  me  "sir,"  and  thinks  me  old; 
Hears  in  an  embarrassed  way 
All  the  compliments  I  pay; 

Finds  my  homage  quite  a  bore,  vol  oHT 
Will  not  smile  on  me,  and  more ' 
To  her  taste  she  finds  the  noise  < 
And  the  chat  of  callow  boys.       >hq  ailT 


In   Explanation  743 

Not  the  lines  around  my  eye, 
Deepening  as  the  years  go  by; 
Not  white  hairs  that  strew  my  head, 
Nor  my  less  elastic  tread ; 

Cares  I  find,  nor  joys  I  miss, 
IMake  me  feel  my  years  like  this: — 
Sweet  sixteen  is  shy  and  cold, 
Calls  me  "sir,"  and  thinks  me  old. 

Waller  Learned  [1847-1Q15I 

TIME'S  REVENGE 

When  I  was  ten  and  she  fifteen — 

Ah,  me!  how  fair  I  thought  her. 
She  treated  with  disdainful  mien 

The  homage  that  I  brought  her, 
And,  in  a  patronizing  way, 
Would  of  my  shy  advances  say: 

"It's  really  quite  absurd,  you  see; 

He's  very  much  too  young  for  me." 

I'm  twenty  now,  sh.e  twenty-five— 

Well,  well!  how  old  she's  growing. 
I  fancy  that  my  suit  might  thrive 

If  pressed  again;  but,  owing 
To  great  discrepancy  in  age. 
Her  marked  attentions  don't  engage 

My  young  affections,  for,  you  see, 

She's  /eally  quite  too  old  for  me. 

Walter  Learned  [1847-1015] 

IN  EXPLANATION 

Her  lips  were  so  near 

That — what  else  could  I  do? 
You'll  be  angiy,  I  fear. 
But  her  lips  were  so  near — 
Well,  I  can't  make  it  clear, 

Or  explain  it  to  you. 
But — her  lips  were  so  near 

That — what  else  could  I  do? 

Waller  Learned  [1847-1915] 


744  Poems  of  Love 


OMNIA  VINCIT 

Long  from  the  lists  of  love  I  stood  aloof 
My  heart  was  steeled  and  I  was  beauty-proof; 
Yet  I,  unscathed  in  many  a  peril  past, 
Lo!  here  am  I  defeated  at  the  last. 

My  practice  was,  in  easy-chair  reclined, 
Superior-wise  to  speak  of  womankind, 
Waving  away  the  worn-out  creed  of  love 
To  join  the  smoke  that  wreathed  itself  above. 

Love,  I  said  in  my  wisdom.  Love  is  dead, 
For  all  his  fabled  triumphs — and  instead 
We  find  a  calm  affectionate  respect. 
Doled  forth  by  Intellect  to  Intellect. 

Yet  when  Love,  taking  vengeance,  smote  me  sore, 
My  Siren  called  me  from  no  classic  shore; 
It  was  no  Girton  trumpet  that  laid  low 
The  walls  of  this  Platonic  Jericho. 

For  when  my  peace  of  mind  at  length  was  stole, 
I  thought  no  whit  of  Intellect  or  Soul, 
Nay!    I  was  cast  in  pitiful  distress 
By  brown  eyes  wide  with  truth  and  tenderness. 
Alfred  Cochrane  [1865- 


A  PASTORAL 

Along  the  lane  beside  the  mead 
Where  cowslip-gold  is  in  the  grass 

I  matched  the  milkmaid's  easy  speed, 
A  tall  and  springing  country  lass: 

But  though  she  had  a  merry  plan 
To  shield  her  from  my  soft  replies. 

Love  played  at  Catch-me-if-you-Can 
In  Mary's  eyes. 


A   Rose  745 

A  mile  or  twain  from  Varley  bridge 

I  plucked  a  dock-leaf  for  a  fan, 
And  drove  away  the  constant  midge, 

And  cooled  her  forehead's  strip  of  tan. 
But  though  the  maiden  would  not  spare 

My  hand  her  pretty  finger-tips, 
Love  played  at  Kiss-me-if-you-Dare 
On  Mary's  lips. 

Since  time  was  short  and  blood  was  bold, 

I  drew  me  closer  to  her  side. 
And  watched  her  freckles  change  from  gold 

To  pink  beneath  a  blushing  tide. 
But  though  she  turned  her  face  away, 

How  much  her  panting  heart  confessed! 
Love  played  at  Find-me-for-you-May 
In  Mary's  breast, 

Norman  Gale  [1862- 


A  ROSE 

'TwAS  a  Jacqueminot  rose 

That  she  gave  me  at  parting; 
Sweetest  flower  that  blows, 
'Twas  a  Jacqueminot  rose. 
In  the  love  garden  close, 

With  the  swift  blushes  starting, 
'Twas  a  Jacqueminot  rose 

That  she  gave  me  at  parting. 

If  she  kissed  it,  who  knows — 
Since  I  will  not  discover, 

And  love  is  that  close. 

If  she  kissed  it,  who  knows? 

Or  if  not  the  red  rose 

Perhaps  then  the  lover! 

If  she  kissed  it,  who  knows. 

Since  I  will  not  discover. 


746  Poems  of  Love 

Yet  at  least  with  the  rose 

Went  a  kiss  that  I'm  wearing! 

More  I  will  not  disclose, 

Yet  at  least  with  the  rose 

Went  whose  kiss  no  one  knows,— 
Since  I'm  only  declaring, 

"Yet  at  least  with  the  rose 

Went  a  kiss  that  I'm  wearing." 

Arlo  Bates  [1850- 


'  WOOED   AND   MARRIED   AND   A'" 

The  bride  cam'  out  o'  the  byre, 

And  oh,  as  she  dighted  her  cheeks: 
"Sirs,  I'm  to  be  married  the  night,        '    - 

And  ha'e  neither  blankets  nor  sheets; 
Ha'e  neither  blankets  nor  sheets. 

Nor  scarce  a  coverlet  too; 
The  bride  that  has  a'  thing  to  borrow, 
Has  e'en  right  muckle  ado!" 
Wooed  and  married,  and  a\ 
Married  and  wooed  and  a'! 
A  nd  was  she  nae  very  weel  ajj, 
That  was  wooed  and  married  and  a'? 

Out  spake  the  bride's  father, 

As  he  cam'  in  frae  the  pieugh: 
"Oh,  baud  your  tongue,  my  dochter, 

And  ye'se  get  gear  eneugh; 
The  stirk  stands  i'  the  tether. 

And  our  braw  bawsint  yaud. 
Will  carry  ye  hame  your  corn — 

What  wad  ye  be  at,  ye  jaud?" 

Out  spake  the  bride's  mither: 
"What  deil  n^s  a'  this  pride? 

I  had  nae  a  plack  in  my  pouch 
That  night  I  was  a  bride; 


'' Owre  the  Muir  Aniang  the  Heather"     747 

My  gown  was  linsey  woolsey, 

And  ne'er  a  sark  ava; 
And  ye  ha'e  ribbons  and  buskins, 

Mair  than  ane  or  twa." 

Out  spake  the  bride's  brither, 

As  he  cam'  in  wi'  the  kye: 
"Poor  Willie  wad  ne'er  ha'e  ta'en  ye, 

Had  he  kent  ye  as  weel  as  I; 
For  ye're  baith  proud  and  saucy 

And  no  for  a  puir  man's  wife; 
Gin  I  canna  get  a  better, 

I'se  ne'er  tak'  ane  i'  my  Ufe." 

Out  spake  the  bride's  sister, 

As  she  cam'  in  frae  the  byre: 
"O  gin  I  were  but  married, 

It's  a'  that  I  desire; 
But  we  puir  folk  maun  live  single, 

And  do  the  best  w'e  can; 
I  dinna  ken  what  I  should  want, 

If  I  could  get  but  a  man!" 

Alexander  Ross  [1609-1784] 


'OWRE  THE  MUIR  AMANG  THE  HEATHER" 

Comin'  through  the  craigs  o'  Kyle, 
Amang  the  bonnie  bloomin'  heather. 

There  I  met  a  bonnie  lassie, 
Keepin'  a'  her  ewes  thegither. 

Owre  the  muir  amang  the  heather, 
Owre  the  muir  amang  the  heather; 

There  I  met  a  bonnie  lassie, 
Keepin'  a'  her  ewes  thegither. 

Says  I,  My  dear,  where  is  thy  hame, — 
In  muir  or  dale,  pray  tell  me  whether? 

She  says,  I  tent  the  fleecy  flocks 
That  feed  amang  the  bloomin'  heather. 


74^  Poems  of  Love        -idi  j; 

We  laid  us  down  upon  a  bank, 

Sae  warm  and  sunny  was  the  weather: 

She  left  her  flocks  at  large  to  rove 
Amang  the  bonnie  bloomin'  heather. 

While  thus  we' lay,  she  sung  a  sang, 
Till  echo  rang  a  mile  and  farther; 

And  aye  the  burden  of  the  sang 

Was,  Owre  the  muir  amang  the  heather. 

She  charmed  my  heart,  and  aye  sinsyne 

I  couldna  think  on  ony  ither; 
By  sea  and  sky!  she  shall  be  mine, 

The  bonnie  lass  amang  the  heather. 

Jean  Glover  [i  758-1801] 


MARRIAGE  AND   THE   CARE  O'T 

Quoth  Rab  to  Kate,  My  sonsy  deai, 
I've  wooed  ye  mair  than  ha'  a  year, 
An'  if  ye'd  wed  me  ne'er  cou'd  speer. 

Wi'  blateness,  an'  the  care  o't. 
Now  to  the  point:  sincere  I'm  wi't: 
Will  ye  be  my  ha'f-marrow,  sweet? 
Shake  ban's,  and  say  a  bargain  be't 

An'  ne'er  think  on  the  care  o't. 

Na,  na,  quo'  Kate,  I  winna  wed, 
O'  sic  a  snare  I'll  aye  be  rede; 
How  mony,  thochtless,  are  misled 

By  marriage,  an'  the  care  o't! 
A  single  life's  a  life  o'  glee, 
A  wife  ne'er  think  to  mak'  o'  me, 
Frae  toil  an'  sorrow  I'll  keep  free, 

An'  a'  the  dool  an'  care  o't. 

Weel,  weel,  said  Robin,  in  reply, 

Ye  ne'er  again  shall  me  deny, 

Ye  may  a  toothless  maiden  die  ' 


The   Womei;!  Folk  749 

For  me,  I'll  tak'  nae  care  o't. 
Fareweel  for  ever! — aff  I  hie; — 
Sae  took  his  leave  without  a  sigh; 
Oh!  stop,  quo'  Kate,  I'm  yours,  I'll  try 

The  married  life,  an'  care  o't. 

Rab  wheel't  about,  to  Kate  cam'  back, 
An'  ga'e  her  mou'  a  hearty  smack, 
Syne  lengthened  out  a  lovin'  crack 

'Bout  marriage  an'  the  care  o't. 
Though  as  she  thocht  she  didna  speak, 
An'  lookit  unco  mim  an'  meek, 
Yet  blithe  was  she  wi'  Rab  to  cleek, 

In  marriage,  wi'  the  care  o't. 

Robert  Lochore  [1762-1S52] 


THE  WOMEN   FOLK 

0  SAIRLY  may  I  rue  the  day 

I  fancied  first  the  womenkind; 
For  aye  sinsyne  I  ne'er  can  ha'e 

Ae  quiet  thought  or  peace  o'  mind ! 
They  ha'e  plagued  my  heart,  an'  pleased  my  e'e, 

An'  teased  an'  flattered  me  at  will. 
But  aye,  for  a'  their  witchery. 

The  pawky  things!    I  lo'e  them  still. 
O,  the  women  folk!    O,  the  women  folk, 

But  they  ha'e  been  the  wreck  0'  me; 
O,  weary  fa'  the  women  folk. 
For  they  winna  let  a  body  be! 

1  ha'e  thought  an'  thought,  but  darcna  tell, 
I've  studied  them  wi'  a'  my  skill, 

I've  lo'ed  them  better  than  mysel', 

I've  tried  again  to  like  them  iU. 
Wha  sairest  strives,  will  sairest  rue, 

To  comprehend  what  nae  man  can; 
When  he  has  done  what  man  can  do, 

He'll  end  at  last  where  he  began. 


750  Poems  of  Love 

That  they  ha'e  gentle  forms  an'  meet, 

A  man  wi'  half  a  look  may  see;         » 
An'  gracefu'  airs,  an'  faces  sweet, 

An'  waving  curls  aboon  the  bree!      ■ 
An'  sm.iles  as  saft  as  the  young  rose-bud, 

An'  e'en  sae  pawky,  bright,  an'  rare, 
Wad  lure  the  laverock  frae  the  clud — 

But,  laddie,  seek  to  ken  nae  mair! 

James  Hogg  [1770-1835] 


"LOVE   IS  LIKE   A  DIZZINESS" 

I  LATELY  lived  in  quiet  ease, 

An'  never  wished  to  marry,  O! 
But  when  I  saw  my  Peggy's  face, 

I  felt  a  sad  quandary,  O! 
Though  wild  as  ony  Athol  deer, 

She  has  trepanned  me  fairly,  O! 
Her  cherry  cheeks  an'  een  sae  clear 
Torment  me  late  an'  early,  0! 
O,  love,  love,  love! 

Love  is  like  a  dizziness; 
It  winna  let  a  poor  body 
Gang  about  his  biziness! 

To  tell  my  feats  this  single  week 

Wad  mak  a  daft-like  diary,  O! 
I  drave  my  cart  out  owre  a  dike, 

My  horses  in  a  miry,  O! 
I  wear  my  stockings  white  an'  blue, 

My  love's  sae  fierce  an'  fiery,  O! 
I  drill  the  land  that  I  should  pleugh, 

An'  pleugh  the  drills  entirely,  O! 

Ae  morning,  by  the  dawn  o'  day, 
I  rase  to  theek  the  stable,  O! 

I  cuist  my  coat,  an'  plied  away 
As  fast  as  I  was  able,  O! 


"Behave   Youisel'   Before   Folk"      751 

I  wrought  that  morning  out  an'  out, 

As  I'd  been  redding  iire,  O! 
When  I  had  done  an'  looked  about, 

Gudefaith,  it  was  the  byre,  O! 

Her  wily  glance  I'll  ne'er  forget, 

The  dear,  the  lovely  blinkin'  o't 
Has  pierced  me  through  an'  through  the  heart, 

An'  plagues  me  wi'  the  prinkling  o't. 
I  tried  to  sing,  I  tried  to  pray, 

I  tried  to  drown  't  wi'  drinkin'  o't, 
I  tried  wi'  sport  to  drive  't  away. 

But  ne'er  can  sleep  for  thinkin'  o't. 

Nae  man  can  tell  what  pains  I  prove, 

Or  how  severe  my  pliskie,  0! 
I  swear  I'm  sairer  drunk  wi'  love 

Than  ever  I  was  wi'  whiskey,  O ! 
For  love  has  raked  me  fore  an'  aft, 

I  scarce  can  lift  a  leggie,  01 
I  first  grew  dizzy,  then  gaed  daft. 

An'  soon  I'll  dee  for  Peggy,  O! 

James  Hogg  (i 770-1835] 


"BEHAVE  YOURSEL'  BEFORE  FOLK" 

Behave  yoursel'  before  folk, 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk. 
And  dinna  be  sae  rude  to  me, 
As  kiss  me  sae  before  folk. 

It  wadna  gi'e  me  meikle  pain. 
Gin  we  were  seen  and  heard  by  nanc, 
To  tak'  a  kiss,  or  grant  you  ane; 
But  guidsake!  no  before  folk. 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk. 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk; 
Whate'er  ye  do,  when  out  o'  view, 
Be  cautious  aye  before  folk. 


752 


Poems   of  Love       '(^51" 

Consider,  lad,  how  folk  will  crack, 
And  what  a  great  affair  they'll  mak' 
O'  naething  but  a  simple  smack, 
That's  gi'en  or  ta'en  before  folk. 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk, 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk; 
Nor  gi'e  the  tongue  o'  auld  or  young 
Occasion  to  come  o'er  folk. 

It's  no  through  hatred  o'  a  kiss, 
That  I  sae  plainly  tell  you  this;  ■ '  i 

But,  losh!  I  tak'  it  sair  amiss  t'"" '  ^ 

To  be  sae  teased  before  folk. 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk. 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk; 
When  we're  our  lane  ye  may  tak'  ane, 
But  fient  a  ane  before  folk. 

I'm  sure  wi'  you  I've  been  as  free 
As  ony  modest  lass  should  be; 
But  yet  it  doesna  do  to  see 
Sic  freedom  used  before  folk. 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk, 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk; 
I'll  ne'er  submit  again  to  it — 
So  mind  you  that — before  folk. 

Ye  tell  me  that  my  face  is  fair; 
It  may  be  sae — I  dinna  care — 
But  ne'er  again  gar't  blush  sae  sair 
As  ye  ha'e  done  before  folk. 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk. 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk ; 
Nor  heat  my  cheeks  wi'  your  mad  freaks, 
But  aye  be  douce  before  folk. 

Ye  tell  me  that  my  lips  are  sweet. 
Sic  tales,  I  doubt,  are  a'  deceit; 
At  ony  rate,  it's  hardly  meet 


Rory   O'More;  or,   Good   Omens     753 

,  To  pree  their  sweets  before  folk. 
m[      Behave  yoursel'  before  folk, 
■  Behave  yoursel'  before  folk; 
Gin  that's  the  case,  there's  time,  and  place, 
But  surely  no  before  folk. 

But,  gin  you  really  do  insist 
That  I  should  suffer  to  be  kissed, 
Gae,  get  a  license  frae  the  priest, 
And  mak'  me  yours  before  folk. 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk, 
Behave  yoursel'  before  folk; 
And  when  we're  ane,  baith  flesh  and  bane, 
Ye  may  tak'  ten — before  folk. 

A lexa?ider- Rodger  [i 784-1846] 


RORY  O'MORE;   OR,   GOOD   OMENS 

Young  Rory  O'More  courted  Kathleen  bawn. 
He  was  bold  as  a  hawk, — she  as  soft  as  the  dawn; 
He  wished  in  his  heart  pretty  Kathleen  to  please, 
And  he  thought  the  best  way  to  do  that  was  to  tease. 
"Now,  Rory,  be  aisy,"  sweet  Kathleen  would  cry 
(Reproof  on  her  lip,  but  a  smile  in  her  eye), 
"With  your  tricks  I  don't  know,  in  troth,  what  I'm  about, 
Faith,  you've  teased  till  I've  put  on  my  cloak  inside  out.'! 
"Och!  jewel,"  says  Rory,  "that  same  is  the  way 
You've  thrated  my  heart  for  this  many  a  day; 
And  'tis  plazed  that  I  am,  and  why  not,  to  be  sure? 
For  'tis  all  for  good  luck,"  says  bold  Rory  O'More. 

"Indeed,  then,"  says  Kathleen,  "don't  think  of  the  like. 

For  I  half  gave  a  promise  to  soothering  Mike; 

The  ground  that  I  walk  on  he  loves,  I'll  be  bound." 

"  Faith,"  says  Rory,  "  I'd  rather  love  you  than  the  ground." 

"Now,  Rory,  I'll  cry  if  you  don't  let  me  go; 

Sure  I  drame  ev'ry  night  that  I'm  hating  you  so!" 

"Oh,"  says  Rory,  "that  same  I'm  delighted  to  hear, 

For  drames  always  go  by  conthrairies,  my  dear; 


754  Poems  of  Love 

So,  jewel,  keep  draming  that  same  till  you  die, 
And  bright  morniii'  will  give  dirty  night  the  black  lie! 
And  'tis  plazed  that  I  am,  and  why  not,  to  be  sure? 
Since  'tis  all  for  good  luck,"  says  bold  Rory  O'More. 

."Arrah,  Kathleen,  my  darlint,  you've  teased  me  enough, 
Sure  I've  thrashed  for  your  sake  Dinny  Grimes  and  Jim  Duff; 
And  I've  made  myself,  drinkin'  your  health,  quite  a  baste, 
So  I  think,  after  that,  I  may  talk  to  the  praste." 
Then  Rory,  the  rogue,  stole  his  arm  round  her  neck, 
So  soft  and  so  white,  without  freckle  or  speck, 
And  he  looked  in  her  eyes  that  were  beaming  with  light. 
And  he  kissed  her  sweet  lips; — don't  you  think  he  was  right? 
"Now,  Rory,  leave  off,  sir;  you'll  hug  me  no  more; 
That's  eight  times  to-day  that  you've  kissed  me  before." 
"Then  here  goes  another,"  says  he,  "to  make  sure. 
For  there's  luck  in  odd  numbers,"  says  Rory  O'More. 

Samuel  Lover  [1797-186S] 


ASK  AND   HAVE  H 

"On,  'tis  time  I  should  talk  to  your  mother, 

Sweet  Mary,"  says  I; 
"Oh,  don't  talk  to  my  mother,"  says  Mary, 

Beginning  to  cry: 
"For  my  mother  says  men  are  deceivers. 

And  never,  I  know,  will  consent;  .,y 

She  says  girls  in  a  hurry  to  marry,  , ;  /. 

At  leisure  repent,"  '' 

"Then,  suppose  I  would  talk  to  your  father,  1  ■ 

Sweet  Mary,"  says  I;  ■  I 

"Oh,  don't  talk  to  my  father,"  says  Mary,  XT 

Beginning  to  cry: 
"For  my  father  he  loves  me  so  dearly, 

He'll  never  consent  I  should  go — 
If  you  talk  to  my  father,"  says  Mary,  

"He'll  surely  say,  'No.'  "  iBib  lol 


The  Plaidie  755 

"Then  how  shall  I  get  you,  my  jewel? 

Sweet  Mary,"  says  I; 
"If  your  father  and  mother's  so  cruel, 

Most  surely  I'll  die!" 
"Oh,  never  say  die,  dear,"  says  Mary; 
"  A  way  now  to  save  you  I  sec; 
Since  my  parents  are  both  so  contrary — 
You'd  better  ask  me!" 

Samuel  Lover  [i 797-1868] 

KITTY  OF  COLERAINE 

As  beautiful  Kitty  one  morning  was  tripping. 

With  a  pitcher  of  milk,  from  the  fair  of  Coleraine, 

When  she  saw  me  she  stumbled,  the  pitcher  down  tumbled. 
And  all  the  sweet  buttermilk  watered  the  plain. 

"Oh!  what  shall  I  do  now — 'twas  looking  at  you,  now; 

Sure,  sure,  such  a  pitcher  I'U  ne'er  meet  again! 
'Twas  the  pride  of  my  dairy!     Oh!  Barney  MacCleary,,y 

You're  sent  as  a  plague  to  the  girls  of  Coleraine." 

I  sat  down  beside  her,  and  gently  did  chide  her. 
That  such  a  misfortune  should  give  her  such  pain; 

A  kiss  then  I  gave  her,  and,  ere  I  did  leave  her, 
She  vowed  for  such  pleasure  she'd  break  it  again. 

'Twas  hay-making  season — I  can't  tell  the  reason — 
Misfortunes  wiU  never  come  single,  'tis  plain; 

For  very  soon  after  poor  Kitty's  disaster 
The  devil  a  pitcher  was  whole  in  Coleraine. 

Charles  Dawson  Shanly  [1811-1875) 

THE   PLAIDIE 

Upon  anc  stormy  Sunday, 

Coming  adoon  the  lane, 
Were  a  score  of  bonnie  lassies — 

And  the  sweetest  I  maintain, 
Was  Caddie, 
That  I  took  un'neath  my  plaidie, 

To  shield  her  from  the  rain. 


756  Poems  of  Love 

She  said  the  daisies  bkished 

For  the  kiss  that  I  had  ta'en; 
I  wadna  hae  thought  the  lassie 

Wad  sae  of  a  kiss  complain; 

"Now,  laddie! 

I  winna  stay  under  your  plaidie, 

If  I  gang  hame  in  the  rain!" 

But,  on  an  after  Sunday, 

When  cloud  there  was  not  ana, 
This  self-same  winsome  lassie 
(We  chanced  to  meet  in  the  lane) 
Said,  "Laddie, 
Why  dinna  ye  wear  your  plaidie? 
Wha  kens  but  it  may  rain?" 

Charles  Sibley  [  ?  ] 

KITTY  NEIL 

"Ah,  sweet  Kitty  Neil,  rise  up  from  that  wheel. 

Your  neat  little  foot  will  be  weary  from  spinning; 
Come  trip  down  with  me  to  the  sycamore-tree. 

Half  the  parish  is  there,  and  the  dance  is  beginning. 
The  sun  is  gone  down,  but  the  full  harvest-moon 

Shines  sweetly  and  cool  on  the  dew-whitened  valley, 
While  all  the  air  rings  with  the  soft,  loving  things 

Each  little  bird  sings  in  the  green  shaded  alley." 

With  a  blush  and  a  smile,  Kitty  rose  up  the  while, 

Her  eye  in  the  glass,  as  she  bound  her  hair,  glancing; 
'Tis  hard  to  refuse  when  a  young  lover  sues. 

So  she  couldn't  but  choose  to  go  off  to  the  dancing. 
And  now  on  the  green  the  glad  groups  are  seen. 

Each  gay-hearted  lad  with  the  lass  of  his  choosing; 
And  Pat,  without  fail,  leads  out  sweet  Kitty  Neil, — 

Somehow,  when  he  asked,  she  ne'er  thought  of  refusing. 

Now,  Felix  Magee  puts  his  pipes  to  his  knee, 

And  with  flourish  so  free  sets  each  couple  in  motion; 

With  a  cheer  and  a  bound,  the  lads  patter  the  ground. 
The  maids  move  around  just  like  swans  on  the  ocean: 


"The  Dale's  i'  This  Bonnet  o'  Mine"  757 

Cheeks  bright  as  the  rose — feet  Hght  as  the  doe's, 
Now  coyly  retiring,  now  boldly  advancing — 

Search  the  world  all  around,  from  the  sky  to  the  ground, 
No  such  sight  can  be  found  as  an  Irish  lass  dancing! 

Sweet  Kate!  who  could  view  your  bright  eyes  of  deep  blue, 

Beaming  humidly  through  their  dark  lashes  so  mildly, 
Your  fair-turned  arm,  heaving  breast,  rounded  form. 

Nor  feel  his  heart  warm,  and  his  pulses  throb  wildly? 
Young  Pat  feels  his  heart,  as  he  gazes,  depart, 

Subdued  by  the  smart  of  such  painful  yet  sweet  love; 
The  sight  leaves  his  eye,  as  he  cries  with  a  sigh, 

^^  Dance  light,  for  my  heart  it  lies  under  your  feet,  love  !" 
John  Francis  Waller  [iS  10-1894] 


"THE  DULE'S  I'  THIS  BONNET  O'   MINE" 

The  dule's  i'  this  bonnet  o'  mine; 

My  ribbins'll  never  be  reet; 
Here,  Mally,  aw'm  like  to  be  fine, 

For  Jamie'll  be  comin'  to-neet; 
He  met  me  i'  th'  lone  t'other  day, — 

Aw 're  gooin'  for  wayter  to  th'  well, — 
An'  he  begged  that  aw'd  wed  him  i'  May; — 

Bi  th'  mass,  iv  he'll  let  me,  aw  will! 

When  he  took  my  two  honds  into  his. 

Good  Lord,  heaw  they  trembled  between; 
An'  aw  durstn't  look  up  in  his  face, 

Becose  on  him  seein'  my  e'en;  . 
My  cheek  went  as  red  as  a  rose ; — 

There's  never  a  mortal  can  tell 
Heaw  happy  aw  felt;  for,  thea  knows. 

One  couldn't  ha'  axed  him  theirscl'. 

But  th'  tale  wur  at  th'  end  o'  my  tung, — 

To  let  it  eawt  wouldn't  be  reet, — 
For  aw  thought  to  seem  forrud  wur  wrung. 

So  aw  towd  him  aw'd  tell  him  to-neet; 
But  Mally,  thae  knows  very  weel, — 


758  Poems  of  Love 

Though  it  isn't  a  thing  one  should  own, — 
Iv  aw'd  th'  pikein'  o'  th'  world  to  mysel', 
Aw'd  oather  ha'  Jamie  or  noan. 

Neaw,  Mally,  aw've  towd  tho  my  mind; 

What  would  to  do  iv't  wur  thee? 
"Aw'd  tak  him  just  while  he're  inclined, 

An'  a  farrantly  bargain  he'd  be; 
For  Jamie's  as  gradely  a  lad 

As  ever  stepped  eawt  into  th'  sun; — 
Go,  jump  at  thy  chance,  an'  get  wed, 

An'  mak  th'  best  o'  th'  job  when  it's  done!" 

Eh,  dear,  but  it's  time  to  be  gwon, — 

Aw  shouldn't  like  Jamie  to  wait; 
Aw  connut  for  shame  be  too  soon, 

An'  aw  wouldn't  for  th'  world  be  too  late; 
Aw'm  a'  ov  a  tremble  to  th'  heel, — 

Dost  think  'at  my  bonnet'U  do? — 
"Be  off,  lass, — thae  looks  very  weel; 

He  wants  noan  o'  th'  bonnet,  thae  foo!" 

Edwin  Waugh  [1817-1S90] 


THE  OULD   PLAID   SHAWL 

Not  far  from  old  Kinvara,  in  the  merry  month  of  ]\Iay, 
When  birds  were  singing  cheerily,  there  came  across  my  way. 
As  if  from  out  the  sky  above  an  angel  chanced  to  fall, 
A  little  Irish  caihn  in  an  ould  plaid  shawl. 

She  tripped  along  right  joyously,  a  basket  on  her  arm; 
And  oh!  her  face;  and  oh!  her  grace,  the  soul  of  saint  would 

charm : 
Her  brown  hair  rippled  o'er  her  brow,  but  greatest  charm 

of  all 
Was  her  modest  blue  eyes  beaming  'neath  her  ould  plaid 

shawl. 

I  courteously  saluted  her — "God  save  you,  miss,"  says  I; 
"God  save  you  kindly,  sir,"  said  she,  and  shylv  passed  me 
by; 


Little   Mary   Cassidy  759 

Off  went  my  heart  along  with  her,  a  captive  in  her  thrall, 
Imprisoned  in  the  corner  of  her  ould  plaid  shawl. 

Enchanted  with  her  beauty  rare,  I  gazed  in  pure  delight, 
TiU  round  an  angle  of  the  road  she  vanished  from  my  sight; 
But  ever  since  I  sighing  say,  as  I  that  scene  recall, 
"The  grace  of  God  about  you  and  your  ould  plaid  shawl." 

I've  heard  of  highway  robbers  that  with  pistols  and  with 

'■     knives, 
Make  trembling  travelers  yield  them  up  their  money  or 

their  lives. 
But  think  of  me  that  handed  out  my  heart  and  head  and 

all 
To  a  simple  little  caihn  in  an  ould  plaid  shawl. 

Oh!  graceful  the  mantillas  that  the  signorinas  wear, 
And  tasteful  arc  the  bonnets  of  Parisian  ladies  fair. 
But  never  cloak,  or  hood,  or  robe,  in  palace,  bower,  or  hall, 
Clad  half  such  witching  beauty  as  that  ould  plaid  shawl. 

Oh!  some  men  sigh  for  riches,  and  some  men  live  for  fame. 
And  some  on  history's  pages  hope  to  win  a  glorious  name: 
My  aims  are  not  ambitious,  and  my  wishes  are  but  small — 
You  might  wrap  them  all  together  in  an  ould  plaid  shawl. 

I'll  seek  her  all  through  Gal  way,  and  I'll  seek  her  all  through 

Clare, 
I'll  search  for  tale  or  tidings  of  my  traveler  everywhere. 
For  peace  of  mind  I'll  never  find  until  my  own  I  call 
That  little  Irish  cailin  in  her  ould  plaid  shawl. 

Francis  A.  Fahy  [1854- 


LITTLE  MARY  CASSIDY 

Oh,  'tis  little  Mary  Cassidy's  the  cause  of  all  my  misery, 
And  the  raison  that  I  am  not  now  the  boy  I  used  to  be; 

Oh,  she  bates  the  beauties  all  that  we  read  about  in  history, 
And  sure  half  the  country-side  is  as  hot  for  her  as  me. 


760  {  Poems  of  Love 

Travel  Ireland  up  and  down,  hill,  village,  vale  and  town — 
Fairer  than  the  CaiHn  Donn,  you're  looking  for  in  vain; 

Oh,  I'd  rather  live  in  poverty  with  httle  Mary  Cassidy 
Than  emperor,  without  her,  be  of  Germany  or  Spain. 

'Twas  at  the  dance  at  Darmody's  that  first  I  caught  a  sight 
of  her, 
And  heard  her  sing  the  "Droighnean  Donn,"  till  tears 
came  in  my  eyes, 
And  ever  since  that  blessed  hour  I'm  dreaming  day  and 
night  of  her; 
The  devil  a  wink  of  sleep  at  all  I  get  from  bed  to  rise. 
Cheeks  like  the  rose  in  June,  song  like  the  lark  in  tune, 
Working,  resting,  night  or  noon,  she  never  leaves  my 
mind; 
Oh,  till  singing  by  my  cabin  fire  sits  little  Mary  Cassidy, 
'Tis  little  aise  or  happiness  I'm  sure  I'll  ever  find. 

What  is  wealth,  what  is  fame,  what  is  all  that  people  fight 
about 
To  a  kind  word  from  her  lips  or  a  love-glance  from  her  eye? 
Oh,  though  troubles  throng  my  breast,  sure  they'd  soon  go 
to  the  right-about 
If  I  thought  the  curly  head  of  her  would  rest  there  by  and 
by. 
Take  all  I  own  to-day,  kith,  kin,  and  care  away, 

Ship  them  all  across  the  say,  or  to  the  frozen  zone: 
Lave  me  an  orphan  bare — but  lave  me  Mary  Cassidy, 
I  never  would  feel  lonesome  with  the  two  of  us  alone. 

Francis  A.  FaJiy  [1854- 

THE  ROAD 

"Now  where  are  ye  goin', "  ses  I,  "wid  the  shawl 

An'  cotton  umbrella  an'  basket  an'  ail? 

Would  ye  not  wait  for  McMullen's  machine, 

Wid  that  iligant  instep  befittin'  a  queen? 

Oh,  you  wid  the  wind-soft  gray  eye  wid  a  wile  in  it, 
You  wid  the  lip  wid  the  troublesome  smile  in  it. 
Sure,  the  road's  wet,  ivery  rain-muddied  mile  in  it—  " 

^' Ah,  the  Sainls'll  be  kapin'  mc  pdticoats  clean!''' 


Twickenham   Ferry  761 

"But,"  ses  I,  "would  ye  like  it  to  meet  Clancy's  bull,     , 
Or  the  tinks  poachin'  rabbits  above  Slieve-na-coul? 
An'  the  ford  at  Kihnaddy  is  big  wid  the  snows, 
An'  the  whisht  Little  People  that  wear  the  green  close, 
They'd  run  from  the  bog  to  be  makin'  a  catch  o'  ye. 
The  king  o'  them's  wishful  o'  weddin'  the  match  o'  ye, 
'Twould  be  long,  if  they  did,  ere  ye  lifted  the  latch  o'  ye — " 
"What  fairy's  to  touch  her  that  si)!gs  as  she  goes'" 

"Ah,  where  are  ye  goin',"  ses  I,  "wid  the  shawl. 
An'  the  gray  eyes  a-drcamin'  beneath  it  an'  all? 
The  road  by  the  mountain's  a  long  one,  depend 
Ye'll  be  done  for,  alannah,  ere  reachin'  the  end; 

Ve'W  be  bate  wid  the  wind  on  each  back-breakin'  bit  on  it, 
Wet  wid  the  puddles  and  lamed  wid  the  grit  on  it, — 
Since  lonesome  ye're  layin'  yer  delicut  fit  on  it — " 
"Sure  whin's  a  road  lonesome  that's  stepped  ivid  a  friend?" 

That's  stepped  wid  a  friend? 
Who  did  Bridgy  intend? 
Still  'twas  me  that  went  wid  her  right  on  to  the  end! 

Patrick  R.  Chalmers  [18 

TWICKENHAM  FERRY 

"Ahoy!  and  0-ho!  and  it's  who's  for  the  ferry?" 
(The  briar's  in  bud  and  the  sun  going  down) 
"And  I'U  row  ye  so  quick  and  I'll  row  ye  so  steady, 

And  'tis  but  a  penny  to  Twickenham  Town." 
The  ferryman's  slim  and  the  ferryman's  young, 
With  just  a  soft  tang  in  the  turn  of  his  tongue; 
And  he's  fresh  as  a  pippin  and  brown  as  a  berry. 
And  'tis  but  a  penny  to  Twickenham  Town. 

■"Ahoy!  and  0-ho!  and  it's  I'm  for  the  ferry," 

(The  briar's  in  bud  and  the  sun  going  down) 
"And  it's  late  as  it  is  and  I  haven't  a  penny— 

Oh!  how  can  I  get  me  to  Twickenham  Town?" 
She'd  a  rose  in  her  bonnet,  and  oh!  she  looked  sweet 
As  the  little  pink  flower  that  grows  in  the  wheat, 


762  Poems   of  Love 

With  her  checks  like  a  rose  and  her  lips  like  a  cherry — 
It's  sure  but  you're  welcome  to  Twickenham  Town. 

"Ahoy!  and  0-ho!" — You're  too  late  lor  the  ferry, 

(The  briar's  in  bud  and  the  sun  has  gone  down) 
And  he's  not  rowing  quick  and  he's  not  rowing  steady; 

It  seems  quite  a  journey  to  Twickenham  Town. 
"  Ahoy!  and  0-ho!"  you  may  call  as  you  will; 

The  young  moon  is  rising  o'er  Petersham  Hill; 
And,  with  Love  like  a  rose  in  the  stern  of  the  wherry, 
There's  danger  in  crossing  to  Twickenham  Town. 
Theophlle  Marzlals  [1850- 


THE  HUMOR  OF  LOVE 

SONG 

I  PRITHEE  send  mc  back  my  heart, 

Since  I  cannot  have  thine: 
For  if  from  yours  you  will  not  part, 

Why  then  shouldst  thou  have  mine? 

Yet  now  I  think  on't,  let  it  lie, 

To  find  it  were  in  vain, 
For  thou  hast  a  thief  in  either  eye 

Would  steal  it  back  again. 

Why  should  two  hearts  in  one  breast  lie, 
And  yet  not  lodge  together? 

0  love,  where  is  thy  sympathy, 
If  thus  our  breasts  thou  sever? 

But  love  is  such  a  mystery, 

I  cannot  find  it  out: 
For  when  I  think  I  'm  best  resolved, 

I  then  am  most  in  doubt. 

Then  farewell  care,  and  farewell  woe! 

I  will  no  longer  pine; 
For  I'll  believe  I  have  her  heart. 

As  much  as  she  hath  mine. 

John  Siicldiiig  [1609-164  2] 

A  BALLAD  UPON  A  WEDDING 

1  TELL  thee,  Dick,  where  I  have  been. 
Where  I  the  rarest  things  have  seen; 

Oh,  things  without  compare! 
Such  sights  again  cannot  be  found 
In  any  place  on  English  ground, 

Be  it  at  wake  or  fair. 
763 


764  Poems  of  Love 

At  Charing  Cross,  hard  by  the  way 
Where  we  (thou  know'st)  do  sell  our  hay, 

There  is  a  house  with  stairs; 
And  there  did  I  see  coming  down 
Such  folk  as  are  not  in  our  town, 

Forty  at  least,  in  pairs. 

Amongst  the  rest,  one  pest 'lent  fine 
(His  beard  no  bigger,  though,  than  mine) 

Walked  on  before  the  rest; 
Our  landlord  looks  like  nothing  to  him; 
The  king  (God  bless  him !)  'twould  undo  him 

Should  he  go  still  so  drest. 

At  Course-a-park,  without  all  doubt. 
He  should  have  first  been  taken  out 

By  all  the  maids  i'  th'  town: 
Though  lusty  Roger  there  had  been. 
Or  little  George  upon  the  green. 

Or  Vincent  of  the  Crown. 

But  wot  you  what?    The  youth  was  going 
To  make  an  end  of  all  his  wooing; 

The  parson  for  him  staid: 
Yet  by  his  leave  (for  all  his  haste). 
He  did  not  so  much  wish  all  past, 

(Perchance)  as  did  the  maid. 

The  maid  (and  thereby  hangs  a  tale) 
For  such  a  maid  no  Whitsun-ale 

Could  ever  yet  produce: 
No  grape  that's  kindly  ripe,  could  be 
So  round,  so  plump,  so  soft,  as  she, 

Nor  half  so  full  of  juice. 

Her  finger  was  so  small,  the  ring 
Would  not  stay  on  which  they  did  bring; 

It  was  too  wide  a  peck : 
And  to  say  truth  (for  out  it  must) 
It  looked  like  the  great  collar  (Just) 

About  our  young  colt's  neck. 


A   Ballad  upon  a  Wedding  765 

Her  feet  beneath  her  petticoat 
Like  little  mice  stole  in  and  out, 

As  if  they  feared  the  hght: 
But  oh,  she  dances  such  a  way! 
No  sun  upon  an  Easter-day 

Is  half  so  fine  a  sight. 

Her  cheeks  so  rare  a  white  was  on. 
No  daisy  makes  comparison ; 

Who  sees  them  is  undone; 
For  streaks  of  red  were  mingled  there, 
Such  as  are  on  a  Cath'rine  pear, 

The  side  that's  next  the  sun. 

Her  lips  were  red;  and  one  was  thin 
Compared  to  that  was  next  her  chin 

(Some  bee  had  stung  it  newly) ; 
But,  Dick,  her  eyes  so  guard  her  face, 
I  durst  no  more  upon  them  gaze. 

Than  on  the  sun  in  July. 

Her  mouth  so  small,  when  she  does  speak, 
Thou'dst  swear  her  teeth  her  words  did  break, 

That  they  might  passage  get ; 
But  she  so  handled  still  the  matter, 
They  came  as  good  as  ours,  or  better, 

And  are  not  spent  a  whit. 

Passion  o' me!    how  I  run  on! 

There's  that  that  would  be  thought  upon, 

I  trow,  besides  the  bride: 
The  business  of  the  kitchen's  great, 
For  it  is  lit  that  men  should  eat; 

Nor  was  it  there  denied. 

Just  in  the  nick  the  cook  knocked  thrice, 
And  all  the  waiters  in  a  (rice 

His  summons  did  obey; 
Each  serving-man,  with  dish  in  hand,       ' ' 
Marched  boldly  up,  like  our  trained-band,'-'' 
Presented,  and  awav.  ■ 


766  Poems  of  Love 

When  all  the  meat  was  on  the  table, 
What  man  of  knife,  or  teeth,  was  able 

To  stay  to  be  intreated? 
And  this  the  very  reason  was, 
Before  the  parson  could  say  grace, 

The  company  was  seated. 

Now  hats  fly  off,  and  youths  carouse; 
Healths  first  go  round,  and  then  the  house. 

The  bride's  come  thick  and  thick ; 
And  when  'twas  named  another's  health. 
Perhaps  he  made  it  hers  by  stealth, 

(And  who  could  help  it,  Dick?) 

O'  th'  sudden  up  they  rise  and  dance; 
Then  sit  again,  and  sigh,  and  glance; 

Then  dance  again,  and  kiss.  ' 

Thus  sev'ral  ways  the  time  did  pass, 
Till  ev'ry  woman  wished  her  place, 

And  ev'ry  man  wished  his. 

By  this  time  all  were  stol'n  aside 

To  counsel  and  undress  the  bride;        ■-'■ 

But  that  he  must  not  know: 
But  yet  'twas  thought  he  guessed  her  mind. 
And  did  not  mean  to  stay  behind 

Above  an  hour  or  so. 

John  Suckling  [1609-1642] 


TO  CHLOE  JEALOUS  ni  iaul 

Dear  Chloe,  how  blubbered  is  that  pretty  face! 

Thy  cheek  all  on  fire,  and  thy  hair  all  uncurled: 
Prithee  quit  this  caprice;  and  (as  old  Falstaff  says). 

Let  us  e'en  talk  a  little  like  folks  of  this  world. 


Jack  and  Joan  767 

How  canst  thou  presume,  thou  hast  leave  to  destroy 
The  beauties,  which  Venus  but  lent  to  thy  keeping? 

Those  looks  were  designed  to  inspire  love  and  joy: 
More  ordinary  eyes  may  serve  people  for  weeping. 

To  be  vexed  at  a  trifle  or  two  that  I  writ, 

Your  judgment  at  once,  and  my  passion  you  wrong: 

You  take  that  for  fact,  which  will  scarce  be  found  wit: 
Od's  life!  must  one  swear  to  the  truth  of  a  song? 

What  I  speak,  my  fair  Chloe,  and  what  I  write,  shows 
The  difference  there  is  betwixt  nature  and  art: 

I  court  others  in  verse;  but  I  love  thee  in  prose: 

And  they  have  my  whimsies;  but  thou  hast  my  heart. 

The  god  of  us  verse-men  (you  know.  Child)  the  sun. 
How  after  his  journeys  he  sets  up  his  rest; 

If  at  morning  o'er  earth  'tis  his  fancy  to  run; 
At  night  he  reclines  on  his  Thetis's  breast. 

So  when  I  am  wearied  with  wandering  all  day; 

To  thee,  my  delight,  in  the  evening  I  come: 
Mo  matter  what  beauties  I  saw  in  my  way: 

They  were  but  my  visits,  but  thou  art  my  home. 

Then  finish,  dear  Chloe,  this  pastoral  war; 

And  let  us,  like  Horace  and  Lydia,  agree: 
For  thou  art  a  girl  as  much  brighter  than  her, 

As  he  was  a  poet  sublimer  than  me. 

Matthew  Prior  [1664-1721] 


JACK  AND  JOAN 

Jack  and  Joan  they  think  no  ill. 

But  loving  live,  and  merry  still; 

Do  their  week-days'  work,  and  pray 

Devoutly  on  the  holy  day: 

Skip  and  trip  it  on  the  green. 

And  help  to  choose  the  Summer  Queen; 


-768  Poems  of  Love 

Lash  out,  at  a  country  feast, 
-.  Their  silver  penny  with  the  best. 

Well  can  they  judge  of  nappy  ale, 

And  tell  at  large  a  winter  tale; 

Climb  up  to  the  apple  loft, 

And  turn  the  crabs  till  they  be  soft. 

Tib  is  all  the  father's  joy, 

And  little  Tom  the  mother's  boy. 

All  their  pleasure  is  content; 

And  care,  to  pay  their  yearly  rent.  ;  , 

-p.,    T 

Joan  can  call  by  name  her  cows, 
And  deck  her  windows  with  green  boughs; 
'"'"   '''She  can  wreaths  and  tuttyes  make, 
And  trim  with  plums  a  bridal  cake. 
Jack  knows  what  brings  gain  or  loss; 
And  his  long  flail  can  stoutly  toss: 
Makes  the  hedge  which  others  break; 
And  ever  thinks  what  he  doth  speak. 

Now,  you  courtly  dames  and  knights, 
That  study  only  strange  delights; 
Though  you  scorn  the  home-spun  gray. 
And  revel  in  your  rich  array: 
Though  your  tongues  dissemble  deep, 
And  can  your  heads  from  danger  keep; 
Yet,  for  all  your  pomp  and  train. 
Securer  Hves  the  silly  swain. 

Thomas  Campion  [    ?    -i6iy] 


PHILLIS  AND   CORYDON 

Phillis  kept  sheep  along  the  western  plains. 
And  Corydon  did  feed  his  flocks  hard  by: 

This  shepherd  was  the  flower  of  all  the  swains 
That  traced  the  downs  of  fruitful  Thessaly; 

And  Phillis,  that  did  far  her  flocks  surpass 

In  silver  hue,  was  thought  a  bonny  lass. 


Sally  in   Our  Alley  769 

A  bonny  lass,  quaint  in  her  country  'tire, 

Was  lovely  Phillis, — Corydon  swore  so; 
Her  locks,  her  looks,  did  set  the  swain  on  fire, 

He  left  his  lambs,  and  he  began  to  woo; 
He  looked,  he  sighed,  he  courted  with  a  kiss, 
No  better  could  the  silly  swad  than  this. 

He  little  knew  to  paint  a  tale  of  love. 

Shepherds  can  fancy,  but  they  cannot  say: 

Phillis  'gan  smile,  and  wily  thought  to  prove 
What  uncouth  grief  poor  Corydon  did  pay; 

She  asked  him  how  his  flocks  or  he  did  fare, 

Yet  pensive  thus  his  sighs  did  tell  his  care. 

The  shepherd  blushed  when  Phillis  questioned  so, 
And  swore  by  Pan  it  was  not  for  his  flocks: 

"  'Tis  love,  fair  Phillis,  breedeth  all  this  woe. 

My  thoughts  are  trapped  within  thy  lovely  locks; 

Thine  eye  hath  pierced,  thy  face  hath  set  on  fire; 

Fair  Phillis  kindleth  Corydon's  desire." 

"Can  shepherds  love?"  said  Phillis  to  the  swain. 

"Such  saints  as  Phillis,"  Corydon  replied. 
"Men  when  they  lust  can  many  fancies  feign," 

Said  Phillis.    This  not  Corydon  denied, 
That  lust  had  lies;  "But  love,"  quoth  he,  "says  truth: 
Thy  shepherd  loves,  then,  Phillis,  what  ensu'th?" 

Phillis  was  won,  she  blushed  and  hung  her  head; 

The  swain  stepped  to,  and  cheered  her  with  a  kiss: 
With  faith,  with  troth,  they  struck  the  matter  dead; 

So  used  they  when  men  thought  not  amiss: 
Thus  love  begun  and  ended  both  in  one; 
Phillis  was  loved,  and  she  liked  Corytlon. 

Robert  CrccHC  [isGoP-isgj] 

SALLY  IN  OUR  ALLEY 

Of  all  the  girls  that  are  so  smart. 

There's  none  like  pretty  Sally; 
She  is  the  darling  of  my  heart, 

And  she  lives  in  our  alley. 


770  Poems  of  Love 

There  is  no  lady  in  the  land 

Is  half  so  sweet  as  Sally; 
She  is  the  darling  of  my  heart, 

And  she  lives  in  our  alley. 

Her  father  he  makes  cabbage-nets, 

And  through  the  streets  does  cry  'em; 
Her  mother  she  sells  laces  long 

To  such  as  please  to  buy  'em; 
But  sure  such  folks  could  ne'er  beget 

So  sweet  a  girl  as  Sally! 
She  is  the  darling  of  my  heart, 

And  she  lives  in  our  alley. 

When  she  is  by,  I  leave  my  work, 

I  love  her  so  sincerely; 
My  master  comes  like  any  Turk, 

And  bangs  me  most  severely: 
But  let  him  bang  his  bellyful, 

I'll  bear  it  all  for  Sally; 
She  is  the  darling  of  my  heart. 

And  she  lives  in  our  alley. 

Of  all  the  days  that's  in  the  week 

I  dearly  love  but  one  day — 
And  that's  the  day  that  comes  betwixt 

A  Saturday  and  Monday; 
For  then  I'm  dressed  all  in  my  best 

To  walk  abroad  with  Sally; 
She  is  the  darling  of  my  heart, 

And  she  lives  in  our  alley.  ,       .,., 

:ii;,iM 
^.   My  master  carries  me  to  church. 

And  often  am  I  blamed 
Because  I  leave  him  in  the  lurch 

As  soon  as  text  is  named; 
I  leave  the  church  in  sermon-time 

And  slink  away  to  Sally; 
She  is  the  darling  of  my  heart, 

And  she  lives  in  our  alley. 


The   Country    Wedding  771 

When  Christmas  comes  about  again, 

O,  then  I  shall  have  money; 
I'll  hoard  it  up,  and  box  it  all, 

I'll  give  it  to  my  honey: 
I  would  it  were  ten  thousand  pound, 

I'd  give  it  all  to  Sally; 
She  is  the  darling  of  my  heart, 

y\nd  she  lives  in  our  alley. 

INIy  master  and  the  neighbors  all  \  n 

]\lake  game  of  me  and  Sally, 
And,  but  for  her,  I'd  better  be 

A  slave  and  row  a  galley; 
But  when  my  seven  long  years  are  out, 

O,  then  I'll  marry  Sally;  "r 

O,  then  we'll  wed,  and  then  we'll  bed — 

But  not  in  our  alley! 

Henry  Carey  [    ?    -1743] 


THE   COUNTRY  WEDDING 

Well  met,  pretty  nymph,  says  a  jolly  young  swain 
To  a  lovely  young  shepherdess  crossing  the  plain; 
Why  so  much  in  haste? — now  the  month  it  was  May — 
May  I  venture  to  ask  you,  fair  maiden,  which  way? 
Then  straight  to  this  question  the  nymph  did  reply, 
With  a  blush  on  her  cheek,  and  a  smile  in  her  eye, 
I  came  from  the  village,  and  homeward  I  go, 
And  now,  gentle  shepherd,  pray  why  would  you  know? 

I  hope,  pretty  maid,  you  won't  take  it  amiss, 

If  I  tell  you  my  reason  for  asking  you  this; 

I  would  see  you  safe  home — (now  the  swain  was  in  love!) 

Of  such  a  companion  if  you  would  approve. 

Your  offer,  kind  shepherd,  is  civil,  I  own; 

But  I  see  no  great  danger  in  going  alone; 

Nor  yet  can  I  hinder,  the  road  being  free 

For  one  as  another,  for  you  as  for  me. 


772  Poems  of  Love        ' 

No  danger  in  going  alone,  it  is  true, 
But  yet  a  companion  is  pleasanter,  too; 
And  if  you  could  like — (now  the  swain  he  took  heart) — 
Such  a  sweetheart  as  me,  why  we  never  would  part. 
O  that's  a  long  word,  said  the  shepherdess  then, 
I've  often  heard  say  there's  no  minding  you  men. 
You'll  say  and  unsay,  and  you'll  flatter,  'tis  true! 
Then  to  leave  a  young  maiden's  the  first  thing  you  do. 

O  judge  not  so  harshly,  the  shepherd  replied, 
To  prove  what  I  say,  I  will  make  you  my  bride. 
To-morrow  the  parson — (well-said,  little  swain!)  — 
Shall  join  both  our  hands,  and  make  one  of  us  twain. 
Then  what  the  nymph  answered  to  this  isn't  said, 
The  very  next  morn,  to  be  sure,  theywere  wed. 
Sing  hey-diddle, — ho-diddle, — hey-diddle-down, — 
Now  when  shall  wc  see  such  a  wedding  in  town? 
l£l>Vi-    *••  Unknown 


"O   MERRY   MAY  THE   MAID   BE" 

O  MERRY  may  the  maid  be 

That  marries  wi' the  miller, 
For,  foul  day  and  fair  day. 

He's  aye  bringing  till  her, — 
Has  aye  a  penny  in  his  purse 

For  dinner  or  for  supper; 
And,  gin  she  please,  a  good  fat  cheese 

And  lumps  of  yellow  butter. 

When  Jamie  first  did  woo  me, 

I  speired  what  was  his  calling; 
"Fair  maid,"  says  he,  "O  come  and  see, 

Ye're  welcome  to  my  dwaUing." 
Though  I  was  shy,  yet  could  I  spy 

The  truth  o'  what  he  told  me. 
And  that  his  house  was  warm  and  couth,  >' <.  j'-"'- 

And  room  in  it  to  hold  me.  :  ano  lo'I 


The   Lass  o'   Gowrie 

Behind  the  door  a  bag  o'  meal,        :^  oT 

And  in  the  kist  was  plenty 
O'  guid  hard  cakes  his  mither  bakes, 

And  bannocks  werena  scanty. 
A  guid  fat  sow,  a  sleeky  cow 

Was  standing  in  the  byre, 
Whilst  lazy  puss  with  mealy  mouse 

Was  playing  at  the  lire. 

"  Guid  signs  are  these,"  my  mither  says, 

And  bids  me  tak'  the  miller; 
For,  fair  day  and  foul  day. 

He's  aye  bringing  till  her; 
For  meal  and  maut  she  doesna  want, 

Nor  anything  that's  dainty; 
And  now  and  then  a  kecking  hen. 

To  lay  her  eggs  in  plenty. 


In  winter,  when  the  wind  and  rain 

Blaws  o'er  the  house  and  byre, 
He  sits  beside  a  clean  hearth-stane, 

Before  a  rousing  fire. 
With  nut-brown  ale  he  tells  his  tale, 

Which  rows  him  o'er  fu'  nappy:  — 
Wha'd  be  a  king — a  petty  thing, 

When  a  miller  lives  so  happy? 

John  Clerk  [1684-1755] 


THE  LASS  O'   GOWRIE 

'TwAS  on  a  simmer's  afternoon, 
A  wee  afore  the  sun  gaed  doun, 
A  lassie  wi'  a  braw  new  goun 

Cam'  owre  the  hills  to  Gowrie. 
The  rosebud  washed  in  simmer's  shower 
Bloomed  fresh  within  the  sunny  bower; 
But  Kitty  was  the  fairest  flower 

That  e'er  was  seen  in  Gowrie. 


773 


774  Poems  of  Love 

To  see  her  cousin  she  cam'  there; 
And  oh!  the  scene  was  passing  fair, 
For  what  in  Scotland  can  compare 
>  Wi'  the  Carse  o'  Gowrie? 

The  sun  was  setting  on  the  Tay, 
The  blue  hills  melting  into  gray, 
The  mavis  and  the*blackbird's  lay 
Were  sweetly  heard  in  Gowrie. 

0  lang  the  lassie  I  had  wooed, 

And  truth  and  constancy  had  vowed, 
But  could  nae  speed  wi'  her  I  lo'ed 
Until  she  saw  fair  Gowrie. 

1  pointed  to  my  faither's  ha' — 
Yon  bonnie  bield  ayont  the  shaw, 

Sae  loun  that  there  nae  blast  could  blaw: — ■ 
Wad  she  no  bide  in  Gowrie? 

Her  faither  was  baith  glad  and  wae; 
Her  mither  she  wad  naething  say; 
The  bairnies  thocht  they  wad  get  play 

If  Kitty  gaed  to  Gowrie. 
She  whiles  did  smile,  she  whiles  did  greet; 
The  blush  and  tear  were  on  her  cheek ; 
She  narthing  said,  and  hung  her  head; — 

But  now  she's  Leddy  Gowrie. 

Carolina  Nairne  [i 766-1845] 


THE   CONSTANT  SWAIN  AND   VIRTUOUS 
MAID 

Soon  as  the  day  begins  to  waste, 
Straight  to  the  well-known  door  I  haste, 

And  rapping  there,  I'm  forced  to  stay 
While  Molly  hides  her  work  with  care, 
Adjusts  her  tucker  and  her  hair. 

And  nimble  Becky  scours  away. 

Entering,  I  see  in  Molly's  eyes 
A  sudden  smiling  joy  arise. 


"  When   the    Kye   Comes   Hame "     77^ 

As  quickly  checked  by  virgin  shame: 
She  drops  a  curtsey,  steals  a  glance, 
Receives  a  kiss,  one  step  advance. — 

If  such  I  love,  am  I  to  blame? 

I  sit,  and  talk  of  twenty  things, 

Of  South  Sea  stock,  or  death  of  kings, 

While  only  "Yes"  or  "No,"  says  Molly; 
As  cautious  she  conceals  her  thoughts. 
As  others  do  their  private  faults: — 

Is  this  her  prudence,  or  her  folly? 

Parting,  I  kiss  her  lip  and  cheek, 
I  hang  about  her  snowy  neck. 

And  cry,  "Farewell,  my  dearest  Molly!" 
Yet  still  I  hang  and  still  I  kiss. 
Ye  learned  sages,  say,  is  this 

In  me  the  effect  of  love,  or  folly? 

No — both  by  sober  reason  move, — 
She  prudence  shows,  and  I  true  love — 

No  charge  of  folly  can  be  laid. 
Then  (till  the  marriage-rites  proclaimed 
Shall  join  our  hands)  let  us  be  named 

The  constant  swain,  the  virtuous  maid. 

Unknown 

"WHEN  THE  KYE   COMES  HAME" 

Come,  all  ye  joUy  shepherds 

That  whistle  through  the  glen, 
I'll  tell  ye  of  a  secret 

That  courtiers  dinna  ken: 
W^hat  is  the  greatest  bHss 

That  the  tongue  o'  man  can  name? 
'Tis  to  woo  a  bonnie  lassie 
When  the  kye  comes  hame. 
When  the  kye  comes  hame. 

When  the  kye  comes  hame, 
'Tween  the  gloamin  and  the  mirk, 
When  the  kye  comes  hame. 


-776  Poems  of  Love 

'Tis  not  beneath  the  coronet, 

Nor  canopy  of  state, 
'Tis  not  on  couch  of  velvet, 

Nor  arbor  of  the  great — 
'Tis  beneath  the  spreading  birk, 

In  the  glen  without  the  name, 
Wi'  a  bonnie,  bonnie  lassie, 

When  the  kye  comes  hame. 

There  the  blackbird  bigs  his  nest 

For  the  mate  he  lo'es  to  see. 
And  on  the  topmost  bough,  ^y^ 

O,  a  happy  bird  is  he!  ,  p,.j,-.,-j  j 

Then  he  pours  his  melting  ditty, 

And  love  is  a'  the  theme, 
And  he'll  woo  his  bonnie  lassie 

When  the  kye  comes  hame. 

When  the  blewart  bears  a  pearl, 

And  the  daisy  turns  a  pea, 
And  the  bonnie  lucken  gowan 

Has  fauldit  up  her  e'e, 
Then  the  laverock  frae  the  blue  lift 

Draps  down,  and  thinks  nae  shame 
To  woo  his  bonnie  lassie 

When  the  kye  comes  hame. 

See  yonder  pawkie  shepherd 

That  lingers  on  the  hill — 
His  ewes  are  in  the  fauld. 

And  his  lambs  are  lying  still; 
Yet  he  downa  gang  to  bed. 

For  his  heart  is  in  a  flame 
To  meet  his  bonnie  lassie 

When  the  kye  comes  hame. 

When  the  little  vv'ee  bit  heart 
Rises  high  in  the  breast, 

And  the  little  wee  bit  starn 
Rises  red  in  the  east,     '< 


The   Low- Backed   Car  777 

O  there's  a  joy  sae  dear, 

That  the  heart  can  hardly  frame, 
Wi '  a  bonnie,  bonnie  lassie. 
When  the  kye  comes  hame. 

■.-177 
Then  since  all  nature  joins  ri'l' 

In  this  love  without  alloy, 
O,  wha  wad  prove  a  traitor 
To  Nature's  dearest  joy? 
Or  wha  wad  choose  a  crown, 
Wi'  its  perils  and  its  fame, 
And  miss  his  bonnie  lassie 
When  the  kye  comes  hame? 
When  the  kye  comes  hame. 

When  the  kye  comes  hame    ';' 
'Twecn  the  gloamin'  and  the  mirk. 
When  the  kye  comes  hame! 
oJk'bo;,         James  Hogg  I1770-1835] 


THE   LOW-BACKED   CAR 

When  first  I  saw  sweet  Peggy, 

'Twas  on  a  market  day, 
A  low-backed  car  she  drove,  and  sat 

Upon  a  truss  of  hay; 
But  when  that  hay  w-as  blooming  grass 

And  decked  with  flowers  of  Spring, 
No  flower  was  there  that  could  compare 

W^ith  the  blooming  girl  I  sing. 
As  she  sat  in  the  low-backed  car. 
The  man  at  the  turnpike  bar 
Never  asked  for  the  toll. 
But  just  rubbed  his  ould  poll. 
And  looked  after  the  low-backed  car. 

In  battle's  wild  commotion. 
The  proud  and  mighty  Mars, 

With  hostile  scythes,  demands  his  tithes 
Of  death — in  warlike  cars; 


778  Poems  of  Love 

While  Peggy,  peaceful  goddess, 
Has  darts  in  her  bright  eye. 
That  knock  men  down  in  the  market  town, 

As  right  and  left  they  fly; — 
While  she  sits  in  her  low-backed  car, 
Than  battle  more  dangerous  far,— 
For  the  doctor's  art 
Cannot  cure  the  heart 
That  is  hit  from  that  low-backed  car. 

Sweet  Peggy  round  her  car,  sir. 

Has  strings  of  ducks  and  geese, 
But  the  scores  of  hearts  she  slaughters 

By  far  outnumber  these; 
While  she  among  her  poultry  sits, 

Just  like  a  turtle-dove. 
Well  worth  the  cage,  I  do  engage. 

Of  the  blooming  god  of  Love! 
While  she  sits  in  her  low-backed  car, 
The  lovers  come  near  and  far. 
And  envy  the  chicken 
That  Peggy  is  pickin'. 
As  she  sits  in  her  low-backed  car. 

O,  I'd  rather  own  that  car,  sir. 

With  Peggy  by  my  side, 
Than  a  coach-and-four,  and  goold  galore, 

And  a  lady  for  my  bride; 
For  the  lady  would  sit  forninst  me. 

On  a  cushion  made  with  taste. 
While  Peggy  would  sit  beside  me, 

With  my  arm  around  her  waist, — 

While  we  drove  in  the  low-backed  car, 

To  be  married  by  Father  Mahar, 

O,  my  heart  would  beat  high 

At  her  glance  and  her  sigh, — 

Though  it  beat  in  a  low-backed  car! 

Samuel  Lover  [i  797-1  f 


The    Pretty   Girl  of  Loch   Dan       779 


THE  PRETTY  GIRL  OF  LOCH  DAN 

The  shades  of  eve  had  crossed  the  glen 
That  frowns  o'er  infant  Avonmore, 

When,  nigh  Loch  Dan,  two  weary  men, 
We  stopped  before  a  cottage  door. 

"God  save  all  here!"  my  comrade  cries, 
And  rattles  on  the  raised  latch-pin; 

"God  save  you  kindly!"  quick  replies 
A  clear  sweet  voice,  and  asks  us  in. 

We  enter;  from  the  wheel  she  starts, 

A  rosy  girl  with  soft  black  eyes; 
Her  fluttering  curtsey  takes  our  hearts, 

Her  blushing  grace  and  pleased  surprise. 

Poor  Mary,  she  was  quite  alone. 

For,  all  the  way  to  Glenmalure, 
Her  mother  had  that  morning  gone, 

And  left  the  house  in  charge  with  her. 

But  neither  household  cares,  nor  yet 
The  shame  that  startled  virgins  feel, 

Could  make  the  generous  girl  forget 
Her  wonted  hospitable  zeal. 

She  brought  us,  in  a  beechen  bowl, 

Sweet  milk  that  smacked  of  mountain  thyme. 
Oat  cake,  and  such  a  yellow  roll 

Of  butter, — it  gilds  all  my  rhyme! 

And,  while  we  ate  the  grateful  food 
(With  weary  limbs  on  bench  reclined), 

Considerate  and  discreet,  she  stood 
Apart,  and  Hstened  to  the  wnd. 

Kind  vidshes  both  our  souls  engaged, 

From  breast  to  breast  spontaneous  ran 
The  mutual  thought, — we  stood  and  pledged 
The  modest  rose  above  Loch  Dan. 


780  Poems  of  Love 

"The  milk  we  drink  is  not  more  pure, 

Sweet  Mary, — bless  those  budding  charms! — 

Than  your  own  generous  heart,  I'm  sure, 
Nor  whiter  than  the  breast  it  warms!" 

She  turned  and  gazed,  unused  to  hear 
Such  language  in  that  homely  glen; 

But,  Mary,  you  have  naught  to  fear. 
Though  smiled  on  by  two  stranger-men. 

Not  for  a  crown  would  I  alarm  •  •  -  •  :■■■■ 

Your  virgin  pride  by  word  or  sign,=i  iBob  A 

Nor  need  a  painful  blush  disarm 

My  friend  of  thoughts  as  pure  as  mine. 

Her  simple  heart  could  not  but  feel 

The  words  we  spoke  were  free  from  guile; 

She  stooped,  she  blushed,  she  fixed  her  wheel,- 
'Tis  all  in  vain, — she  can't  but  smile! 

Just  like  sweet  April's  dawn  appears  .^^ 

Her  modest  face, — I  see  it  yet, — 

And  though  I  lived  a  hundred  years 
Methinks  I  never  could  forget 

The  pleasure  that,  despite  her  heart, 
Fills  all  her  downcast  eyes  with  light; 

The  lips  reluctantly  apart, 

The  white  teeth  struggling  into  sight, 

The  dimples  eddying  o'er  her  cheek, — 
The  rosy  cheek  that  won't  be  still:— 

O,  who  could  blame  what  flatterers  speak. 
Did  smiles  like  this  reward  their  skill? 

For  such  another  smile,  I  vow, 

Though  loudly  beats  the  midnight  rain, 

I'd  take  the  mountain-side  e'en  now. 
And  walk  to  Luggelaw  again! 

Samuel  Ferguson  [1810-1S 


Muckle- Mouth    Meg  781 


MUCKLE-MOUTH  MEG 

Frowned  che  Laird  on  the  Lord:  "So,  red-handed  I  catch 
thee? 

Death-doomed  by  our  Law  of  the  Border! 
We've  a  gallows  outside  and  a  chicl  to  dispatch  thee: 

Who  trespasses — hangs:  all's  in  order." 

He  met  frown  with  smile,  did  the  young  English  gallant: 
Then  the  Laird's  dame:  "Nay,  Husband,  I  beg! 

He's  comely:  be  merciful!    Grace  for  the  callant 
— If  he  marries  our  Muckle-mouth  Meg!" 

"No  mile-wide-mouthed  monster  of  yours  do  I  marry: 

Grant  rather  the  gallows!"  laughed  he. 
"Foul  fare  kith  and  kin  of  you — why  do  you  tarry?" 

"To  tame  your  fierce  temper!"  quoth  she. 

"Shove  him  quick  in  the  Hole,  shut  him  fast  for  a  week: 

Cold,  darkness,  and  hunger  work  wonders: 
Who  lion-like  roars,  now  mouse-fashion  will  squeak, 

And  'it  rains'  soon  succeed  to  'it  thunders.'" 

A  week  did  he  bide  in  the  cold  and  dark 

■ — Not  hunger:  for  duly  at  morning 
In  flitted  a  lass,  and  a  voice  like  a  lark 

Chirped,  "Muckle-mouth  ]\Ieg  still  ye're  scorning? 

"Go  hang,  but  here's  parritch  to  hearten  ye  first!" 
"Did  Meg's  muckle-mouth  boast  within  some 

Such  music  as  yours,  mine  should  match  it  or  burst: 
No  frog-jaws!    So  tell  folk,  my  Winsome!" 

Soon  week  came  to  end,  and,  from  Hole's  door  set  wide. 
Out  he  mj^rched,  and  there  waited  the  lassie: 

"Yon  gallows,  or  Muckle-mouth  Meg  for  a  bride! 
Consider!     Sky's  blue  and  turf's  grassy: 

"Life's  sweet;  shall  I  say  ye  wed  Muckle-mouth  Meg?" 
"Not  I,"  quoth  the  stout  heart:  "too  eerie 

The  mouth  that  can  swallow  a  bubblyjock's  egg: 
Shall  I  let  it  munch  mine?    Never,  Dearie! " 


782  Poems  of  Love 

"Not  Muckle-mouth  Meg?     Wow,  the  obstinate  man! 

Perhaps  he  would  rather  wed  me!" 
"Ay,  would  he — with  just  for  a  dowry  your  can!" 

"I'm  Muckle-mouth  Meg,"  chirruped  she.       ^     '. 

(iAfn  r,n!-^ 

"Then  SO — so — so— so — "  as  he  kissed  her  apace —      ,  ,,, 

3V  3W 

"Will  I  widen  thee  out  till  thou  turnest  ^^^j 

From  Margaret  Minnikin-mou',  by  God's  grace, 
To  Muckle-mouth  Meg  in  good  earnest!" 

Igod  I  .'  Robert  Browning  [181 2-1880] 

'  n  - 

MUCKLE-MOU'D   MEG     ^^.       , 

"Oh,  what  hae  ye  brought  us  hame  now,  my  brave  lord, 

Strappit  flaught  owre  his  braid  saddle-bow? 
Some  bauld  Border  reiver  to  feast  at  our  board, 

An'  harry  our  pantry,  I  trow. 
He's  buirdly  an'  stalwart  in  lith  an'  in  limb; 

Gin  ye  were  his  master  in  war 
The  field  was  a  saft  eneugh  litter  for  him, 

Ye  needna  hae  brought  him  sae  far. 
Then  saddle  an'  munt  again,  harness  an'  dunt  again, 
An' when  ye  gae  hunt  again,  strike  higher  gamp.'f, , .      .     , 

ii  1)911  jfl   III 

"Hoot,  whisht  ye,  my  dame,  for  he  comes  o'  gude  kin, 

An'  boasts  o'  a  lang  pedigree; 
This  night  he  maun  share  0'  our  gude  cheer  within, 

At  morning's  gray  dawn  he  maun  dee. 
He's  gallant  Wat  Scott,  heir  o'  proud  Harden  Ha', 

Wha  ettled  our  lands  clear  to  sweep;  ''A""-  '-'^^ 

But  now  he  is  snug  in  auld  Elibank's  paw,        j{-jyv/  noo- 

An'  shall  swing  frae  our  donjon-keep.  ^  ,^^^  ,  q 

Though  saddle  an'  munt  again,  harness  an'  5.unt  again, 
I'll  ne'er  when  I  hunt  again  strike  higher  game." 

"Is  this  young  Wat  Scott?  an'  wad  ye  rax  his  craig, 

When  our  daughter  is  fey  for  a  man? 
Gae,  gaur  the  loun  marry  our  muckle-mou'd  Meg,    ■ 

Or  we'll  ne'er  get  the  jaud  afi  our  han'!" 


Glenlogie  783 

"Od!  hear  our  gudewife,  she  wad  fain  save  your  Ufe;  " 

Wat  Scott,  will  ye  marry  or  hang?" 
But  Meg's  muckle  mou  set  young  Wat's  heart  agrue.  ' 

.Wat  swore  to  the  woodie  he'd  gang.  '  ./ 

Ne'er  saddle  nor  raunt  again,  harness  nor  dunt  again, 
Wat  ne'er  shall  hunt  again,  ne'er  see  his  hame. 

Syne  muckle-mou'd  Meg  pressed  in  close  to  his  side, 

An'  bhnkit  fu'  sleely  and  kind. 
But  aye  as  Wat  glowered  at  his  braw  proffered  bride, 

He  shook  Hke  a  leaf  in  the  wind. 
"A  bride  or  a  gallows,  a  rope  or  a  wife!" 

The  morning  dawned  sunny  and  clear — 
Wat  boldly  strode  forward  to  part  wi'  his  life. 

Till  he  saw  Meggy  shedding  a  tear; 
Then  saddle  an'  munt  again,  harness  an'  dunt  again, 
Fain  wad  Wat  hunt  again,  fain  wad  be  hame. 

Meg's  tear  touched  his  bosom,  the  gibbet  frowned  high. 

An'  slowly  Wat  strode  to  his  doom ; 
He  gae  a  glance  round  wi'  a  tear  in  his  eye, 

Meg  shone  like  a  star  through  the  gloom. 
She  rushed  to  his  arms,  they  were  wed  on  the  spot. 

An'  lo'ed  ither  muckle  and  lang; 
Nae  bauld  border  laird  had  a  wife  like  Wat  Scott ; 

'Twas  better  to  marry  than  hang. 
So  saddle  an'  munt  again,  harness  an'  dunt  again, 
Elibank  hunt  again,  Wat's  snug  at  hame. 

James  Ballanlinc  [1808-1877] 

GLENLOGIE 

Threescore  o'  nobles  rade  to  the  king's  ha', 
But  bonnie  Glenlogie's  the  flower  0'  them  a', 
Wi'  his  miik-white  steed  and  his  bonnie  black  e'e, 
"Glenlogie,  dear  mither,  Glenlogie  for  me!" 

"O  hand  your  tongue,  dochter,  ye'll  get  better  than  he"; 

"O  say  na  sae,,  mither,  for  that  canna  be; 

Though  Doumlie  is  richer,  and  greater  than  he. 

Yet  if  I  maurr  tak'  him,  I'll  certainly  dee.  ;  )• 


784  Poems  of  Love 

"Where  will  I  get  a  bonnie  boy,  to  win  hose  and  shoon, 
Will  gae  to  Glenlogie,  and  come  again  soon?" 
"O  here  am  I,  a  bonnie  boy,  to  win  hose  and  shoon. 
Will  gae  to  Glenlogie  and  come  again  soon." 

When  he  gaed  to  Glenlogie,  'twas  "Wash  and  go  dine"; 
'Twas  "Wash  ye,  my  pretty  boy,  wash  and  go  dine." 
"O  'twas  ne'er  my  father's  fashion,  and  it  ne'er  shall  be  mine 
To  gar  a  lady's  errand  wait  till  I  dine. 

"But  there  is,  Glenlogie,  a  letter  for  thee." 
The  first  line  that  he  read,  a  low  smile  ga'e  he; 
The  next  line  that  he  read,  the  tear  blindit  his  e'e: 
But  the  last  line  he  read,  he  gart  the  table  flee. 

"Gar  saddle  the  black  horse,  gar  saddle  the  brown; 
Gar  saddle  the  swiftest  steed  e'er  rade  frae  a  town"; 
But  lang  ere  the  horse  was  brought  round  to  the  green, 
O  bonnie  Glenlogie  was  two  mile  his  lane. 

When  he  cam'  to  Glenfeldy's  door,  sma'  mirth  was  there; 

Bonnie  Jean's  mithcr  was  tearing  her  hair; 

"Ye're  welcome,  Glenlogie,  ye're  welcome,"  said  she, 

"  Ye're  welcome,  Glenlogie,  your  Jeanie  to  see."  ; 

Pale  and  wan  was  she,  when  Glenlogie  gaed  ben, 
But  red  rosy  grew  she  whene'er  he  sat  down; 
She  turned  awa'  her  head,  but  the  smile  was  in  her  e'e, 
"O  binna  feared,  mither,  I'll  maybe  no  dee." 

Unknown 

LOCHINVAR 

From  "Marmion" 

O,  YOUNG  Lochinvar  is  come  out  of  the  west, 
Through  all  the  wide  Border  his  steed  was  the  best ; 
And,  save  his  good  broadsword,  he  weapon  had  none, 
He  rode  all  unarmed,  and  he  rode  all  alone. 
So  faithful  in  love,  and  so  dauntless  in  war. 
There  never  was  knight  like  the  young  Lochinvar. 


Lochinvar  785 

Ke  stayed  not  for  brake,  and  he  stopped  not  for  stone, 

He  swam  the  Eske  river  where  ford  there  was  none; 

But,  ere  he  aUghted  at  Netherby  gate, 

The  bride  had  consented,  the  gallant  came  late; 

For  a  laggard  in  love,  and  a  dastard  in  war, 

Was  to  wed  the  fair  Ellen  of  brave  Lochinvar. 

So  boldly  he  entered  the  Netherby  Hall, 

Among  bridesmen,  and  kinsmen,  and  brothers,  and  all. 

Then  spoke  the  bride's  father,  his  hand  on  his  sword, 

(For  the  poor  craven  bridegroom  said  never  a  word), 

"O  come  ye  in  peace  here,  or  come  ye  in  war, 

Or  to  dance  at  our  bridal,  young  Lord  Lochinvar?" 

"I  long  wooed  your  daughter,  my  suit  you  denied; — 
Love  swells  like  the  Solway,  but  ebbs  like  its  tide, — 
And  now  am  I  come,  with  this  lost  love  of  mine, 
To  lead  but  one  measure,  drink  one  cup  of  wine. 
There  are  maidens  in  Scotland  more  lovely  by  far, 
That  would  gladly  be  bride  to  the  young  Lochinvar." 

The  bride  kissed  the  goblet;  the  knight  took  it  up. 
He  quaffed  off  the  wine,  and  he  threw  down  the  cup. 
She  looked  down  to  blush,  and  she  looked  up  to  sigh. 
With  a  smile  on  her  lips,  and  a  tear  in  her  eye. 
He  took  her  soft  hand,  ere  her  mother  could  bar, — 
"Now  tread  we  a  measure!"  said  young  Lochinvar. 

So  stately  his  form,  and  so  lovely  her  face. 

That  never  a  hall  such  a  galliard  did  grace; 

While  her  mother  did  fret,  and  her  father  did  fume. 

And  the  bridegroom  stood  dangling  his  bonnet  and  plume; 

And  the  bride-maidens  whispered,  '"Twere  better  by  far. 

To  have  matched  our  fair  cousin  with  young  Lochinvar." 

One  touch  to  her  hand,  and  one  word  in  her  ear. 
When  they  reached  the  hall-door,  and  the  charger  stood  near- 
So  light  to  the  croupe  the  fair  lady  he  swung. 
So  light  to  the  saddle  before  her  he  sprung! 


786  Poems  of  Love 

"She  is  won!  we  are  gone!  over  bank,  bush,  and  scaur; 
They'll  have  fleet  steeds  that  follow,"  quoth  young  Loch- 


There  was  mounting  'mong  Grammes  of  the  Netherby  clan;   I 

Forsters,  Fenwicks,  and  Musgraves,  they  rode  and  they  rati: 

There  was  racing  and  chasing  on  Cannobie  Lee, 

But  the  lost  bride  of  Netherby  ne'er  did  they  see. 

So  daring  in  love,  and  so  dauntless  in  war, 

Have  ye  e'er  heard  of  gallant  like  young  Lochinvar? 

Walter  Scott  [1771-18^2]^, 

-  •-0  O" 
JOCK  OF  HAZELDEAN 

"Why  weep  ye  by  the  tide,  ladie? 

Why  weep  ye  by  the  tide? 
I'll  wed  ye  to  my  youngest  son, 

And  ye  sail  be  his  bride: 
And  ye  sail  be  his  bride,  ladie, 

Sae  comely  to  be  seen" — 
But  aye  she  loot  the  tears  down  fa' 

For  Jock  of  Hazeldean. 

"Now  let  this  wilfu'  grief  be  done, 

And  dry  that  cheek  so  pale; 
Yovmg  Frank  is  chief  of  Errington 

And  lord  of  Langley-dale; 
His  step  is  first  in  peaceful  ha', 

His  sword  in  battle  keen  " — 
But  aye  she  loot  the  tears  down  fa' 

For  Jock  of  Hazeldean. 

"A  chain  of  gold  ye  sail  not  lack. 

Nor  braid  to  bind  your  hair. 
Nor  mettled  hound,  nor  managed  hawk, 

Nor  palfrey  fresh  and  fair; 
And  you  the  foremost  o'  them  a' 

Shall  ride  our  forest-queen" — 
But  aye  she  loot  the  tears  down  fa' 

For  Jock  of  Hazel '    . 


1/.    Candor  -..->*  f  787 

The  kirk  was  decked  at  morning-Lide, 

The  tapers  glimmered  fair; 
The  priest  and  bridegroom  wait  the  bride, 
■    And  dame  and  knight  are  there: 
They  sought  her  baith  by  bower  and  ha'; 

The  ladie  was  not  seen! 
She's  o'er  the  Border,  and  awa' 

\Vi'  Jock  of  Hazeldean. 

Waller  Scott  [i 771-1832] 


CANDOR 

OCTOBER — ^A    WOOD 

"I  KNOW  what  you're  gorng  to  say,"  she  said, 
And  she  stood  up,  looking  uncommonly  tall: 
"You  are  going  to  speak  of  the  hectic  fall. 

And  say  you're  sorry  the  summer's  dead, 
And  no  other  summer  was  like  it,  you  know, 
And  can  I  imagine  what  made  it  so. 

Now  aren't  you,  honestly?"    "Yes,"  I  said. 

"I  know  what  you're  going  to  say,"  she  said: 
"You  are  going  to  ask  if  I  forget  'f^^-  rn'I 

That  day  in  June  w'hen  the  w^oods  were  wet, 

And  you  carried  me" — here  she  drooped  her  head — 
"Over  the  creek;  you  are  going  to  say, 
Do  I  remember  that  horrid  day. 

Now  aren't  you,  honestly?"    "Yes,"  I  said. 

"I  know  what  you're  going  to  say,"  she  said: 
"You  are  going  to  say  that  since  that  time 

You  have  rather  tended  to  run  to  rhyme. 
And" — her  clear  glance  fell,  and  her  cheek  grew  red- 

"And  have  I  noticed  your  tone  was  queer. 

Why,  everybody  has  seen  it  here! 
Now  aren't  you,  honestly?"    "Yes,"  I  said. 

"I  know  what  you're  going  to  say,"  I  said: 

"You're  going  to  say  you've  been  much  annoyed; 
And  I'm  short  of  tact — you  will  say,  devoid — 


788  Poems  of  Love 

And  I'm  clumsy  and  awkward;  and  call  me  Ted; 

And  I  bear  abuse  like  a  dear  old  lamb; 

And  you'll  have  me,  anyway,  just  as  I  am. 
Now  aren't  you,  honestly?"    "Ye-es,"  she  said. 
Henry  Ciiylcr  Bunner  [1855-1J 


"DO   YOU   REMEMBER" 

Do  you  remember  when  you  heard 

My  lips  breathe  love's  first  faltering  word? 

You  do,  sweet — don't  you? 
When,  having  wandered  all  the  day, 
Linked  arm  in  arm,  I  dared  to  say, 

"You'll  love  me — won't  you?  " 

And  when  you  blushed  and  could  not  speak, 
I  fondly  kissed  your  glowing  cheek. 

Did  that  affront  you? 
Oh,  surely  not — your  eye  expressed 
No  wrath — but  said,  perhaps  in  jest, 

"You'll  love  me — won't  you?  " 

I'm  sure  my  eyes  replied,  "I  will." 
And  you  believe  that  promise  still. 

You  do,  sweet — don't  you? 
Yes,  yes!  when  age  has  made  our  eyes 
Unfit  for  questions  or  replies. 

You'll  love  me — won't  you? 

Thomas  Ilaynes  Bayly  [1797-1839] 

BECAUSE 

Sweet  Nea! — for  your  lovely  sake 

I  weave  these  rambling  numbers, 
Because  I've  lain  an  hour  awake. 

And  can't  compose  my  slumbers; 
Because  your  beauty's  gentle  light 

Is  round  my  pillow  beaming. 
And  flings,  I  know  not  why,  to-night, 

Some  witchery  o'er  my  dreaming! 


Because  789 

Because  we've  passed  some  joyous  days, 

And  danced  some  merry  dances; 
Because  wc  love  old  Beaumont's  plays, 

And  old  Froissart's  romances! 
Because  whene'er  I  hear  your  words 

Some  pleasant  feeling  lingers; 
Because  I  think  your  heart  has  cords 

That  vibrate  to  your  fingers. 

Because  you've  got  those  long,  soft  curls, 

I've  sworn  should  deck  my  goddess; 
Because  you're  not,  like  other  girls. 

All  bustle,  blush,  and  bodice! 
Because  your  eyes  are  deep  and  blue, 

Your  fingers  long  and  rosy; 
Because  a  little  child  and  you 

Would  make  one's  home  so  cosy! 

Because  your  little  tiny  nose 

Turns  up  so  pert  and  funny; 
Because  I  know  you  choose  your  beaux 

More  for  their  mirth  than  money; 
Because  I  think  you'd  rather  twirl 

A  waltz,  with  me  to  guide  you. 
Than  talk  small  nonsense  with  an  earl, 

And  a  coronet  beside  you! 

Because  you  don't  object  to  walk. 

And  arc  not  given  to  fainting; 
Because  you  have  not  learned  to  talk 

Of  flowers,  and  Poonah-painting; 
Because  I  think  you'd  scarce  refuse 

To  sew  one  on  a  button; 
Because  I  know  j'ou  sometimes  choose 

To  dine  on  simple  mutton! 

Because  I  think  I'm  just  so  weak 

As,  some  of  those  fine  morrows. 
To  ask  you  if  you'll  let  me  speak 

My  story — and  my  sorrows; 


790  Poems  of  Love 

Because  the  rest's  a  simple  thing, 

A  matter  quickly  over 
A  church— a  priest — a  sigh — a  ring — 

And  a  chaise-and-four  to  Dover. 

Edward  Fitzgerald  [1800-1883] 

LOVE  AND   AGE 

From  "  Gryll  Grange  " 

I  PLAYED  with  you  'mid  cowslips  blowing, 

When  I  was  six  and  you  were  four; 
When  garlands  weaving,  fiower-balls  throwing, 

Were  pleasures  soon  to  please  no  more. 
Through  groves  and  meads,  o'er  grass  and  heather, 

With  little  playmates,  to  and  fro. 
We  wandered  hand  in  hand  together; 

But  that  was  sixty  years  ago. 

You  grew  a  lovely  roseate  maiden. 

And  still  our  early  love  was  strong; 
Still  with  no  care  our  days  were  laden. 

They  glided  joyously  along; 
And  I  did  love  you  very  dearly — 

How  dearly,  words  want  power  to  show; 
I  thought  your  heart  was  touched  as  nearly; 

But  that  was  fifty  years  ago. 

Then  other  lovers  came  around  you. 

Your  beauty  grew  from  year  to  year, 
And  many  a  splendid  circle  found  you 

The  center  of  its  glittering  sphere. 
I  saw  you  then,  first  vows  forsaking. 

On  rank  and  wealth  your  hand  bestow; 
O,  then,  I  thought  my  heart  was  breaking, — 

But  that  was  forty  years  ago. 

And  I  lived  on,  to  wed  another: 

No  cause  she  gave  me  to  repine; 
And  when  I  heard  you  were  a  mother, 

I  did  not  wish  the  children  mine. 


To  Helen  791 

My  own  young  flock,  in  fair  progression, 

Made  up  a  pleasant  Christmas  row: 
My  joy  in  them  was  past  expression; — 

But  that  was  thirty  years  ago. 

You  grew  a  matron  plump  and  comely, 

You  dwelt  in  fashion's  brightest  blaze; 
]My  earthly  lot  was  far  more  homely; 

But  I  too  had  my  festal  days. 
No  merrier  eyes  have  ever  glistened 

Around  the  hearth-stone's  wintry  glow. 
Than  when  my  youngest  child  was  christened: — 

But  that  was  twenty  years  ago. 

Time  passed.    ]\Iy  eldest  girl  was  married, 

And  I  am  now  a  grandsire  gray; 
One  pet  of  four  years  old  I've  carried 

Among  the  wild-flowered  meads  to  play. 
In  our  old  fields  of  childish  pleasure, 

Where  now,  as  then,  the  cowslips  blow. 
She  fills  her  basket's  ample  measure, — 

And  that  is  not  ten  years  ago. 

But  though  .first  love's  impassioned  bUndness 

Has  passed  away  in  colder  light, 
I  still  have  thought  of  you  with  kindness. 

And  shall  do,  till  our  last  good-night. 
The  ever-rolling  silent  hours 

Will  bring  a  time  we  shall  not  know. 
When  our  young  days  of  gathering  flowers 

Will  be  an  hundred  years  ago. 

Thomas  Love  Peacock  [1785-1866] 


TO  HELEN 

If  wandering  in  a  wizard's  car 

Through  yon  blue  ether,  I  were  able 

To  fashion  of  a  little  star 
A  taper  for  my  Helen's  table; — 


792  Poems   of  Love 

"What  then?"  she  asks  me  with  a  laugh — 
Why,  then,  with  all  heaven's  luster  glowing, 

It  would  not  gild  her  path  with  half 

The  light  her  love  o'er  mine  is  throwing! 

Winthrop  Mackworth  Praed  [1802- 183  9] 

AT  THE  CHURCH  GATE 

From  "  Pendennb  " 

Although  I  enter  not, 
Yet  round  about  the  spot 

Ofttimes  I  hover; 
And  near  the  sacred  gate, 
With  longing  eyes  I  wait, 

Expectant  of  her. 

The  Minster  bell  tolls  out 
Above  the  city's  rout, 

And  noise  and  humming; 
They've  hushed  the  Minster  bell: 
The  organ  'gins  to  swell; 

She's  coming,  she's  coming! 

My  lady  comes  at  last, 
Timid,  and  stepping  fast 

And  hastening  hither, 
With  modest  eyes  downcast; 
She  comes — she's  here — she's  past! 

May  heaven  go  with  her! 

Kneel  undisturbed,  fair  Saint! 
Pour  out  your  praise  or  plaint 

M«ekly  and  duly; 
I  will  not  enter  there. 
To  sully  your  pure  prayer 

With  thoughts  unruly. 

But  suffer  me  to  pace 
Round  the  forbidden  place. 
Lingering  a  minute, 


Toujours   Amour  793 

Like  outcast  spirits,  who  wait, 
And  see,  through  heaven 's  gate, 
Angels  within  it. 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 


MABEL,  IN  NEW  HAMPSHIRE 

Fairest  of  the  fairest,  rival  of  the  rose. 

That  is  Mabel  of  the  Hills,  as  everybody  knows. 

Do  you  ask  me  near  what  stream  this  sweet  floweret  grows? 
That's  an  ignorant  question,  sir,  as  everybody  knows. 

Ask  you  what  her  age  is,  reckoned  as  time  goes? 
Just  the  age  of  beauty,  as  everybody  knows. 

Is  she  tall  as  Rosalind,  standing  on  her  toes? 

She  is  just  the  perfect  height,  as  everybody  knows." 

What's  the  color  of  her  eyes,  when  they  ope  or  close? 
Just  the  color  they  should  be,  as  everybody  knows. 

Is  she  lovelier  dancing,  or  resting  in  repose? 
Both  are  radiant  pictures,  as  everybody  knows. 

Do  her  ships  go  sailing  on  every  wind  that  blows? 
She  is  richer  far  than  that,  as  everybody  knows. 

Has  she  scores  of  lovers,  heaps  of  bleeding  beaux? 
That  question's  quite  superfluous,  as  everybody  knows. 

I  could  tell  you  something,  if  I  only  chose! — 

But  what's  the  use  of  telling  what  everybody  knows? 

James  Thomas  F;VWj[iSi6-i8Si] 


TOUJOURS  AMOUR 

Prithee  tell  me,  Dimple-Chin, 
At  what  age  does  Love  begin? 
Your  blue  eyes  have  scarcely  seen 
Summers  three,  my  fairy  queen, 


794  Poems  of  Love 

But  a  miracle  of  sweets, 
Soft  approaches,  sly  retreats, 
Show  the  little  archer  there. 
Hidden  in  your  pretty  hair; 
When  didst  learn  a  heart  to  win? 
Prithee  tell  me,  Dimple-Chin! 

"Oh!"  the  rosy  lips  reply, 

"I  can't  tell  you  if  I  try. 

'Tis  so  long  I  can't  remember: 

Ask  some  younger  lass  than  I!" 

Tell,  O  tell  me,  Grizzled-Face, 
Do  your  heart  and  head  keep  pace? 
When  does  hoary  Love  expire. 
When  do  frosts  put  out  the  lire? 
Can  its  embers  burn  below 
All  that  chill  December  snow? 
Care  you  still  soft  hands  to  press. 
Bonny  heads  to  smooth  and  bless? 
When  does  Love  give  up  the  chase? 
Tell,  O  tell  me,  Grizzled-Face! 

"Ah!"  the  wise  old  lips  reply, 
"Youth  may  pass  and  strength  may  die; 
But  of  Love  I  can't  foretoken : 
Ask  some  older  sage  than  I!" 

Edmund  Clarence  Stedman  [1833-1008] 

THE  DOORSTEP 

The  conference-meeting  through  at  last. 
We  boys  around  the  vestry  waited 

To  see  the  girls  come  tripping  past. 
Like  snovz-birds  willing  to  be  mated. 

Not  braver  he  that  leaps  the  wall 
By  level  musket-flashes  bitten, 

Than  I,  that  stepped  before  them  all 
Who  longed  to  see  me  get  the  mitten. 


The   Doorstep  795 

But  no!  she  blushed  and  took  my  arm: 
We  let  the  old  folks  have  the  highway, 

And  started  toward  the  Maple  Farm 
Along  a  kind  of  lovers'  by-way. 

I  can't  remember  what  we  said, — 
'Twas  nothing  worth  a  song  or  story; 

Yet  that  rude  path  by  which  we  sped 
Seemed  all  transformed  and  in  a  glory. 

The  snow  was  crisp  beneath  our  feet, 

The  moon  was  full,  the  fields  were  gleaming; 

By  hood  and  tippet  sheltered  sweet. 

Her  face  with  youth  and  health  was  beaming. 

The  little  hand  outside  her  muff 

(0  sculptor!  if  you  could  but  mold  it) 

So  lightly  touched  my  jacket-cuff, 
To  keep  it  warm  I  had  to  hold  it. 

To  have  her  with  me  there  alone, — 

'Twas  love  and  fear  and  triumph  blended-; 

At  last  we  reached  the  foot -worn  stone 
Where  that  delicious  journey  ended. 

The  old  folks,  too,  were  almost  home: 
Her  dim.pled  hand  the  latches  fingered, 

We  heard  the  voices  nearer  come, 
Yet  on  the  doorstep  still  we  lingered. 

She  shook  her  ringlets  from  her  hood. 

And  with  a  "Thank  you,  Ned!"  dissembled; 

But  yet  I  knew  she  understood 

With  what  a  daring  wish  I  trembled. 

A  cloud  passed  kindly  overhead, 
The  moon  was  slyly  peeping  through  it. 

Yet  hid  its  face,  as  if  it  said — 

"Come,  now  or  never!  do  it!  do  ill" 


796  Poems  of  Love 

My  lips  till  then  had  only  known  ,    _. . 

The  kiss  of  mother  and  of  sister, — 
But  somehow,  full  upon  her  own 

Sweet,  rosy,  darling  mouth, — I  kissed  her! 

Perhaps  'twas  boyish  love:  yet  still, 

0  listless  woman!  weary  lover! 

To  feel  once  more  that  fresh,  wild  thrill 

1  'd  give — but  who  can  live  youth  over? 

Ednitmd  Clarence  Stedmaii  [i S3 3- 1908] 


THE  WHITE  FLAG 

I  SENT  my  love  two  roses, — one 

As  white  as  driven  snow, 
And  one  a  blushing  royal  red, 

A  flaming  Jacqueminot. 

I  meant  to  touch  and  test  my  fate; 

That  night  I  should  divine, 
The  moment  I  should  see  my  love, 

If  her  true  heart  were  mine. 

For  if  she  holds  me  dear,  I  said, 

She'll  wear  my  blushing  rose; 
If  not,  she'll  wear  my  cold  Lamarque, 

As  white  as  winter's  snows. 

My  heart  sank  when  I  met  her:  sure 

I  had  been  overbold. 
For  on  her  breast  my  pale  rose  lay 

In  virgin  whiteness  cold. 

Yet  with  low  words  she  greeted  me, 

With  smiles  divinely  tender; 
Upon  her  cheek  the  red  rose  dawned, — 

The  white  rose  meant  surrender. 

John  Hay  [1838-1905] 


A  Song  of  the   Four  Seasons        797 


A  SONG  OF  THE  FOUR  SEASONS 

When  Spring  comes  laughing 

By  vale  and  hill, 
By  wind-flower  walking 

And  daffodil, — 
Sing  stars  of  morning, 

Sing  morning  skies. 
Sing  blue  of  speedwell, — 

And  my  Love's  eyes. 

When  comes  the  Summer, 

Full-leaved  and  strong. 
And  gay  birds  gossip 

The  orchard  long, — 
Sing  hid,  sweet  honey 

That  no  bee  sips; 
Sing  red,  red  roses,— 

And  my  Love's  lips. 

When  Autumn  scatters 

The  leaves  again, 
And  piled  sheaves  bury 

The  broad-wheeled  wain, — 
Sing  flutes  of  harvest 

Where  men  rejoice;     , 
Sing  rounds  of  reapers, — 

And  my  Love's  voice. 

But  W'hen  comes  Winter 

With  hail  and  storm. 
And  red  fire  roaring 

And  ingle  warm, — 
Sing  first  sad  going 

Of  friends  that  part; 
Then  sing  glad  meeting, — 

And  my  LoVe's  heart. 

Austin  Dobson  [1S40- 


798  Poems   of  Love 


THE  LOVE-KNOT 

Tying  her  bonnet  under  her  chin, 
She  tied  her  raven  ringlets  in; 
But  not  aione  in  the  silken  snare 
Did  she  catch  her  lovely  iloating  hair, 
For,  tying  her  bonnet  under  her  chin, 
She  tied  a  young  man's  heart  within. 

They  were  strolling  together  up  the  hill, 
Where  the  wind  came  blowing  merry  and  chill; 
And  it  blew  the  curls,  a  frolicsome  race. 
All  over  the  happy  peach-colored  face. 
Till,  scolding  and  laughing,  she  tied  them  in, 
Under  her  beautiful,  dimpled  chin. 

And  it  blew  a  color,  bright  as  the  bloom 
Of  the  pinkest  fuchsia's  tossing  plume, 
All  over  the  cheeks  of  the  prettiest  girl 
That  ever  imprisoned  a  romping  curl. 
Or,  in  tying  her  bonnet  under  her  chin. 
Tied  a  young  man's  heart  within. 

Steeper  and  steeper  grew  the  hill. 
Madder,  merrier,  chilHer  still 
The  western  wind  blew  down,  and  played 
The  wildest' tricks  with  the  little  maid. 
As,  tying  her  bonnet  under  her  chin. 
She  tied  a  young  man's  heart  within. 

O  western  wind,  do  you  think  it  was  fair 

To  play  such  tricks  with  her  floating  hair? 

To  gladly,  gleefully,  do  your  best 

To  blow  her  against  the  young  man's  breast, 

Where  he  as  gladly  folded  her  in, 

And  kissed  her  mouth  and  her  dimpled  chin? 

Ah!  Ellery  Vane,  you  little  thought, 
An  hour  ago,  when  you  besought 


Riding  Down  799 

This  country  lass  to  walk  with  you, 
After  the  sun  had  dried  the  dew, 
What  terrible  danger  you'd  be  in, 
As  she  tied  her  bonnet  under  her  chin! 

Nora  Perry  [18,^2-1896] 

RIDING  DOWN 

Oh,  did  you  see  him  riding  down, 
And  riding  down,  while  all  the  town 
Came  out  to  see,  came  out  to  see. 
And  all  the  bells  rang  mad  with  glee? 

Oh,  did  you  hear  those  bells  ring  out, 
The  bells  ring  out,  the  people  shout, 
And  did  you  hear  that  cheer  on  cheer 
That  over  all  the  bells  rang  clear? 

And  did  you  see  the  waving  flags. 

The  fluttering  flags,  the  tattered  flags, 

Red,  white,  and  blue,  shot  through  and  tlirough, 

Baptized  with  battle's  deadly  dew? 

And  did  you  hear  the  drums'  gay  beat, 
The  drums'  gay  beat,  the  bugles  sweet, 
The  cymbals'  clash,  the  cannons'  crash. 
That  rent  the  sky  with  sound  and  flash? 

And  did  you  see  mc  waiting  there. 
Just  waiting  there,  and  watching  there. 
One  little  lass,  amid  the  mass 
That  pressed  to  see  the  hero  pass? 

And  did  you  see  him  smiling  down. 
And  smiling  down,  as  riding  down 
With  slowest  pace,  with  stately  grace, 
He  caught  the  vision  of  a  face, — 

My  face  uplifted  red  and  white. 
Turned  red  and  white  with  sheer  delight, 


Soo  Poems  of  Love 

To  meet  the  eyes,  the  smiHng  eyes, 
Outflashing  in  their  swift  surprise? 

Oh,  did  you  see  how  swift  it  came, 
How  swift  it  came  Hke  sudden  flame, 
That  smile  to  me,  to  only  me. 
The  little  lass  who  blushed  to  see? 

And  at  the  windows  all  along, 
Oh,  all  along,  a  lovely  throng 
Of  faces  fair,  beyond  compare, 
Beamed  out  upon  him  riding  there! 

Each  face  was  like  a  radiant  gem, 
A  sparkhng  gem,  and  yet  for  them 
No  swift  smile  came  like  sudden  flame, 
No  arrowy  glance  took  certain  aim. 

He  turned  away  from  all  their  grace, 
From  all  that  grace  of  perfect  face, 
He  turned  to  me,  to  only  me. 
The  little  lass  who  blushed  to  see! 

Nora  Perry  [1832-1806] 


"FORGETTIN"' 

The  night  when  last  I  saw  my  lad 
His  eyes  were  bright  an'  wet. 

He  took  my  two  hands  in  his  own, 
"'Tis  well,"  says  he,  "we're  met. 

Asthore  machreel  the  likes  o'  me 
I  bid  ye  now  forget." 

Ah,  sure  the  same's  a  thriflin'  thing. 

'Tis  more  I'd  do  for  him! 
I  mind  the  night  I  promised  well. 

Away  on  Ballindim. — 
An'  every  little  while  or  so 

I  thry  forgettin'  Jim. 

It  shouldn't  take  that  long  to  do, 
An'  him  not  very  tall: 


"Across  the   Fields  to  Anne"        8oi 

'Tis  quare  the  way  I'll  hear  his  voice, 

A  boy  that's  out  o'  call, — 
An'  whiles  I'll  see  him  stand  as  plain 

As  e'er  a  six-fut  wall. 

Och,  never  fear,  my  jewel! 

I'd  forget  ye  now  this  minute, 
If  I  only  had  a  notion 

O'  the  way  I  should  begin  it; 
But  first  an'  last  it  isn't  known 

The  heap  o'  throuble's  in  it. 

Meself  began  the  night  ye  went 

An'  hasn't  done  it  yet; 
I'm  nearly  fit  to  give  it  up, 

For  where's  the  use  to  fret? — 
An'  the  memory's  fairly  spoilt  on  me 

Wid  mindin'  to  forget. 

Uoira  O'Neill  [i8 

"ACROSS  THE  FIELDS  TO  ANNE" 

How  often  in  the  summer-tide, 

His  graver  business  set  aside, 

Has  stripling  Will,  the  thoughtful-eyed. 

As  to  the  pipe  of  Pan, 
Stepped  blithesomely  with  lover's  pride 

Across  the  fields  to  Anne. 

It  must  have  been  a  merry  mile, 
This  summer  stroll  by  hedge  and  stile, 
With  sweet  foreknowledge  all  the  while 

How  sure  the  pathway  ran 
To  dear  delights  of  kiss  and  smile, 

Across  the  fields  to  Anne. 

The  silly  sheep  that  graze  to-day, 

I  wot,  they  let  him  go  his  way, 

Nor  once  looked  up,  as  who  would  say: 

"It  is  a  seemly  man." 
For  many  lads  went  wooing  aye 

Across  the  fields  to  Anne. 


8o2  Poems  of  Love 

The  oaks,  they  have  a  wiser  look; 
Mayhap  they  whispered  to  the  brook: 
"The  world  by  him  shall  yet  be  shook, 

It  is  in  nature's  plan; 
Though  now  he  fleets  like  any  rook 

Across  the  fields  to  Anne." 

And  I  am  sure,  that  on  some  hour 
Coquetting  soft  'twixt  sun  and  shower, 
He  stooped  and  broke  a  daisy-flower 

With  heart  of  tiny  span, 
And  bore  it  as  a  lover's  dower 

Across  the  fields  to  Anne. 

Whfle  from  her  cottage  garden-bed 
She  plucked  a  jasmin's  goodlihede. 
To  scent  his  jerkin's  brown  instead; 

Now  since  that  love  began, 
What  luckier  swain  than  he  who  sped 

Across  the  fields  to  i\.nne? 

The  winding  path  whereon  I  pace. 

The  hedgerows  green,  the  summer's  grace. 

Are  still  before  me  face  to  face; 

Methinks  I  almost  can 
Turn  port  and  join  the  singing  race 

Across  the  fields  to  Anne. 

Richard  Burton  [iSsg- 

PAMELA  IN  TOWN 

The  fair  Pamela  came  to  town. 

To  London  town,  in  early  summer; 
And  up  and  down  and  round  about 

The  beaux  discussed  the  bright  newcomer. 
With  "Gadzooks,  sir,"  and  "Ma'am,  my  duty," 
And  "Odds  my  life,  but  'tis  a  Beauty!" 

To  Ranelagh  went  Mistress  Pam, 

Sweet  Mistress  Pam  so  fair  and  merry, 

With  cheeks  of  cream  and  roses  blent, 
With  voice  of  lark  and  lip  of  cherry. 


Pamela  in  Town  803 

Then  all  the  beaux  vowed  'twas  their  duty 
To  win  and  wear  this  country  Beauty. 

And  first  Frank  Lovelace  tried  his  wit, 

With  whispers  bold  and  eyes  still  bolder; 
The  warmer  grew  his  saucy  llamc, 

Cold  grew  the  charming  fair  and  colder. 
'Twas  "icy  bosom" — "cruel  beauty" — 
"To  love,  sweet  Mistress,  'tis  a  duty." 

Then  Jack  Carew  liis  arts  essayed, 

With  honeyed  sighs  and  feigned  weeping. 
Good  lack!  his  billets  bound  the  curls 
That  pretty  Pam  she  wore  a-sleeping. 
Next  day  these  curls  had  richer  beauty, 
So  well  Jack's  fervor  did  its  duty. 

Then  Cousin  Will  came  up  to  view 

The  way  Pamela  ruled  the  fashion; 
He  watched  the  gallants  crowd  about. 
And  flew  into  a  rustic  passion, — 
Left  "Squire,  his  mark,"  on  divers  faces. 
And  pinked  Carew  beneath  his  laces. 

Alack !  one  night  at  Ranelagh 

The  pretty  Sly-boots  feU  a-blushing; 
And  all  the  mettled  bloods  looked  round 
To  see  what  caused  that  telltale  flushing. 
Up  stepped  a  grizzled  Poet  Fellow 
To  dance  with  Pam  a  saltarello. 

Then  Jack  and  Frank  and  Will  resolved, 

With  hand  on  sword  and  cutting  glances. 
That  they  would  lead  that  Graybeard  forth 
To  Hveher  tunes  and  other  dances. 
But  who  that  saw  Pam's  eyes  a-shining 
With  love  and  joy  would  see  her  pining! 

And  — oons!    Their  wrath  cooled  as  they  looked — 

That  Poet  stared  as  fierce  as  any! 
He  was  a  mighty  proper  man. 

With  blade  on  hip  and  inches  many; 


8o4  Poems  of  Love 

The  beaux  air  vowed  it  was  their  duty 
To  toast  some  newer,  softer  Beauty. 

Sweet  Pam  she  bridled,  blushed  and  smiled — 

The  wild  thing  loved  and  could  but  show  it! 
Mayhap  some  day  you'll  see  in  town 
Pamela  and  her  grizzled  Poet. 
Forsooth  he  taught  the  rogue  her  duty. 
And  won  her  faith,  her  love,  her  beauty. 

Ellen  Mackay  Hutchinson  Cortissoz  [i8    - 


YES? 

Is  it  true,  then.,  my  girl,  that  you  mean  it — 

The  word  spoken  yesterday  night? 
Does  that  hour  seem  so  sweet  now  between  it 

And  this  has  come  day's  sober  light? 
Have  you  woke  from  a  moment  of  rapture 

To  remember,  regret,  and  repent, 
And  to  hate,  perchance,  him  who  has  trapped  your 

Unthinking  consent? 

Who  was  he,  last  evening — this  fellow 

Whose  audacity  lent  him  a  charm? 
Have  you  promised  to  wed  Pulchinello? 

For  life  taking  Figaro's  arm? 
Will  you  have  the  Court  fool  of  the  papers, 

The  clown  in  the  journalists'  ring, 
Who  earns  his  scant  bread  by  his  capers. 

To  be  your  heart's  king? 

When  we  met  quite  by  chance  at  the  theatre 

And  I  saw  you  home  under  the  moon, 
I'd  no  thought,  love,  that  mischief  would  be  at  her 

Tricks  with  my  tongue  quite  so  soon; 
That  I  should  forget  fate  and  fortune 

Make  a  difference  'twixt  Sevres  and  delf — 
That  I'd  have  the  calm  nerve  to  importune 

You,  sweet,  for  yourself. 


The  Prime  of  Life  805 

It's  appalling,  by  Jove,  the  audacious 

Effrontery  of  that  request ! 
But  you — you  grew  suddenly  gracious. 

And  hid  your  sweet  face  on  my  breast. 
Why  you  did  it  I  cannot  conjecture; 

I  surprised  you,  poor  child,  I  dare  say, 
Or  perhaps — does  the  moonlight  affect  your 

Head  often  that  way? 

You're  released!    With  some  wooer  replace  me 

More  worthy  to  be  your  life's  light; 
From  the  tablet  of  memory  efface  me. 

If  you  don't  mean  your  Yes  of  last  night. 
But — unless  you  are  anxious  to  see  me  a 

Wreck  of  the  pipe  and  the  cup 
In  my  birthplace  and  graveyard,  Bohemia — 

Love,  don't  give  me  up! 

Henry  Cuyler  Biinner  [1855-1896] 

THE   PRIME  OF  LIFE 

Just  as  I  thought  I  was  growing  old. 

Ready  to  sit  in  my  easy  chair, 
To  watch  the  world  with  a  heart  grown  cold, 

And  smile  at  a  folly  I  would  not  share, 

Rose  came  by  with  a  smile  for  me, 

And  I  am  thinking  that  forty  year 
Isn't  the  age  that  it  seems  to  be, 

When  two  pretty  brown  eyes  are  near. 

Bless  me!  of  life  it  is  just  the  prime, 
A  fact  that  I  hope  she  will  understand; 

And  forty  year  is  a  perfect  rhyme 

To  dark  brown  eyes  and  a  pretty  hand. 

These  gray  hairs  are  by  chance,  you  see — 

Boys  are  sometimes  gray,  I  am  told: 
Rose  came  by  with  a  smile  for  me, 

Just  as  I  thought  I  was  getting  old. 

Waller  Learned  [1847-1915] 


8o6  Poems  of  Love 


THOUGHTS  ON   THE   COMMANDMENTS 

"Love  your  neighbor  as  yourself," — 

So  the  parson  preaches: 
That's  one  half  the  Decalogue, — 

So  the  prayer-book  teaches. 
Half  my  duty  I  can  do  ^^  Li^Ai 

With  but  httle  labor, 
For  with  all  my  heart  and  soul 

I  do  love  my  neighbpr. 

Mighty  little  credit;  that, 

To  my  self-denial, 
Not  to  love  her,  though,  might  be 

Something  of  a  trial. 
Why,  the  rosy  light,  that  peeps 

Through  the  glass  above  her, 
Lingers  round  her  lips, — you  see 

E'en  the  sunbeams  love  her,, 

So  to  make  my  merit  more, 

I'll  go  beyond  the  letter: — 
i'  Love  my  neighbor  as  myself? 

Yes,  and  ten  times  better. 
For  she's  sweeter  than  the  breath 

Of  the  Spring,  that  passes  , 

Through  the  fragrant,  budding  woods, 

O'er  the  meadow-grasses. 

And  I've  preached  the  word  I  know. 

For  it  was  my  duty 
To  convert  the  stubborn  heart 

Of  the  little  beauty.  • 
Once  again  success  has  crowned 

Missionary  labor, 
For  her  sweet  eyes  own  that  she 

Also  loves  her  neighbor. 

George  Augustus  Baker  [1849-1906] 


THE  IRONY  OF  LOVE 

"SIGH  NO  MORE,  LADIES" 

From"  Much  Ado  About  Nothing  " 

Sigh  no  more,  ladies,  sigh  no  more, 

IMen  were  deceivers  ever; 
One  foot  in  sea,  and  one  on  shore; 
To  one  thing  constant  never. 
Then  sigh  not  so, 
But  let  them  go, 
And  be  you  bHthe  and  bonny, 
Converting  aU  your  sounds  of  woe 
Into  Hey  nonny,  nonny. 

Sing  no  more  ditties,  sing  no  moe 

Of  dumps  so  dull  and  heavy; 
The  fraud  of  men  was  ever  so, 
Since  sum.mer  first  was  leavy. 
Then  sigh  not  so, 
But  let  them  go, 
And  be  you  blithe  and  bonny, 
Converting  all  your  sounds  of  woe 
Into  Hey  nonny,  nonny. 

William  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 


A  RENUNCIATION 

If  women  could  be  fair,  and  yet  not  fond, 
Or  that  their  love  were  firm,  not  fickle  still, 
I  would  not  marvel  that  they  make  men  bond 
By  service  long  to  purchase  their  good  will; 
But  when  I  see  how  frail  those  creatures  arel'''^ 
I  muse  that  men  forget  themselves  so  far.     - 
S07 


8o8  Poems  of  Love 

To  mark  the  choice  they  make,  and  how  they  change, 
How  oft  from  Phoebus  they  do  flee  to  Pan; 
Unsettled  still,  like  haggards  wild  they  range, 
These  gentle  birds  that  fly  from  man  to  man; 
Who  would  not  scorn  and  shake  them  from  the  fist, 
And  let  them  fly,  fair  fools,  which  way  they  list? 

Yet  for  disport  we  fawn  and  flatter  both. 
To  pass  the  time  when  nothing  else  can  please, 
And  train  them  to  our  lure  with  subtle  oath, 
Till,  weary  of  their  wiles,  ourselves  we  ease; 
And  then  we  say  when  we  their  fancy  try. 
To  play  with  foois,  O  what  a  fool  was  I ! 

Edward  Vere  [i 550-1 604] 

A  SONG 

Ye  happy  swains,  whose  hearts  are  free 

From  Love 's  imperial  chain, 
Take  warning,  and  be  taught  by  me, 

To  avoid  the  enchanting  pain; 
Fatal  the  wolves  to  trembhng  flocks, 

Fierce  winds  to  blossoms  prove, 
To  careless  seamen,  hidden  rocks. 

To  human  quiet,  love. 

Fly  the  fair  sex,  if  bliss  you  prize; 

The  snake's  beneath  the  flower: 
Who  ever  gazed  on  beauteous  eyes,  f 

That  tasted  cjuiet  more? 
How  faithless  is  the  lovers'  joy! 

How  constant  is  their  care 
The  kind  with  falsehood  to  destroy, 

The  cruel,  with  despair. 

George  Elhcrcge  [1635?-! 691] 

TO  HIS   FORSAKEN  MISTRESS 

I  DO  confess  thou'rt  smooth  and  fair, 

And  I  might  have  gone  near  to  love  thee, 

Had  I  not  found  the  slightest  prayer 

That  lips  could  speak,  had  power  to  move  thee: 


To  All   Inconstant  809 

But  I  can  let  thee  now  alone 
As  worthy  to  be  loved  by  none. 

I  do  confess  thou'rt  sweet;  yet  find 

Thee  such  an  unthrift  of  thy  sweets, 
Thy  favors  are  but  like  the  wind 

That  kisseth  everything  it  meets: 
And  since  thou  canst  with  more  than  one, 
Thou'rt  worthy  to  be  kissed  by  none. 

The  morning  rose  that  untouched  stands 

■  Armed  with  her  briers,  how  sweet  her  smell! 
But  plucked  and  strained  through  ruder  hands, 

Her  sweets  no  longer  with  her  dwell: 
But  scent  and  beauty  both  are  gone, 
And  leaves  fall  from  her,  one  by  one. 

Such  fate  ere  long  will  thee  betide 
When  thou  hast  handled  been  awhile, 

With  sere  flowers  to  be  thrown  aside; 
And  I  shall  sigh,  while  some  will  smile, 

To  see  thy  love  for  more  than  one 

Hath  brought  thee  to  be  loved  by  none. 

Robert  Ayton  [1570-1638] 


TO  AN  INCONSTANT 

I  loVED  thee  once;  I'll  love  no  more, — 

Thine  be  the  grief  as  is  the  blame; 
Thou  art  not  what  thou  wast  before. 
What  reason  I  should  be  the  same? 
He  that  can  love  unloved  again, 
Hath  better  store  of  love  than  brain: 
God  send  me  love  my  debts  to  pay. 
While  unthrifts  fool  their  love  away! 

Nothing  could  have  my  love  o'erthrown. 
If  thou  hadst  still  continued  mine; 

Yea,  if  thou  hadst  remained  thy  own, 
I  might  perchance  have  yet  been  thine. 


8io  Poems  of  Love 

But  thou  thy  freedom  didst  recall, 
That,  if  thou  might,  elsewhere  enthrall: 

And  then  how  could  I  but  disdain 

A  captive's  captive  to  remain? 

When  new  desires  had  conquered  thee, 
And  changed  the  object  of  thy  will, 
It  had  been  lethargy  in  me. 

Not  constancy,  to  love  thee  still. 

Yea,  it  had  been  a  sin  to  go 

And  prostitute  affection  so, 

Since  we  are  taught  no  prayers  to  say 

To  such  as  must  to  others  pray. 

Yet  do  thou  glory  in  thy  choice, — 

Thy  choice  of  his  good  fortune  boast; 
I'll  neither  grieve  nor  yet  rejoice, 
To  see  him  gain  what  I  have  lost : 
The  height  of  my  disdain  shall  be, 
To  laugh  at  him,  to  blush  for  thee; 
To  love  thee  still,  but  go  no  more 
A-begging  at  a  beggar's  door. 

Robert  Aylon  [1570-1638] 


ADVICE  TO  A   GIRL 

Never  love  unless  you  can 

Bear  with  all  the  faults  of  man! 

Men  sometimes  will  jealous  be, 

Though  but  little  cause  they  see. 

And  hang  the  head,  as  discontent. 

And  speak  what  straight  they  will  repent. 

Men,  that  but  one  Saint  adore. 
Make  a  show  of  love  to  more ; 
Beauty  must  be  scorned  in  none, 
Though  but  truly  served  in  one: 
For  what  is  courtship  but  disguise? 
True  hearts  may  have  dissembling  eyes. 


True   Beauty  g  j  j 

Men,  when  their  affairs  require, 
Must  awhile  themselves  retire; 
Sometimes  hunt,  and  sometimes  hawk, 
And  not  ever  sit  and  talk: — 
If  these  and  such-like  you  can  bear. 
Then  like,  and  love,  and  never  fear! 

Thomas  Campion  [    ?    -i6iy] 


SONG 

THAT  WOMEN  ARE  BUT  MEN'S  SHADOWS 
From  "The  Forest  " 

Follow  a  shadow,  it  still  Hies  you; 

Seem  to  fly  it,  it  will  pursue: 
So  court  a  mistress,  she  denies  you; 
Let  her  alone,  she  will  court  you. 
Say,  are  not  women  truly,  then, 
Styled  but  the  shadows  of  us  men? 

At  morn  and  even,  shades  are  longest; 

At  noon  they  are  or  short  or  none : 
So  men  at  weakest,  they  are  strongest, 
But  grant  us  perfect,  they're  not  known. 
Say,  are  not  women  truly  then, 
Styled  but  the  shadows  of  us  men? 

Ben  J  onsen  [t573?-i637] 


TRUE   BEAUTY  ' 

May  I  find  a  woman  fair 
And  her  mind  as  clear  as  air! 
If  her  beiuty  go  alone, 
'Tis  to  me  as  if  'twere  none. 

May  I  find  a  woman  rich, 
And  not  of  too  high  a  pitch !; ; 
If  that  pride  should  cause  disdain, 
Tell  me.  Lover,  where's  thy  gain? 


8 12  Poems  of  Love 

May  I  find  a  woman  wise, 
And  her  falsehood  not  disguise! 
Hath  she  wit  as  she  hath  will, 
Double-armed  she  is  to  ill. 

May  I  find  a  woman  kind, 
And  not  wavering  like  the  wind! 
How  should  I  call  that  love  mine 
When  'tis  his,  and  his,  and  thine? 

May  I  find  a  woman  true! 
There  is  beauty's  fairest  hue: 
There  is  beauty,  love,  and  wit. 
Happy  he  can  compass  it ! 

Francis  Beaumont  [1584-1616] 


THE  INDIFFERENT 

Never  more  will  I  protest 
To  love  a  woman  but  in  jest : 
For  as  they  cannot  be  true. 
So  to  give  each  man  his  due, 

When  the  wooing  fit  is  past, 

Their  affection  cannot  last. 

Therefore  if  I  chance  to  meet 
With  a  mistress  fair  and  sweet, 
She  my  service  shall  obtain. 
Loving  her  for  love  again: 

Thus  much  liberty  I  crave 

Not  to  be  a  constant  slave. 

But  when  we  have  tried  each  other. 
If  she  better  like  another, 
Let  her  quickly  change  for  me; 
Then  to  change  am  I  as  free. 

He  or  she  that  loves  too  long 

Sell  their  freedom  for  a  song. 

Francis  Beaumont  [1584-1616] 


The   Lover's    Resolution  813 


THE  LOVER'S  RESOLUTION 

Shall  I,  wasting  in  despair, 
Die  because  a  woman's  fair? 
Or  make  pale  my  cheeks  with  care 
'Cause  another's  rosy  are? 
Be  she  fairer  than  the  day, 
Or  the  flowery  meads  in  May, 
If  she  think  not  well  of  me, 
What  care  I  how  fair  she  be? 

Shall  my  silly  heart  be  pined 
'Cause  I  see  a  woman  kind? 
Or  a  well  disposed  nature 
Joined  with  a  lovely  feature? 
Be  she  meeker,  kinder,  than 
Turtle-dove  or  pelican. 
If  she  be  not  so  to  me, 
What  care  I  how  kind  she  be? 

Shall  a  woman's  virtues  move 
Me  to  perish  for  her  love? 
Or  her  well-deservings  known 
Make  me  quite  forget  my  own? 
Be  she  with  that  goodness  blest 
Which  may  merit  name  of  Best, 
If  she  be  not  such  to  me, 
What  care  I  how  good  she  be? 

'Cause  her  fortune  seems  too  high. 
Shall  I  play  the  fool  and  die? 
She  that  bears  a  noble  mind. 
If  not  outward  helps  she  find. 
Thinks  what  with  them  he  would  dc 
That  without  them  dares  her  woo; 
And  unless  that  mind  I  see, 
What  care  I  how  great  she  be? 

Great,  or  good,  or  kind,  or  fair, 
I  will  ne'er  the  more  despair; 


14  Poems  of  Love 

If  she  love  me,  this  believe, 

I  will  die  ere  she  shall  grieve; 

If  she  slight  me  when  I  woo, 

I  can  scorn  and  let  her  go; 
For  if  she  be  not  for  me, 
What  care  I  for  whom  she  be? 

George  Wither  [1588-1667] 

HIS   FURTHER  RESOLUTION 

Shall  I  (like  a  hermit)  dwell 
On  a  rock  or  in  a  cell; 
Calling  home  the  smallest  part 
That  is  missing  of  my  heart, 
To  bestow  it  where  I  may 
Meet  a  rival  every  day? 

If  she  undervalue  me. 

What  care  I  how  fair  she  be! 

Were  her  tresses  angel-gold; 
If  a  stranger  may  be  bold, 
Unrebuked,  and  unafraid, 
To  convert  them  to  a  braid; 
And,  with  little  more  ado. 
Work  them  into  bracelets,  too! 

If  the  mine  be  grown  so  free, 

What  care  I  how  rich  it  be! 

Were  her  hands  as  rich  a  prize 

As  her  hair  or  precious  eyes; 

If  she  lay  them  out  to  take 

Kisses  for  good  manners'  sake! 

And  let  every  lover  slip 

From  her  hand  unto  her  lip! 
If  she  seem  not  chaste  to  me, 
What  care  I  how  chaste  she  be! 

No!     She  must  be  perfect  snow 
In  effect  as  well  as  show! 
Warming  but  as  snowballs  do; 


Song  815 


Not  like  fire  by  burning,  too! 
But  when  she  by  change  hath  got 
To  her  heart  a  second  lot; 

Then  if  others  share  with  me, 

Farewell  her!  whate'er  she  be! 

Unknown 

SONG 

From  "  Britannia's  Pastorals" 

Shall  I  tell  you  whom  I  love? 

Hearken  then  awhile  to  me; 
And  if  such  a  woman  move 

As  I  now  shall  versify, 
Be  assured  'tis  she  or  none. 
That  I  love,  and  love  alone. 

Nature  did  her  so  much  right 

As  she  scorns  the  help  of  art; 
In  as  many  virtues  dight 

As  e'er  yet  embraced  a  heart: 
So  much  good  so  truly  tried, 
Some  for  less  were  deified. 

Wit  she  hath,  without  desire 

To  make  known  how  much  she  hath; 

And  her  anger  flames  no  higher 
Than  may  fitly  sweeten  wrath. 

Full  of  pity  as  may  be, 

Though  perhaps  not  so  to  me. 

Reason  masters  every  sense, 

And  her  virtues  grace  her  birth; 
Lovely  as  all  excellence, 

Modest  in  her  most  of  mirth. 
Likelihood  enough  to  prove 
Only  worth  could  kindle  love. 

Such  she  is:  and  if  \ou  know 

Such  a  one  as  I  have  sung; 
Be  she  brown,  or  fair,  or  so 

That  she  be  but  somewhat  young; 


8 1 6  Poems  of  Love 

Be  assured  'tis  she,  or  none, 
That  I  love,  and  love  alone. 

William  Browne  [1591-1643?] 

TO  DIANEME 

Sweet,  be  not  proud  of  those  two  eyes, 
Which,  star-like,  sparkle  in  their  skies; 
Nor  be  you  proud  that  you  can  see 
All  hearts  your  captives,  yours  yet  free; 
Be  you  not  proud  of  that  rich  hair, 
Which  wantons  with  the  love-sick  air; 
Whenas  that  ruby  which  you  wear. 
Sunk  from  the  tip  of  your  soft  ear, 
Will  last  to  be  a  precious  stone 
When  all  your  world  of  beauty's  gone. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


INGRATEFUL  BEAUTY  THREATENED 

Know,  Celia,  since  thou  art  so  proud, 
'Twas  I  that  gave  thee  thy  renown. 

Thou  hadst  in  the  forgotten  crowd 
Of  common  beauties  lived  unknown, 

Had  not  my  verse  extolled  thy  name. 

And  with  it  imped  the  wings  of  Fame. 

That  killing  power  is  none  of  thine; 

I  gave  it  to  thy  voice  and  eyes; 
Thy  sweets,  thy  graces,  all  are  mine; 

Thou  art  my  star,  shin'st  in  my  skies; 
Then  dart  not  from  thy  borrowed  sphere 
Lightning  on  him  that  fixed  thee  there. 

Tempt  me  with  such  affrights  no  more, 

Lest  what  I  made  I  uncreate; 
Let  fools  thy  mystic  form  adore, 

I  know  thee  in  thy  mortal  state. 
Wise  poets,  that  wrapped  Truth  in  tales. 
Knew  her  themselves  through  all  her  veils. 

Thomas  Carcw  [isgSP-iCjg?] 


''  Love  Who  Will,  For  I'll  Love  None"   817 


DISDAIN  RETURNED 

He  that  loves  a  rosy  cheek, 

Or  a  coral  lip  admires, 
Or  from  star-like  eyes  doth  seek 

Fuel  to  maintain  his  fires: 
As  old  Time  makes  these  decay, 
So  his  flames  must  waste  away. 

But  a  smooth  and  steadfast  mind, 
Gentle  thoughts,  and  calm  desires, 

Hearts  with  equal  love  combined, 
Kindle  never-dying  fires: — 

Where  these  are  not,  I  despise 

Lovely  cheeks,  or  lips,  or  eyes. 

No  tears,  Celia,  now  shall  win 

My  resolved  heart  to  return; 
I  have  searched  thy  soul  within, 

And  find  naught  but  pride  and  scorn; 
I  have  learned  thy  arts,  and  now 
Can  disdain  as  much  as  thou. 

Some  power,  in  my  revenge,  convey 
That  love  to  her  I  cast  away. 

Thomas  Carcd'  [i598?-i639?] 


"LOVE  WHO  WILL,   FOR  I'LL  LOVE  NONE" 

Love  who  will,  for  I'll  love  none, 
There's  fools  enough  beside  me: 

Yet  if  each  woman  have  not  one, 
Come  to  me  where  I  hide  me, 

And  if  she  can  the  place  attain, 

For  once  I'll  be  her  fool  again. 

It  is  an  easy  place  to  find, 

And  women  sure  should  know  it; 

Yet  thither  serves  not  every  wind, 
Nor  many  men  can  show  it: 


]  1 8  Poems  of  Love 

It  is  the  storehouse,  where  doth  lie 
All  woman's  truth  and  constancy. 

If  the  journey  be  so  long, 

No  woman  wiU  adventer; 
But  dreading  her  weak  vessel's  wrong, 

The  voyage  will  not  enter: 
Then  may  she  sigh  and  lie  alone. 
In  love  with  all,  yet  loved  of  none. 

Thomas  Browne  [i 605-1 682] 

VALERIUS  ON  WOMEN 

She  that  denies  me  I  would  have; 

Who  craves  me  I  despise: 
Venus  hath  power  to  rule  mine  heart, 

But  not  to  please  mine  eyes. 

Temptations  offered  I  still  scorn; 

Denied,  I  cling  them  still; 
I'U  neither  glut  mine  appetite. 

Nor  seek  to  starve  my  will. 

Diana,  double-clothed,  offends; 

So  Venus,  naked  quite: 
The  last  begets  a  surfeit,  and 

The  other  no  delight. 

That  crafty  girl  shall  please  me  best, 
That  no,  for  yea,  can  say; 

And  every  v;anton  willing  kiss 
Can  season  with  a  nay. 

Thomas  Ileynoood  [    ?    -1650?] 

DISPRAISE  OF  LOVE,   AND  LOVERS'   FOLLIES 

If  love  be  life,  I  long  to  die, 

Live  they  that  list  for  me; 
And  he  that  gains  the  most  thereby, 

A  fool  at  least  shall  be. 


The   Constant   Lover  819 

But  he  that  feels  the  sorest  fits, 
'Scapes  with  no  less  than  loss  of  wits. 

Unhappy  life  they  gain, 

Which  love  do  entertain. 

In  day  by  feigned  looks  they  live, 

By  lying  dreams  in  night; 
Each  frown  a  deadly  wound  doll',  give, 

Each  smile  a  false  delight. 
If  't  hap  their  lady  pleasant  seem, 
It  is  for  others'  love  they  deem: 

If  void  she  seem  of  joy. 

Disdain  doth  make  her  coy. 

Such  is  the  peace  that  lovers  find, 

Such  is  the  life  they  lead. 
Blown  here  and  there  with  every  wind, 

Like  flowers  in  the  mead; 
Now  war,  now  peace,  now  war  again. 
Desire,  despair,  delight,  disdain: 

Though  dead  in  midst  of  life. 

In  peace,  and  yet  at  strife. 

Francis  Davison  [fl.  1602] 


THE   CONSTANT  LOVER 

Out  upon  it,  I  have  loved 
Three  whole  days  together! 

And  am  like  to  love  three  more, 
If  it  prove  fair  weather. 

Time  shall  moult  away  his  wings. 

Ere  he  shall  discover 
In  the  whole  wide  world  again 

Such  a  constant  lover. 

But  the  spite  on't  is,  no  praise 

Is  due  at  all  to  me: 
Love  with  me  had  made  no  stays, 

Had  it  any  been  but  she. 


820  Poems  of  Love 

Had  it  any  been  but  she, 
'  ■: '    And  that  very  face, 

There  had  been  at  least  ere  this 
A  dozen  in  her  place. 

John  Suckling  [1609-164  2 

SONG 

From  "Aglaura" 

Why  so  pale  and  wan,  fond  lover? 

Prithee,  why  so  pale? 
Will,  when  looking  well  can't  move  her. 

Looking  ill  prevail? 

Prithee,  why  so  pale? 

Why  so  dull  and  mute,  young  sinner? 

Prithee,  why  so  mute? 
Will,  when  speaking  well  can't  win  her, 

Saying  nothing  do't? 

Prithee,  why  so  mute? 

Quit,  quit,  for  shame,  this  will  not  move: 

This  cannot  take  her. 
If  of  herself  she  will  Jiot  love. 

Nothing  can  make  her: 

The  devil  take  her! 

JoJin  Snckling  [1609-164 2 

WISHES  TO  HIS   SUPPOSED   MISTRESS 

Whoe  'er  she  be. 

That  not  impossible  She 

That  shall  command  my  heart  and  me: 

Where'er  she  lie. 

Locked  up  from  mortal  eye 

In  shady  leaves  of  destiny: 

Till  that  ripe  birth 

Of  studied  Fate  stand  forth, 

And  teach  her  fair  steps  tread  our  earth: 


Wishes  to  His  Supposed  Mistress      821 


FooJ 


Till  that  divine 

Idea  take  a  shrine 

Of  crystal  flesh,  through  which  to  shine: 

Meet  you  her,  my  Wishes, 
Bespeak  her  to  my  bhsses, 
And  be  ye  called  my  absent  kisses. 

I  wish  her  Beauty 

That  owes  not  all  its  duty 

To  gaudy  tire,  or  glistering  shoe-tie: 

Something  more  than 
Tafifeta  or  tissue  can. 
Or  rampant  feather,  or  rich  fan. 

More  than  the  spoil 

Of  shop,  or  silkworm's  toil. 

Or  a  bought  blush,  or  a  set  smile. 

A  Face  that's  best 

By  its  own  beauty  dressed. 

And  can  alone  commend  the  rest 

A  Face,  made  up 

Out  of  no  other  shop 

Than  what  Nature's  white  hand  sets  ope, 

A  Cheek,  where  youth 

And  blood,  with  pen  of  truth. 

Write  what  their  reader  sweetly  ru  'th. 

A  Cheek,  where  grows 
More  than  a  morning  rose, 
Which  to  no  box  its  being  owes. 

Lips,  where  all  day 

A  lover's  kiss  may  play. 

Yet  carry  nothing  thence  away. 


822  Poems  of  Love  .i-;\/7 

Looks,  that  oppress 

Their  richest  tires,  but  dress  ,  , 

Themselves  in  simple  nakedness. 

Eyes,  that  displace 

The  neighbor  diamond,  and  outface 

That  sunshine  by  their  own  sweet  grace. 

Tresses,  that  wear 
Jewels  but  to  declare 

How  much  themselves  more  precious  are: 

,i;;>aoi 

Whose  native  ray 

Can  tame  the  wanton  day 

Of  gems  that  in  their  bright  shades  play. 

Each  ruby  there. 

Or  pearl  that  dare  appear, 

Be  its  own  blush,  be  its  own  tear. 

A  well-tamed  Heart, 

For  whose  more  noble  smart 

Love  may  be  long  choosing  a  dart. 

Eyes,  that  bestow 

Full  quivers  on  Love's  bow, 

Yet  pay  less  arrows  than  they  owe. 

Smiles,  that  can  warm 

The  blood,  yet  teach  a  charm, 

That  chastity  shall  take  no  harm. 


Blushes,  that  bin 

The  burnish  of  no  sin,  , . 

Nor  flames  of  aught  too  hot  within,      '^ 

Joys,  that  confess 

Virtue  their  mistress. 

And  have  no  other  head  to  dress. 


Wishes  to  His   Supposed   Mistress      823 

Fears,  fond  and  slight 

As  the  coy  bride's,  when  night. 

First  docs  the  longing  lover  right. 

Days  that  need  borrow 

No  part  of  their  good-morrow 

From  a  fore-spent  night  of  sorrow. 

Days  that,  in  sj)ite 
Of  darkness,  by  the  light 
Of  a  clear  mind,  are  day  all  night,  ^ 

jj 
Nights,  sweet  as  they. 
Made  short  by  lovers'  play. 
Yet  long  by  the  absence  of  the  day. 

Life,  that  dares  send 

A  challenge  to  his  end, 

And  when  it  comes,  say,  "Welcome,  friend!" 

Sydneian  showers 

Of  sweet  discourse,  wliose  powers 

Can  crown  old  Winter's  head  with  flowers. 

Soft  silken  hours. 

Open  suns,  shady  bowers; 

'Bove  all,  nothing  within  that  lowers. 

W^hate  'er  delight 

Can  make  Day 's  forehead  bright, 

Or  give  down  to  the  wings  of  Night 

In  her  whole  frame 

Have  Nature  all  the  name; 

Art  and  Ornament,  the  shame! 

Her  flattery. 

Picture  and  Poesy: 

Her  counsel  her  own  virtue  be. 


824  Poems   of  Love 

I  wish  her  store 

Of  worth  may  leave  her  poor 

Of  wishes;  and  I  wish — no  more. 

Now,  if  Time  knows 

That  Her,  whose  radiant  brows 

Weave  them  a  garland  of  my  vows; 

Her,  whose  just  bays 

My  future  hopes  can  raise, 

A  trophy  to  her  present  praise; 

Her,  that  dares  be 

What  these  lines  wish  to  see; 

I  seek  no  further,  it  is  She. 

'Tis  She,  and  here, 

Lo!  I  unclothe  and  clear 

My  Wishes'  cloudy  character. 

May  She  enjoy  it 

Whose  merit  dare  apply  it, 

But  modesty  dares  still  deny  it! 

Such  worth  as  this  is 
Shall  fix  my  flying  Wishes, 
And  determine  them  to  kisses. 

Let  her  full  glory, 

My  fancies,  fly  before  ye; 

Be  ye  my  fictions — but  her  Story! 

Richard  Crashaw  [i6i3?-i649] 

SONG 

From  "  Abdelazer  " 

Love  in  fantastic  triumph  sate 

Whilst  bleeding  hearts  around  him  flowed. 
For  whom  fresh  pains  he  did  create 

And  strange  tyrannic  power  he  showed: 
From  thy  bright  eyes  he  took  his  fires, 

Which  round  about  in  sport  he  hurled; 
But  'twas  from  mine  he  took  desires 

Enough  t'  undo  the  amorous  world. 


Les  Amours  825 

From  me  he  took  his  sighs  and  tears, 

From  thee  his  pride  and  cruelty; 
From  me  his  languishments  and  fears, 

And  every  kilHng  dart  from  thee. 
Thus  thou  and  I  the  god  have  armed 

And  set  him  up  a  deity; 
But  my  poor  heart  alone  is  harmed, 

Whilst  thine  the  victor  is,  and  free! 

Aphra  Behn  [1640-1680] 

LES  AMOURS 

She  that  I  pursue,  stiU  flies  me; 

Her  that  follows  me,  I  fly; 
She  that  I  still  court,  denies  me; 

Her  that  courts  me,  I  deny; 
Thus  in  one  web  we're  subtly  wove, 
And  yet  we  mutiny  in  love. 

She  that  can  save  me,  must  not  do  it; 

She  that  cannot,  fain  would  do; 
Her  love  is  bound,  yet  I  still  woo  it; 

Hers  by  love  is  bound  in  woe: 
Yet  how  can  I  of  love  complain, 
Since  I  have  love  for  love  again? 

This  is  thy  work,  imperious  Child, 

Thine's  this  labyrinth  of  love. 
That  thus  hast  our  desires  beguiled. 

Nor  scest  how  thine  arrows  rove. 
Then,  prithee,  to  compose  this  stir, 
Make  her  love  me,  or  me  love  her. 

But,  if  irrevocable  are 

Those  keen  shafts  that  wound  us  so, 
Let  me  prevail  with  thee  thus  far. 

That  thou  once  more  take  thy  bow; 
Wound  her  hard  heart,  and  by  my  troth, 
I'll  be  content  to  take  them  both. 

Charles  Cotton  [1630-1687] 


826  Poems  of  Love 


RIVALS 

Of  all  the  torments,  all  the  cares, 

With  which  our  Hves  are  cursed; 
Of  all  the  plagues  a  lover  bears, 

Sure  rivals  are  the  worst! 
By  partners  in  each  other  kind 

Afflictions  easier  grow; 
In  love  alone  we  hate  to  find 

Companions  of  our  woe. 

Sylvia,  for  all  the  pangs  you  see 

Are  laboring  in  my  breast, 
I  beg  not  you  would  favor  me, 

Would  you  but  slight  the  rest! 
How  great  soe'er  your  rigors  are, 

With  them  alone  I'll  cope; 
I  can  endure  my  own  despair. 

But  not  another's  hope. 

William  Walsh  [i 663-1 708] 

"I   LATELY  VOWED,   BUT 'TWAS   IN   HASTE" 

I  LATELY  vowed,  but  'twas  in  haste. 

That  I  no  more  would  court 
The  joys  which  seem  when  they  are  past 

As  dull  as  they  are  short. 

I  oft  to  hate  my  mistress  swear, 

But  soon  my  weakness  find: 
I  make  my  oaths  when  she's  severe, 
But  break  them  when  she's  kind. 

John  Oldmixon  [1673-1742] 

THE   TOUCH-STONE 

A  FOOL  and  knave  with  different  views 

For  Julia's  hand  apply;         inuoY/ 
The  knave  to  mend  his  fortune  Sues', 
[\Z.: ,  The  fool  to  please  his  eye. 


"  I   Took  a  Hansom  on   To-day  "     827 

Ask  you  how  Julia  will  behave,       ' 

Depend  on't  for  a  rule, 
If  she's  a  fool  she'll  wed  the  knave — 

If  she's  a  knave,  the  fool. 

Samuel  Bishop  [1731-17Q5] 

AIR 

.  From  "  The  Duenna  " 

I  ne'er  could  any  luster  see 

In  eyes  that  would  not  look  on  me; 

I  ne'er  saw  nectar  on  a  lip, 

But  where  my  own  did  hope  to  sip. 

Has  the  maid  who  seeks  my  heart 

Cheeks  of  rose,  untouched  by  art? 

I  will  own  the  color  true 

When  yielding  blushes  aid  their  hue. 

Is  her  hand  so  soft  and  pure? 
I  must  press  it,  to  be  sure; 
io;  Nor  can  I  be  certain  then, 
Till  it,  grateful,  press  again. 
Must  I,  with  attentive  eye. 
Watch  her  heaving  bosom  sigh? 
I  will  do  so,  when  I  see 
That  heaving  bosom  sigh  for  me. 

Richard  Brinslcy  Sheridan  [1751-1S16] 


'I  TOOK  A  HANSOM  ON  TO-DAY" 

I  TOOK  a  hansom  on  to-day. 
For  a  round  I  used  to  know — 

That  I  used  to  take  for  a  woman's  sake 
In  a  fever  of  to-and-fro. 

There  v^fcre  the  landmarks  one  and  all — 
What  did  they  stand  to  show? 

Street  and  square  and  river  were  there — 
Where  was  the  ancient  woe? 


828 


Never  a  hint  of  a  challenging  hope 

Nor  a  hope  laid  sick  and  low, 
But  a  longing  dead  as  its  kindred  sped 

A  thousand  years  ago! 

William  Ernest  Henley  [1849-1903] 

DA  CAPO 

Short  and  sweet,  and  we've  come  to  the  end  of  it — 

Our  poor  little  love  lying  cold. 
Shall  no  sonnet,  then,  ever  be  penned  of  it? 

Nor  the  joys  and  pains  of  it  told? 
How  fair  was  its  face  in  the  morning, 

How  close  its  caresses  at  noon. 
How  its  evening  grew  chill  without  warning, 
Unpleasantly  soon! 

I  can't  say  just  how  we  began  it — 

In  a  blush,  or  a  smile,  or  a  sigh; 
Fate  took  but  an  instant  to  plan  it; 

It  needs  but  a  moment  to  die. 
Yet — remember  that  first  conversation. 

When  the  flowers  you  had  dropped  at  your  feet 
I  restored.    The  familiar  quotation 

Was— "Sweets  to  the  sweet." 

Oh,  their  delicate  perfume  has  haunted 

My  senses  a  whole  season  through. 
If  there  was  one  soft  charm  that  you  wanted 

The  violets  lent  it  to  you. 
I  whispered  you,  life  was  but  lonely: 

A  cue  which  you  graciously  took; 
And  your  eyes  learned  a  look  for  me  only^ 
A  very  nice  look. 

And  sometimes  your  hand  would  touch  my  hand, 

With  a  sweetly  particular  touch; 
You  said  many  things  in  a  sigh,  and 

Made  a  look  express  wondrously  much. 
We  smiled  for  the  mere  sake  of  smiling. 

And  laughed  for  no  reason  but  fun; 
Irrational  joys;  but  beguiling — 
And  all  that  is  done! 


Song  Against  Women  829 

We  were  idle,  and  played  for  a  moment 
At  a  game  that  now  neither  will  press: 

I  cared  not  to  find  out  what  "No"  meant; 
Nor  your  lips  to  grow  yielding  with  "Yes." 

Love  is  done  with  and  dead;  if  there  lingers 
A  faint  and  indefinite  ghost, 

It  is  laid  with  this  kiss  on  your  fingers — 
A  jest  at  the  most. 

'Tis  a  commonplace,  stale  situation, 

Now  the  curtain  comes  down  from  above 
On  the  end  of  our  little  flirtation — 

A  travesty  romance;  for  Love, 
If  he  climbed  in  disguise  to  your  lattice, 

Fell  dead  of  the  first  kisses'  pain: 
But  one  thing  is  left  us  now;  that  is — 
Begin  it  again. 

Henry  Cuylcr  Bunncr  [1855-1896] 

SONG  AGAINST  WOMEN 

Why  should  I  sing  of  women 

And  the  softness  of  night, 
When  the  dawn  is  loud  with  battle 

And  the  day's  teeth  bite, 
And  there's  a  sword  to  lay  my  hand  to 

And  a  man's  fight? 

Why  should  I  sing  of  women?  .  .  . 

There's  fife  in  the  sun, 
And  red  adventure  calling 

Where  the  roads  run, 
And  cheery  brews  at  the  tavern 

When  the  day's  done. 

I've  sung  of  a  hundred  women 

In  a  hundred  lands: 
But  all  their  love  is  nothing 

But  drifting  sands. 
I'm  sick  of  their  tears  and  kisses 

And  their  pale  hands. 


830  Poems  of  Love 

I've  sung  of  a  hundred  women 

And  their  bought  lips; 
But  out  on  the  dean  horizon 

I  can  hear  the  whips 
Of  the  white  waves  lashing  the  bulwarks 

Of  great,  strong  ships: 

And  the  trails  that  run  to  the  wcstwaru 

Are  shot  with  fire, 
And  the  winds:  hurl  from  the  headland 

With  ancient  ire; 
And  all  my  body  itches  '  ' 

With  an  old  desire. 

So  I'll  deal  no  more  in  women 

And  the  softness  of  night. 
But  I'll  follow  the  red  adventure 

And  the  wind's  flight; 
And  I'll  sing  of  the  sea  and  of  battle 

And  of  men's  might. 

Willard  Huntington  Wright  [i8 

SONG  OF  THYRSIS 

The  turtle  on  yon  withered  bough, 

That  lately  mourned  her  murdered  mate, 

Has  found  another  comrade  now-r- 

Such  changes  all  await! 

Again  her  drooping  plume  is  drest, 

Again  she's  wilUng  to  be  blest 

And  takes  her  lover  to  her  nest. 

If  nature  has  decreed  it  so 
With  all  above,  and  all  below, 
Let  us  like  them  forget  our  woe. 

And  not  be  killed  with  sorrow. 
If  I  should  quit  your  arms  to-night 
And  chance  to  die  before  'twas  light, 
I  would  advise  you — and  you  might— 

Love  again  to-morrow. 

Philip  Freneau  [1752-1832] 


The  Snake  831 


THE  TEST 

I  HELD  her  hand,  the  pledge  of  bhss, 

Her  hand  that  trembled  and  withdrew; 
She  bent  her  head  before  my  kiss  .  .  . 

My  heart  was  sure  that  hers  was  true. 
Now  I  have  told  her  I  must  part, 

She  shakes  my  hand,  she  bids  adieu, 
Nor  shuns  the  kiss.    Alas,  my  heart! 

Hers  never  was  the  heart  for  you. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 

"THE  FAULT  IS  NOT  MINE" 

The  fault  is  not  mine  if  I  love  you  too  much, 

I  loved  you  too  little  too  long. 
Such  ever  your  graces,  your  tenderness  such, 

And  the  music  the  heart  gave  the  tongue. 

A  time  is  now  coming  when  Love  must  be  gone, 
Though  he  never  abandoned  me  yet. 

Acknowledge  our  friendship,  our  passion  disown,' 
Our  follies  (ah  can  you?)  forget. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [  1 7  7  5- 1 864] 

THE  SNAKE 

My  love  and  I,  the  other  day, 
Within  a  myrtle  arbor  lay. 
When  near  us,  from  a  rosy  bed, 
A  little  Snake  put  forth  its  head. 

"Sec,"  said  the  maid,  with  laughing  eyes — 
"Yonder  the  fatal  emblem  lies! 
Who  could  expect  such  hidden  harm 
Beneath  the  rose's  velvet  charm?" 

Never  did  moral  thought  occur 

In  more  unlucky  hour  than  this; 
For  oh!  I  just  was  leading  her 

To  talk  of  love  and  think  of  bliss. 


832  Poems  of  Love 

I  rose  to  kill  the  sPxake,  but  she 
In  pity  prayed  it  might  not  be. 
"No,"  said  the  girl — and  many  a  spark 

Flashed  from  her  eyelid  as  she  said  it — 
"  Under  the  rose,  or  in  the  dark. 

One  might,  perhaps,  have  cause  to  dread  it; 
But  when  its  wicked  eyes  appear. 

And  when  we  know  for  what  they  wink  so, 
One  must  be  very  simple,  dear, 

To  let  it  sting  one — don't  you  think  so?" 

Thomas  Moore  [1770-1852] 

"WHEN   I  LOVED   YOU" 

When  I  loved  you,  I  can't  but  allow 
I  had  many  an  exquisite  minute; 

But  the  scorn  that  I  feel  for  you  now 
Hath  even  more  luxury  in  it! 

Thus,  whether  we're  on  or  we're  off, 
Some  witchery  seems  to  await  you; 

To  love  you  is  pleasant  enough, 

And  oh!  'tis  delicious  to  hate  you! 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 

A  TEMPLE  TO  FRIENDSHIP 

"A  TEMPLE  to  Friendship,"  said  Laura,  enchanted, 

"I'll  build  in  this  garden, — the  thought  is  divine!" 
Her  temple  was  built,  and  she  now  only  wanted 

An  image  of  Friendship  to  place  on  the  shrine. 
She  flew  to  a  sculptor,  who  set  down  before  her 

A  Friendship,  the  fairest  his  art  could  invent; 
But  so  cold  and  so  dull,  that  the  youthful  adorer 

Saw  plainly  this  was  not  the  idol  she  meant. 

"O  never,"  she  cried,  "could  I  think  of  enshrining 
An  image  whose  looks  are  so  joyless  and  dim: — 

But  yon  little  god,  upon  roses  reclining. 

We'll  make,  if  you  please,  sir,  a  Friendship  of  him." 


The   Glove  and  the   Lions  833 

So  the  bargain  was  struck.    With  the  little  god  laden 
She  joyfuUy  flew  to  her  shrine  in  the  grove: 

"Farewell,"  said  the  sculptor,  "you're  not  the  first  maiden 
Who  came  but  for  Friendship  and  took  away  Love!" 

Thomas  Moore  [i 779-1852] 

THE   GLOVE  AND  THE  LIONS 

King  Francis  was  a  hearty  king,  and  loved  a  royal  sport, 
And  one  day,  as  his  lions  fought,  sat  looking  on  the  court. 
The  nobles  filled  the  benches,  and  the  ladies  in  their  pride, 
And  'mongst  them  sat  the  Count  de  Lorge,  with  one  for 

whom  he  sighed: 
And  truly  'twas  a  gallant  thing  to  see  that  crowning  show. 
Valor  and  love,  and  a  king  above,  and  the  royal  beasts  below. 

Ramped  and  roared  the  lions,  with  horrid  laughing  jaws; 
They  bit,  they  glared,  gave  blows  like  beams,  a  wind  went 

with  their  paws; 
With  wallowing  might  and  stifled  roar  they  rolled  on  one 

another, 
Till  all  the  pit  with  sand  and  mane  was  in  a  thunderous 

smother; 
The  bloody  foam  above  the  bars  came  whisking  through  the 

air; 
Said  Francis  then,  "Faith,  gentlemen,  we're  better  here  than 

there." 

De  Lorge's  love  o'erheard  the  King,  a  beauteous  lively  dame, 
With  smiling  lips  and  sharp  bright   eyes,   which  always 

seemed  the  same; 
She  thought,  "  The  Count,  my  lover,  is  brave  as  brave  can 

be; 
He  surely  would  do  wondrous  things  to  show  his  love  of  me; 
King,  ladies,  lovers,  all  look  on;  the  occasion  is  divine; 
I'U  drop  my  glove  to  prove  his  love;  great  glory  will  be 

mine." 

She  dropped  her  glove,  to  prove  his  love,  then  looked  at  him 

and  smiled; 
He  bowed^  and  in  a  moment  leaped  among  the  lions  wild; 


834  Poems  of  Love 

The  leap  was  quick,  return  was  quick,  he  has  regained  his 

place, 
Then  threv/  the  glove,  but  not  with  love,  right  in  tine  lady's 

face.  .„-,.  ,.rr,%'  .,,■'^  ,  .rf// 

"By  Heaven,"  said  Francis,  "rightly  done!"  and  he  rose 

from  where  he  sat; 
"No  love,"  quoth  he,  "but  vanity,  sets  love  a  task  like  that." 

Leigh  Hunt  [1784-1859] 

TO  WOMAN 

Woman!  experience  might  have  told  me 
That  all  must  love  thee  who  behold  thee; 
Surely  experience  might  have  taught 
Thy  firmest  promises  are  naught; 
"  But,  placed  in  all  thy  charms  before  me. 
All  I  forget,  but  to  adore  thee. 
Oh,  Memory!  thou  choicest  blessing, 
When  joined  with  hope,  when  still  possessing; 
But  how  much  cursed  by  every  lover, 
When  hope  is  fled,  and  passion's  over! 
Woman,  that  fair  and  fond  deceiver,  , 

How  prompt  are  striplings  to  believe  her! 
How  throbs  the  pulse  when  first  we  view  ,. 

The  eye  that  rolls  in  glossy  blue. 
Or  sparkles  black,  or  mildly  throws  .  .^ 

A  beam  from  under  hazel  brows! 
How  quick  we  credit  every  oath, 
And  hear  her  phght  the  willing  troth!  1 1 

Fondly  we  hope  'twill  last  for  aye,  •    '/' 

When,  lo!  she  changes  in  a  day. 
This  record  will  forever  stand,  ;--. 

"Woman,  thy  vows  are  traced  in  sand." 

George  Gordon  Byron  [i 788-1824] 

LOVE'S   SPITE 

You  take  a  town  you  cannot  keep; 

And,  forced  in  turn  to  fly, 
O'er  ruins  you  have  made  shall  leap 

Your  deadliest  enemy!  ir 


Lady    Clara   V'cre  de   Verc  835 

Her  love  is  yours — and  be  it  so — 
But  can  you  keep  it?    No,  no,  no! 

Upon  her  brow  we  gazed  with  awe, 
And  loved,  and  wished  to  love,  in  vain 

But  when  the  snow  begins  to  thaw 
We  shun  with  scorn  the  miry  plain. 

A\'omen  with  grace  may  yield:  but  she 

Appeared  some  Virgin  Deity. 

Bright  was  her  soul  as  Dian's  crest 
Whitening  on  Vesta's  fane  its  sheen: 

Cold  looked  she  as  the  waveless  breast 
Of  some  stone  Dian  at  thirteen. 

Men  loved,  but  hope  they  deemed  to  be 

A  sweet  Imj^ossibility! 

Aubrey  Thomas  De  Verc  [1814-1002] 

LADY  CLARA  VERE  DE  VERE 

Lady  Clara  Vere  de  Vere, 

Of  me  you  shall  not  win  renown: 
You  thought  to  break  a  country  heart 

For  pastime,  ere  you  went  to  town. 
At  me  you  smiled,  but  unbeguiled 

I  saw  the  snare,  and  I  retired: 
The  daughter  of  a  hundred  carls, 

You  are  not  one  to  be  desired. 

Lady  Clara  Vere  de  Vere, 

I  know  you  proud  to  bear  your  name. 
Your  pride  is  yet  no  mate  for  mine. 

Too  proud  to  care  from  whence  I  came. 
Nor  would  I  break  for  your  sweet  sake 

A  heart  that  dotes  on  truer  charms. 
A  simple  maiden  in  her  llower 

Is  worth  a  hundred  coats-of-arms. 

Lady  Clara  Vere  de  Wrc, 

Some  meeker  pupil  you  must  find, 
For,  were  you  queen  of  all  that  is, 

I  could  not  stoop  to  such  a  mind. 


836  Poems  of  Love 

You  sought  to  prove  how  I  could  love, 

And  my  disdain  is  my  reply. 
The  lion  on  your  old  stone  gates 

Is  not  more  cold  to  you  than  I. 

Lady  Clara  Vere  de  Vere, 

You  put  strange  memories  in  my  head. 
Not  thrice  your  branching  limes  have  blown 

Since  I  beheld  young  Laurence  dead. 
O,  your  sweet  eyes,  your  low  replies! 

A  great  enchantress  you  may  be; 
But  there  was  that  across  his  throat 

Which  you  had  hardly  cared  to  see. 

Lady  Clara  Vere  de  Vere, 

When  thus  he  met  his  mother's  view, 
She  had  the  passions  of  her  kind. 

She  spake  some  certain  truths  of  you. 
Indeed  I  heard  one  bitter  word 

That  scarce  is  fit  for  you  to  hear; 
Her  manners  had  not  that  repose 

Which  stamps  the  caste  of  Vere  de  Vere. 

Lady  Clara  Vere  de  Vere, 

There  stands  a  specter  in  your  hall ; 
The  guilt  of  blood  is  at  j'our  door; 

You  changed  a  wholesome  heart  to  gall. 
You  held  your  course  without  remorse. 

To  make  him  trust  his  modest  worth, 
And,  last,  you  fixed  a  vacant  stare. 

And  slew  him  v«th  your  noble  birth. 

Trust  me,  Clara  Vere  de  Vere, 

From  yon  blue  heavens  above  us  bent, 
The  gardener  Adam  and  his  wife 

Smile  at  the  claims  of  long  descent. 
Howe'er  it  be,  it  seems  to  me, 

'Tis  only  noble  to  be  good. 
Kind  hearts  are  more  than  coronets, 

And  simple  faith  than  Norman  blood. 


Shadows  837 

I  know  you,  Clara  Vere  cle  Vere; 

You  pine  among  your  halls  and  towers: 
The  languid  light  of  your  proud  eyes 

Is  wearied  of  the  rolling  hours. 
In  glowing  health,  with  boundless  wealth, 

But  sickening  of  a  vague  disease. 
You  know  so  ill  to  deal  with  time. 

You  needs  must  play  such  pranks  as  these. 

Clara,  Clara  Vere  de  Vere, 

If  time  be  heavy  on  your  hands. 
Are  there  no  beggars  at  your  gate, 

Nor  any  poor  about  your  lands? 
O,  teach  the  orphan-boy  to  read, 

Or  teach  the  orphan-girl  to  sew, 
Pray  Heaven  for  a  human  heart, 

And  let  the  foolish  yeoman  go. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 

SHADOWS 

Th^y  seemed,  to  those  who  saw  them  meet, 

The  casual  friends  of  every  day; 
Her  smile  was  undisturbed  and  sweet, 

His  courtesy  was  free  and  gay. 

But  yet  if  one  the  other's  name 

In  some  unguarded  moment  heard, 
The  heart  you  thought  so  calm  and  tame 

Would  struggle  hke  a  captured  bird: 

And  letters  of  mere  formal  phrase 
Were  blistered  with  repeated  tears, — 

And  this  was  not  the  work  of  days, 
But  had  gone  on  for  years  and  years! 

Alas,  that  love  was  not  too  strong 

For  maiden  shame  and  manly  pride! 
Alas,  that  they  delayed  so  long 

The  goal  of  mutual  bliss  beside! 


838  Poems  of  Love 

Yet  what  no  chance  could  then  reveal, 
And  neither  would  be  first  to  own, 

Let  fate  and  courage  now  conceal, 

When  truth  could  bring  remorse  alone. 

Richard  Monckton  Milnes  [i8og-i8Ss] 

SORROWS  OF  WERTHER 

Werther  had  a  love  for  Charlotte 
Such  as  words  could  never  utter; 

Would  you  know  how  first  he  met  her? 
She  was  cutting  bread  and  butter. 

Charlotte  was  a  married  lady. 
And  a  moral  man  was  Werther, 

And,  for  all  the  wealth  of  Indies, 
Would  do  notliing  for  to  liurt  her. 

So  he  sighed  and  pined  and  ogled. 
And  his  passion  boiled  and  bubbled. 

Till  he  blew  his  silly  brains  out, 
And  no  more  was  by  it  troubled. 

Charlotte,  having  seen  his  body 

Borne  before  her  on  a  shutter. 
Like  a  well-conducted  person. 

Went  on  cutting  bread  and  butter. 

'William  Makepeace  TJiackeray  [1811-1S63] 

THE  AGE  OF  WISDOM 

Ho,  pretty  page,  with  the  dimpled  chin, 

That  never  has  known  the  barber's  shear. 
All  your  wish  is  v/oman  to  win. 
This  is  the  way  that  boys  begin, — 
Wait  till  you  come  to  Forty  Year. 

Curly  gold  locks  cover  foolish  brains, 

Billing  and  cooing  is  all  your  cheer;    ■  '. 
Sighing,  and  singing  of  midnight  strains, 
Under  Bonnybell's  window-panes, — 
Wait  till  you  come  to  Forty  Year. 


Andrea  del   Sarto  839 

Forty  times  over  let  IMichaelmas  pass, 
Grizzling  hair  the  brain  does  clear — 

Then  you  know  a  boy  is  an  ass, 

Then  you  know  the  worth  of  a  lass, 
Once  you  have  come  to  Forty  Year. 

Pledge  me  round;  I  bid  ye  declare, 
All  good  fellows  whose  beards  are  gray, 

Did  not  the  fairest  of  the  fair 

Common  grow  and  wearisome  ere 
Ever  a  month  was  passed  away? 

The  reddest  lips  that  ever  have  kissed. 
The  brightest  eyes  that  ever  have  shonfe,   ; 

May  pray  and  whisper,  and  we  not  list, 

Or  look  away  and  never  be  missed. 
Ere  yet  ever  a  month  is  gone. 

Gillian's  dead,  God  rest  her  bier. 
How  I  loved  her  twenty  years  syne! 

Marian's  married,  but  I  sit  here, 

Alone  and  merry  at  Forty  Year, 

Dipping  my  nose  in  the  Gascon  wine. 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1S11-1S63] 


ANDREA  DEL   SARTO 

CALLED    "the    FAULTLESS   PAINTER " 

But  do  not  let  us  cjuarrel  any  more, 
No,  my  Lucrezia;  bear  with  me  for  once: 
Sit  down  and  all  shall  happen  as  you  wish. 
You  turn  your  face,  but  does  it  bring  your  heart? 
I'll  work  then  for  your  friend's  friend,  never  fear, 
Treat  his  own  subject  after  his  own  way, 
Fix  his  own  time,  accept  too  his  own  price, 
And  shut  the  money  into  this  small  hand 
When  next  it  takes  mine.     Will  it?  tenderly? 
Oh,  I'll  content  him, — but  to-morrow.  Love! 
I  often  am  much  wearier  than  you  think. 
This  evening  more  than  usual,  and  it  seems 


840  Poems  of  Love 

As  if — forgive  now — should  you  let  me  sit 
Here  by  the  window,  with  your  hand  in  mine, 
And  look  a  half-hour  forth  on  Fiesole, 
Both  of  one  mind,  as  married  people  use, 
Quietly,  quietly  the  evening  through, 
I  might  get  up  to-morrow  to  my  work 
Cheerful  and  fresh  as  ever.     Let  us  try. 
To-morrow  how  you  shall  be  glad  for  this! 
Your  soft  hand  is  a  woman  of  itself. 
And  mine  the  man's  bared  breast  she  curls  inside. 
Don't  count  the  time  lost  neither;  you  must  serve 
For  each  of  the  five  pictures  we  require; 
It  saves  a  model.     So!  keep  looking  so — 
My  serpentining  beauty,  rounds  on  rounds! 
— How  could  you  ever  prick  those  perfect  ears, 
Even  to  put  the  pearl  there!  oh,  so  sweet — 
My  face,  my  moon,  my  everybody's  moon, 
Which  everybody  looks  on  and  calls  his. 
And,  I  suppose,  is  looked  on  by  in  turn. 
While  she  looks — no  one's:  very  dear,  no  less. 
You  smile?  why,  there's  my  picture  ready  made, 
There's  what  we  painters  call  our  harmony! 
A  common  grayness  silvers  everything, — 
All  in  a  twilight,  you  and  I  alike 
— You,  at  the  point  of  your  first  pride  in  me 
(That's  gone  you  know), — but  I,  at  every  point; 
My  youth,  my  hope,  my  art,  being  all  toned  down 
To  yonder  sober  pleasant  Fiesole. 
There's  the  bell  clinking  from  the  chapel-top; 
That  length  of  convent  wall  across  the  way 
Holds  the  trees  safer,  huddled  more  inside; 
The  last  monk  leaves  the  garden ;  days  decrease, 
And  autumn  grows,  autumn  in  everything. 
Eh?  the  whole  seems  to  fall  into  a  shape 
As  if  I  saw  alike  my  work  and  self 
And  all  that  I  was  born  to  be  and  do, 
A  twilight-piece.     Love,  we  are  in  God's  hand. 
How  strange  now  looks  the  life  he  makes  us  lead; 
So  free  we  seem,  so  fettered  fast  we  are! 
I  feel  he  laid  the  fetter;  let  it  lie! 


Andrea  del   Sarto  841 

This  chamber  for  example — turn  your  head — 

All  that's  behind  us!     You  don't  understand 

Nor  care  to  understand  about  my  art, 

But  you  can  hear  at  least  when  people  speak: 

And  that  cartoon,  the  second  from  the  door 

— It  is  the  thing,  Love!  so  such  thing  should  be — = 

Behold  Madonna ! — I  am  bold  to  say. 

I  can  do  with  my  pencil  what  I  know. 

What  I  see,  what  at  bottom  of  my  heart 

I  wish  for,  if  I  ever  w-ish  so  deep — 

Do  easily,  too — when  I  say,  perfectly, 

I  do  not  boast,  perhaps:  yourself  are  judge, 

Who  listened  to  the  Legate's  talk  last  week, 

And  just  as  much  they  used  to  say  in  France, 

At  any  rate  'tis  easy,  all  of  it ! 

No  sketches  first,  no  studies,  that's  long  past: 

I  do  what  many  dream  of  all  their  lives, 

— Dream?  strive  to  do,  and  agonize  to  do, 

And  fail  in  doing.     I  could  count  twenty  such 

On  twice  your  fingers,  and  not  leave  this  town. 

Who  strive — you  don't  know  how  the  others  strive 

To  paint  a  little  thing  like  that  you  smeared 

Carelessly  passing  with  your  ro'oes  afloat, — 

Yet  do  much  less,  so  much  less.  Someone  says, 

(I  know  his  name,  no  matter) — so  much  less! 

Well,  less  is  more,  Lucrezia:  I  am  judged. 

There  burns  a  truer  light  of  God  in  them, 

In  their  vexed  beating  stuiYed  and  stopped-up  brain, 

Heart,  or  whate'er  else,  than  goes  on  to  prompt 

This  low-pulsed  forthright  craftsman's  hand  of  mine. 

Their  works  drop  groundward,  but  themselves,  I  know, 

Reach  many  a  time  a  heaven  that's  shut  to  me, 

Enter  and  take  their  place  there  sure  enough. 

Though  they  come  back  and  cannot  tell  the  world. 

My  works  are  nearer  heaven,  but  I  sit  here. 

The  sudden  blood  of  these  men !  at  a  word — 

Praise  them,  it  boils,  or  blame  them,  it  boils  too. 

I,  painting  from  myself  and  to  myself. 

Know  what  I  do.  am  unmoved  by  men's  i)lame 

Or  their  praise  either.     Somebody  remarks 


842  Poems  of  Love 

Morello's  outline  there  is  wrongly  traced, 

His  hue  mistaken;  what  of  that?  or  else, 

Rightly  traced  and  well  ordered;  what  of  that? 

Speak  as  they  please,  what  does  the  mountain  care? 

Ah,  but  a  man's  reach  should  exceed  his  grasp, 

Or  what's  a  heaven  for?     All  is  silver-gray, 

Placid  and  perfect  with  my  art;  the  worse! 

I  know  both  what  I  want  and  what  might  gain; 

And  yet  how  profitless  to  know,  to  sigh 

"  Had  I  been  two,  another  and  myself, 

Our  head  would  have  o'erlooked  the  world!"   No  doubt 

Yonder's  a  work  now,  of  that  famous  youth 

The  Urbinate  who  died  five  years  ago. 

('Tis  copied,  George  Vasari  sent  it  me.) 

Well,  I  can  fancy  how  he  did  it  all. 

Pouring  his  soul,  with  kings  and  popes  to  see. 

Reaching,  that  heaven  might  so  replenish  him. 

Above  and  through  his  art — for  it  gives  way; 

That  arm  is  wrongly  put — and  there  again — 

A  fault  to  pardon  in  the  drawing's  lines, 

Its  body,  so  to  speak:  its  soul  is  right. 

He  means  right, — that,  a  child  may  understand. 

Still,  what  an  arm!  and  I  could  alter  it: 

But  all  the  play,  the  insight  and  the  stretch — 

Out  of  me,  out  of  me!     And  wherefore  out? 

Had  you  enjoined  them  on  me,  given  me  soul, 

We  might  have  risen  to  Rafael,  I  and  you! 

Nay,  Love,  you  did  give  all  I  asked,  I  think — 

More  than  I  merit,  yes,  by  many  times. 

But  had  you — oh,  with  the  same  perfect  brow, 

And  perfect  eyes,  and  more  than  perfect  mouth. 

And  the  low  voice  my  soul  hears,  as  a  bird 

The  fowler's  pipe,  and  follows  to  the  snare — 

Had  you,  with  these  the  same,  but  brought  a  mind! 

Some  women  do  so.     Had  the  mouth  there  urged, 

"God  and  the  glory!  never  care  for  gain. 

The  present  by  the  future,  what  is  that? 

Live  for  fame,  side  by  side  with  Agnolo! 

Rafael  is  waiting:  up  to  God,  all  three!" 

I  might  have  done  it  for  you.     So  it  seems: 


Andrea  del   Sarto  843 

Perhaps  not.     All  is  as  God  overrules. 

Beside,  incentives  come  from  the  soul's  self; 

The  rest  avail  not.     Why  do  I  need  you? 

What  wife  had  Rafael,  or  has  Agnolo? 

In  this  world,  who  can  do  a  thing,  will  not; 

And  who  would  do  it,  cannot,  I  perceive: 

Yet  the  will's  somewhat — somewhat,  too,  the  power — 

And  thus  we  half-men  struggle.     At  the  end, 

God  I  conclude,  compensates,  punishes. 

'Tis  safer  for  me,  if  the  award  be  strict, 

That  I  am  something  underrated  here. 

Poor  this  long  while,  despised,  to  speak  the  truth. 

I  dared  not,  do  you  know,  leave  home  all  day, 

For  fear  of  chancing  on  the  Paris  lords. 

The  best  is  when  they  pass  and  look  aside; 

But  they  speak  sometimes;  I  must  bear  it  all. 

Well  may  they  speak!     That  Francis,  that  first  time, 

And  that  long  festal  year  at  Fontainebleau ! 

I  surely  then  could  sometimes  leave  the  ground, 

Put  on  the  glory,  Rafael's  daily  wear. 

In  that  humane  great  monarch's  golden  look, — 

One  finger  in  his  beard  or  twisted  curl 

Over  his  mouth's  good  mark  that  made  the  smile, 

One  arm  about  my  shoulder,  round  my  neck, 

The  jingle  of  his  gold  chain  in  my  ear, 

I  painting  proudly  with  his  breath  on  me. 

All  his  court  round  him,  seeing  with  his  eyes, 

Such  frank  French  eyes,  and  such  a  fire  of  souls 

Profuse,  my  hand  kept  plying  by  those  hearts, — 

And,  best  of  all,  this,  this,  this  face  beyond. 

This  in  the  background,  waiting  on  my  work, 

To  crown  the  issue  with  a  last  reward ! 

A  good  time,  was  it  not,  my  kingly  days? 

And  had  you  not  grown  restless  .  .  .  but  I  know — 

'Tis  done  and  past;  'twas  right,  my  instinct  said; 

Too  live  the  life  grew,  golden  and  not  gray, 

And  I'm  the  weak-eyed  bat  no  sun  should  tempt 

Out  of  the  grange  whose  four  walls  make  his  world. 

How  could  it  end  in  any  other  way? 

You  called  me,  and  I  came  home  to  your  heart. 


844  Poems  of  Love 

The  triumph  was, — to  reach  and  stay  there;  since 

I  reached  it  ere  tlie  triumph,  what  is  lost? 

Let  my  hands  frame  your  face  in  your  hair's  gold. 

You  beautiful  Lucrezia  that  are  mine! 

"Rafael  did  this,  Andrea  painted  that; 

The  Roman's  is  the  better  when  you  pray. 

But  still  the  other's  Virgin  was  his  wife  " — 

Men  will  excuse  me.     I  am  glad  to  judge 

Both  pictures  in  your  presence;  clearer  grows 

My  better  fortune,  I  resolve  to  think. 

For  do  you  know,  Lucrezia,  as  God  lives. 

Said  one  day  Agnolo,  his  very  self 

To  Rafael  ...  I  have  known  it  all  these  years  .  .  . 

(When  the  young  man  was  flaming  out  his  thoughts 

Upon  a  palace-wall  for  Rome  to  see. 

Too  lifted  up  in  heart  because  of  it) 

"Friend,  there's  a  certain  sorry  little  scrub 

Goes  up  and  down  our  Florence,  none  cares  how, 

Who,  were  he  set  to  plan  and  execute 

As  you  are,  pricked  on  by  your  popes  and  kings, 

Would  bring  the  sweat  into  that  brow  of  yours!" 

To  Rafael's!     And  indeed  the  arm  is  wrong. 

I  hardly  dare  .  .  .  yet,  only  you  to  see. 

Give  the  chalk  here — quick,  thus  the  line  should  go! 

Ay,  but  the  soul!  he's  Rafael!  rub  it  out! 

Still,  all  I  care  for,  if  he  spoke  the  truth, 

(What  he?  why,  who  but  Michel  Agnolo? 

Do  you  forget  already  words  like  those?) 

If  really  there  was  such  a  chance,  so  lost, — 

Is,  whether  you're — not  grateful — but  more  pleased. 

Well,  let  me  think  so.     And  you  smile  indeed! 

This  hour  has  been  an  hour!     Another  smile? 

If  you  would  sit  thus  by  me  every  night 

I  should  work  better,  do  you  comprehend? 

I  mean  that  I  should  earn  more,  give  you  more. 

See,  it  is  settled  dusk  now;  there's  a  star; 

Morello's  gone,  the  watch-lights  show  the  wall. 

The  cue-owls  speak  the  name  we  call  them  by. 

Come  from  the  window,  love, — come  in,  at  last, 

Inside  the  melancholy  little  house 


Andrea  del   Sarto  845 

We  built  to  be  so  gay  with.     God  is  just. 

King  Francis  may  forgive  me:  oft  at  nights 

When  I  look  up  from  painting,  eyes  tired  out, 

The  walls  become  illumined,  brick  from  brick 

Distinct,  instead  of  mortar,  fierce  bright  gold, 

That  gold  of  his  I  did  cement  them  with! 

Let  us  but  love  each  other.     Must  you  go? 

That  Cousin  here  again?  he  waits  outside? 

Must  see  you — you,  and  not  with  me?     Those  loans? 

More  gaming  debts  to  pay?  you  smiled  for  that? 

Well,  let  smiles  buy  me!  have  you  more  to  spend? 

While  hand  and  eye  and  something  of  a  heart 

Are  left  me,  work's  my  ware,  and  what's  it  worth? 

I'll  pay  my  fancy.     Only  let  me  sit 

The  gray  remainder  of  the  evening  out. 

Idle,  you  call  it,  and  muse  perfectly 

How  I  could  paint,  were  I  but  back  in  France,        .' 

One  picture,  just  one  more, — the  Virgin's  face, 

Not  yours  this  time!     I  want  you  at  my  side 

To  hear  them — that  is  Michel  Agnolo — 

Judge  all  I  do  and  tell  you  of  its  worth. 

Will  you?     To-morrow,  satisfy  your  friend. 

I  take  the  subjects  for  his  corridor. 

Finish  the  portrait  out  of  hand — there,  there, 

And  throw  him  in  another  thing  or  two 

If  he  demurs;  the  whole  should  prove  enough 

To  pay  for  this  same  Cousin's  freak.     Beside, 

What's  better  and  what's  all  I  care  about, 

Get  you  the  thirteen  scudi  for  the  ruff! 

Love,  does  that  please  you?     Ah,  but  what  does  he. 

The  Cousin!  what  does  he  to  please  you  more? 

I  am  grown  peaceful  as  old  age  to-night.  T 

I  regret  little,  I  would  change  still  less. 
Since  there  my  past  Hfe  lies,  why  alter  it? 
The  very  wrong  to  Francis! — it  is  true  /. 

I  took  his  coin,  was  tempted  and  complied, 
And  built  this  house  and  sinned,  and  all  is  said. 
My  father  and  my  mother  died  of  want. 
Well,  had  I  riches  of  my  own?  you  see 


846  Poems  of  Love 

How  one  gets  rich!     Let  each  one  bear  his  lot. 
They  were  born  poor,  lived  poor,  and  poor  they  died: 
And  I  have  labored  somewhat  in  my  time 
And  not  been  paid  profusely.     Some  good  son 
Paint  my  two  hundred  pictures — let  him  try! 
No  doubt,  there's  something  strikes  a  balance.     Yes, 
You  loved  me  quite  enough,  it  seems  to-night. 
This  must  suffice  me  here.     What  would  one  have? 
In  heaven,  perhaps,  new  chances,  one  more  chance — 
Four  great  walls  in  the  New  Jerusalem,  ih 

Meted  on  each  side  by  the  angel's  reed,  '// 

For  Leonard,  Rafael,  Agnolo,  and  me  I  // 

To  cover, — the  three  first  without  a  wife, 
While  I  have  mine!     So — still  they  overcome 
•   Because  there's  still  Lucrezia, — as  I  choose. 

Again  the  Cousin's  whistle!     Go,  my  love.  '! 

Robert  Broivning  [1812-1889] 


MY  LAST   DUCHESS 


That's  my  last  Duchess  painted  on  the  wall, 
Looking  as  if  she  were  alive.    I  call 
That  piece  a  wonder,  now:  Fra  Pandolf's  hands 
Worked  busily  a  day,  and  there  she  stands. 
Will't  please  you  sit  and  look  at  her?    I  said 
"Fra.  Pandolf "  by  design,  for  never  read 
Strangers  like  you  that  pictured  countenance, 
The  depth  and  passion  of  its  earnest  glance. 
But  to  myself  they  turned  (since  none  puts  by 
The  curtain  I  have  drawn  for  you,  but  I) 
And  seemed  as  they  would  ask  me,  if  they  durst, 
How  such  a  glance  came  there;  so,  not  the  first 
Are  you  to  turn  and  ask  thus.    Sir,  'twas  not 
Her  husband's  presence  only,  called  that  spot 
Of  joy  into  the  Duchess'  cheek:  perhaps 
Fra  Pandolf  chanced  to  say,  "Her  mantle  laps 
Over  my  lady's  wrist  too  much,"  or  "Paint 


My   Last   Duchess  84.7 

Must  never  hope  to  reproduce  the  faint 

Half-flush  that  dies  along  her  throat":  such  stuff 

Was  courtesy,  she  thought,  and  cause  enough 

For  calling  up  that  spot  of  joy.    She  had 

A  heart — how  shall  I  say? — too  soon  made  glad,j„^ 

Too  easily  impressed:  she  liked  whate'er 

She  looked  on,  and  her  looks  went  everywhere. 

Sir,  'twas  all  one!    My  favor  at  her  breast,  jy 

The  dropping  of  the  daylight  in  the  West, 

The  bough  of  cherries  some  officious  fool 

Broke  in  the  orchard  for  her,  the  white  mule 

She  rode  with  round  the  terrace — all  and  each 

Would  draw  from  her  alike  the  approving  speech, 

Or  blush,  at  least.    She  thanked  men, — good!  but  thanked 

Somehow — I  know  not  how — as  if  she  ranked 

My  gift  of  a  nine  hundred-ycars-old  name 

With  anybody's  gift.    Who'd  stoop  to  blame 

This  sort  of  trifling?    Even  had  you  skill 

In  speech — (which  I  have  not) — to  make  your  will 

Quite  clear  to  such  an  one,  and  say,  "Just  this 

Or  that  in  you  disgusts  me;  here  you  miss, 

Or  there  exceed  the  mark" — and  if  she  let 

Herself  be  lessoned  so,  nor  plainly  set 

Her  wits  to  yours,  forsooth,  and  made  excuse, 

— E'en  then  would  be  some  stooping;  and  I  choose 

Never  to  stoop.    Oh  sir,  she  smiled,  no  doubt, 

Whene'er  I  passed  her;  but  who  passed  without 

Much  the  same  smile?    This  grew;  I  gave  commands; 

Then  all  smiles  stopped  together.    There  she  stands 

As  if  alive.    WiU't  please  you  rise?    We'll  meet 

The  company  below,  then.    I  repeat, 

The  Count  your  master's  known  munificence 

Is  ample  warrant  that  no  just  pretense 

Of  mine  for  dowry  will  be  disallowed; 

Though  his  fair  daughter's  self,  as  I  avowed 

At  starting,  is  my  object.    Nay,  we'U  go 

Together  down,  sir.    Notice  Neptune,  though. 

Taming  a  sea-horse,  thought  a  rarity. 

Which  Claus  of  Innsbruck  cast  in  bronze  for  me! 

Robert  Browning  [18 12-1889] 


848  Poems  of  Love 

ADAM,   LILITH,  AND   EVE 

One  day,  it  thundered  and  lightened. 

Two  women,  fairly  frightened. 

Sank  to  their  knees,  transformed,  transfixed, 

At  the  feet  of  the  man  who  sat  betwixt; 

And  "Mercy!"  cried  each — "if  I  tell  the  truth 

Of  a  passage  in  my  youth!" 

Said  This:  "Do  you  mind  the  morning 
I  met  your  love  with  scorning? 
As  the  worst  of  the  venom  left  rny  lips, 
I  thought,  '  If,  despite  this  lie,  he  strips 
The  mask  from  my  soul  with  a  kiss — I  crawl 
His  slave, — soul,  body,  and  all!'" 

Said  That:  "We  stood  to  be  married; 
The  priest,  or  some  one,  tarried; 
*If  Paradise-door  prove  locked?'  smiled  you. 
I  thought,  as  I  nodded,  smiling  too, 
'Did  one,  that's  away,  arrive — nor  late 
Nor  soon  should  unlock  Hell's  gate!'" 

It  ceased  to  lighten  and  thunder. 

Up  started  both  in  wonder. 

Looked  around  and  saw  that  the  sky  was  clear. 

Then  laughed  "Confess  you  beUeved  us.  Dear!" 

"I  saw  through  the  joke!"  the  man  replied 

They  re-seated  themselves  beside. 

Robert  Browning  [1812-18 

THE  LOST  MISTRESS 

All's  over,  then:  does  truth  sound  bitter 

As  one  at  first  believes? 
Hark,  'tis  the  sparrows'  good-night  twitter 

About  your  cottage  eaves! 

And  the  leaf-buds  on  the  vine  are  woolly, 

I  noticed  that,  to-day; 
One  day  more  bursts  them  open  fully 

— You  know  the  red  turns  gray. 


Lost  Love  849 

To-morrow  we  meet  the  same  then,  dearest? 

May  I  take  your  hand  in  mine? 
Mere  friends  are  we, — well,  friends  the  merest 

Keep  much  that  I  resign: 

For  each  glance  of  the  eye  so  bright  and  black, 
Though  I  keep  with  heart's  endeavor, — 

Your  voice,  when  you  wish  the  snowdrops  back, 
Though  it  stay  in  my  soul  forever! — 

Yet  I  will  but  say  what  mere  friends  say, 

Or  only  a  thought  stronger; 
I  will  hold  your  hand  but  as  long  as  all  may. 

Or  so  very  little  longer! 

Robert  Browning  [i8i2-i88g] 

FRIEND   AND   LOVER  ' 

// 
When  Psyche's  friend  becomes  her  lover^^^jj  ^^ 

How  sweetly  these  conditions  blend!        ,..,  .  .1 

But,  oh,  what  anguish  to  discover 

Her  lover  has  become — her  friend! 

Mary  Ainge  de  Vere  [1844- 


LOST  LOVE 

Who  wins  his  Love  shall  lose  her, 
Who  loses  her  shall  gain, 

For  still  the  spirit  wooes  her, 
A  soul  without  a  stain; 

And  Memory  still  pursues  her 
With  longings  not  in  vain! 

He  loses  her  who  gains  her. 
Who  watches  day  by  day 

The  dust  of  time  that  stains  her, 
The  griefs  that  leave  her  gray,  '^' 

The  flesh  that  yet  enchains  her 
Whose  grace  hath  passed  away! 

Oh,  happier  he  who  gains  not 
The  Love  some  seem  to  gain: 

The  joy  that  custom  stains  not 
Shall  still  with  him  remain, 


// 


850  Poems  of  Love 

The  loveliness  that  wanes  not, 
The  Love  that  ne'er  can  wane. 

In  dreams  she  grows  not  older 
The  lands  of  Dream  among, 

Though  all  the  world  wax  colder, 
Though  all  the  songs  be  sung, 

In  dreams  doth  he  behold  her 
Still  fair  and  kind  and  young. 

Andrew  Lang  [1844-1912] 

VOBISCUM  EST  lOPE 

When  thou  must  home  to  shades  of  underground, 

And  there  arrived,  a  new  admired  guest, 

The  beauteous  spirits  do  engirt  thee  round, 

White  lope,  blithe  Helen,  and  the  rest, 

To  hear  the  stories  of  thy  finished  love 

From  that  smooth  tongue  whose  music  hell  can  move; 

Then  wilt  thou  speak  of  banqueting  delights. 
Of  masques  and  revels  which  sweet  youth  did  make, 
Of  tourneys  and  great  challenges  of  knights, 
And  all  these  triumphs  for  thy  beauty's  sake: 
When  thou  hast  told  these  honors  done  to  thee. 
Then  tell,  O  tell,  how  thou  didst  murder  me! 

Thomas  Campion  {    ?   -1619J 

FOUR  WINDS 

"  Four  winds  blowing  through  the  sky. 
You  have  seen  poor  maidens  die, 
Tell  me  then  what  I  shall  do 
That  my  lover  may  be  true." 
Said  the  wind  from  out  the  south, 
"Lay  no  kiss  upon  his  mouth," 
And  the  wind  from  out  the  west, 
"Wound  the  heart  within  his  breast," 
And  the  wind  from  out  the  east, 
"Send  him  empty  from  the  feast," 
And  the  wind  from  out  the  north, 


Crowned  851 


"In  the  tempest  thrust  him  forth; 
When  thou  art  more  cruel  than  he, 
Then  will  Love  be  kind  to  thee." 

Sara  Tcasdalc  [1884- 

TO  MANON 

AS   TO   HIS   CHOICE    OF   HER 

If  I  had  chosen  thee,  thou  shouldst  have  been 

A  virgin  proud,  untamed,  immaculate,  ^• 

Chaste  as  the  morning  star,  a  saint,  a  queen, 

Scarred  by  no  wars,  no  violence  of  hate. 

Thou  shouldst  have  been  of  soul  commensurate 

With  thy  fair  body,  brave  and  virtuous 

And  kind  and  just;  and  if  of  poor  estate, 

At  least  an  honest  woman  for  my  house. 

I  would  have  had  thee  come  of  honored  blood   > 

And  honorable  nurture.    Thou  shouldst  bear 

Sons  to  my  pride  and  daughters  to  my  heart. 

And  men  should  hold  thee  happy,  wise,  and  good. 

Lo,  thou  art  none  of  this,  but  only  fair. 

Yet  must  I  love  thee,  dear,  and  as  thou  art. 

Wilfrid  Scawen  Blunt  [1840- 

CROWNED 

You  came  to  me  bearing  bright  roses, 

Red  like  the  wine  of  your  heart; 
You  twisted  them  into  a  garland 

To  set  me  aside  from  the  mart. 
Red  roses  to  crown  me  your  lover. 

And  I  walked  aureoled  and  apart. 

Enslaved  and  encircled,  I  bore  it, 

Proud  token  of  my  gift  to  you. 
The  petals  waned  paler,  and  shriveled. 

And  dropped;  and  the  thorns  started  through. 
Bitter  thorns  to  proclaim  me  your  lover, 

A  diadem  woven  with  rue. 
1  Amy  Lowell  [1874- 


852  Poems  of  Love 

HEBE 

I  SAV/  the  twinkle  of  white  feet, 
I  saw  the  flash  of  robes  descending; 

Before  her  ran  an  influence  fleet, 

That  bowed  my  heart  like  barley  bending 

As,  in  bare  fields,  the  searching  bees 

Pilot  to  blooms  beyond  our  finding. 
It  led  me  on,  by  sweet  degrees 

Joy's  simple  honey-cells  unbinding. 

/ 
Those  Graces  were  that  seemed  grim  Fates; 

With  nearer  love  the  sky  leaned  o'er  me; 
The  long-sought  Secret's  golden  gates 

On  musical  hinges  swung  before  me. 

I  saw  the  brimmed  bowl  in  her  grasp 
Thrilhng  with  godhood ;  like  a  lover 

I  sprang  the  profifered  life  to  clasp; — 
The  beaker  fell;  the  luck  was  over. 

The  Earth  has  drunk  the  vintage  up; 

What  boots  it  patch  the  goblet's  splinters? 
Can  Summer  fill  the  icy  cup 

Whose  treacherous  crystal  is  but  Winter's? 

O  spendthrift  haste!  await  the  Gods; 

Their  nectar  crowns  the  lips  of  Patience; 
Haste  scatters  on  unthankful  sods 

The  immortal  gift  in  vain  libations.        :,<i; 

Coy  Hebe  flies  from  those  that  woo, 
•f'l'    And  shuns  the  hands  would  seize  upon  her; 
Follow  thy  life,  and  she  will  sue  ■''•  * 

To  pour  for  thee  the  cup  of  honor. 

-t:'i;  James  Russell  Lowell  [1819-1J 


"Justine,  You   Love   Me   Not!"      853 
"JUSTINE,  YOU  LOVE  ME  NOT!" 

"  Uelas  !  vous  ne  m'aimez  pas." — Piron 

I  KNOW,  Justine,  you  speak  me  fair 

As  often  as  we  meet; 
And  'tis  a  luxury,  I  swear, 

To  hear  a  voice  so  sweet; 
And  yet  it  does  not  please  me  quite, 

The  civil  way  you've  got; 
For  me  you're  something  too  polite — 

Justine,  you  love  me  not ! 

I  knew  Justine,  you  never  scold 

At  aught  that  I  may  do: 
If  I  am  passionate  or  cold, 

'Tis  all  the  same  to  you. 
"A  charming  temper,"  say  the  men, 

"To  smooth  a  husband's  lot": 
I  wish  'twere  ruffled  now  and  then — 

Justine  you  love  me  not! 

I  know,  Justine,  you  wear  a  smile 

As  beaming  as  the  sun; 
But  who  supposes  all  the  while 

It  shines  for  only  one? 
Though  azure  skies  are  fair  to  see, 

A  transient  cloudy  spot 
In  yours  would  promise  more  to  me — 

Justine,  you  love  me  not ! 

I  know,  Justine,  you  make  my  name 

Your  eulogistic  theme, 
And  say — if  any  chance  to  blame— 

You  hold  me  in  esteem. 
Such  words,  for  all  their  kindly  scope. 

Delight  me  not  a  jot ; 
Just  as  you  would  have  praised  the  Pope — 

Justine,  you  love  me  not! 


I54  Poems  ot   Love   ^lii^u!  '■ 

I  know,  Justine — for  I  have  heard 

What  friendly  voices  tell — 
You  do  not  blush  to  say  the  word, 

"You  like  me  passing  well"; 
And  thus  the  fatal  sound  I  hear 

That  seals  my  lonely  lot : 
There's  nothing  now  to  hope  or  fear — 

Justine,  you  love  me  not! 

John  Godfrey  Saxe  [1816- 


SNOWDROP 

When,  full  of  warm  and  eager  love, 

I  clasp  you  in  my  fond  embrace, 
You  gently  push  me  back  and  say, 

"Take  care,  my  dear,  you'll  spoil  my  lace." 

You  kiss  me  just  as  you  would  kiss 

Some  woman  friend  you  chanced  to  see; 

You  call  me  "dearest." — All  love's  forms 
Are  yours,  not  its  reality. 

Oh,  Annie!  cry,  and  storm,  and  rave! 

Do  anything  with  passion  in  it ! 
Hate  me  an  hour,  and  then  turn  round 

And  love  me  truly,  just  one  minute. 

William  Wet  more  Story  [1819-1895] 


WHEN  THE   SULTAN   GOES  TO  ISPAHAN 

When  the  Sultan  Shah-Zaman 
Goes  to  the  city  Ispahan, 
Even  before  he  gets  so  far 
As  the  place  where  the  clustered  palm-trees  are. 
At  the  last  of  the  thirty  palace-gates, 
The  flower  of  the  harem,  Rose-in-Bloom, 
Orders  a  feast  in  his  favorite  room — 
Glittering  squares  of  colored  ice, 


When  the  Sultan  Goes  to   Ispahan     855 

Sweetened  with  syrop,  tinctured  witii  spice, 

Creams,  and  cordials,  and  sugared  dates, 

Syrian  apples,  Othmanee  quinces. 

Limes,  and  citrons,  and  apricots, 

And  wines  that  are  known  to  Eastern  princes; 

And  Nubian  slaves,  with  smoking  pots 

Of  spiced  meats  and  costliest  fish 

And  all  that  the  curious  palate  could  wish. 

Pass  in  and  oijt  of  the  cedam  doors; 

Scattered  over  mosaic  floors 

Are  anemones,  myrtles,  and  violets, 

And  a  musical  fountain  throws  its  jets 

Of  a  hundred  colors  into  the  air. 

The  dusk  Sultana  loosens  her  hair. 

And  stains  with  the  henna-plant  the  tips 

Of  her  pointed  nails,  and  bites  her  lips 

Till  they  bloom  again;  but,  alas,  that  rose  , 

Not  for  the  Sultan  buds  and  blows,      ,;j 

Not  for  the  Sultan  Shah-Zaman 

When  he  goes  to  the  city  Ispahan.  ,; ;, 

Then  at  a  wave  of  her  sunny  hand 
The  dancing-girls  of  Samarcand 
Glide  in  like  shapes  from  fairy-land, 
Making  a  sudden  mist  in  air 
Of  fleecy  veils  and  floating  hair 
And  white  arms  lifted.    Orient  blood 
Runs  in  their  veins,  shines  in  their  eyes. 
And  there,  in  this  Eastern  Paradise, 
Filled  with  the  breath  of  sandal-wood. 
And  Khoten  musk,  and  aloes  and  myrrh, 
Sits  Rose-in-Bloom  on  a  silk  divan, 
Sipping  the  wines  of  Astrakhan; 
And  her  Arab  lover  sits  with  her. 
That's  when  the  Sidtan  Shah-Zaman 
Goes  to  the  city  Ispahan. 

Now,  when  I  see  an  extra  light. 
Flaming,  flickering  on  the  night 
From  my  neighbor's  casement  opposite, 


856  Poems  of  Love  '"' 

I  know  as  well  as  I  know  to  pray, 
I  know  as  well  as  a  tongue  can  say, 
That  the  innocent  Sultan  Shah-Zaman 
Has  gone  to  the  city  Ispahan. 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldricli  [1837-1907! 


THE  SHADOW  DANCE 

She  sees  her  image  in  the  glass, — 

How  fair  a  thing  to  gaze  upon! 

She  lingers  while  the  moments  run, 
With  happy  thoughts  that  come  and  pass, 

Like  winds  across  the  meadow  grass 
When  the  young  June  is  just  begun: 

She  sees  her  image  in  the  glass, — 
How  fair  a  thing  to  gaze  upon! 

What  wealth  of  gold  the  skies  amass! 

How  glad  are  all  things  'neath  the  sun! 

How  true  the  love  her  love  has  won! 
She  recks  not  that  this  hour  will  pass, — 
She  sees  her  image  in  the  glass. 

Louise  Chandler  Moulton  [1835-1908] 


"ALONG  THE  FIELD   AS  WE   CAME  BY" 

Along  the  field  as  we  came  by 

A  year  ago,  my  love  and  I, 

The  aspen  over  stile  and  stone 

Was  talking  to  itself  alone. 

"Oh,  who  are  these  that  kiss  and  pass? 

A  country  lover  and  his  lass; 

Two  lovers  looking  to  be  wed; 

And  time  shall  put  them  both  to  bed, 

But  she  shall  lie  with  earth  above, 

And  he  beside  another  love." 


"Grieve   Not,    Ladies"  857 

And  sure  enough  beneath  the  tree 
There  walks  another  love  with  me, 
And  overhead  the  aspen  heaves 
Its  rainy-sounding  silver  leaves; 
And  I  spell  nothing  in  their  stir, 
But  now  perhaps  they  speak  to  her, 
And  plain  for  her  to  understand 
They  talk  about  a  time  at  hand 
When  I  shall  sleep  with  clover  clad, 
And  she  beside  another  lad. 

Alfred  Edward  Housman  [1859- 


'WHEN  I  WAS  ONE-AND-TWENTY" 

Wbden  I  was  one-and-twenty 

I  heard  a  wise  man  say, 
"Give  crowns  and  pounds  and  guineas 

But  not  your  heart  away; 
Give  pearls  away  and  rubies 

But  keep  your  fancy  free." 
But  I  was  one-and-twenty, 

No  use  to  talk  to  me. 

When  I  was  one-and-twenty 

I  heard  him  say  again, 
"The  heart  out  of  the  bosom 

Was  never  given  in  vain; 
'Tis  paid  with  sighs  a  plenty 

And  sold  for  endless  rue." 
And  I  am  two-and-twenty. 

And  oh,  'tis  true,  'tis  true. 

Alfred  Edward  Housman  [1859- 


" GRIEVE  NOT,  LADIES" 

Oh,  grieve  not,  Ladies,  if  at  night 
Ye  wake  to  feel  your  beauty  going; 

It  was  a  web  of  frail  delight. 
Inconstant  as  an  April  snowing. 


Poems   of  Love 

In  other  eyes,  in  other  lands, 

In  deep  fair  pools  new  beauty  lingers; 
But  like  spent  water  in  your  hands 

It  runs  from  your  reluctant  fingers. 

You  shall  not  keep  the  singing  lark 
That  owes  to  earlier  skies  its  duty. 

Weep  not  to  hear  along  the  dark 
The  sound  of  your  departing  beauty. 

The  fine  and  anguished  ear  of  night 
Is  tuned  to  hear  the  smallest  sorrow: 

Oh,  wait  until  the  morning  light! 
It  may  not  seem  so  gone  to-morrow. 

But  honey-pale  and  rosy-red! 

Brief  lights  that  make  a  little  shining! 
Beautiful  looks  about  us  shed — 

They  leave  us  to  the  old  repining. 

Think  not  the  watchful,  dim  despair 

Has  come  to  you  the  first,  sweet-heartedJ 

For  oh,  the  gold  in  Helen's  hair! 

And  how  she  cried  when  that  departed! 

Perhaps  that  one  that  took  the  most, 
The  swiftest  borrower,  wildest  spender, 

May  count,  as  we  would  not,  the  cost — 
And  grow  more  true  to  us  and  tender. 

Happy  are  we  if  in  his  eyes 

We  see  no  shadow  of  forgetting. 

Nay — if  our  star  sinks  in  those  skies 
We  shall  not  wholly  see  its  setting. 

Then  let  us  laugh  as  do  the  brooks, 
That  such  immortal  youth  is  ours. 

If  memory  keeps  for  them  our  looks 
As  fresh  as  are  the  springtime  flowers. 


Suburb  8.5)9 

So  grieve  not,  Ladies,  if  at  night 

Ye  wake  to  feel  the  cold  December! 
Rather  recall  the  early  light. 

And  in  your  loved  one's  arms,  remember. 
Anna  Hempstead  Branch  [18 


SUBURB 

Dull  and  hard  the  low  wind  creaks 
Among  the  rustling  pampas  plumes. 
Drearily  the  year  consumes 
Its  fifty-two  insipid  weeks. 

Most  of  the  gray -green  meadow  land 

Was  sold  in  parsimonious  lots; 

The  dingy  houses  stand 

Pressed  by  some  stout  contractor's  hand 

Tightly  together  in  their  plots. 

Through  builded  banks  the  sullen  river 
Gropes,  where  its  houses  crouch  and  shiver. 
Over  the  bridge  the  tyrant  train 
Shrieks,  and  emerges  on  the  plain. 

In  all  the  better  gardens  you  may  pass, 
(Product  of  many  careful  Saturdays), 
Large  red  geraniums  and  tall  pampas  grass 
Adorn  the  plots  and  mark  the  gravelled  ways. 

Sometimes  in  the  background  may  be  seen 

A  private  summer-house  in  white  or  green. 

Here  on  warm  nights  the  daughter  brings 

Her  vacillating  clerk, 

To  talk  of  small  exciting  things 

And  touch  his  fingers  through  the  dark. 

He,  in  the  uncomfortable  breach 
Between  her  trilling  laughters, 
Promises,  in  halting  speech. 
Hopeless  immense  Hereafters. 


86o  Poems  of  Love 

She  trembles  like  the  pampas  plumes. 
Her  strained  lips  haggle.  He  assumes 
The  serious  quest.  ... 

Now  as  the  train  is  whistling  past 
He  takes  her  in  his  arms  at  last. 

It's  done.    She  blushes  at  his  side 
Across  the  lawn — a  bride,  a  bride. 

The  stout  contractor  will  design, 
The  lazy  laborers  will  prepare, 
Another  villa  on  the  line; 
In  the  little  garden-square 
Pampas  grass  will  rustle  there. 

Harold  Monro  [1879- 


THE   BETROTHED 

"  You  must  choose  between  me  and  your  cigar" 

Open  the  old  cigar-box,  get  me  a  Cuba  stout, 

For  things  are  running  crossways,  and  Maggie  and  I  are  out. 

We    quarreled   about   Havanas — we    fought   o'er   a   good 

cheroot — 
And  I  know  she  is  exacting,  and  she  says  I  am  a  brute. 

Open  the  old  cigar-box — let  me  consider  a  space, 

In  the  soft  blue  veil  of  the  vapor,  musing  on  Maggie's  face. 

Maggie  is  pretty  to  look  at — Maggie's  a  loving  lass, 
But  the  prettiest  cheeks  must  wrinkle,  the  truest  of  loves 
must  pass. 

There's  peace  in  a  Laranaga,  there's  calm  in  a  Henry  Clay, 
But  the  best  cigar  in  an  hour  is  finished  and  thrown  away — 

Thrown  away  for  another  as  perfect  and  ripe  and  brown — 
But  I  never  could  throw  away  Maggie  for  fear  o'  the  talk  o' 
the  town! 


The    Betrothed  86i 

Maggie,  my  wife  at  fifty — gray  and  dour  and  old — ■■ 
With  never  another  Maggie  to  purchase  for  love  or  gold. 

And  the  light  of  Days  that  have  Been,  the  dark  of  the  Days 

that  Are, 
And  Love's  torch  stinking  and  stale,  like  the  butt  of  a  dead 

cigar — • 

The  butt  of  a  dead  cigar  you  are  bound  to  keep  in  your 

pocket — 
With  never  a  new  one  to  light,  though  it's  charred  and  black 

to  the  socket. 

Open  the  old  cigar-box — let  me  consider  awhile; 
Here  is  a  mild  Manilla — there  is  a  wifely  smile. 

Which  is  the  better  portion — bondage  bought  with  a  ring. 
Or  a  harem  of  dusky  beauties,  fifty  tied  in  a  string? 

Counselors  cunning  and  silent — comforters  true  and  tried. 
And  never  a  one  of  the  fifty  to  sneer  at  a  rival  bride. 

Thought  in  the  early  morning,  solace  in  time  of  woes, 
Peace  in  the  hush  of  the  twilight,  balm  ere  my  eyelids  close. 

This  will  the  fifty  give  me,  asking  naught  in  return, 
With  only  a  Suttee's  passion — to  do  their  duty  and  burn. 

This  will  the  fifty  give  me.    When  they  are  spent  and  dead, 
Five  times  other  fifties  shall  be  my  servants  instead. 

The  furrows  of  far-off  Java,  the  isles  of  the  Spanish  Main, 
When  they  hear  that  my  harem  is  empty,  will  send  me  my 
brides  again. 

I  will  take  no  heed  to  their  raiment,  nor  food  for  their  mouths 

withal, 
So  long  as  the  guUs  are  nesting,  so  long  as  the  showers  fall. 


852  Poems  of  Love 

I  will  scent  'em  with  best  vanilla,  with  tea  will  I  temper  their 

hides,  ;  -jovof!  AWU 

And  the  Moor  and  the  Mormon  shall  envy  who  read  of  the 
tale  of  my  brides. 

For  Maggie  has  written  a  letter  to  give  me  my  choice  between 
The  wee  little  whimpering  Love  and  the  great  god  Nick 
o'  Teen. 

And  I  have  been  servant  of  Love  for  barely  a  twelvemonth 

clear, 
But  I  have  been  Priest  of  Partagas  a  matter  of  seven  year;' 

And  the  gloom  of  my  bachelor  days  is  flecked  with  the  cheery 

light 
Of  stumps  that  I  burned  to  Friendship,  and  Pleasure,  and 

Work,  and  Fight. 

And  I  turn  my  eyes  to  the  future  that  Maggie  and  I  must 

prove. 
But  the  only  light  on  the  marshes  is  the  Will-o'-the-Wisp  of 

Love. 

Will  it  see  me  safe  through  my  journey,  or  leave  me  bogged 

in  the  mire? 
Since  a  puff  of  tobacco  can  cloud  it,  shall  I  follow  the  fitful 

fire? 

Open  the  old  cigar-box — let  me  consider  anew —  • 

Old  friends,  and  who  is  Maggie,  that  I  should  abandon  you? 

A  million  surplus  Maggies  are  willing  to  bear  the  yoke; 
And  a  woman  is  only  a  woman,  but  a  good  cigar  is  a  Smoke. 

Light  me  another  Cuba — I  hold  to  my  first-sworn  vows,      ' 
If  Maggie  will  have  no  rival,  I'll  have  no  Maggie  for  spouse! 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 


LOVE'S  SADNESS 

'THE  NIGHT  HAS  A   THOUSAND   EYES" 

The  night  has  a  thousand  eyes, 

And  the  day  but  one; 
Yet  the  light  of  the  bright  world  dies 

With  the  dying  sun. 

The  mind  has  a  thousand  eyes, 

And  the  heart  but  one; 
Yet  the  Ught  of  a  whole  life  dies 

When  love  is  done. 

Frattcis  William  Bourdillon  [1852- 

"I   SAW  MY  LADY  WEEP" 

I  SAW  my  Lady  weep, 
And  Sorrow  proud  to  be  advanced  so 
In  those  fair  eyes  where  all  perfections  keep. 

Her  face  was  full  of  Woe, 
But  such  a  Woe  (believe  me)  as  wins  more  hearts 
Than  Mirth  can  do  with  her  enticing  parts. 

Sorrow  was  there  made  fair. 
And  Passion,  wise;  Tears,  a  dehghtful  thing; 
Silence,  beyond  all  speech,  a  wisdom  rare: 

She  made  her  sighs  to  sing. 
And  all  things  with  so  sweet  a  sadness  move 
As  made  my  heart  at  once  both  grieve  and  love. 

O  fairer  than  aught  else 
The  world  can  show,  leave  off  in  lime  to  grieve! 
Enough,  enough:  your  joyful  look  excels: 

Tears  kill  the  heart,  believe. 
O  strive  not  to  be  excellent  in  Woe, 
Which  only  breeds  your  beauty's  overthrow. 

Unknown 

863 


864  Poems  of  Love 


LOVE'S  YOUNG  DREAM 

Oh!  the  days  are  gone,  when  Beauty  bright 

My  heart's  chain  wove; 
When  my  dream  of  life,  from  morn  till  night, 
Was  love,  still  love. 
New  hope  may  bloom, 
And  days  may  come, 
Of  milder,  calmer  beam, 
But  there's  nothing  half  so  sweet  in  life 

As  love's  young  dream; 
No,  there's  nothing  half  so  sweet  in  life 
As  love's  young  dream. 

Though  the  bard  to  purer  fame  may  soar. 

When  wild  youth's  past; 
Though  he  win  the  wise,  who  frowned  before, 
To  smile  at  last; 
He'll  never  meet 
A  joy  so  sweet. 
In  all  his  noon  of  fame. 
As  when  first  he  sung  to  Avoman's  ear 

His  soul-felt  flame, 
And,  at  every  close,  she  blushed  to  hear 
The  one  loved  name. 

No, — that  hallowed  form  is  ne'er  forgot 

Which  first  love  traced; 
Still  it  lingering  haunts  the  greenest  spot 
On  memory's  waste. 
'Twas  odor  fled 
As  soon  as  shed; 
'Twsis  morning's  winged  dream; 
'Twas  a  light  that  ne'er  can  shine  again 

On  life's  dull  stream; 
Oh !  'twas  light  that  ne'er  can  shine  again 
On  life's  dull  stream. 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 


The  Grave  of  Love  86^ 


"NOT  OURS  THE  VOWS" 

Not  ours  the  vows  of  such  as  pUghl 

Their  troth  ia  sunny  weather, 
While  leaves  are  green,  and  skies  are  bright, 

To  walk  on  flowers  together. 

But  we  have  loved  as  those  who  tread 

The  thorny  path  of  sorrow. 
With  clouds  above,  and  cause  to  dread 

Yet  deeper  gloom  to-morrow. 

That  thorny  path,  those  stormy  skies, 

Have  drawn  our  spirits  nearer; 
And  rendered  us,  by  sorrow's  ties,. 

Each  to  the  other  dearer. 

Love,  born  in  hours  of  joy  and  mirth, 

With  mirth  and  joy  may  perish; 
That  to  which  darker  hours  gave  birth 

Still  more  and  more  we  cherish. 

It  looks  beyond  the  clouds  of  time. 
And  through  death's  shadowy  portal; 

Made  by  adversity  sublime. 
By  faith  and  hope  immortal. 

Bernard  Barton  [1784-1840] 


THE  GRAVE  OF  LOVE 

I  DUG,  beneath  the  cypress  shade, 

What  well  might  seem  an  elfin's  grave; 

And  every  pledge  in  earth  I  laid. 
That  erst  thy  false  affection  gave. 

t  pressed  them  down  the  sod  beneath; 

I  placed  one  mossy  stone  above; 
And  twined  the  rose's  fading  wreath 

Around  the  sepulcher  of  love. 


866  Poems  of  Love 

Frail  as  thy  love,  the  flowers  were  dead 
Ere  yet  the  evening  sun  was  set: 

But  years  shall  see  the  cypress  spread, 
Immutable  as  my  regret. 

Thomas  Love  Peacock  [1785-15 


"WE'LL   GO  NO  MORE  A  ROVING" 

So,  we'll  go  no  more  a  roving 

So  late  into  the  night, 
Though  the  heart  be  still  as  loving. 

And  the  moon  be  still  as  bright. 

For  the  sword  outwears  its  sheath, 
And  the  soul  wears  out  the  breast, 

And  the  heart  must  pause  to  breathe, 
And  Love  itself  have  rest. 

Though  the  night  was  made  for  loving. 

And  the  day  returns  too  soon, 
Yet  we'll  go  no  more  a  roving/y 

By  the  light  of  the  moon.         ' 

George  Gordon  Byron  [1788-1824] 

SONG 

Sing  the  old  song,  amid  the  sounds  dispersing 
That  burden  treasured  in  your  hearts  too  long; 

Sing  it,  with  voice  low-breathed,  but  never  name  her: 
She  will  not  hear  you,  in  her  turrets  nursing 

High  thoughts,  too  high  to  mate  with  mortal  song — 
Bend  o'er  her,  gentle  Fleaven,  but  do  not  claim  her! 

In  twilight  caves,  and  secret  lonelinesses. 
She  shades  the  bloom  of  her  unearthly  days; 

And  the  soft  winds  alone  have  power  to  woo  her: 
Far  ofT  we  catch  the  dark  gleam  of  her  tresses; 
And  wild  birds  haunt  the  wood-walks  where  she  strays, 
Intelligible  music  warbling  to  her. 


The  Question  867 

That  Spirit  charged  to  follow  and  defend  her,^r>  ,• 
He  also,  doubtless,  sufTers  this  love-pain;      7/ 
And  she,  perhaps,  is  sad,  hearing  his  sighing: 
And  yet  that  face  is  not  so  sad  as  tender; 

Like  some  sweet  singer's,  when  her  sweetest  strain 
From  the  heaved  heart  is  gradually  dying! 

Aubrey  Thomas  De  Verc  [i 814-1902] 

THE  QUESTION 

I  DREAMED  that,  as  I  wandered  by  the  way. 
Bare  Winter  suddenly  was  changed  to  Spring; 

And  gentle  odors  led  my  steps  astray. 

Mixed  with  a  sound  of  waters  murmuring 

Along  a  shelving  bank  of  turf,  which  lay 
Under  a  copse,  and  hardly  dared  to  fling 

Its  green  arms  round  the  bosom  of  the  stream. 

But  kissed  it  and  then  fled,  as  thou  mightest  in  dream. 

There  grew  pied  wind-flowers  and  violets; 

Daisies,  those  pearled  Arcturi  of  the  earth. 
The  constellated  flower  that  never  sets; 

Faint  oxlips;  tender  bluebells,  at  whose  birth 
The  sod  scarce  heaved;  and  that  tall  flower  that  wets^— 

Like  a  child,  half  in  tenderness  and  mirth — 
Its  mother's  face  with  heaven-collected  tears  ,; 

When  the  low  wind,  its  playmate's  voice,  it  hears,  y 

And  in  the  warm  hedge  grew  lush  eglantine,  ,^ 

Green  cowbind  and  the  moonlight-colored  may, 

And  cherry-blossoms,  and  white  cups  whose  wine 
Was  the  bright  dew  yet  drained  not  by  the  day; 

And  wild  roses,  and  ivy  serpentine. 

With  its  dark  buds  and  leaves  wandering  astray;' 

And  flowers,  azure,  black,  and  streaked  with  gold, 

Fairer  than  any  wakened  eyes  behold. 

And  nearer  to  the  ri\-er's  trembling  edge 

There  grew  broad  flag-flowers,  purple  pranked  with  white, 
And  starry  river-buds  among  the  sedge. 

And  floating  water-lilies,  broad  and  bright, 


868  Poems  of  Love 

Which  lit  the  oak  that  overhung  the  hedge  ' 

With  moonhght  beams  of  their  own  watery  light; 
And  bulrushes,  and  reeds  of  such  deep  green 
As  soothed  the  dazzled  eye  with  sober  sheen. 

Methought  that  of  these  visionary  flowers 
I  made  a  nosegay,  bound  in  such  a  way 

That  the  same  hues  which  in  their  natural  bowers 
Were  mingled  or  opposed,  the  like  array 

Kept  these  imprisoned  children  of  the  Hours 
Within  my  hand;— and  then,  elate  and  gay, 

I  hastened  to  the  spot  whence  I  had  come, 

That  I  might  there  present  it — O!  to  whom? 

Percy  Bysshc  Shelley  [1792-182 2] 

Jiiivi'jfi.^  (;  3no,i/. 


THE  WANDERER 

Love  comes  back  to  his  vacant  dwelling, — 
The  old,  old  Love  that  we  knew  of  yore! 
We  see  him  stand  by  the  open  door. 

With  his  great  eyes  sad,  and  his  bosom  swelling. 

He  makes  as  though  in  our  arms  repelling, 
He  fain  would  lie  as  he  lay  before; — 

Love  comes  back  to  his  vacant  dwelling, — 
The  old,  old  Love  that  we  knew  of  yore! 


Ah,  who  shall  keep  us  from  over-spelling 
That  sweet  forgotten,  forbidden  lore! 
E'en  as  we  doubt  in  our  hearts  once  more, 
With  a  rush  of  tears  to  our  eyelids  welling, 
Love  comes  back  to  his  vacant  dwelling. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 

EGYPTIAN  SERENADE 

Sing  again  the  song  you  sung 
When  we  were  together  young — 
When  there  were  but  you  and  I 
Underneath  the  summer  sky. 


ni  hilA 


The  Water   Lady  869 

'II.      Sing  the  song,  and  o'er  and  o'er         :  |.. 
Though  I  know  that  nevermore 
Will  it  seem  the  song  you  sung 
When  we  were  together  young. 

George  William  Curtis  [1824-1802] 


THE  WATER  LADY 

Alas,  the  moon  should  ever  beam 
To  show  what  man  should  never  see! 
I  saw  a  maiden  on  a  stream, 
And  fair  was  she! 

I  stayed  awhile,  to  see  her  throw 
Her  tresses  back,  that  all  beset 
The  fair  horizon  of  her  brow 
With  clouds  of  jet. 

I  stayed  a  little  while  to  view 
Her  cheek,  that  v/ore,  in  place  of  red, 
The  bloom  of  water,  tender  blue, 
Daintily  spread. 

I  stayed  to  watch,  a  little  space, 
Her  parted  lips  if  she  would  sing; 
The  waters  closed  above  her  face 
With  many  a  ring. 

And  still  I  stayed  a  little  more: 
Alas,  she  never  comes  again! 
I  throw  my  flowers  from  the  shore, 
And  watch  in  vain. 

I  know  my  life  will  fade  away, 
I  know  that  I  must  vainly  pine. 
For  I  am  made  of  mortal  clay. 
But  she's  divine! 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-184; 


Syo  Poems  of  Love 

"TRIPPING   DOWN  THE  FIELD-PATH" 

Tripping  down  the  field-path, 

Early  in  the  morn, 
There  I  met  my  own  love 

'Midst  the  golden  corn; 
Autumn  winds  were  blowing, 

As  in  frolic  chase, 
All  her  sUken  ringlets 

Backward  from  her  face; 
Little  time  for  speaking 

Had  she,  for  the  wind. 
Bonnet,  scarf,  or  ribbon. 

Ever  swept  behind. 

Still  some  sweet  improvement 

In  her  beauty  shone; 
Every  graceful  movement 

Won  me, — one  by  one! 
As  the  breath  of  Venus 

Seemed  the  breeze  of  morn. 
Blowing  thus  between  us, 

'Midst  the  golden  corn.  . 
Little  time  for  wooing 

Had  we,  for  the  wind 
Still  kept  on  undoing 

What  we  sought  to  bind. 

Oh!  that  autumn  morning 

In  my  heart  it  beams, 
Love's  last  look  adorning 

With  its  dream  of  dreams: 
Still,  like  waters  flowing 

In  the  ocean  sheU, 
Sounds  of  breezes  blowing 

In  my  spirit  dwell; 
Still  I  see  the  field-path; — 

Would  that  I  could  see 
Her  whose  graceful  beauty 

Lost  is  now  to  me! 

Charles  Swain  [i  801-1874] 


"A    Place  in   Thy   Memory"         871 

LOVE  NOT 

Love  not,  love  not,  ye  hapless  sons  of  clay! 

Hope's  gayest  wreaths  are  made  of  earthly  flowers — • 
Things  that  are  made  to  fade  and  fall  away. 

When  they  have  blossomed  but  a  few  short  hours. 
Love  not,  love  not! 

Love  not,  love  not!    The  thing  you  love  may  die — 
May  perish  from  the  gay  and  gladsome  earth; 

The  silent  stars,  the  blue  and  smiling  sky, 
Beam  on  its  grave  as  once  upon  its  birth. 
Love  not,  love  not! 

Love  not,  love  not!    The  thing  you  love  may  change, 

The  rosy  lip  may  cease  to  smile  on  you; 
The  kindly  beaming  eye  grow  cold  and  strange; 

The  heart  still  warmly  beat,  yet  not  be  true. 
Love  not,  love  not! 

Love  not,  love  not!    O  warning  vainly  said 
In  present  years,  as  in  the  years  gone  by! 

Love  flings  a  halo  round  the  dear  one's  head, 
Faultless,  immortal — till  they  change  or  die! 

'  '  Love  not,  love  not! 

Caroline  Elizabeth  Sarah  Norton  [1808-1877] 

"A  PLACE  IN  THY  MEMORY" 

A  PLACE  in  Ihy  memory,  Dearest! 

Is  all  that  I  claim: 
To  pause  and  look  back  when  thou  hearest 

The  sound  of  my  name. 
Another  may  woo  thee,  nearer; 

Another  may  win  and  wear:  '•'  ' 

I  care  not  though  he  be  dearer, 

If  I  am  remembered  there. 

Remember  me,  not  as  a  lover 

Whose  hope  was  crossed, 
Whose  bosom  can  never  recover 

The  light  it  hath  lost! 


8y2  ■      Poems  of  Love 

As  the  young  bride  remembers  the  mother 
She  loves,  though  she  never  may  see, 

As  a  sister  remembers  a  brother,  avoJ 

O  Dearest,  remember  me!  idTT 

Could  I  be  thy  true  lover,  Dearest! 

Couldst  thou  smile  on  me, 
I  would  be  the  fondest  and  nearest 

That  ever  loved  thee: 
But  a  cloud  on  my  pathway  is  glooming 

That  never  must  burst  upon  thine; 
And  heaven,  that  made  thee  all  blooming, 

Ne'er  made  thee  to  wither  on  mine. 

Remember  me  then!    O  remember 

My  calm  light  love! 
Though  bleak  as  the  blasts  of  November 

My  life  may  prove. 
That  life  will,  though  lonely,  be  sweet 

If  its  brightest  enjoyment  should  be 
A  smile  and  kind  word  when  we  meet,     .r,         . 

And  a  place  in  thy  memory.  '    ,, 

Gerald  Griffin  [1803- 1840] 


INCLUSIONS 

Oh,  wilt  thou  have  my  hand.  Dear,  to  lie  along  in  thine? 
As  a  little  stone  in  a  running  stream,  it  seems  to  lie  and  pine. 
Now  drop  the  poor  pale  hand.  Dear,  unfit  to  plight  with 
thine. 

Oh,  wilt  thou  have  my  cheek.  Dear,  drawn  closer  to  thine 

own? 
My  cheek  is  white,  my  cheek  is  worn,  by  many  a  tear  run 

down. 
Now  leave  a  little  space,  Dear,  lest  it  should  wet  thine  own. 

Oh,  must  thou  have  my  soul,  Dear,  commingled  with  thy 
soul? — 


Mariana 


!7: 


Red  grows  the  cheek,  and  warm  the  hand;  the  part  is  in  the 

whole ; 
Nor  hands  nor  cheeks  keep  separate,  when  soul  is  joined  to 

soul. 

Elizabdli  Barrett  Broiotiing  [i 806-1861] 


MARIANA 

Mariana  in  the  moated  grange. — Measure  for  Measure 

With  blackest  moss  the  flower-plots 

Were  thickly  crusted,  one  and  all: 

The  rusted  nails  fell  from  the  knots 

That  held  the  pear  to  the  gable-wall. 
The  broken  sheds  looked  sad  and  strange: 
Unlifted  was  the  clinking  latch; 
Weeded  and  worn  the  ancient  thatch 
Upon  the  lonely  moated  grange. 

She  only  said,  "My  life  is  dreary, 

He  Cometh  not,"  she  said; 
She  said,  "I  am  aweary,  aweary, 
I  would  that  I  were  dead!" 

Her  tears  fell  with  the  dews  at  even; 

Her  tears  fell  ere  the  dews  were  dried; 
She  could  not  look  on  the  sweet  heaven. 

Either  at  morn  or  eventide. 
After  the  flitting  of  the  bats,        -''"  '^'-"^ 
When  thickest  dark  did  trance  the  sky, 
She  drew  her  casement-curtain  by, 
And  glanced  athwart  the  glooming  flats. 
She  only  said,  "The  night  is  dreary, 

He  Cometh  not,"  she  said; 
She  said,  "I  am  aweary,  aweary, 
I  would  that  I  were  dead!" 

Upon  the  middle  of  the  night. 

Waking  .she  heard  the  night-fowl  crow: 
The  cock  sung  out  an  hour  ere  light : 

From  the  dark  fen  the  oxen's  low 


874  Poems  of  Love 

Came  to  her:  without  hope  of  change,  ,>| 

In  sleep  she  seemed  to  walk  forlorn, 
Till  cold  winds  woke  the  gray-eyed  mor%jfi  ■^^^y[ 
About  the  lonely  moated  grange.  ;,,;) 

She  only  said,  "The  day  is  dreary, 

He  Cometh  not,"  she  said; 
She  said,  "I  am  aweary,  aweary, 
I  would  that  I  were  dead!" 

About  a  stone-cast  from  the  wall 

A  sluice  with  blackened  waters  slept. 
And  o'er  it  many,  round  and  small, 

The  clustered  marish-mosses  crept. 
Hard  by  a  poplar  shook  alway, 
All  silver-green  with  gnarled  bark: 
For  leagues  no  other  tree  did  mark 
The  level  waste,  the  rounding  gray. 
She  only  said,  "My  life  is  dreary, 

He  cometh  not,"  she  said; 
She  said,  "I  am  aweary,  aweary, 
I  would  that  I  were  dead!" 

And  ever  when  the  moon  was  low. 

And  the  shrill  winds  were  up  and  away, 
In  the  white  curtain,  to  and  fro, 

She  saw  the  gusty  shadow  sway. 
But  when  the  moon  was  very  low. 

And  wild  winds  bound  within  their  cell, 
The  shadow  of  the  poplar  fell 
Upon  her  bed,  across  her  brow. 
-,     She  only  said,  "The  night  is  dreary 
He  cometh  not,"  she  said; 
She  said,  "I  am  aweary,  aweary, 
I  would  that  I  were  dead!" 

All  day  within  the  dreamy  house. 
The  doors  upon  their  hinges  creaked; 

The  blue  fly  sung  in  the  pane;  the  mouse 
Behind  the  moldering  wainscot  shrieked, 


875 


"Ask   Me   No   More" 

Or  from  the  crevice  peered  about. 
rii.OId  faces  glimmered  through  the  doors, 

Old  footsteps  trod  the  upper  floors, 
Old  voices  called  her  from  without. 
She  only  said,  "My  life  is  dreary, 

He  cometh  not,"  she  said; 
She  said,  "I  am  aweary,  aweary, 
I  would  that  I  were  dead!" 


The  sparrow's  chirruj)  on  the  roof, 

The  slow  clock  ticking,  and  the  sound 
Which  to  the  wooing  wind  aloof 

The  poplar  made,  did  all  confound 

Her  sense;  but  most  she  loathed  the  hour 

When  the  thick-moted  sunbeam  lay 

Athwart  the  chambers,  and  the  day 

Was  sloping  toward  his  western  bower. 

Then,  said  she,  "I  am  very  dreary. 

He  will  not  come,"  she  said; 
She  wept,  "I  am  aweary,  aweary, 
O  God,  that  I  were  dead!" 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


"ASK   ME   NO   MORE" 

From  "  The  Princess  " 

Ask  me  no  more:  the  moon  may  draw  the  sea; 

The  cloud  may  stoop  from  heaven  and  take  the  shape, 
With  fold  to  fold,  of  mountain  or  of  cape; 

But  O  too  fond,  when  have  I  answered  thee? 
Ask  me  no  more. 

Ask  me  no  more:  what  answer  should  I  give? 
I  love  not  hollow  cheek  or  faded  eye: 
Yet,  O  my  friend,  I  will  not  have  thee  die! 

Ask  mc  no  more,  lest  I  should  bid  thee  live; 
Ask  me  no  more. 


876  Poems  of  Love 

Ask  me  no  more:  thy  fate  and  mine  are  sealed; 
I  strove  against  the  stream  and  all  in  vain; 
Let  the  great  river  take  me  to  the  main. 
No  more,  dear  love,  for  at  a  touch  I  yield; 
Ask  me  no  more. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1802] 


A  WOMAN'S  LAST  WORD 

Let's  contend  no  more,  Love, 

Strive  nor  weep: 
AH  be  as  before,  Love, 

— Only  sleep! 

What  so  wild  as  words  are.'' 

I  and  thou 
In  debate,  as  birds  are, 

Hawk  on  bough! 

See  the  creature  stalking 

While  we  speak! 
Hush  and  hide  the  talking. 

Cheek  on  cheek! 

What  so  false  as  truth  is. 

False  to  thee? 
Where  the  serpent's  tooth  is 

Shun  the  tree — 

Where  the  apple  reddens 

Never  pry — 
Lest  we  lose  our  Edens, 

Eve  and  I ! 

Be  a  god  and  hold  me 

With  a  charm! 
Be  a  man  and  fold  me 

With  thine  arm! 


The   Last   Ride   Together  87- 

Teach  me,  only  teach,  Love! 

As  I  ought  '['{ 

I  will  speak  thy  speech,  Love, 

Think  thy  thought- 
Meet,  if  thou  require  it. 

Both  demands, 
Laying  ilesh  and  spirit 

In  thy  hands. 

That  shall  be  to-morrow 

Not  to-night  : 
I  must  bury  sorrow 

Out  of  sight: 

— Must  a  little  weep,  Love. 

(Foolish  m.e!) 
And  so  fall  asleep.  Love 

Loved  by  thee. 

Robert  Browning  [181 2-1889] 


THE  LAST  RIDE  TOGETHER 

I  SAID — Then,  dearest,  since  'tis  so, 
Since  now  at  length  my  fate  I  know. 
Since  nothing  all  my  love  avails, 
Since  all,  my  life  seemed  meant  for,  fails. 

Since  this  was  written  and  needs  must  be- 
My  whole  heart  rises  up  to  bless 
Your  name  in  pride  and  thankfulness! 
Take  back  the  hope  you  gave, — I  claim 
Only  a  memory  of  the  same, 
— And  this  beside,  if  you  will  not  blame; 

Your  leave  for  one  more  last  ride  with  me. 

My  mistress  bent  that  brow  of  hers; 
Those  deep  dark  eyes  where  pride  demurs 
When  pity  would  be  softening  through, 
Fixed  me  a  breathing-while  or  two 


878  Poems   of  Love 

With  life  or  death  in  the  balance:  right! 
The  blood  replenished  me  again ; 
My  last  thought  was  at  least  not  vain: 
I  and  my  mistress,  side  by  side 
Shall  be  together,  breathe  and  ride, 
So,  one  day  more  am  I  deified. 

Who  knows  but  the  world  may  end  to-night? 

Hush!  if  you  saw  some  western  cloud 

All  billowy-bosomed,  over-bowed 

By  many  benedictions — sun's 

And  moon's  and  evening-star's  at  once — 

And  so,  you,  looking  and  loving  best. 
Conscious  grew,  your  passion  drew 
Cloud,  sunset,  moonrise,  star-shine  too, 
Down  on  you,  near  and  yet  more  near. 
Till  flesh  must  fade  for  heaven  was  here! — 
Thus  leant  she  and  lingered — joy  and  fear! 

Thus  lay  she  a  moment  on  my  breast. 

Then  we  began  to  ride.    My  soul 
Smoothed  itself  out,  a  long-cramped  scroll 
Freshening  and  fluttering  in  the  wind. 
Past  hopes  already  lay  behind. 

What  need  to  strive  with  a  life  awry? 
Had  I  said  that,  had  I  done  this, 
So  might  I  gain,  so  might  I  miss. 
Might  she  have  loved  me?  just  as  well 
She  might  have  hated,  v/ho  can  tell! 
Where  had  I  been  now  if  the  worst  befell? 

And  here  we  are  riding,  she  and  I. 

Fail  I  alone,  in  words  and  deeds? 
Why,  all  men  strive,  and  who  succeeds? 
We  rode;  it  seemed  my  spirit  flew. 
Saw  other  regions,  cities  new. 

As  the  world  rushed  by  on  either  side. 
I  thought, — All  labor,  yet  no  less 
Bear  up  beneath  their  unsuccess. 


The   Last  Ride  Together  879 

Look  at  the  end  of  work,  contrast 
The  petty  done,  the  undone  vast, 
This  present  of  theirs  with  the  hopeful  past! 
I  hoped  she  would  love  me;  here  we  ride. 

What  hand  and  brain  went  ever  paired? 
What  heart  alike  conceived  and  dared? 
What  act  proved  all  its  thought  had  been? 
What  will  but  felt  the  fleshly  screen? 

We  ride  and  I  see  her  bosom  heave. 
There's  many  a  crown  for  who  can  reach. 
Ten  lines,  a  statesman's  life  in  each! 
The  flag  stuck  on  a  heap  of  bones, 
A  soldier's  doing!  what  atones? 
They  scratch  his  name  on  the  Abbey-stones. 

My  riding  is  better,  by  their  leave. 

What  does  it  all  mean,  poet?    Well, 
Your  brains  beat  into  rhythm,  you  tell 
What  we  felt  only;  you  expressed 
You  hold  things  beautiful  the  best. 

And  place  them  in  rhyme  so,  side  by  side. 
'Tis  something,  nay  'tis  much:  but  then, 
Have  you  yourself  what's  best  for  men? 
Are  you — poor,  sick,  old  ere  your  time — 
Nearer  one  whit  your  own  sublime 
Than  we  who  never  have  turned  a  rhyme? 

Sing,  riding's  a  joy!    For  me,  I  ride. 

And  you,  great  sculptor — so,  you  gave 
A  score  of  years  to  Art,  her  slave. 
And  that's  your  Venus,  whence  we  turn 
To  yonder  girl  that  fords  the  burn! 

You  acquiesce,  and  shall  I  repine? 
What,  man  of  music,  you  grown  gray 
With  notes  and  nothing  else  to  say. 
Is  this  your  sole  praise  from  a  friend, 
"Greatly  his  opera's  strains  intend, 
But  in  music  we  know  how  fashions  end!" 

I  gave  my  youth:  but  we  ride,  in  fine. 


88o  Poems  of  Love 

Who  knows  what's  fit  for  us?    Had  fate 
Proposed  bliss  here  should  sublimate 
My  being — had  I  signed  the  bond —      ,,.  , 
Still  one  must  lead  some  life  beyond,      ; 

Have  a  bliss  to  die  v/ith,  dim-descried. 
This  foot  once  planted  on  the  goal, 
This  glory-garland  round  my  soul, 
Could  I  descry  such?    Try  and  test! 
I  sink  back  shuddering  from  the  quest. 
Earth  being  so  good,  would  heaven  seem  best? 

Now,  heaven  and  she  are  beyond  this  ride. 

And  yet — she  has  not  spoke  so  long! 
What  if  heaven  be  that,  fair  and  strong 
At  life's  best,  with  our  eyes  upturned 
Whither  life's  flower  is  first  discerned, 

We,  fixed  so,  ever  should  so  abide? 
What  if  we  still  ride  on,  we  two, 
With  life  forever  old  yet  new, 
Changed  not  in  kind  but  in  degree, 
The  instant  made  eternity, — 
And  heaven  just  prove  that  I  and  she 

Ride,  ride  together,  forever  ride? 

Robert  Brotcniug  [i8i2-i88y] 

YOUTH   AND   ART 

It  once  might  have  been,  once  only: 

We  lodged  in  a  street  together, 
You,  a  sparrow  on  the  housetop  lonely, 

I,  a  lone  she-bird  of  his  feather. 

Your  trade  was  with  sticks  and  clay, 

You  thumbed,  thrust,  patted,  and  polished. 

Then  laughed,  "They  will  see  some  day 
Smith  made,  and  Gibson  demolished." 

My  business  was  song,  song,  song; 

I  chirped,  cheeped,  trilled,  and  twittered, 
"Kate  Brown's  on  the  boards  ere  long, 

And  Grisi's  existence  embittered!" 


Youth  and  Art 

I  earned  no  more  by  a  warble 
Than  you  by  a  sketch  in  plaster; 

You  wanted  a  piece  of  marble, 
I  needed  a  music-master. 

We  studied  hard  in  our  styles, 

Chipf)ed  each  at  a  crust  like  Hindoos, 

For  air,  looked  out  on  the  tiles, 

For  fun,  watched  each  other's  windows. 

You  lounged,  like  a  boy  of  the  South, 
Cap  and  blouse — nay,  a  bit  of  beard  too; 

Or  you  got  it,  rubbing  your  mouth 
With  lingers  the  clay  adhered  to. 

And  I — soon  managed  to  find 

Weak  points  in  the  flower-fence  facing, 
Was  forced  to  put  up  a  blind, 

And  be  safe  in  my  corset-lacing. 

No  harm!    It  was  not  my  fault 

If  you  never  turned  your  eye's  tail  ups 

As  I  shook  upon  E  in  all., 

Or  ran  the  chromatic  scale  up: 

For  spring  bade  the  sparrow's  pair, 
And  the  boys  and  girls  gave  guesses. 

And  stalls  in  our  street  looked  rare 
With  bulrush  and  water-cresses. 

Why  did  not  you  pinch  a  flower 
In  a  pellet  of  clay  and  fling  it? 

Why  did  not  I  put  a  power 
Of  thanks  in  a  look,  or  sing  it? 

I  did  look,  sharp  as  a  lynx 

(And  yet  the  memory  rankles), 

When  models  arrived,  some  minx 

Tripped  up-stairs,  she  and  her  ankles. 


882  Poems  of  Love 

But  I  think  I  gave  you  as  good! 

"That  foreign  fellow, — who  can  know 
How  she  pays,  in  a  playful  mood, 

For  his  tuning  her  that  piano?" 

Could  you  say  so,  and  never  say, 

"Suppose  we  join  hands  and  fortunes, 

And  I  fetch  her  from  over  the  way. 

Her,  piano,  and  long  tunes  and  short  tunes"? 

No,  no:  you  would  not  be  rash. 
Nor  I  rasher  and  something  over: 

You've  to  settle  yet  Gibson's  hash, 
And  Grisi  yet  lives  in  clover. 

But  you  meet  the  Prince  at  the  Board, 

I'm  queen  myself  at  bals-pare, 
I've  married  a  rich  old  lord, 

And  you're  dubbed  knight  and  an  R.  A. 

Each  life  unfulfilled,  you  see; 

It  hangs  still,  patchy  and  scrappy: 
We  have  not  sighed  deep,  laughed  free. 

Starved,  feasted,  despaired, — been  happy. 

And  nobody  calls  you  a  dunce, 

And  people  suppose  me  clever: 
This  could  but  have  happened  once. 

And  we  missed  it,  lost  it  forever. 

Robert  Broiviiing  [1812-1J 


TWO  IN  THE   CAMPAGNA 

I  WONDER  do  you  feel  to-day 

As  I  have  felt  since,  hand  in  hand, 

We  sat  down  on  the  grass,  to  stray 
In  spirit  better  through  the  land, 

This  morn  of  Rome  and  May? 


Two   in  the   Canipagna  883 

For  me,  I  touched  a  thought,  I  know, 

Has  tantaUzed  me  many  times, 
(Like  turns  of  thread  the  spiders  throw 

Mocking  across  our  path)  for  rhymes 
To  catch  at  and  let  go. 

Help  me  to  hold  it !    First  it  left 

The  yellowing  fennel,  run  to  seed 
There,  branching  from  the  brickwork's  cleft, 

Some  old  tomb's  ruin:  yonder  weed 
Took  up  the  floating  weft, 

Where  one  small  orange  cup  amassed 

Five  beetles, — blind  and  green  they  grope 

Among  the  honey-meal:  and  last, 
Everywhere  on  the  grassy  slope 

I  traced  it.    Hold  it  fast! 

The  champaign  with  its  endless  fleece 

Of  feathery  grasses  everywhere! 
Silence  and  passion,  joy  and  peace, 

And  everlasting  wash  of  air — 
Rome's  ghost  since  her  decease. 

Such  life  here,  through  such  lengths  of  hours, 

Such  miracles  performed  in  play. 
Such  primal  naked  forms  of  flowers. 

Such  letting  Nature  have  her  way 
While  Heaven  looks  from  its  towers! 

How  say  you?    Let  us,  O  my  dove, 

Let  us  be  unashamed  of  soul. 
As  earth  lies  bare  to  heaven  above! 

How  is  it  under  our  control 
To  love  or  not  to  love? 

I  would  that  you  were  all  to  me. 

You  that  are  just  so  much,  no  more. 
Nor  yours,  nor  mine, — nor  slave  nor  free! 

Where  docs  the  fault  lie?     What  the  core 
Of  the  wound,  since  wound  must  be? 


884  Poems  of  Love 

I  would  I  could  adopt  your  will, 

See  with  your  eyes,  and  set  my  heart 

Beating  by  yours,  and  drink  my  fill 

At  your  soul's  springs, — your  part,  my  part 

In  life,  for  good  and  ill. 

No.    I  yearn  upward,  touch  you  close, 
Then  stand  away.    I  kiss  your  cheek, 

Catch  your  soul's  warmth, — I  pluck  the  rose 
And  love  it  more  than  tongue  can  speak — 

Then  the  good  minute  goes. 

Already  how  am  I  so  far 

Out  of  that  minute?    Mvist  I  go 
Still  like  the  thistle-ball,  no  bar, 

Onward,  whenever  light  winds  blow, 
Fixed  by  no  friendly  star? 

Just  when  I  seemed  about  to  learn! 

Where  is  the  thread  now?    Off  again! 
The  old  trick !    Only  I  discern — 

Infinite  passion,  and  the  pain 
Of  finite  hearts  that  yearn. 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1889] 

ONE  WAY  OF  LOVE 

All  June  I  bound  the  rose  in  sheaves. 

Now,  rose  by  rose,  I  strip  the  leaves 

And  strew  them  where  Pauline  may  pass. 

She  will  not  turn  aside?    Alas! 

Let  them  lie.    Suppose  they  die? 

The  chance  was  they  might  take  her  eye. 

Hov/  many  a  month  I  strove  to  suit 
These  stubborn  fingers  to  the  lute! 
To-day  I  venture  all  I  know. 
She  will  not  hear  my  music?    So! 
Break  the  string;  fold  music's  wing: 
Suppose  Pauline  had  bade  me  sing! 


Song  885 

My  whole  life  long  I  learned  to  love. 
This  hour  my  utmost  art  I  prove 
And  speak  my  passion — heaven  or  hell? 
She  will  not  give  me  heaven?    'Tis  well! 
Lose  who  may — I  still  can  say, 
Those  who  win  heaven,  blest  are  they! 

Robert  Browning  [181 2-1 889] 

"NEVER  THE  TIME  AND  THE   PLACE" 

Never  the  time  and  the  place 

And  the  loved  one  all  together! 
This  path — how  soft  to  pace! 

This  May — what  magic  weather! 
Where  is  the  loved  one's  face? 
In  a  dream  that  loved  one's  face  meets  mine, 
But  the  house  is  narrow,  the  place  is  bleak 
Where,  outside,  rain  and  wind  combine 
With  a  furtive  ear,  if  I  strive  to  speak, 
With  a  hostile  eye  at  my  flushing  cheek, 
With  a  malice  that  marks  each  word,  each  sign! 
O  enemy  sly  and  serpentine,  r 

Uncoil  thee  from  the  waking  man! 

Do  I  hold  the  Past  .,r 

Thus  firm  and  fast 
Yet  doubt  if  the  Future  hold  I  can? 
This  path  so  soft  to  pace  shall  lead 
Through  the  magic  of  May  to  herself  indeed! 
Or  narrow  if  needs  the  house  must  be. 
Outside  are  the  storms  and  strangers:  we — 
Oh,  close,  safe,  warm  sleep  I  and  she, 
— I  and  she! 

Robert  Browning  [181 2-1 889] 

SONG 

From  "  The  Saint's  Tragedy  " 

Oh!  that  we  two  were  Maying 

Down  the  stream  of  the  soft  spring  breeze; 

Like  children  with  violets  placing 

In  the  shade  of  the  whispering  trees. 


886  Poems  of  Love 

Oh!  that  we  two  sat  dreaming  -  ,• 

On  the  sward  of  some  sheep-trimmed  down,  j 
Watching  the  white  mist  steaming 
Over  river  and  mead  and  town. 

Oh!  that  we  two  lay  sleeping  j  j- 

In  our  nest  in  the  churchyard  sod, 
With  our  limbs  at  rest  on  the  quiet  earth's  breast, 
And  our  souls  at  home  with  God! 

Charles  Kingslcy  [1819-1875] 

FOR  HE  HAD  GREAT  POSSESSIONS 

Ah!  marvel  not  if  when  I  come  to  die  ,  , 

And  follow  Death  the  way  my  fancies  went  j  ,/ 
Year  after  fading  year,  the  last  mad  sky  .  ,,y 

Finds  me  impenitent; 
For  though  my  heart  went  doubting  through  the  night, 

With  many  a  backward  glance  at  heaven's  face, 
Yet  found  I  many  treasures  of  delight 

Within  this  pleasant  place. 

I  shall  not  grieve  because  the  girls  were  fair 

And  kinder  than  the  world,  nor  shall  I  weep 
Because  with  crying  lips  and  cHnging  hair 

They  stole  away  my  sleep. 
For  lacking  this  I  might  not  yet  have  known 

How  high  the  heart  could  climb,  or  waking  seen 
The  mountains  bare  their  silver  breasts  of  stone ' 

From  their  chaste  robes  of  green. 

Though  it  were  all  a  sin,  within  the  mirth,, ^ ,   ^^^. 

And  pain  of  life  I  found  a  song  above  ,  j-,^j£  j 

Our  songs,  in  her  who  scattered  on  the  earth 

Her  glad  largesse  of  love; 
And  though  she  held  some  dream  that  was  not  ours 

In  some  far  place  that  was  not  for  our  feet, 
Where  blew  across  the  gladder,  madder  flowers 

A  wind  more  bitter-sweet. 

Ah!  who  shall  hearten  when  the  music  stops, 
For  joy  of  silence?    While  they  dreamed  above 


Jessie  887 

She  showed  me  love  upon  the  mountain  tops 

And  in  the  valleys,  love. 
And  while  the  wise  found  heaven  with  their  charts 

And  lore  of  souls,  she  made  an  earth  for  me 
More  sweet  than  all,  and  from  our  beating  hearts 

She  called  the  pulsing  sea. 

So  marvel  not  if  in  the  days  when  death 

Shall  make  my  body  mine,  I  do  not  cry 
For  hours  and  treasure  lost,  but  with  my  breath 

Praise  my  mortality. 
For  lo!  this  place  is  fair,  and  losing  all 

That  I  have  won  and  dreamed  beneath  her  kiss, 
I  would  not  see  the  light  of  morning  fall 

On  any  world  but  this. 

Richard  Middleton  [1882-1911] 

WINDLE-STRAWS 

She  kissed  me  on  the  forehead, 

She  spoke  not  any  word. 
The  silence  flowed  between  us. 

And  I  nor  spoke  nor  stirred. 

So  hopeless  for  my  sake  it  was, 

So  full  of  ruth,  so  sweet, 
My  whole  heart  rose  and  blessed  her, 

— Then  died  before  her  feet. 

Edward  Dowdcn  [1843-19 13] 

JESSIE 

When  Jessie  comes  with  her  soft  breast, 

And  yields  the  golden  keys. 
Then  is  it  as  if  God  caressed 

Twin  babes  upon  His  knees — 
Twn  babes  that,  each  to  other  pressed, 
Just  feel  the  Father's  arms,  wherewith  they  both  are  blessed. 

But  when  I  think  if  we  must  part. 

And  all  this  personal  dream  be  fled — 
O  then  my  heart!    O  then  my  useless  heart! 

Would  God  that  thou  wert  dead — 


888  Poems  ot   J  ,ove 

A  clod  insensible  to  joys  and  ills —  '    '  '*''  ' 

A  stone  remote  in  some  bleak  guUy  of  the  hills! 

Thomas  Edward  Brown  [183  0-189  7] 


THE   CHESS-BOARD 

My  little  love,  do  you  remember, 

Ere  we  were  grown  so  sadly  wise. 

Those  evenings  in  the  bleak  December, 

Curtained  warm  from  the  snowy  weather, 

When  you  and  I  played  chess  together. 

Checkmated  by  each  other's  eyes? 


.rl 


Ah!  still  I  see  your  soft  white  hand 
Hovering  warm  o'er  Queen  and  Knight; 

Brave  Pawns  in  valiant  battle  stand; 
The  double  Castles  guard  the  wings; 
The  Bishop,  bent  on  distant  things. 
Moves,  sliding,  through  the  fight. 

Our  fingers  touch;  our  glances  meet. 
And  falter;  falls  your  golden  hair 

Against  my  cheek;  your  bosom  sweet 
Is  heaving.     Down  the  field,  your  Queen 
Rides  slow,  her  soldiery  all  between, 

And  checks  me  unaware. 

Ah  me!  the  little  battle's  done: 
Dispersed  is  all  its  chivalry. 
FuU  many  a  move,  since  then,  have  we 
'Mid  Life's  perplexing  chequers  made, 
And  many  a  game  with  Fortune  played;^ 

What  is  it  we  have  won? 

This,  this  at  least, — if  this  alone: 

That  never,  never,  never  more,  n3nw  iu3 

As  in  those  old  still  nights  of  yore  "^  "^^^ 

(Ere  we  were  grown  so  sadly  wise). 

Can  you  and  I  shut  out  the  skies. 


.rf  I    (1 


Aux   Italiens  889 

Shut  out  the  world  and  wintry  weather, 

And,  eyes  exchanging  warmth  with  eyes. 
Play  chess,  as  then  we  played  together! 

Edward  Robert  Bulwer  Lytton  [1831-1891] 


AUX  ITALIENS 

At  Paris  it  was,  at  the  Opera  there; — 

And  she  looked  like  a  queen  in  a  book  that  night, 

With  the  wreath  of  pearl  in  her  raven  hair, 
And  the  brooch  on  her  breast,  so  bright. 

Of  all  the  operas  that  Verdi  wrote, 

The  best,  to  my  taste,  is  the  Trovatore; 

And  Mario  can  soothe  with  a  tenor  note 
The  souls  in  Purgatory. 

The  moon  on  the  tower  slept  soft  as  snow: 

And  who  was  not  thrilled  in  the  strangest  way, 

As  we  heard  him  sing,  while  the  gas  burned  low, 
"Non  ti  scordar  di  me"? 

The  Emperor  there,  in  his  box  of  state, 
Looked  grave,  as  if  he  had  just  then  seen 

The  red  flag  wave  from  the  city-gate 
Where  his  eagles  in  bronze  had  been. 

The  Empress,  too,  had  a  tear  in  her  eye. 

You'd  have  said  that  her  fancy  had  gone  back  again. 
For  one  moment,  under  the  old  blue  sky. 

To  the  old  glad  life  in  Spain. 

Well!  there  in  our  front-row  box  we  sat. 

Together,  my  bride-betrothed  and  I; 
My  gaze  was  fixed  on  m}'  opera-hat. 

And  hers  on  the  stage  hard  by. 

And  both  were  silent,  and  both  were  sad. 

Like  a  queen  she  leaned  on  her  full  white  arm, 
With  that  regal,  indolent  air  she  had; 

So  confident  of  her  charm! 


goo  Poems  of  Love 

I  have  not  a  doubt  she  was  thinking  then 
Of  her  former  lord,  good  soul  that  he  v/as! 

Who  died  the  richest  and  roundest  of  men, 
The  Marquis  of  Carabas. 

I  hope  that,  to  get  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
Through  a  needle's  eye  he  had  not  to  pass. 

I  wish  him  well,  for  the  jointure  given 
To  my  lady  of  Carabas. 

Meanwhile,  I  was  thinking  of  my  first  love, 
As  I  had  not  been  thinking  of  aught  for  years, 

Till  over  my  eyes  there  began  to  move 
Something  that  felt  like  tears. 

I  thought  of  the  dress  that  she  wore  last  time. 
When  we  stood,  'neath  the  cypress-trees,  together, 

In  that  lost  land,  in  that  soft  clime, 
In  the  crimson  evening  weather; 

Of  that  muslin  dress  (for  the  eve  was  hot), 

And  her  warm  white  neck  in  its  golden  chain,     .i  1 

And  her  full,  soft  hair,  just  tied  in  a  knot,  ,1 

And  falling  loose  again;  .    ',' 

And  the  jasmine-flower  in  her  fair  3'oung  breast, 
(O  the  faint,  sweet  smell  of  that  jasmine-flower!) 

And  the  one  bird  singing  alone  to  his  nest. 
And  the  one  star  over  the  tower. 

I  thought  of  our  little  quarrels  and  strife. 

And  the  letter  that  brought  me  back  my  ring. 

And  it  all  seemed  then,  in  the  waste  of  life. 
Such  a  very  little  thing! 


For  I  thought  of  her  grave  below  the  hill. 

Which  the  sentinel  cypress-tree  stands  over;      ^ 

And  I  thought  .  .  .  "were  she  only  living  still, 
How  I  could  forgive  her,  and  love  her!" 


n/L 


Aux  Italiens  891 

And  I  swear,  as  I  thought  of  her  thus,  in  that  hour; 

And  of  how,  after  all,  old  things  were  best, 
That  I  smelt  the  smell  of  that  jasmine-flower    '•     ''"' 

Which  she  used  to  wear  in  her  breast.  '  '' 

It  smelt  so  faint,  and  it  smelt  so  sweet, 
It  made  me  creep,  and  it  made  me  cold! 

Like  the  scent  that  steals  from  the  crumbling  sheet 
Where  a  mummy  is  half  unrolled. 

And  I  turned,  and  looked.     She  was  sitting  there 
In  a  dim  box,  over  the  stage;  and  dressed 

In  that  muslin  dress  with  that  full  soft  hair, 
And  that  jasmine  in  her  breast! 

I  was  here;  and  she  was  there; 

And  the  glittering  horseshoe  curved  between: — 
From  my  bride-betrothed,  with  her  raven  hair, 

And  her  sumptuous  scornful  mien, 

To  my  early  love,  with  her  eyes  downcast, 

And  over  her  primrose  face  the  shade 
(In  short  from  the  I'uture  back  to  the  Past). 

There  was  but  a  step  to  be  made. 

To  my  early  love  from  my  future  bride 

One  moment  I  looked.     Then  I  stole  to  the  door, 

I  traversed  the  passage;  and  down  at  her  side 
I  was  sitting,  a  moment  more. 

My  thinking  of  her,  or  the  music's  strain, 
Or  something  which  never  will  be  expressed, 

Had  brought  her  back  from  the  grave  again, 
With  the  jasmine  in  her  breast. 

She  is  not  dead,  and  she  is  not  wed! 

But  she  loves  me  now,  and  she  loved  me  then! 
And  the  very  first  word  that  her  sweet  lips  said. 

My  heart  gre\v  youthful  again. 


892  Poems  of  Love 

The  Marchioness  there,  of  Carabas, 

She  is  wealthy,  and  young,  and  handsome  still, 

And  but  for  her  .  .  .  well,  we'll  let  that  pass. 
She  may  marry  whomever  she  will. 

But  I  will  marry  my  own  first  love, 

With  her  primrose  face:  for  old  things  are  best, 

And  the  flower  in  her  bosom,  I  prize  it  above 
The  brooch  in  my  lady's  breast. 

The  world  is  filled  with  folly  and  sin, 

And  Love  must  cling  where  it  can,  I  say: 

For  Beauty  is  easy  enough  to  win; 
But  one  isn't  loved  every  day. 

And  I  think,  in  the  hves  of  most  women  and  men. 

There's  a  moment  when  all  would  go  smooth  and  even, 

If  only  the  dead  could  find  out  when 
To  come  back,  and  be  forgiven. 

But  O  the  smell  of  that  jasmine-flower! 

And  O  that  music!  and  O  the  way 
That  voice  rang  out  from  the  donjon  tower, 
Non  ti  scordar  di  me, 
Non  ti  scordar  di  me  ! 

Edward  Robert  Bidwer  Lytton  [1831-1891] 

SONG 

I  SAW  the  day's  white  rapture 

Die  in  the  sunset's  flame. 
But  all  her  shining  beauty 

Lives  like  a  deathless  name. 

Our  lamps  of  joy  are  wasted, 
Gone  is  Love's  hallowed  light ; 

But  you  and  I  remember 
Through  every  starlit  night. 

Charles  Hanson  Towne  [1877- 


Evensong  893 


THE  LONELY  ROAD 

I  TinNK  thou  waitest,  Love,  beyond  the  Gate — 
Eager,  with  wind-stirred  ripples  in  thy  hair; 

I  have  not  found  thee,  and  the  hour  is  late, 
And  harsh  the  weight  I  bear. 

Far  have  I  sought,  and  flung  my  wealth  of  years 
Like  a  young  traveler,  gay  at  careless  inns — 

See  how  the  wine-stain  whitens  'neath  the  tears 
My  burden  wins! 

And  wilt  thou  know  me,  Love,  with  bended  back, 
Or  wilt  thou  scorn  me,  in  so  drear  a  guise? 

I  have  a  wealth  of  sorrows  in  my  pack, 
One  lonely  prize — • 

Thy  dream — and  dross  of  sin.  .  .  .    O,  dim  the  fields- 
I  may  not  find  thee  in  so  dark  a  land — 

Yet  I  await  what  hope  the  turning  yields 
And  beg  with  empty  hand. 

Konielh  Ratid  [iSgi- 

EVENSONG 

Beauty  calls  and  gives  no  warning, 

Shadows  rise  and  wander  on  the  day. 

In  the  twilight,  in  the  quiet  evening, 

We  shall  rise  and  smile  and  go  away. 

Over  the  flaming  leaves 

Freezes  the  sky. 

It  is  the  season  grieves, 

Not  you,  not  I. 

All  our  spring-times,  all  our  summers. 

We  have  kept  the  longing  warm  within. 

Now  we  leave  the  after-comers 

To  attain  the  dreams  we  did  not  win. 

Oh,  we  have  wakened.  Sweet,  and  had  our  birth, 

And  that's  the  end  of  earth; 

And  we  have  toiled  and  smiled  and  kept  the  light, 

And  that's  the  end  of  night. 

Rid  gel  y  Torrencc  [1875- 


8^4  Poems  of  Love 

THE  NYMPH'S  SONG  TO  HYLAS 

From  "  The  Life  and  Death  of  Jason  " 

I  KNOW  a  little  garden-close  ,  yvj^ri  i 

Set  thick  with  lily  and  red  rose,  f,,,/ 

Where  I  would  wander  if  I  might 
From  dewy  dawn  to  dewy  night,  '■ 

And  have  one  with  me  wandering. 

And  though  within  it  no  birds  sing, 

And  though  no  pillared  house  is  there,  •,     . 

And  though  the  apple  boughs  are  bare 

Of  fruit  and  blossom,  would  to  God, 

Her  feet  upon  the  green  grass  trod, 

And  I  beheld  them  as  before! 

There  comes  a  murmur  from  the  shore, 

And  in  the  close  two  fair  streams  are, 

Drawn  from  the  purple  hiUs  afar,         y,_,^j  ^^j^^ 

Drawn  down  unto  the  restless  sea; 

Dark  hills  whose  heath-bloom  feeds  no  bee, 

Dark  shore  no  ship  has  ever  seen. 

Tormented  by  the  billows  green. 

Whose  murmur  comes  unceasingly 

Unto  the  place  for  which  I  cry. 

For  which  I  cry  both  day  and  night. 
For  which  I  let  slip  all  delight,  -"'^' 

Whereby  I  grow  both  deaf  and  blind,  -^-''->i'J^^ 
Careless  to  win,  unskilled  to  find,  ''  ^^*  ^'  -^^ 
And  quick  to  lose  what  all  men  seek. 

Yet  tottering  as  I  am,  and  weak,  '  '■'  i^ 

Still  have  I  left  a  little  breath  J  •'  <voyi 

To  seek  within  the  jaws  of  death  nifiJiB  oT 
An  entrance  to  that  happy  place; '-''-^■^^'^  ^w  ,riO 
To  seek  the  unforgotten  face  '^^  '■' -"f^^  fj"A 
Once  seen,  once  kissed,  once  reft  from  me  'nA 
Anigh  the  murmuring  of  the  sea.  ■'''■ 

William  Morris  [1834-1896] 


"A   Little   While"  895 

NO  AND   YES 

If  I  could  choose  my  paradise, 

And  please  myself  with  choice  of  bhss, 

Then  I  would  have  your  soft  blue  eyes 
And  rosy  little  mouth  to  kiss! 

Your  lips,  as  smooth  and  tender,  child, 

As  rose-leaves  in  a  coppice  wild. 

If  fate  bade  choose  some  sweet  unrest, 

To  weave  my  troubled  life  a  snare. 
Then  I  would  say  "her  maiden  breast 

And  golden  ripple  of  her  hair"; 
And  weep  amid  those  tresses,  child. 
Contented  to  be  thus  beguiled. 

Thomas  Ashe  [1836-1889] 

LOVE  IN  DREAMS 

Love  hath  his  poppy -wreath, 

Not  Night  alone. 
I  laid  my  head  beneath 

Love's  lilied  throne: 
Then  to  ray  sleep  he  brought 

This  anodyne — 
The  flower  of  many  a  thought 

And  fancy  fine: 
A  form,  a  face,  no  more; 

Fairer  than  truth; 
A  dream  from  death's  pale  shore; 

The  soul  of  youth: 
A  dream  so  dear,  so  deep. 

All  dreams  above. 
That  still  I  pray  to  sleep — 

Bring  Love  back,  Love! 

John  Addington  Symotids  [1840-1893] 

"A  LITTLE  WHILE  I   FAIN  WOULD 
LINGER   YET" 

A  LITTLE  while  (my  life  is  almost  set!) 

I  fain  would  pause  along  the  downward  way, 
Musing  an  hour  in  this  sad  sunset-ray, 


896  Poems  of  Love 

While,  Sweet!  our  eyes  with  tender  tears  are  wet: 
A  Httle  hour  I  fain  would  linger  yet. 

A  little  while  I  fain  would  linger  yet, 

All  for  love's  sake,  for  love  that  cannot  tire; 
Though  fervid  youth  be  dead,  with  youth's  desire, 

And  hope  has  faded  to  a  vague  regret, 

A  little  while  I  fain  would  linger  yet. 

A  little  while  I  fain  would  linger  here: 

Behold!  who  knows  what  strange,  mysterious  bars 
'Twixt  souls  that  love  may  rise  in  other  stars? 

Nor  can  love  deem  the  face  of  death  is  fair: 

A  little  while  I  still  would  linger  here. 

A  little  while  I  yearn  to  hold  thee  fast, 

Hand  locked  in  hand,  and  loyal  heart  to  heart; 
(O  pitying  Christ!  those  woeful  words,  "We  part!") 
So,  ere  the  darkness  fall,  the  light  be  past, 
A  little  while  I  fain  would  hold  thee  fast. 

A  little  while,  when  light  and  twilight  meet, — 
Behind,  our  broken  years;  before,  the  deep 
Weird  wonder  of  the  last  unfathomed  sleep, — 
A  little  while  I  still  would  clasp  thee,  Sweet, 
A  Httle  while,  when  night  and  twilight  meet. 

A  little  while  I  fain  would  linger  here; 

Behold!  who  knows  what  soul-dividing  bars 
Earth 's  faithful  loves  may  part  in  other  stars? 

Nor  can  love  deem  the  face  of  death  is  fair: 

A  little  while  I  still  would  linger  here. 

Paul  Hamilton  Hay  lie  [1830- 1886 

SONG 

I  MADE  another  garden,  yea, 

For  my  new  Love: 
I  left  the  dead  rose  where  it  lay 

And  set  the  new  above. 


^''''  'Scihg'"-^'^''  897 

Why  did  my  Summer  not  begin? 

Why  did  my  heart  not  haste? 
My  old  Love  came  and  walked  therein, 

And  laid  the  garden  waste. 

She  entered  with  her  weary  smile, 

Just  as  of  old ; 
She  looked  around  a  little  while 

And  shivered  with  the  cold: 
Her  passing  touch  was  death  to  all, 

Her  passing  look  a  blight ; 
She  made  the  white  rose-petals  fall. 

And  turned  the  red  rose  white. 

Her  pale  robe  clinging  to  the  grass 

Seemed  like  a  snake 
That  bit  the  grass  and  ground,  alas! 

And  a  sad  trail  did  make. 
She  went  up  slowly  to  the  gate, 

And  then,  just  as  of  yore, 
She  turned  back  at  the  last  to  wait 

And  say  farewell  once  more. 

Arthur  O' Shaughncssy  [1844-1881] 


SONG 

Has  summer  come  without  the  rose, 

Or  left  the  bird  behind? 
Is  the  blue  changed  above  thee, 

O  world!  or  am  I  bhnd? 
Will  you  change  every  flower  that  grows. 

Or  only  change  this  spot, 
Where  she  who  said,  I  love  thee. 

Now  says,  I  love  thee  not? 

The  skies  seemed  true  above  thee, 

The  rose  true  on  the  tree; 
The  bird  seemed  true  the  summer  through, 

But  all  proved  false  to  me. 


898  Poems  of  Love 

World!  is  there  one  good  thing  in  you, 
Life,  love,  or  death — or  what? 

Since  lips  that  sang,  I  love  thee, 
Have  said,  I  love  thee  not? 

I  think  the  sun's  kiss  will  scarce  fall 

Into  one  flower's  gold  cup; 
I  think  the  bird  will  miss  me, 

And  give  the  summer  up. 
O  sweet  place!  desolate  in  tall 

Wild  grass,  have  you  forgot 
How  her  lips  loved  to  kiss  me, 

Now  that  they  kiss  me  not? 

Be  false  or  fair  above  me, 

Come  back  with  any  face, 
Summer! — do  I  care  what  you  do? 

You  cannot  change  one  place — 
The  grass,  the  leaves,  the  earth,  the  dew, 

The  grave  I  make  the  spot — 
Here,  where  she  used  to  love  me, 

Here,  where  she  loves  me  not. 

Arthur  O'Shaughnessy  [1844- 

AFTER 

A  LITTLE  time  for  laughter, 
A  little  time  to  sing, 
A  little  lime  to  kiss  and  cling, 

And  no  more  kissing  after. 

A  little  while  for  scheming 
Love's  unperfected  schemes; 
A  little  time  for  golden  dreams. 

Then  no  more  any  dreaming. 

A  little  while  'twas  given 
To  me  to  have  thy  love; 
Now,  like  a  ghost,  alone  I  move 

About  a  ruined  heaven. 


After  Summer  899 

A  little  time  for  speaking 

Things  sweet  to  say  and  hear; 

A  time  to  seek,  and  find  thee  near, 
Then  no  more  any  seeking. 

A  little  time  for  saying 

Words  the  heart  breaks  to  say; 

A  short  sharp  time  wherein  to  pray. 
Then  no  more  need  of  praying; 

But  long,  long  years  to  weep  in. 
And  comprehend  the  whole 
Great  grief  that  desolates  the  soul, 

And  eternity  to  sleep  in. 

Philip  Bourkc  Marston  [1850-1887] 


AFTER  SUMMER 

We'll  not  weep  for  summer  over, — 

No,  not  we: 
Strew  above  his  head  the  clover, — 

Let  him  be! 

Other  eyes  may  weep  his  dying. 

Shed  their  tears 
There  upon  him,  where  he's  lying 

With  his  peers.  101 1 

Unto  some  of  them  he  proffered 

Gifts  most  sweet; 
For  our  hearts  a  grave  he  offered,— ^ 

Was  this  meet? 

All  our  fond  hopes,  praying,  perished 

In  his  wrath, — 
All  the  lovely  dreams  we  cherished 

Strewed  his  path. 

Shall  we  in  our  tombs,  I  wonder, 

Far  apart. 
Sundered  wide  as  seas  can  sunder 

Heart  from  heart, 


9^0  Poems   of  Love 

Dream  at  all  of  all  the  sorrows 

That  were  ours, — 
Bitter  nights,  more  bitter  morrows; 

Poison-flowers 

Summer  gathered,  as  in  madness. 

Saying,  "See, 
These  are  yours,  in  place  of  gladness, — 

Gifts  from  me"? 

Nay,  the  rest  that  will  be  ours 

Is  supreme, — 
And  below  the  poppy  flowers 

Steals  no  dream. 

Philip  Bourke  Marston  [1850-1? 

ROCOCO 

Take  hand  and  part  with  laughter; 

Touch  lips  and  part  with  tears; 
Once  more  and  no  more  after, 

Whatever  comes  with  years. 
We  twain  shall  not  remeasure 

The  ways  that  left  us  twain; 
Nor  crush  the  lees  of  pleasure 

From  sanguine  grapes  of  pain. 

We  twain  once  well  in  sunder. 

What  will  the  mad  gods  do 
For  hate  with  me,  I  wonder, 

Or  what  for  love  with  you? 
Forget  them  till  November, 

And  dream  there's  April  yet, 
Forget  that  I  remember, 

And  dream  that  I  forget. 

Time  found  our  tired  love  sleeping, 
And  kissed  away  his  breath; 

But  what  should  we  do  weeping, 
Though  light  love  sleep  to  death? 


Rococo 

We  have  drained  his  Hps  at  leisure, 
Till  there's  not  left  to  drain 

A  single  sob  of  pleasure, 
A  single  pulse  of  pain. 

Dream  that  the  lips  once  breathless 

Might  quicken  if  they  would; 
Say  that  the  soul  is  deathless; 

Dream  that  the  gods  are  good; 
Say  March  may  wed  September, 

And  time  divorce  regret ; 
But  not  that  you  remember, 

And  not  that  I  forget. 

We  have  heard  from  hidden  places 

What  love  scarce  lives  and  hears: 
We  have  seen  on  fervent  faces 

The  pallor  of  strange  tears : 
We  have  trod  the  wine-vat's  treasure, 

Whence,  ripe  to  steam  and  stain. 
Foams  round  the  feet  of  pleasure 

The  blood-red  must  of  pain. 

Remembrance  may  recover 

And  time  bring  back  to  time 
The  name  of  your  first  lover, 

The  ring  of  my  first  rhyme: 
But  rose-leaves  of  December 

The  frosts  of  June  shall  fret. 
The  day  that  you  remember. 

The  day  that  I  forget. 

The  snake  that  hides  and  hisses 

In  heaven  we  twain  have  known; 
The  grief  of  cruel  kisses, 

The  joy  whose  mouth  makes  moan; 
The  pulses'  pause  and  measure, 

Where  in  one  furtive  vein 
Throbs  through  the  heart  of  pleasure 

The  purpler  blood  of  pain. 


901 


^02  Poems  of  Love 

We  have  done  with  tears  and  treasons 

And  love  for  treason's  sake; 
Room  for  the  swift  new  seasons, 

The  years  that  burn  and  break, 
Dismantle  and  dismember 

Men's  days  and  dreams,  Juliette; 
For  love  may  not  remember, 

But  time  will  not  forget. 

Life  treads  down  love  in  flying, 

Time  withers  him  at  root; 
Bring  all  dead  things  and  dying, 

Reaped  sheaf  and  ruined  fruit. 
Where,  crushed  by  three  days'  pressure 

Our  three  days'  love  lies  slain; 
And  earlier  leaf  of  pleasure, 

And  latter  flower  of  pain. 

Breathe  close  upon  the  ashes, 

It  may  be  flame  will  leap; 
Unclose  the  soft  close  lashes, 

Lift  up  the  lids  and  weep. 
Light  love's  extinguished  ember. 

Let  one  tear  leave  it  wet 
For  one  that  you  remember 

And  ten  that  you  forget. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [183 7- 1909] 

RONDEL 

These  many  years  since  we  began  to  be. 
What  have  the  Gods  done  with  us?  what  with  me, 
What  with  my  love?    They  have  shown  me  fates  and  fears. 
Harsh  springs,  and  fountains  bitterer  than  the  sea. 
Grief  a  fixed  star,  and  joy  a  vane  that  veers. 
These  many  years. 

With  her,  my  Love,— with  her  have  they  done  well? 
But  who  shall  answer  for  her?  who  shall  tell 
Sweet  things  or  sad,  such  things  as  no  man  hears? 
May  no  tears  fall,  if  no  tears  ever  fell, 


The  Song  of  the   Bower  903 

From  eyes  more  dear  to  me  than  starriest  spheres, 
These  many  years! 

But  if  tears  ever  touched,  for  any  grief, 
Those  eyehds  folded  hke  a  white-rose  leaf, 
Deep  double  shells  where  through  the  eye-flower  peers, 
Let  them  weep  once  more  only,  sweet  and  brief, 
Brief  tears  and  bright,  for  one  who  gave  her  tears 
These  many  years! 
Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1909] 

THE  OBLATION  r 

Ask  nothing  more  of  me,  sweet; 
All  I  can  give  you  I  give. 

Heart  of  my  heart,  were  it  more, 
More  would  be  laid  at  your  feet: 
Love  that  should  help  you  to  Hve, 
Song  that  should  spur  you  to  soar. 

All  things  were  nothing  to  give 
Once  to  have  sense  of  you  more, 
Touch  you  and  taste  of  you,  sweet. 
Think  you  and  breathe  you  and  live. 
Swept  of  your  wings  as  they  soar, 
Trodden  by  chance  of  your  feet. 

I  that  have  love  and  no  more 
Give  you  but  love  of  you,  sweet: 
He  that  hath  more,  let  him  give; 
He  that  hath  wings,  let  him  soar; 
Mine  is  the  heart  at  your  feet 
Here,  that  must  love  you  to  live. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1909] 

THE   SONG  OF  THE  BOWER 

From  "  The  House  of  Life  " 

Say,  is  it  day,  is  it  dusk  in  thy  bower, 
Thou  whom  I  long  for,  who  longest  for  me? 

Oh!  be  it  light,  be  it  night,  'tis  Love's  hour, 
Love's  that  is  fettered  as  Love's  that  is  free. 


9^4  Poems  of  Love 

Free  Love  has  leaped  to  that  innermost  chamber,        ; 

Oh!  the  last  time,  and  the  hundred  before: 
Fettered  Love,  motionless,  can  but  remember. 

Yet  something  that  sighs  from  him  passes  the  door. 

Nay,  but  my  heart  when  it  flies  to  thy  bower,  i 

What  does  it  find  there  that  knows  it  again?  l 

There  it  must  droop  like  a  shower-beaten  flower,  '  laiiS 

Red  at  the  rent  core  and  dark  with  the  rain. 
Ah!  yet  what  shelter  is  still  shed  above  it, — 

What  waters  still  image  its  leaves  torn  apart? 
Thy  soul  is  the  shade  that  clings  round  it  to  love  it, 

And  tears  are  its  mirror  deep  down  in  thy  heart. 

What  were  my  prize,  could  I  enter  thy  bower, 

This  day,  to-morrow,  at  eve  or  at  morn? 
Large  lovely  arms  and  a  neck  like  a  tower. 

Bosom  then  heaving  that  now  lies  forlorn. 
Kindled  with  love-breath,  (the  sun's  kiss  is  colder!) 

Thy  sweetness  all  near  me,  so  distant  to-day; 
My  hand  round  thy  neck  and  thy  hand  on  my  shoulder. 

My  mouth  to  thy  mouth  as  the  world  melts  away. 

What  is  it  keeps  me  afar  from  thy  bower, — 

My  spirit,  my  body,  so  fain  to  be  there? 
Waters  engulfing  or  fires  that  devour? — 

Earth  heaped  against  me  or  death  in  the  air? 
Nay,  but  in  day-dreams,  for  terror,  for  pity, 

The  trees  wave  their  heads  with  an  omen  to  tell; 
Nay,  but  in  night-dreams,  throughout  the  dark  city. 

The  hours,  clashed  together,  lose  count  in  the  bell. 

Shall  I  not  one  day  remember  thy  bower. 

One  day  when  all  days  are  one  day  to  me? — 
Thinking,  "I  stirred  not,  and  yet  had  the  power," 

Yearning,  "Ah  God,  if  again  it  might  be!" 
Peace,  peace!  such  a  small  lamp  illumes,  on  this  highway, 

So  dimly  so  few  steps  in  front  of  my  feet, — 
Yet  shows  me  that  her  way  is  parted  from  my  way.  .  .  . 

Out  of  sight,  beyond  light,  at  what  goal  may  we  meet? 
Dante  Gabriel  Rosselti  [182 8- 1882] 


Maud   Muller  9^5 


SONG 

We  break  the  glass,  whose  sacred  wine 

To  some  beloved  health  we  drain, 
Lest  future  pledges,  less  divine. 

Should  e'er  the  hallowed  toy  profane; 
And  thus  I  broke  a  heart  that  poured 

Its  tide  of  feelings  out  for  thee. 
In  draughts,  by  after-times  deplored, 

Yet  dear  to  memory. 

But  still  the  old,  impassioned  ways 

And  habits  of  my  mind  remain, 
And  still  unhappy  light  displays 

Thine  image  chambered  in  my  brain, 
And  still  it  looks  as  when  the  hours 

Went  by  like  flights  of  singing  birds, 
Or  that  soft  chain  of  spoken  flowers 

And  airy  gems, — thy  words. 

Edward  Coate  Pinkney  [1802-1828] 


MAUD   MULLER 

Maud  Muller  on  a  summer's  day 
Raked  the  meadow  sweet  with  hay. 

Beneath  her  torn  hat  glowed  the  wealth 
Of  simple  beauty  and  rustic  health. 

Singing,  she  wrought,  and  her  merry  glee 
The  mock-bird  echoed  from  his  tree.    - 

But  when  she  glanced  to  the  far-off  town,  f 
White  from  its  hill-slope  looking  down. 

The  sweet  song  died,  and  a  vague  unrest   .. 
And  a  nameless  longing  filled  her  breast, — 

A  wish  that  she  hardly  dared  to  own, 
For  something  better  than  she  had  known. 


9^6  Poems  of  Love 

The  Judge  rode  slowly  down  the  lane, 
Smoothing  his  horse's  chestnut  mane. 

He  drew  his  bridle  in  the  shade 

Of  the  apple-trees,  to  greet  the  maid, 

And  asked  a  draught  from  the  spring  that  flowed 
Through  the  meadow  across  the  road. 

She  stooped  where  the  cool  spring  bubbled  up. 
And  filled  for  him  her  small  tin  cup, 

And  blushed  as  she  gave  it,  looking  down 
On  her  feet  so  bare,  and  her  tattered  gown. 

"Thanksl"  said  the  Judge;  "a  sweeter  draught 
From  a  fairer  hand  was  never  quaffed." 

He  spoke  of  the  grass  and  flowers  and  trees. 
Of  the  singing  birds  and  the  humming  bees; 

Then  talked  of  the  haying,  and  wondered  whether 
The  cloud  in  the  west  would  bring  foul  weather. 

And  Maud  forgot  her  brier-torn  gown. 
And  her  graceful  ankles  bare  and  brown; 

And  listened,  while  a  pleased  surprise 
Looked  from  her  long-lashed  hazel  eyes. 

At  last,  like  one  who  for  delay 
Seeks  a  '>fain  excuse,  he  rode  away. 

Maud  Muller  looked  and  sighed:  "Ah  me! 
That  I  the  Judge's  bride  might  be! 

"He  would  dress  me  up  in  silks  so  fine, 
And  praise  and  toast  me  at  his  wine. 

"My  father  should  wear  a  broadcloth  coat; 
My  brother  should  sail  a  painted  boat. 


Maud  Muller  907 

"I'd  dress  my  mother  so  grand  and  gay, 

And  the  baby  should  have  a  new  toy  each  day. 

"And  I'd  feed  the  hungry  and  clothe  the  poor, 
And  all  should  bless  me  who  left  our  door." 

The  Judge  looked  back  as  he  climbed  the  hill, 
And  saw  Maud  Muller  standing  still. 

"A  form  more  fair,  a  face  more  sweet, 
Ne'er  hath  it  been  my  lot  to  meet. 

"And  her  modest  answer  and  graceful  air 
Show  her  wise  and  good  as  she  is  fair. 

"Would  she  were  mine,  and  I  to-day. 
Like  her,  a  harvester  of  hay; 

"No  doubtful  balance  of  rights  and  wrongs, 
Nor  weary  lawyers  with  endless  tongues, 

"But  low  of  cattle  and  song  of  birds, 
And  health  and  quiet  and  loving  words." 

But  he  thought  of  his  sisters,  proud  and  cold, 
And  his  mother,  vain  of  her  rank  and  gold. 

So,  closing  his  heart,  the  Judge  rode  on. 
And  Maud  was  left  in  the  field  alone. 

But  the  lawyers  smiled  that  afternoon, 
When  he  hummed  in  court  an  old  love-tune; 

And  the  young  girl  mused  beside  the  well 
Till  the  rain  on  the  unraked  clover  fell. 

He  wedded  a  wife  of  richest  dower. 
Who  lived  for  fashion,  as  he  for  power. 

Yet  oft,  in  his  marble  hearth's  bright  glow, 
He  watched  a  picture  come  and  go; 


9o8  Poems  of  Love 

And  sweet  Maud  Muller's  hazel  eyes 
Looked  out  in  their  innocent  surprise. 

Oft,  when  the  wine  in  his  glass  was  red, 
He  longed  for  the  wayside  well  instead; 

And  closed  his  eyes  on  his  garnished  rooms 
To  dream  of  meadows  and  clover-blooms. 

And  the  proud  man  sighed,  with  a  secret  pain 
"Ah,  that  I  were  free  again! 

"Free  as  when  I  rode  that  day. 

Where  the  barefoot  maiden  raked  her  hay." 

She  wedded  a  man  unlearned  and  poor, 
And  many  children  played  round  her  door. 

But  care  and  sorrow,  and  childbirth  pain. 
Left  their  traces  on  heart  and  brain. 

And  oft,  when  the  summer  sun  shone  hot 
On  the  new-mown  hay  in  the  meadow  lot, 

And  she  heard  the  little  spring  brook  fall 
Over  the  roadside,  through  the  wall. 

In  the  shade  of  the  apple-tree  again 
She  saw  a  rider  draw  his  rein; 

And,  gazing  down  with  timid  grace, 
She  felt  his  pleased  eyes  read  her  face. 

Sometimes  her  narrow  kitchen  walls 
Stretched  away  into  stately  halls; 

The  weary  wheel  to  a  spinet  turned. 
The  tallow  candle  an  astral  burned. 

And  for  him  who  sat  by  the  chimney  lug. 
Dozing  and  grumbling  o'er  pipe  and  mug, 


La  Grisette  909 

A  manly  form  at  her  side  she  saw, 
And  joy  was  duty  and  love  was  law. 

Then  she  took  up  her  burden  of  life  again, 
Saying  only,  "It  might  have  been." 

Alas  for  maiden,  alas  for  Judge, 

For  rich  repiner  and  household  drudge! 

God  pity  them  both!  and  pity  us  all. 
Who  vainly  the  dreams  of  youth  recall. 

For  of  all  sad  words  of  tongue  or  pen. 

The  saddest  are  these:  "It  might  have  been!" 

Ah,  well!  for  us  all  some  sweet  hope  lies 
Deeply  buried  from  human  eyes; 

And,  in  the  hereafter,  angels  may 
Roll  the  stone  from  its  grave  away! 

John  GrcenlcaJ  Whitlier  [1807-1892] 


LA   GRISETTE 

Ah,  Clemence!  when  I  saw  thee  last 

Trip  down  the  Rue  de  Seine, 
And  turning,  when  thy  form  had  passed,     ' 

I  said,  "We  meet  again," — 
I  dreamed  not  in  that  idle  glance 

Thy  latest  image  came. 
And  only  left  to  memory's  trance 

A  shadow  and  a  name. 

I 

The  few  strange  words  myiips  had  taught 

Thy  timid  voice  to  speak, 
Their  gentler  signs,  which  often  brought     . 

Fresh  roses  to  thy  cheek. 
The  trailing  of  thy  long  loose  hair 

Bent  o'er  my  couch  of  pain. 
All,  all  returned,  more  sweet,  more  fair; 

Oh,  had  we  met  again! 


9IO  Poems  of  Love 

I  walked  where  saint  and  virgin  keep 

The  vigil  lights  of  Heaven,  voj^  bnA 

I  knew  that  thou  hadst  woes  to  weep, 

And  sins  to  be  forgiven; 
I  watched  where  Genevieve  was  laid, 

I  knelt  by  Mary's  shrine, 
Beside  me  low,  soft  voices  prayed; 

Alas!  but  where  was  thine? 

And  when  the  morning  sun  was  bright, 

When  wind  and  wave  were  calm. 
And  flamed,  in  thousand-tinted  light. 

The  rose  of  Notre  Dame, 
I  wandered  through  the  haunts  of  men, 

From.  Boulevard  to  Quai, 
Till,  frowning  o'er  Saint  Etienne, 

The  Pantheon's  shadow  lay. 

In  vain,  in  vain;  we  meet  no  more. 

Nor  dream  what  fates  befall ; 
And  long  upon  the  stranger's  shore 

My  voice  on  thee  may  call, 
When  years  have  clothed  the  line  in  moss 

That  tells  thy  name  and  days, 
A.nd  withered,  on  thy  simple  cross. 

The  wreaths  of  Pere-Ia-Chaise! 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [1S09-1894] 


THE   DARK   MAN 

Rose  o'  the  World,  she  came  to  my  bed 
And  changed  the  dreams  of  my  heart  and  head; 
For  joy  of  mine  she  left  grief  of  hers, 
And  garlanded  me  with  a  crown  of  furze.-  ' 

Rose  o'  the  World,  they  go  out  and  in, 
And  watch  me  dream  amd  my  mother  spin; 
And  they  pity  the  tears  on  my  sleeping  face 
While  my  soul's  away  in  a  fairy  place. 


Eurydice  ^*i  911 

Rose  o'  the  World,  they  have  words  galore, 
And  wide's  the  swing  of  my  mother's  door: 
And  soft  they  speak  of  my  darkened  eyes — 
But  what  do  they  know,  who  are  all  so  wise? 

Rose  o'  the  World,  the  pain  you  give 
Is  worth  all  days  that  a  man  may  live — 
Worth  all  shy  prayers  that  the  colleens  say 
On  the  night  that  darkens  the  wedding-day. 

Rose  o'  the  World,  what  man  would  wed 
When  he  might  dream  of  your  face  instead? 
Might  go  to  the  grave  with  the  blessed  pain 
Of  hungering  after  your  face  again? 

Rose  o'  the  World,  they  may  talk  their  fill, 
For  dreams  are  good,  and  my  life  stands  still 
While  their  lives'  red  ashes  the  gossips  stir; 
But  my  fiddle  knows — and  I  talk  to  her. 

Nora  Hopper  [1871- 


EURYDICE 

He  came  to  call  me  back  from  death 
To  the  bright  world  above. 

I  hear  him  yet  with  trembling  breath 
Low  calling,  "O  sweet  love! 

Come  back!     The  earth  is  just  as  fair; 

The  flowers,  the  o])en  skies  arc  there; 
Come  back  to  hfe  and  love! " 

Oh!  all  my  heart  went  out  to  him. 

And  the  sweet  air  above. 
With  happy  tears  my  eyes  were  dim; 

I  called  him,  "O  sweet  love! 
I  come,  for  thou  art  all  to  me. 
Go  forth,  and  I  will  follow  thee, 

Right  back  to  life  and  love!" 


912  Poems  of  Love 

I  followed  through  the  cavern  black; 

I  saw  the  blue  above. 
Some  terror  turned  me  to  look  back: 

I  heard  him  wail,  "O  love! 
What  hast  thou  done!    What  hast  thou  done! 
And  then  I  saw  no  more  the  sun, 

And  lost  were  life  and  love. 

Francis  William  Bourdillon  [1852- 


A  WOMAN'S  THOUGHT  : 

I  AM  a  woman — therefore  I  may  not 

Call  to  him,  cry  to  him, 

Fly  to  him, 

Bid  him  delay  not! 

Then  when  he  comes  to  mc,  I  must  sit  quiet  1 
Still  as  a  stone — 
All  silent  and  cold. 

If  my  heart  riot — 
Crush  and  defy  it! 
Should  I  grow  bold, 
Say  one  dear  thing  to  him, 
All  my  life  fling  to  him. 
Cling  to  him — 
What  to  atone 
Is  enough  for  m}'  sinning! 
This  were  the  cost  to  me, 
This  were  my  winning — 
That  he  were  lost  to  me. 

Not  as  a  lover 
At  last  if  he  part  from  mc. 
Tearing  my  heart  from  mC; 
Hurt  beyond  cure, — 
Calm  and  demure 
Then  must  I  hold  me, 
In  myself  fold  me. 
Lest  he  discover: 


Laus   V^eneris  913 

Showing  no  sign  to  him 
By  look  of  mine  to  him 
What  he  has  been  to  me — 
How  my  heart  turns  to  him, 
Follows  him,  yearns  to  him, 
Prays  him  to  love  me. 

Pity  me,  lean  to  me. 
Thou  God  above  me! 

Richard  Watson  Gilder  [1844-1QOQ] 


LAUS  VENERIS 

A    PICTURE    BY   BURNE-JONES 

Pallid  with  too  much  longing. 
White  with  passion  and  prayer, 

Goddess  of  love  and  beauty, 
She  sits  in  the  picture  there, — 

Sits  with  her  dark  eyes  seeking 
Something  more  subtle  still 

Than  the  old  delights  of  loving 
Her  measureless  days  to  fill. 

She  has  loved  and  been  loved  so  often 
In  her  long,  immortal  years, 

That  she  tires  of  the  worn-out  rapture, 
Sickens  of  hopes  and  fears. 

No  joys  or  .sorrows  move  her, 
Done  with  her  ancient  pride; 

For  her  head  she  found  too  heavy 
The  crown  she  has  cast  aside. 

Clothed  in  her  scarlet  splendor, 
Bright  with  her  glory  of  hair, 

Sad  that  she  is  not  mortal, — 
Eternallv  sad  and  fair, 


914  Poems  of  Love 


Longing  for  joys  she  knows  not, 

Athirst  with  a  vain  desire, 
There  she  sits  in  the  picture, 

Daughter  of  foam  and  fire. 

Louise  Chandler  MouUon  [1835-1908] 


ADONAIS 

Shall  we  meet  no  more,  my  love,  at  the  binding  of  the 
sheaves. 
In  the  happy  harvest-fields,  as  the  sun  sinks  low, 
When  the  orchard  paths  are  dim  with  the  drift  of  fallen 

leaves. 
And  the  reapers  sing  together,  in  the  mellow,  misty  eves: 
O,  happy  are  the  apples  when  the  south  winds  blow! 

Love  met  us  in  the  orchard,  ere  the  corn  had  gathered 
plume, — 
O,  happy  are  the  apples  when  the  south  winds  blow! 
Sweet  as  summer  days  that  die  when  the  months  are  in  the 

bloom,  jvo  diiib  lari  rfJi// 

And  the  peaks  are  ripe  with  sunset,  like  the  tassels  of  the 
broom, 
In  the  happy  harvest-fields  as  the  sun  sinks  low. 

Sweet  as  summer  days  that  die,  leafing  sweeter  each  to 
each, — 

O,  happy  are  the  apples  when  the  south  winds  blow! 
All  the  heart  was  full  of  feeling:  love  had  ripened  into  speech, 
Like  the  sap  that  turns  to  nectar  in  the  velvet  of  the  peach, 

In  the  happy  harvest-fields  as  the  sun  sinks  low. 

Sweet  as  summer  days  that  die  at  the  ripening  of  the  corn, — 

O,  happy  are  the  apples  when  the  south  winds  blow! 
Sweet  as  lovers'  fickle  oaths,  sworn  to  faithless  maids  for- 
sworn, 
When  the  musty  orchard  breathes  like  a  mellow  drinking- 
horn, 
Over  happy  harvest-fields  as  the  sun  sinks  low. 


Face  to   Face  91^ 

Love  left  us  at  the  dying  of  the  mellow  autumn  eves, — 
O,  happy  are  the  apples  when  the  south  winds  blow! 

When  the  skies  are  ripe  and  fading,  like  the  colors  of  the 
leaves, 

And  the  reapers  kiss  and  part,  at  the  binding  of  the  sheaves, 
In  the  happy  harvest-fields  as  the  sun  sinks  low. 

Then  the  reapers  gather  home,  from  the  gray  and  misty 
meres; — 
O,  happy  are  the  apples  when  the  south  winds  blow! 
Then  the  reapers  gather  home,  and  they  bear  upon  their 

spears, 
One  whose  face  is  like  the  moon,  fallen  gray  among  the 
spheres, 
With  the  daylight's  curse  upon  it,  as  the  sun  sinks  low. 

Faint  as  far-off  bugles  blowing,  soft  and  low  the  reapers 
sung;— 
O,  happy  are  the  apples  when  the  south  winds  blow! 
Sweet  as  summer  in  the  blood,  when  the  heart  is  ripe  and 

young. 
Love  is  sweetest  in  the  dying,  like  the  sheaves  he  lies  among, 
In  the  happy  harvest-fields  as  the  sun  sinks  low. 

William  Wallace  Harney  [1831- 

FACE  TO  FACE 

If  my  face  could  only  promise  that  its  color  would  remain; 
If  my  heart  were  only  certain  it  would  hide  the  moment's 

pain ; 
I  would  meet  you  and  would  greet  you  in  the  old  familiar 

tone. 
And  naught  should  ever  show  you  the  wrong  that  you  have 

done. 

If  my  trembling  hand  were  steady,  if  my  smiles  had  not  all 

fled; 
If  my  eyes  spoke  not  so  plainly  of  the  tears  they  often  shed; 
I  would  meet  you  and  would  greet  you  at  the  old  trysting 

place, 
And  perchance  you'd  deem  me  happy  if  you  met  me  face  to 

face. 


9 1 6  Poems  of  Love 

If  the  melody  of  Springtime  awoke  no  wild  refrain, 

If  the  Autumn's  gold  burthen  awoke  no. living  pain, 

I  would  meet  you  and  would  greet  you,  as  years  ago  we  met. 

Before  our  hearts  were  shipwrecked  on  the  ocean  of  regret. 

If  my  woman's  soul  were  stronger,  if  my  heart  were  not  so 

true, 
I  should  long  have  ceased  remembering  the  love  I  had  for 

you; 
But  I  dare  not  meet  or  greet  you,  in  the  old  familiar  way, 
C^ntil  we  meet  in  Heaven,  where  all  tears  have  passed  away. 

Frances  Cochrane  [i8    - 

ASHORE 

Out  I  came  from  the  dancing-place, 
The  night-wind  met  me  face  to  face. — 

A  wind  off  the  harbor,  cold  and  keen, 

"I  know,"  it  whistled,  "where  thou  hast  been." 

A  faint  voice  fell  from  the  stars  above — 
"Thou?  whom  we  lighted  to  shrines  of  Love!" 

I  found  when  I  reached  my  lonely  room 
A  faint  sweet  scent  in  the  unlit  gloom. 

And  tliis  was  the  worst  of  all  to  bear, 
For  some  one  had  left  white  lilac  there. 

The  flower  you  loved,  in  times  that  were. 

Laurence  Hope  [1865 -1904] 

KHRISTNA  AND   HIS   FLUTE 

Be  still,  my  heart,  and  listen, 
1  ■  For  sweet  and  yet  acute 

I  hear  the  wistful  music 

Of  Khristna  and  his  flute. 
Across  the  cool,  blue  evenings,  t 

Throughout  the  burning  days, 
Persuasive  and  beguiling, 

He  plays  and  plays  and  plays. 


Impenitentia   Ultima  917 

Ah,  none  may  hear  such  music 

Resistant  to  its  charms, 
The  household  work  grows  weary, 

And  cold  the  husband's  ajrns. 
I  must  arise  and  follow,  ,(t 

To  seek,  in  vain  pursuit, 
The  blueness  and  the  distance, 

The  sweetness  of  that  flute! 

In  linked  and  liquid  sequence, 

The  plain ti^'c  notes  dissolve 
Divinely  tender  secrets 

That  none  but  he  can  solve. 
O  Khristna,  I  am  coming, 

I  can  no  more  delay. 
"  My  heart  has  flown  to  join  thee,'* 

How  shall  my  footsteps  stay? 

Beloved,  such  thoughts  have  peril; 

The  wish  is  in  my  mind  ' 

That  I  had  fired  the  jungle, 

And  left  no  leaf  behind, — 
Burnt  all  bamboos  to  ashes, 

And  made  their  music  mute, — 
To  save  thee  from  the  magic 

Of  Khristna  and  his  flute. 

Laurence  Hope  [1865-1004] 


IMPENITENTIA  ULTIMA 

Before  my  light  goes  out  forever,  if  God  should  give  me 
choice  of  graces, 
I   would   not    reck   of  length   of   days,   nor   crave    for 
things  to  be; 
But  cry:  "One  day  of  the  great  lost  days,  one  face  of  all  the 
faces. 
Grant  me  to  see  and  touch  once  more  and  nothing  more 
to  see! 


91 8  Poems  of  Love 

"For,  Lord,  I  was  free  of  all  Thy  flowers,  but  I  chose  the 
world's  sad  roses. 
And  that  is  why  my  feet   are  torn  and  mine  eyes  are 
blind  with  sweat, 
But  at  Thy  terrible  judgment  seat,  when  this  my  tired  life 
closes, 
I  am  ready  to  reap  whereof  I  sowed,  and  pay  my  righteous 
debt. 

"But  once,  before  the  sand  is  run  and  the  silver  thread  is 
broken, 
Give  me  a  grace  and  cast  aside  the  veil  of  dolorous  years, 
Grant  me  one  hour  of  all  mine  hours,  and  let  me  see  for  a 
token 
Her  pure  and  pitiful  eyes  shine  out,  and  bathe  her  feet 
with  tears." 

Her  pitiful  hands  should  calm  and  her  hair  stream  down  and 
blind  me. 
Out  of  the  sight  of  night,  and  out  of  the  reach  of  fear. 
And  her  eyes  should  be  my  light  whilst  the  sun  went  out 
behind  me. 
And  the  viols  in  her  voice  be  the  last  sound  in  mine  ear. 

Before  the  ruining  waters  fall  and  my  life  be  carried  under, 
And  Thine  anger  cleave  me  through,  as  a  child  cuts  down 
a  iiower, 
I  will  praise  Thee,  Lord,  in  hell,  while  my  limbs  are  racked 
asunder, 
For  the  last  sad  sight  of  her  face  and  the  little  grace  of  an 
hour. 

Ernest  Doiuson  [1867-1900] 

NON  SUM  QUALIS  ERAM  BONAE  SUB  REGNO 
CYNARAE 

Last  night,  ah,  yesternight,  betwixt  her  lips  and  mine 
There  fell  thy  shadow,  Cynara!  thy  breath  was  shed 
Upon  my  soul  between  the  kisses  and  the  wine; 
And  I  was  desolate  and  sick  of  an  old  passion. 

Yea,  I  was  desolate  and  bowed  my  head. 
I  have  been  faithful  to  thee,  Cynara!  in  my  fashion. 


Ouid    Non   Speremus,   Amantes''       919 

All  night  upon  mine  heart  I  felt  her  warm  heart  beat, 
Night-long  within  mine  arms  in  love  and  sleep  she  lay; 
Surely  the  kisses  of  her  bought  red  mouth  were  sweet; 
But  I  was  desolate  and  sick  of  an  old  passion, 

When  I  awoke  and  found  the  dawn  was  gray: 
I  have  been  faithful  to  thee,  Cynara!  in  my  fashion. 

I  have  forgot  much,  Cynara!  gone  with  the  wind, 
;  Flung  roses,  roses  riotously  with  the  throng, 
Dancing,  to  put  thy  pale,  lost  lilies  out  of  mind; 
But  I  was  desolate  and  sick  of  an  old  passion. 

Yea,  all  the  time,  because  the  dance  was  long: 
I  have  been  faithful  to  thee,  Cynara!  in  my  fashion. 

I  cried  for  madder  music  and  for  stronger  wine. 
But  when  the  feast  is  finished  and  the  lamps  expire, 
Then  falls  thy  shadow,  Cynara!  the  night  is  thine; 
And  I  am  desolate  and  sick  of  an  old  passion. 
Yea,  hungry  for  the  lips  of  my  desire: 
I  have  been  faithful  to  thee,  Cynara!  in  my  fashion. 

Ernest  Dowson  [1867-1900] 


QUID  NON  SPEREMUS,  AMANTES? 

Why  is  there  in  the  least  touch  of  her  hands 
More  grace  than  other  women's  lips  bestow. 

If  love  is  but  a  slave  to  fleshly  bands 
Of  flesh  to  flesh,  wherever  love  may  go? 

-!{ 

Why  choose  vain  grief  and  heavy-hearted  hours 
For  her  lost  voice,  and  dear  remembered  hair, 

If  love  may  cull  his  honey  from  all  flowers. 
And  girls  grow  thick  as  violets,  everywhere? 

Nay!    She  is  gone,  and  all  things  fall  apart; 

Or  she  is  cold,  and  vainly  have  we  prayed; 
And  broken  is  the  summer's  splendid  heart. 

And  hope  within  a  deep,  dark  grave  is  laid. 


920  Poems  of  Love^ 

As  man  aspires  and  falls,  yet  a  soul  springs 

Out  of  his  agony  of  flesh  at  last, 
So  love  that  flesh  enthralls,  shall  rise  on  wings 

Soul-centered,  when  the  rule  of  flesh  is  past. 

Then,  most  High  Love,  or  wreathed  with  myrtle  sprays, 
Or  crownless  and  forlorn,  nor  less  a,  star. 

Thee  may  I  serve  and  follow  all  my  days, 
Whose  thorns  are  sweet  as  never  roses  are! 

Ernest  Dowson  [1867-1900] 

"SO   SWEET  LOVE   SEEMED" 

So  sweet  love  seemed  that  April  morn, 
When  first  we  kissed  beside  the  thorn, 
So  strangely  sweet,  it  was  not  strange 
We  thought  that  love  could  never  change. 

But  I  can  tell — let  truth  be  told — ■ 
That  love  wfll  change  in  growing  old; 
Though  day  by  day  is  naught  to  see,. 
So  delicate  his  motions  be. 

•  And  in  the  end  'twilj  come  to  pass 
Quite  to  forget  what  once  he  was, 
Nor  even  in  fancy  to  recall 
The  pleasure  that  was  all  in  all. 

His  little  spring,  that  sweet  we  found, 
So  deep  in  summer  floods  is  drowned, 
I  wonder,  bathed  in  joy  complete. 
How  love  so  young  could  be  so  sweet. 

Robert  Bridges  [1S44- 

AN  OLD   TUNE* 

AFTER  GERARD  DE  NERVAL 

There  is  an  air  for  which  I  would  disown 
Mozart's,  Rossini's,  Weber's  melodies, — 

A  sweet  sad  air  that  languishes  and  sighs. 
And  keeps  its  secret  charm  for  me  alone, 
*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3843 


Refuge  921 

Whene'er  I  hear  that  music  vague  and  old, 

Two  hundred  years  are  mist  that  rolls  away; 

The  thirteenth  Louis  reigns,  and  I  behold 
A  green  land  golden  in  the  dying  day. 

An  old  red  castle,  strong  with  stony  towers, 
And  windows  gay  with  many-colored  glass; 

Wide  plains,  and  rivers  flowing  among  flowers, 
That  bathe  the  castle  basement  as  they  pass. 

In  antique  weed,  with  dark  eyes  and  gold  hair, 
A  lady  looks  forth  from  her  window  high; 

It  may  be  that  I  knew  and  found  her  fair. 
In  some  forgotten  life,  long  time  gone  by. 

Andrew  Lang  [i844-igi2] 


REFUGE 

Set  your  face  to  the  sea,  fond  lover, — ■ 

Cold  in  darkness  the  sea-winds  blow! 
Waves  and  clouds  and  the  night  wiU  cover 

All  your  passion  and  all  your  woe : 
Sobbing  waves,  and  the  death  within  them. 

Sweet  as  the  lips  that  once  you  pressed — 
Pray  that  your  hopeless  heart  may  win  them! 

Pray  that  your  weary  life  may  rest! 

Set  your  face  to  the  stars,  fond  lover, — 

Calm,  and  silent,  and  bright,  and  true! — 
They  will  pity  you,  they  will  hover 

Softly  over  the  deep  for  you. 
Winds  of  heaven  will  sigh  your  dirges, 

Tears  of  heaven  for  you  be  spent. 
And  sweet  for  you  will  the  murmuring  surges 

Pour  the  wail  of  their  low  lament. 

Set  your  face  to  the  lonely  spaces. 
Vast  and  gaunt,  of  the  midnight  sky! 

There,  with  the  drifting  cloud,  your  place  is, 
There  with  the  griefs  that  cannot  die. 


9^2  Poems  of  Love 

Love  is  a  mocking  fiend's  derision, 
Peace  a  phantom,  and  faith  a  snare! 

Make  the  hope  of  your  heart  a  vision — 
Look  to  heaven,  and  find  it  there! 

William  Winter  [1836- 

MIDSUMMER 

After  the  May  time  and  after  the  June  time"'  ^^ 

Rare  with  blossoms  and  perfume  sweet, 
Cometh  the  round  world's  royal  noon  time, 

The  red  midsummer  of  blazing  heat,  '  '" 

When  the  sun,  like  an  eye  that  never  closes, 

Bends  on  the  earth  its  fervid  gaze,       ^'^  ^-^''"  •'^ 
,    And  the  winds  are  still,  and  the  crimson  i'osieS 

Droop  and  wither  and  die  in  its  rays. 

Unto  my  heart  has  come  this  season, 

O,  my  lady,  my  worshiped  one, 
When,  over  the  stars  of  Pride  and  Reason, 

Sails  Love's  cloudless,  noonday  sun. 
Like  a  great  red  ball  in  my  bosom  burning 

With  fires  that  nothing  can  quench  or  tame, 
It  glows  till  my  heart  itself  seems  turning 

Into  a  liquid  lake  of  flame. 

The  hopes  half  shy  and  the  sighs  all  tender. 

The  dreams  and  fears  of  an  earlier  day. 
Under  the  noontide's  royal  splendor, 

Droop  like  roses,  and  wither  away. 
From  the  hills  of  Doubt  no  winds  are  blowing, 

From  the  isles  of  Pain  no  breeze  is  sent, — 
Only  the  sun  in  a  white  heat  glowing 

Over  an  ocean  of  great  content. 

Sink,  O  my  soul,  in  this  golden  glory! 

Die,  O  my  heart,  in  thy  rapture-swoon! 
For  the  Autumn  must  come  with  its  mournful  story. 

And  Love's  midsummer  will  fade  too  soon. 

Ella  Wheeler  Wilcox  [1855- 


The   Look  923 


"^aiJ  i      ASHES  OF  ROSES 

Soft  on  the  sunset  sky- 
Bright  dayHght  closes, 
Leaving  when  hght  doth  die, 
Pale  hues  that  mingling  lie — 
Ashes  of  roses. 

When  love's  warm  sun  is  set, 
Love's  brightness  closes; 

Eyes  with  hot  tears  are  wet, 

In  hearts  there  linger  yet 
Ashes  of  roses. 

Elaine  Goodale  Eastman  [1863- 


SYMPATHY 

The  color  gladdens  all  your  heart ; 

You  call  it  Heaven,  dear,  but  I — 
Now  Hope  and  I  are  far  apart — 

Call  it  the  sky. 

I  know  that  Nature's  tears  have  wet 
The  world  with  sympathy;  but  you,    ._, 

Who  know  not  any  sorrow  yet, 
Call  it  the  dew. 

Allhea  Gyles  [   ?   ] 

THE  LOOK 

Strephon  kissed  me  in  the  spring, 

Robin  in  the  fall, 
But  Colin  only  looked  at  me 

And  never  kissed  at  all. 

Strephon's  kiss  was  lost  in  jest,  ,; 

Robin's  lost  in  play. 
But  the  kiss  in  Colin's  eyes 

Haunts  me  night  and  day. 

Sara  Teasdale  [iSSa,- 


9^4  Poems  of  Love 

"WHEN  MY  BELOVED  SLEEPING  LIES" 

When  my  beloved  sleeping  lies 
I  cannot  look  at  him  for  tears, 
Such  mournful  peace  is  on  his  eyes. 

A  look  of  lonely  death  he  wears, 
And  graven  very  calm  and  deep 
Lie  all  the  sorrows  of  old  years. 

He  is  so  passionless  in  sleep, 

With  all  his  strength  relaxed  to  rest; 

I  cannot  see  him  and  not  weep. 

For  weakness  life  has  not  confessed 
And  shadowed  scars  of  old  mistakes, 
I  take  his  head  upon  my  breast. 
And  hold  my  dearest  till  he  wakes. 

Irene  Rutherford  McLeod  [i8 


LOVE   AND  LIFE 

"Give  me  a  fillet.  Love,"  quoth  I, 

"To  bind  my  Sweeting's  heart  to  me, 

So  ne'er  a  chance  of  earth  or  sky 

Shall  part  us  ruthlessly: 

A  fillet.  Love,  but  not  to  chafe 

My  Sweeting's  soul,  to  cause  her  pain; 

But  just  to  bind  her  close  and  safe 

Through  snow  and  blossom  and  sun  and  rain: 

A  fillet,  boy!" 

Love  said,  "Here's  joy." 

"Give  me  a  fetter,  Life,"  quoth  I, 
"To  bind  to  mine  my  Sweeting's  heart, 
So  Death  himself  must  fail  to  pry 
With  Time  the  two  apart : 
A  fetter.  Life,  that  each  shall  wear. 
Whose  precious  bondage  each  shall  know. 
I  prithee,  Life,  no  more  forbear — 
Whv  dost  thou  wait  and  falter  so? 


Rosies  9^S 

Haste,  Life— be  brief!" 
Said  Life: — "Here's  grief." 

Julie  Mathilde  Lippman  [1S64- 


LOVE'S  PRISONER 

Sweet  love  has  twined  his  fingers  in  my  hair, 
And  laid  his  hand  across  my  wondering  eyes. 

I  cannot  move  save  in  the  narrow  space 

Of  his  strong  arms'  embrace, 
Nor  see  but  only  in  my  own  heart  where 
His  image  lies. 
How  can  I  tell, 

Emprisoned  so  well, 
If  in  the  outer  world  be  sunset  or  sunrise? 
Sweet  Love  has  laid  his  hand  across  my  eyes. 

Sweet  Love  has  loosed  his  fingers  from  my  hair, 
His  lifted  hand  has  left  my  eyelids  wet. 
I  cannot  move  save  to  pursue  his  fleet 

And  unreturning  feet, 
Nor  see  but  in  my  ruined  heart,  and  there 
His  face  lies  yet. 
How  should  I  know. 
Distraught  and  blinded  so. 
If  in  the  outer  world  be  sunrise  or  sunset? 
Sweet  Love  has  freed  my  eyes,  but  they  are  wet 
Mariana  Griswold  Van  Rensselaer     [18    - 


ROSIES 

There's  a  rosie-show  in  Derry, 

An'  a  rosie-show  in  Down; 
An'  'tis  like  there's  wan,  I'm  thinkin', 

'11  be  held  in  Randalstown; 
But  if  I  had  the  choosin' 

Av  a  rosie-prize  the  day, 
'T would  be  a  pink  wee  rosie 

Like  he  plucked  whin  rakin'  hay: 


926  Poems  of  Love 

Yon  pink  wee  rosie  in  my  hair — 
He  fixed  it  troth — an'  kissed  it  there! 
White  gulls  wor  wheelin'  roun'  the  sky 
Down  by — down  by. 

Ay,  there's  rosies  sure  in  Derry, 

An'  there's  famous  wans  in  Down; 
Och  there's  rosies  all  a-hawkin' 

Through  the  heart  av  London  town! 
But  if  I  had  the  liftin' 

Or  the  buyin'  av  a  few, 
I'd  choose  jist  pink  wee  rosies  ''^ 

That's  all  drenchin'  wid  the  dew — 
Yon  pink  wee  rosies  wid  the  tears! 
Och  wet,  wet  tears! — ay,  troth,  'tis  years 
Since  we  kep'  rakin'  in  the  hay  'J^ 

Thon  day— thon  day!    t  J^^wB 
Agnes  I.  Hanrahan  [18    =» 

AT  THE   COMEDY 

Last  night,  in  snowy  gown  and  glove, 

I  saw  you  watch  the  play 
Where  each  mock  hero  won  his  love 

In  the  old  unlifelike  way. 

{And,  oh,  were  life  their  Utile  scene 

Where  love  so  smoothly  ran, 
How  different,  Dear,  this  world  had  been 

Since  this  old  world  began  !) 

For  you,  who  saw  them  gayly  win 
Both  hand  and  heart  away. 

Knew  well  where  dwelt  the  mockery  in 
That  foolish  little  play. 

("//  love  were  all — if  love  were  all,^'   . 

The  viols  sobbed  and  cried, 
"Then  love  were  best  whatever  befall!" 

Low,  low,  the  flutes  replied.) 


"  I    Heard  a  Soldier"  927 

And  you,  last  night,  did  you  forget, 

So  far  from  me,  so  near? 
For  watching  there  your  eyes  were  wet 

With  just  an  idle  tear! 

{And  down  the  great  dark  curiam  fell 

Upon  their  foolish  play:    . 
But  you  and  I  knew — Oh,  too  well ! — 

Life  went  another  ivay  !) 

Arthur  Stringer  [1874- 


"  SOMETIME  IT  MAY  BE  " 

Sometime  it  may  be  you  and  I 
In  that  deserted  yard  shall  lie 
Where  memories  fade  away; 
Caring  no  more  for  our  old  dreams, 
Busy  with  new  and  alien  themes, 
The  saints  and  sages  say. 

But  let  our  graves  be  side  by  side, 
So  passers-by  at  even-tide 
May  pause  a  moment's  space: 
"Ah,  they  were  lovers  who  he  here! 
Else  why  these  low  graves  laid  so  near. 
In  this  forgotten  place?" 

Arthur  CoUon  [1868' 


"I  HEARD   A   SOLDIER" 

I  HEARD  a  soldier  sing  some  trifle 
Out  in  the  sun-dried  veldt  alone: 

He  lay  and  cleaned  his  grimy  rifle 
Idly,  behind  a  stone. 

"If  after  death,  love,  comes  a  waking, 
And  in  their  camp  so  dark  and  still 

The  men  of  dust  hear  bugles,  breaking 
Their  halt  upon  the  hill. 


928  Poems  of  Love 

"To  me  the  slow  and  silver  pealing 
That  then  the  last  high  trumpet  pours 

Shall  softer  than  the  dawn  come  stealing, 
For,  with  its  call,  comes  yours!" 

What  grief  of  love  had  he  to  stifle, 

Basking  so  idly  by  his  stone, 
That  grimy  soldier  with  his  rifle 

Out  in  the  veldt,  alone? 

Herbert  Treneh  [1865- 

THE  LAST  MEMORY 

When  I  am  old,  and  think  of  the  old  days, 

And  warm  my  hands  before  a  little  blaze, 

Having  forgotten  love,  hope,  fear,  desire, 

I  shall  see,  smiling  out  of  the  pale  fire, 

One  face,  mysterious  and  exquisite; 

And  I  shall  gaze,  and  ponder  over  it, 

Wondering,  was  it  Leonardo  wrought 

That  stealthy  ardency,  where  passionate  thought 

Burns  inward,  a  revealing  flame,  and  glows 

To  the  last  ecstasy,  which  is  repose? 

Was  it  Bronzino,  those  Borghese  eyes? 

And,  musing  thus  among  my  memories, 

O  unforgotten!  you  will  come  to  seem, 

As  pictures  do,  remembered,  some  old  dream. 

And  I  shall  think  of  you  as  something  strange, 

And  beautiful,  and  full  of  helpless  change, 

Which  I  beheld  and  carried  in  my  heart; 

But  you,  I  loved,  will  have  become  a  part 

Of  the  eternal  mystery,  and  love 

Like  a  dim  pain;  and  I  shall  bend  above 

My  little  fire,  and  shiver,  being  cold. 

When  you  are  no  more  young,  and  I  am  old. 

Arthur  Symons  [1865- 

"DOWN  BY  THE  SALLEY  GARDENS" 

Down  by  the  salley  gardens  my  love  and  I  did  meet; 
She  passed  the  salley  gardens  with  little  snow-white  feet. 
She  bid  me  take  love  easy,  as  the  leaves  grow  on  the  tree; 
But  I,  being  young  and  foolish,  with  her  would  not  agree. 


A   Farewell  929 

In  a  field  by  the  river  my  love  and  I  did  stand, 
And  on  my  leaning  shoulder  she  laid  her  snow-white  hand. 
She  bid  me  take  life  easy,  as  the  grass  grows  on  the  weirs; 
But  I  was  young  and  foolish,  and  now  am  full  of  tears. 

Williajn  Butler  Ycals  [1865- 

ASHES  OF  LIFE 

Love  has  gone  and  left  me,  and  the  days  are  all  alike. 

Eat  I  must,  and  sleep  I  will — and  would  that  night  were 
here!  . 

But  ah,  to  lie  awake  and  hear  the  slow  hours  strike! 

Would  that  it  were  day  again,  with  twilight  near! 

Love  has  gone  and  left  me,  and  I  don't  know  what  to  do; 

This  or  that  or  what  you  will  is  all  the  same  to  me; 
But  all  the  things  that  I  begin  I  leave  before  I'm  through^ 

There's  little  use  in  anything  as  far  as  I  can  see. 

Love  has  gone  and  left  me,  and  the  neighbors  knock  and 
borrow, 
And  life  goes  on  forever  like  the  gnawing  of  a  mouse. 
And  to-morrow   and  to-morrow   and   to-morrow   and  to- 
morrow 
There's  this  little  street  and  this  httle  house. 

Edna  St.  Vincent  Millay  [1892- 

A  FAREWELL 

Thou  wilt  not  look  on  me? 
Ah,  well!  the  world  is  wide; 
The  rivers  still  are  rolling  free. 
Song  and  the  sword  abide; 
And  who  sets  forth  to  sail  the  sea 
Shall  follow  with  the  tide. 

Thrall  of  my  darkling  day, 

I  vassalage  fulfil: 

Seeking  the  myrtle  and  the  bay, 

(They  thrive  when  hearts  are  chill!) 

The  straitness  of  the  narrowing  way, 

The  house  where  all  is  still. 

Alice  Broiun  [1857- 


W-ja  r.  nl 


THE  PARTED  LOVERS  "'"' ^  ^"^ 

SONG 

From  "Twelfth  Night" 

O  MISTRESS  mine,  where  are  you  roaming? 
O,  stay  and  hear;  your  true  Love's  coming, 

That  can  sing  both  high  and  low:  ,  .  ^  ... 

Trip  no  further,  pretty  bweetmg;  .     ,„ 

Journey's  end  in  lovers  meeting, 

Every  wise  man's  son  doth  know.      y  zsA  avoJ 

■  10  eirlT 
What  is  love?  'tis  not  hereafter;  ,, ,  .,        g- 

Present  mirth  hath  present  laughter;  ,.,. 

What's  to  come  is  still  unsure: 
In  delay  there  lies  no  plenty:  ' 

Then  come  kiss  me,  Sweet-and-twenty, 

Youth's  a  stuff  will  not  endure.  j'iii  tu-^^ 

William  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 

"GO,   LOVELY  ROSE" 

Go,  lovely  Rose — 
Tell  her  that  wastes  her  time  and  me, 

That  now  she  knows. 
When  I  resemble  her  to  thee, 
How  sweet  and  fair  she  seems  to  be. 

Tell  her  that's  young, 
And  shuns  to  have  her  graces  spied, 

That  hadst  thou  sprung 
In  deserts,  where  no  men  abide, 
Thou  must  have  uncommended  died. 

Small  is  the  worth 
Of  beauty  from  the  light  retired: 

Bid  her  come  forth, 
Suffer  herself  to  be  desired, 
And  not  blush  so  to  be  admired. 
930 


Memory  931 

Then  die— that  she 
The  common  fate  of  all  things  rare 

May  read  in  thee; 
How  small  a  part  of  time  they  share 
That  are  so  wondrous  sweet  and  fair! 

Edmund  Waller  [i  606-1 687] 

TO  THE  ROSE:  A   SONG 

Go,  happy  Rose,  and,  interwove 
With  other  flowers,  bind  my  love. 
TcU  her,  too,  she  must  not  be 
Longer  flowing,  longer  free, 
That  so  oft  has  fettered  me. 

Say,  if  she's  fretful,  I  have  bands 

Of  pearl  and  gold  to  bind  her  hands; 

Tell  her,  if  she  struggle  still, 

I  have  myrtle  rods  at  will 

For  to  tame,  though  not  to  kill. 

Take  thou  my  blessing  thus,  and  go 
And  tell  her  this, — but  do  not  so! — 
Lest  a  handsome  anger  fly      ■"'^""  ^''^^  ^ 
Like  a  lightning  from  her  eye, 
And  burn  thee  up,  as  well  as  I! 

Robert  H err ick  [1591-1674] 

MEMORY 

From  "  Britannia's  Pastorals  " 

Marina's  gone,  and  now  sit  I, 

As  Philomela  (on  a  thorn. 
Turned  out  of  nature's  livery). 

Mirthless,  alone,  and  all  forlorn: 
Only  she  sings  not,  while  my  sorrows  can 
Breathe  forth  such  notes  as  fit  a  dying  swai;!, 

I    ll  in  I 

So  shuts  the  marigold  her  leaves  •.»!/' 

At  the  departure  of  the  sun ; 
So  from  the  honeysuckle  sheaves 

The  bee  goes  when  the  day  is  done; 


932  Poems  of  Love 

So  sits  the  turtle  when  she  is  but  one, 
And  so  all  woe,  as  I  since  she  is  gone. 

To  some  few  birds,  kind  Nature  hath 

Made  all  the  summer  as  one  day: 
Which  once  enjoyed,  cold  winter's  wrath 

As  night,  they  sleeping  pass  away. 
Those  happy  creatures  arc,  that  know  not  yet 
The  pain  to  be  deprived  or  to  forget. 

I  oft  have  heard  men  say  there  be 
Some  that  with  confidence  profess 

The  helpful  Art  of  Memory: 

But  could  they  teach  Forget  fulness, 

I'd  learn;  and  try  what  further  art  could  do 

To  make  me  love  her  and  forget  her  too. 

Sad  melancholy,  that  persuades 

Men  from  themselves,  to  think  they  be 

Headless,  or  other  bodies'  shades. 
Hath  long  and  bootless  dwelt  with  me; 

For  could  I  think  she  some  idea  were, 

I  still  might  love,  forget,  and  have  her  here. 

But  such  she  is  not:  nor  would  I, 
i,_^^      For  twice  as  many  torments  more, 
As  her  bereaved  company 

Hath  brought  to  those  I  felt  before. 
For  then  no  future  time  might  hap  to  know 
That  she  deserved,  or  I  did  love  her  so. 

Ye  hours,  then,  but  as  minutes  be! 

(Though  so  I  shall  be  sooner  old) 
Till  I  those  lovely  graces  see, 

Which,  but  in  her,  can  none  behold ; 
Then  be  an  age!  that  we  may  never  try 
More  grief  in  parting,  but  grow  old  and  die. 

William  Browne  [1591-1643?] 


To  Lucasta,  Going  Beyond  the  Seas     ^;}S 


TO  LUCASTA,   GOING   TO  THE  WARS 

Tell  me  not,  Sweet,  I  am  unkind, 

That  from  the  nunnery 
Of  thy  chaste  breast  and  quiet  mind 

To  war  and  arms  I  fly. 

True,  a  new  mistress  now  I  chase, 

The  first  foe  in  the  field; 
And  with  a  stronger  faith  embrace 

A  sword,  a  horse,  a  shield. 

Yet  this  inconstancy  is  such 

As  thou  too  shalt  adore; 
I  could  not  love  thee,  Dear,  so  much, 

Loved  I  not  Honor  more. 

Richard  Lovelace  [1618-1658J 


TO  LUCASTA,   GOING  BEYOND   THE  SEAS 

If  to  be  absent  were  to  be 
Away  from  thee; 
Or  that  when  I  am  gone 
You  or  I  were  alone; 
Then,  my  Lucasta,  might  I  crave 
Pity  from  blustering  wind  or  swallowing  wave. 

But  I'll  not  sigh  one  blast  or  gale 
To  swell  miy  sail. 
Or  pay  a  tear  to  'suage 
The  foaming  blue  god's  rage; 
For  whether  he  will  let  me  pass 
Or  no,  I'm  still  as  happy  as  I  was. 

Though  seas  and  land  betwixt  us  both, 
Our  faith  and  troth. 
Like  separated  souls. 
All  time  and  space  controls: 
Above  the  highest  sphere  we  meet 
Unseen,  unknown;  and  greet  as  Angels  greet. 


934  Poems  of  Love   o^^jjouJ  ^i 

So  then  we  do  anticipate 

Our  after-fate,  i  j   Q-p 

And  are  alive  in  the  skies, 
If  thus  our  Hps  and  eyes 
Can  speak  hke  spirits  unconfined 
In  Heaven,  their  earthy  bodies  left  behind. 

Richard  Lovelace  [i6 18-165 8] 


SONG  TO  A   FAIR  YOUNG  LADY,   GOING  OUT 
OF   THE   TOWN   IN   THE   SPRING 

Ask  not  the  cause  why  sullen  Spring 
So  long  delays  her  flowers  to  bear; 
Why  warbling  birds  forget  to  sing, 
And  winter  storms  invert  the  year: 
|>- ,         Chloris  is  gone;  and  fate  provides 

To  make  it  Spring  where  she  resides. 

Chloris  is  gone,  the  cruel  fair; 

She  cast  not  back  a  pitying  eye: 
But  left  her  lover  in  despair 

To  sigh,  to  languish,  and  to  die: 
Ah!  how  can  those  fair  eyes  endure 
To  give  the  wounds  they  will  not  cure? 

Great  God  of  Love,  why  hast  thou  made 
A  face  that  can  all  hearts  command, 

That  all  religions  can  invade. 

And  change  the  laws  of  every  land? 

Where  thou  hadst  placed  such  power  before, 

Thou  shouldst  have  made  her  mercy  more. 

When  Chloris  to  the  temple  comes. 

Adoring  crowds  before  her  fall; 
She  can  restore  the  dead  from  tombs 

And  every  life  but  mine  recall, 
I  only  am  by  Love  designed 
To  be  .the  victim  for  mankind. 
.Jxi'j'ig  shynA  du  >.tny\  John  Dryden  [1631-1700] 


Song  93 S 


SONG 

WRITTEN  AT  SEA,  IN  THE  FIRST  DUTCH  WAR  (1665),  THE  NIGHT 
BEFORE   AN   ENGAGEMENT 

To  all  you  ladies  now  at  land 

We  men  at  sea  indite; 
But  first  would  have  you  understand 

How  hard  it  is  to  write: 
The  Muses  now,  and  Neptune  too, 
We  must  implore  to  write  to  you — ■ 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

For  though  the  INIuses  should  prove  kind, 

And  fill  our  empty  brain, 
Yet  if  rough  Neptune  rouse  the  wind 

To  wave  the  azure  main, 
Our  paper,  pen,  and  ink,  and  we, 
Roll  up  and  down  our  ships  at  sea — 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

Then  if  we  write  not  by  each  post, 

Think  not  v/e  are  unkind; 
Nor  yet  conclude  our  ships  are  lost 

By  Dutchmen  or  by  wind: 
Our  tears  we'll  send  a  speedier  way, 
The  tide  shall  bring  them  twice  a  day — 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

The  King  with  wonder  and  surprise 

Will  swear  the  seas  grow  liold. 
Because  the  tides  will  higher  rise 

Than  e'er  they  did  of  old: 
But  let  him  know  it  is  our  tears 
Bring  floods  of  grief  to  Whitehall  stairs — 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

Should  foggy  Opdam  chance  to  know     r 

Our  sad  and  dismal  story, 
The  Dutch  would  scorn  so  weak  a  foe, 

And  quit  their  fort  at.  Goree: 


93^^  Poems  of  Love 

For  what  resistance  can  they  find 
From  men  who've  left  their  hearts  behind? — 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

Let  wind  and  weather  do  its  worst. 

Be  you  to  us  but  kind; 
Let  Dutchmen  vapor,  Spaniards  curse, 

No  sorrow  we  shall  find: 
'Tis  then  no  matter  how  things  go, 
Or  who's  our  friend,  or  who's  our  foe — 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

To  pass  our  tedious  hours  a^ay 

We  throw  a  merry  main. 
Or  else  at  serious  ombre  play: 

But  why  should  we  in  vain 
Each  other's  ruin  thus  pursue? 
We  were  undone  when  we  left  you — 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

But  now  our  fears  tempestuous  grow 

And  cast  our  hopes  away; 
Whilst  you,  regardless  of  our  woe, 

Sit  careless  at  a  play: 
Perhaps  permit  some  happier  man 
Te  kiss  your  hand,  or  flirt  your  fan — 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

When  any  mournful  tune  you  hear, 

That  dies  in  every  note 
As  if  it  sighed  with  each  man's  care 

For  being  so  remote, 
Think  then  how  often  love  we've  made 
To  you,  when  all  those  tunes  were  played — 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

In  justice  you  cannot  refuse 

To  think  of  our  distress. 
When  we  for  hopes  of  honor  lose 

Our  certain  happiness: 


Black-l\yed   Susan  937 

All  those  designs  are  but  to  prove 
Ourselves  more  worthy  of  your  love — 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

And  now  we've  told  you  all  our  loves,     ,1!  f 

And  likewise  all  our  fears, 
In  hopes  this  declaration  moves 

Some  pity  for  our  tears: 
Let's  hear  of  no  inconstancy — 
We  have  too  much  of  that  at  sea — 
With  a  fa,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

Charles  Sackvillc  [163  8- 17  06) 

SONG 

In  vain  you  tell  your  parting  lover, 

You  wish  fair  winds  may  waft  him  over. 

Alas!  what  v.'inds  can  happy  prove 

That  bear  me  far  from  what  I  love? 

Alas!  what  dangers  on  the  main 

Can  equal  those  that  I  sustain 

From  slighted  vows,  and  cold  disdain? 

Be  gentle,  and  in  pity  choose 

To  wish  the  wildest  tempests  loose: 

That,  thrown  again  upon  the  coast. 

Where  first  my  shipwrecked  heart  was  lost, 

I  may  once  more  repeat  my  pain; 

Once  more  in  dying  notes  complain 

Of  slighted  vows  and  cold  disdain. 

Matthew  Prior-  [16O4-1721] 

BLACK-EYED   SUSAN 

All  in  the  Downs  the  fleet  was  moored. 

The  streamers  waving  in  the  wind. 
When  black-eyed  Susan  came  aboard; 

"O!  where  shall  I  my  true-love  find? 
Tell  me,  ye  jovial  sailors,  tell  me  true 
If  my  sweet  William  sails  among  the  crew." 


93  8  Poems   of  Love 

William,  who  high  upon  the  yard 
Rocked  with  the  billow  to  and  fro, 

Soon  as  her  well-known  voice  he  heard 
He  sighed,  and  cast  his  eyes  below: 

The  cord  slides  swiftly  through  his  glowing  hands, 

And,  quick  as  lightning,  on  the  deck  he  stands. 

So  the  sweet  lark,  high  poised  in  air, 
Shuts  close  his  pinions  to  his  breast 

If  chance  his  mate's  shrill  call  he  hear,       7 
And  drops  at  once  into  her  nest: — 

The  noblest  captain  in  the  British  fleet 

Might  envy  William's  lip  those  kisses  sweet. 

"O  Susan,  Susan,  lovely  dear, 

My  vows  shall  ever  true  remain;    , 

Let  me  kiss  off  that  falling  tear; 
We  only  part  to  meet  again. 

Change  as  ye  list,  ye  winds;  my  heart  shall  be 

The  faithful  compass  that  still  points  to  thee. 

"Believe  not  what  the  landmen  say 

Who  tempt  with  doubts  thy  constant  mind: 

They'll  tell  thee,  sailors,  when  away, 
In  every  port  a  mistress  find: 

Yes,  yes,  believe  them  when  they  tell  thee  so, 

For  Thou  art  present  wheresoe'er  I  go. 

"If  to  far  India's  coast  we  sail. 

Thy  eyes  are  seen  in  diamonds  bright, 

Thy  breath  is  Afric's  spicy  gale. 
Thy  skin  is  ivory  so  white. 

Thus  every  beauteous  object  that  I  view 

Wakes  in  my  soul  some  charm  of  lovely  Sue. 

"Though  battle  call  me  from  thy  arms 

Let  not  my  pretty  Susan  mourn ; 
Though  cannons  roar,  yet,  safe  from  harms, 

William  shall  to  his  Dear  return. 
Love  turns  aside  the  balls  that  round  me  fly, 
Lest  precious  tears  should  drop  from  Susan's  eye." 


Irish   Molly   O  ^r^ij 

The  boatswain  gave  the  dreadful  word, 
The  sails  their  sweUing  bosom  spread, 

No  longer  must  she  stay  aboard; 

They  Idssed,  she  sighed,  he  hung  his  head. 

Her  lessening  boat  unwilling  rows  to  land; 

"Adieu!"  she  cries;  and  waved  her  lily  hand. 

John  Gay  [1685-1732] 

IRISH  MOLLY  O 

Oh!  who  is  that  poor  foreigner  that  lately  came  to  town. 
And  like  a  ghost  that  cannot  rest  still  wanders  up  and  down? 
A  poor,  unhappy  Scottish  youth; — if  more  you  wish  to  know, 
His  heart  is  breaking  all  for  love  of  Irish  Molly  O! 

She's  modest,  mild,   and   beautiful,   the  fairest   I  have 

known — 
The  primrose  of  Ireland — all  blooming  here  alone — 
The  primrose  of  Ireland,  for  wheresoe'er  I  go, 
The  onl}-  one  entices  mc  is  Irish  Molly  O! 

When  Molly's  father  heard  of  it,  a  solemn  oath  he  swore, 
That  if  she'd  wed  a  foreigner  he'd  never  see  her  more. 
He  sent  for  young  MacDonald  and  he  plainly  told  him  so — 
"I'll  never  give  to  such  as  you  my  Irish  Molly  O! " 

MacDonald  heard  the  heavy  news,  and  grievously  did  say — 
"Farewell,  my  lovely  Molly,  since  I'm  banished  far  away, 
A  poor  forlorn  pilgrim  I  must  wander  to  and  fro. 
And  aU  for  the  sake  of  my  Irish  MoUy  0! 

"There  is  a  rose  in  Ireland,  I  thought  it  would  be  mine: 

But  now  that  she  is  lost  to  me,  I  must  for  ever  pine. 

Till  death  shall  come  to  comfort  mc,  for  to  the  grave  I'll  go. 

And  all  for  the  sake  of  my  Irish  Mollv  O! 

'(T 

"And  now  that  I  am  dying,  this  one  request  I  crave, 
To  place  a  marble  tombstone  above  my  humble  grave! 
And  on  the  stone  these  simple  words  I'd  have  engraven  so — 
MacDonald  lost  his  life  for  love  of  Irish  Molly  0! ' " 

Unknown 


94^  Poems  of  Love 


SONG 

At  setting  day  and  rising  morn, 

Wi'  soul  that  still  shall  love  thee, 
I  '11  ask  o'  Heaven  thy  safe  return, 

Wi'  a'  that  can  improve  thee. 
I  '11  visit  aft  the  birken  bush 

Where  first  thou  kindly  tauld  me 
Sweet  tales  o'  love,  and  hid  my  blush, 

Whilst  round  thou  didst  infauld  me.      ^rf-.v  'itT) 

To  a'  our  haunts  I  will  repair, 

By  greenwood,  shaw,  or  fountain. 
Or  where  the  summer  day  I'd  share 

Wi'  thee  upon  yon  mountain: 
There  will  I  tell  the  trees  an'  flooers, 

From  thoughts  unfeigned  an'  tender; 
By  vows  you're  mine,  by  love  is  yours 

A  heart  that  cannot  wander. 

Allan  Ramsay  [1686-1758] 


LOCHABER  NO  MORE 

Farewell  to  Lochaber,  an'  farewell  my  Jean, 
Where  heartsome  wi'  thee  I  hae  mony  day  been; 
For  Lochaber  no  more,  Lochaber  no  more! 
We'll  maybe  return  to  Lochaber  no  more! 
These  tears  that  I  shed,  they  arc  a'  for  my  dear, 
An'  no  for  the  dangers  attending  on  weir,  ,  ,. 

Though  borne  on  rough  seas  to  a  far  bloody  shore^   ,r 
Maybe  to  return  to  Lochaber  no  more.  .,.  ,- 

Though  hurricanes  rise,  an'  rise  every  wind. 
They'll  ne'er  mak'  a  tempest  like  that  in  my  mind; 
Though  loudest  o'  thunders  on  louder  waves  roar, 
That's  naething  like  leaving  my  love  on  the  shore. 
To  leave  thee  behind  me  my  heart  is  sair  pained; 
By  ease  that's  inglorious  no  fame  can  be  gained; 


Willie  and   Helen  94^ 

An'  beauty  an'  love's  the  reward  o'  the  brave, 
An'  I  must  deserve  it  before  I  can  crave. 

Then  glory,  my  Jeanic,  maun  plead  my  excuse; 
Since  honor  commands  me,  how  can  I  refuse? 
Without  it  I  ne'er  can  have  merit  for  thee, 
An'  without  thy  favor  I'd  better  not  be, 
I  gae,  then,  my  lass,  to  win  honor  an'  fame, 
An'  if  I  should  luck  to  come  gloriously  hame, 
I'll  bring  a  heart  to  thee  wi'  love  running  o'er, 
An'  then  I'll  leave  thee  an'  Lochaber  no  more. 

Allan  Ramsay  [1686-17 58] 


WILLIE  AND  HELEN 

"Whabefore  sou'd  ye  talk  o'  love, 

Unless  it  be  to  pain  us? 
Wharefore  sou'd  ye  talk  o'  love 

Whan  ye  say  the  sea  maun  twain  us?" 

"It's  no  because  my  love  is  light. 

Nor  for  your  angry  deddy; 
It's  a'  to  buy  ye  pearlins  bright, 

An'  to  busk  ye  like  a  leddy." 

"O  Willy,  I  can  caird  an'  spin, 
Sae  ne'er  can  want  for  clcedin'; 

An'  gin  I  hae  my  Willy's  heart, 
I  hae  a'  the  pearls  I'm  hecdin'. 

"Will  it  be  time  to  praise  this  cheek 
Whan  years  an'  tears  hae  blenched  it? 

Will  it  be  time  to  talk  0'  love 

Whan  cauld  an'  care  hae  quenched  it?" 

He's  laid  ae  han'  about  her  waist — 

The  ither's  held  to  heaven; 
An'  his  luik  was  like  the  luik  o'  man 

Wha's  heart  in  twa  is  riven. 

Hew  A  inslie  [1792-1 


94-2.  Poems  of  Love 


ABSENCE 

With  leaden  foot  Time  creeps  along 

While  Delia  is  away: 
With  her,  nor  plaintive  was  the  song, 

Nor  tedious  was  the  day. 

Ah,  envious  Power!  reverse  my  doom; 

Now  double  thy  career, 
Strain  every  nerve,  stretch  every  plume, 

And  rest  them  when  she's  here! 

Richard  J  ago  [171 5-1 78 1] 

'MY  MOTHER  BIDS   ME  BIND   MY  HAIR" 

My  mother  bids  me  bind  my  hair 

With  bands  of  rosy  hue; 
Tie  up  my  sleeves  with  ribbons  rare, 

Axid  lace  my  bodice  blue ! 

"For  why,"  she  cries,  "sit  still  and  weep, 

While  others  dance  and  play?" 
Alas!     I  scarce  can  go,  or  creep, 

WTiile  Lubin  is  away! 

■  'Tis  sad  to  think  the  days  are  gone 
When  those  we  love  were  near! 
I  sit  upon  this  mossy  stone. 
And  sigh  when  none  can  hear: 

And  while  I  spin  my  flaxen  thread, 

And  sing  my  simple  lay. 
The  village  seems  asleep,  or  dead, 
'■■  'r    Now  Lubin  is  away! 

A  line  Hunter  [1742-1821] 

"BLOW   HIGH!   BLOW  LOW!" 

Blow  high,  blow  low!  let  tempest  tear 

The  mainmast  by  the  board! 
My  heart  (with  thoughts  of  thee,  my  dear! 

And  love  well  stored) 


The   Siller   Croun  943 

Shall  brave  all  danger,  scorn  all  fear, 
The  roaring  wind,  the  raging  seay.i 
In  hopes,  on  shore,  • ' 

To  be  once  more 
Safe  moored  with  thee. 

Aloft,  while  mountain-high  we  go. 

The  whistling  winds  that  scud  along, 
And  the  surge  roaring  from  below, 
Shall  m^^  signal  be 
To  think  on  thee. 
And  this  shall  be  my  Song, 
Blow  high,  blow  low!  let  tempest  tear.  .  .  „ 

And  on  that  night  (when  all  the  crew 

The  memory  of  their  former  lives. 
O'er  flowing  cans  of  flip  renew. 

And  drink  their  sweethearts  and  their  wives), 
I'll  heave  a  sigh, 
And  think  of  thee. 
And,  as  the  ship  toils  through  the  sea. 
The  burden  of  my  Song  shall  be, 
Blow  high,  blow  low!  let  tempest  tear.  .  .  . 

Charles  Dibdin  [1745-1814] 

THE  SILLER  CROUN  '''' 

"And  ye  sail  walk  in  silk  attire, 

And  siller  ha'e  to  spare. 
Gin  ye'll  consent  to  be  his  bride. 

Nor  think  o'  Donald  mair." 

Oh,  wha  wad  buy  a  silken  goun 

Wi'  a  puir  broken  heart? 
Or  what's  to  me  a  siller  croun. 

Gin'  frae  my  luve  I  part? 

The  mind  wha's  every  wish  is  pure 

Far  dearer  is  to  me; 
And  ere  I'm  forced  to  break  my  faith, 

I'U  lay  me  doun  and  dee. 


■I: 


944  n.  Poems  of  Love 

For  I  ha'e  pledged  my  virgin  troth 
Brave  Donald's  fate  to  share; 

And  he  has  gi'en  to  me  his  heart, 
Wi'  a'  its  virtues  rare. 

His  gentle  manners  wan  my  heart, 
He  gratcfu'  took  the  gift; 

Could  I  but  think  to  tak'  it  back. 
It  wad  be  waur  than  theft. 


For  langest  life  can  ne'er  repay 

The  love  he  bears  to  me; 
And  ere  I'm  forced  to  break  my  troth 

I'll  lay  me  doun  and  dee. 

Susanna  Blamire  [i 747-1 794' 


"MY  NANNIE'S  AWA'" 

Now  in  her  green  mantle  blithe  Nature  arrays, 
An'  listens  the  lambkins  that  bleat  o'er  the  braes, 
While  birds  warble  welcome  in  ilka  green  shaw; 
But  to  me  it's  delightless — my  Nannie's  awa'. 

The  snaw-drap  an'  primrose  our  woodlands  adorn. 
An'  violets  bathe  in  the  weet  o'  the  morn; 
They  pain  my  sad  bosom,  sae  sweetly  they  blaw. 
They  mind  me  o'  Nannie — an'  Nannie's  awa'. 

Thou  laverock  that  springs  frae  the  dews  of  the  lawn, 
The  shepherd  to  warn  o'  the  gray-breaking  dawn. 
An'  thou  mellow  mavis  that  hails  the  iiight-fa', 
Give  over  for  pity — my  Nannie's  awa'. 

Come,  autumn,  sae  pensive,  in  yellow  an'  gray, 
An'  soothe  me  wi'  tidings  o'  Nature's  decay; 
The  dark,  dreary  winter,  an'  wild-driving  snaw 
Alane  can  delight  me — now  Nannie's  awa'. 

Robert  Bums  [1759-1796] 


"The   Dav   Returns"  945 


"AE   FOND   KISS" 

Ae  fond  kiss,  and  then  we  sever; 

Ae  fareweel,  alas,  for  ever! 

Deep  in  heart-wrung  tears  I'll  pledge  thee, 

Warring  sighs  and  groans  I'U  wage  thee! 

Who  shall  say  that  Fortune  grieves  him 
While  the  star  of  Hope  she  leaves  him? 
Me,  nae  cheerfu'  twinkle  lights  me, 
Dark  despair  around  benights  me. 

I'll  ne'er  blame  my  partial  fancy; 
Naething  could  resist  my  Nancy; 
But  to  see  her  was  to  love  her. 
Love  but  her,  and  love  for  ever. 

Had  we  never  loved  sae  kindly, 
Had  we  never  loved  sae  blindly, 
Never  met,  or  never  parted, 
We  had  ne'er  been  broken-hearted. 

Fare  thee  weel,  thou  first  and  fairest! 
Fare  thee  weel,  thou  best  and  dearest! 
Thine  be  ilka  joy  and  treasure, 
Peace,  enjoyment,  love,  and  pleasure! 

Ae  fond  kiss,  and  then  we  sever! 

Ae  fareweel,  alas,  for  ever! 

Deep  in  heart-wrung  tears  I'll  pledge  thee, 

Warring  sighs  and  groans  I'll  wage  thee! 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


"THE  DAY   RETURNS" 

The  day  returns,  my  bosom  burns, 
The  blissful  day  we  twa  did  meet; 

Though  winter  wild  in  tempest  toiled, 
Ne'er  summer  sun  was  half  sae  sweet. 


94^  Poems  of  Love 

Than  a'  the  pride  that  loads  the  tide, 

And  crosses  o'er  the  sultry  line, — 
Than  kingly,  robes,  and  crowns  and  globes, 

Heaven  gave  me  more, — it  made  thee  mine. 

While  day  and  night  can  bring  deiight. 

Or  Nature  aught  of  pleasure  give, — 
While  joys  above  my  mind  can  move, 

For  thee,  and  thee  alone,  I  live. 
When  that  grim  foe  of  life  below 

Comes  in  between  to  make  us  part. 
The  iron  hand  that  breaks  our  band. 

It  breaks  my  bliss, — it  breaks  my  heart. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 

MY  BONNIE  MARY 

Go  fetch  to  me  a  pint  o'  wine, 

And  fill  it  in  a  silver  tassie. 
That  I  may  drink,  before  I  go, 

A  service  to  my  bonnie  lassie. 
The  boat  rocks  at  the  pier  o'  Leith, 

Fu'  loud  the  wind  blaws  frae  the  ferry, 
The  ship  rides  by  the  Berwick-law, 

And  I  maun  leave  my  bonnie  Mary. 

The  trumpets  sound,  the  banners  fly, 

The  glittering  spears  are  ranked  ready; 
The  shouts  o'  war  are  heard  afar. 

The  battle  closes  thick  and  bloody; 
But  it's  no  the  roar  o'  sea  or  shore 

Wad  mak  me  langer  wish  to  tarry; 
Nor  shout  o'  war  that's  heard  afar — 

It's  leaving  thee,  my  bonnie  Mary! 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 

A  RED,   RED   ROSE 

O,  MY  luve's  like  a  red,  red  rose 
That's  newly  sprung  in  June; 

O,  my  luve's  like  the  melodie 
That's  sweetly  played  in  tune. 


I   Love   My  Jean  947 

As  fair  thou  art,  my  bonnie  lass, 

So  deep  in  luve  am  I; 
And  I  will  luve  thee  still,  my  dear, 

Till  a'  the  seas  gang  dry. 

Till  a'  the  seas  gang  dry,  my  dear, 

And  the  rocks  melt  wi'  the  sun; 
I  will  luve  thee  still,  my  dear, 

While  the  sands  o'  life  shall  run. 

And  fare-thee-weel,  my  only  luve! 

And  fare-thee-weel  a  while! 
And  I  will  come  again,  my  luve, 

Though  it  were  ten  thousand  mile. 

Robert  Burns  [i7SQ-i7q6] 


I  LOVE   MY  JEAN 

Of  a'  the  airts  the  wind  can  blaw 

I  dearly  like  the  west. 
For  there  the  bonnie  lassie  Hves, 

The  lassie  I  lo'e  best: 
There's  wild  woods  grow,  and  rivers  row, 

And  monie  a  hill  between ; 
But  day  and  night  my  fancy's  flight 

Is  ever  wi'  my  Jean. 

I  see  her  in  the  dewy  flowers, 

I  see  her  sweet  and  fair: 
I  hear  her  in  the  tunefu'  birds, 

I  hear  her  charm  the  air: 
There's  not  a  bonnie  flower  that  springs 

By  fountain,  shaw,  or  green, 
There's  not  a  bonnie  bird  that  sings 

But  minds  me  o'  my  Jean. 

O  blaw  ye  westlin  winds,  blaw  saft 

Amang  the  leafy  trees; 
Wi'  balmy  gale,  frae  hill  and  dale 

Bring  hamc  the  laden  bees; 


94^  Poems  of  Love 

And  bring  the  lassie  back  to  mc 
That's  aye  sae  neat  and  clean; 

Ae  smile  o'  her  wad  banish  care, 
Sae  charming  is  my  Jean. 

What  sighs  and  vows  amang  the  knowes 

Hae  passed  at  ween  us  twa! 
How  fond  to  meet,  how  wae  to  part 

That  night  she  gaed  awa ! 
The  Powers  aboon  can  only  ken 

To  whom  the  heart  is  seen, 
That  nane  can  be  sae  dear  to  me 

As  my  sweet  lovely  Jean ! 

The  first  Iwo  stanzas  by  Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 
r, .  The  last  two  by  John  Hamilton  [1761-1814] 

THE  ROVER'S  ADIEU 

From  "  Rokeby  " 

"  A  WEARY  lot  is  thine,  fair  maid, 

A  weary  lot  is  thine! 
To  pull  the  thorn  thy  brow  to  braid, 

And  press  the  rue  for  wine. 
A  lightsome  eye,  a  soldier's  mien, 

A  feather  of  the  blue, 
A  doublet  of  the  Lincoln  green — 

No  more  of  me  ye  knew, 
My  Love! 

No  more  of  me  ye  knew. 

"This  morn  is  merry  June,  I  trow, 

The  rose  is  budding  fain; 
But  she  shall  bloom  in  winter  snow 

Ere  we  two  meet  again." 
— He  turned  his  charger  as  he  spake 

Upon  the  river  shore. 
He  gave  the  bridle-reins  a  shake,, 

Said  "Adieu  for  evermore, 
My  Love! 

And  adieu  for  evermore." 

Walter  Scott  [1771-1832] 


"  Loudoun's  Bonnie  Woods  and  Braes  "    949 


"LOUDOUN'S   BONNIE  WOODS   AND   BRAES" 

"Loudoun's  bonnie  woods  and  braes, 

I  maun  lea'  them  a',  lassie; 
Wha  can  thole  when  Britain's  faes 

Wad  gi'e  Britons  law,  lassie? 
Wha  wad  shun  the  field  o'  danger? 
Wha  frae  fame  wad  live  a  stranger? 
Now  when  freedom  bids  avenge  her, 

Wha  wad  shun  her  ca',  lassie? 
Loudoun's  bonnie  woods  and  braes 
Hae  seen  our  happy  bridal  days, 
And  gentle  Hope  shall  soothe  thy  waes 

When  I  am  far  awa',  lassie." 

"Hark!  the  swelling  bugle  sings, 

Yielding  joy  to  thee,  laddie, 
But  the  dolefu'  bugle  brings 

Waefu'  thoughts  to  me,  laddie. 
Lanely  I  majLm  climb  the  mouritain, 
Lanely  stray  beside  the  fountain, 
Still  the  weary  moments  countin', 

Far  frae  love  and  thee,  laddie. 
O'er  the  gory  fields  of  war. 
When  Vengeance  drives  his  crimson  car, 
Thou'lt  maybe  fa',  frae  me  afar. 

And  nane  to  close  thy  e'e,  laddie." 

"O!  resume  thy  wonted  smile! 

O!  suppress  thy  fears,  lassie! 
Glorious  honor  crowns  the  toil 

That  the  soldier  shares,  lassie; 
Heaven  will  shield  thy  faithful  lovci 
Till  the  vengeful  strife  is  over; 
Then  we'll  meet  nae  mair  to  sever; 

Till  the  day  we  dee,  lassie. 
'Midst  our  bonnie  woods  and  braes 
We'll  spend  our  peaceful,  happy  days. 
As  blithc's  yon  lightsome  lamb  that  plays 

On  Loudoun's  flowery  lea,  lassie." 

Robert  TannaJiill  [i 774-1810] 


'050  Poems  of  Love 


"FARE  THEE  WELL" 

Fare  thee  well!  and  if  for  ever, 

Still  for  ever,  fare  thee  well: 
Even  though  unforgiving,  never 

'Gainst  thee  shall  my  heart  rebel. 

Would  that  breast  were  bared  before  thee 
Where  thy  head  so  oft  hath  lain, 

While  that  placid  sleep  came  o'er  thee 
Which  thou  ne'er  canst  know  again: 

Would  that  breast,  by  thee  glanced  over, 
Every  inmost  thought  could  show! 

Then  thou  wouldst  at  last  discover 
'Twas  not  well  to  spurn  it  so. 

Though  the  world  for  this  commend  thee,- 
Though  it  smile  upon  the  blow, 

Even  its  praises  must  offend  thee. 
Founded  on  another's  woe: 

Though  my  many  faults  defaced  me. 

Could  no  other  arm  be  found 
Than  the  one  which  once  embraced  me, 

To  inflict  a  cureless  wound? 

Yet,  oh  yet,  thyself  deceive  not; 

Love  may  sink  by  slow  decay. 
But  by  sudden  wrench,  believe  not    . 

Hearts  can  thus  be  torn  away: 

Still  thine  own  its  life  retaineth; — 

Still  must  mine,  though  bleeding,  beat; 

And  the  undying  thought  which  paineth 
Is — that  we  no  more  may  meet. 

These  are  words  of  deeper  sorrow 
Than  the  wail  above  the  dead; 

Both  shall  live,  but  every  morrow 
Wake  us  from  a  widowed  bed. 


"Maid  of  Athens,  Ere  We  Part"     951 

And  when  thou  wouldst  solace  gather, 

When  our  child's  first  accents  flov;, 
Wilt  thou  teach  her  to  say  "Father!" 

Though  his  care  she  must  forego? 

When  her  little  hands  shall  press  thee,. 

When  her  lip  to  thine  is  pressed, 
Think  of  him  whose  prayer  shall  bless  thee, 

Think  of  him  thy  love  had  blessed! 

Should  her  lineaments  resemble^ 

Those  thou  nevermore  may'st  see, 
Then  thy  heart  will  softly  tremble 

With  a  pulse  yet  true  to  me.  t 

All  my  faults  perchance  thou  knowest,i 

All  my  madness  none  can  know; 
All  my  hopes,  where'er  thou  goest. 

Whither,  yet  with  thcc  they  go. 

Every  feeling  hath  been  shaken; 

Pride,  which  not  a  world  could  bow, 
Bows  tcf  thee, — by  thee  forsaken,  ;' 

Even  my  soul  forsakes  me  now: 

• 
But  'tis  done, — all  words  are  idle, — 

Words  from  me  are  vainer  still; 
But  the  thoughts  we  cannot  bridle 

Force  their  way  without  the  will. 

Fare  thee  well! — thus  disunited. 

Torn  from  every  nearer  tie. 
Seared  in  heart,  and  lone,  and  blighted, 

More  than  this  I  scarce  can  die. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [1788-1824] 


"MAID   OF  ATHENS,   ERE  WE   PART" 

Maid  of  Athens,  ere  we  part, 
Give,  ch,  give  me  back  my  heart! 


9S'^  Poems  of  Love 

Or,  since  that  has  left  my  breast, 
Keep  it  now,  and  take  the  resti 
Hear  my  vow  before  I  go, 
Z(or]  fiov,  ad<i  ayaTrcb. 

By  those  tresses  unconfined, 
Wooed  by  each  ^Egean  wind; 
By  those  lids  whose  jetty  fringe 
Kiss  thy  soft  cheeks'  blooming  tinge; 
By  those  wild  eyes  like  the  roe, 
ZcoT]  /Jiov^  ad<i  ayaTTCi). 

By  that  lip  I  long  to  taste; 
By  that  zone-encircled  waist; 
By  all  the  token-flowers  that  tell 
What  words  can  never  speak  so  well; 
By  love's  alternate  joy  and  woe, 
Z(i}rj  fioVj  ad<i  dyaTrci). 

Maid  of  Athens!  I  am  gone: 
Think  of  me,  sweet!  when  alone. 
Though  I  fly  to  Istambol, 
Athens  holds  my  heart  and  soul: 
Can  I  cease  to  love  thee?    No!» 
Zoirj  fioVj  ad<i  dyairo). 

^  George  Gordon  Byron  [1788-1824] 

"WHEN   WE   TWO   PARTED" 

When  we  two  parted 

In  silence  and  tears, 

Half  broken-hearted. 

To  sever  for  years. 

Pale  grew  thy  cheek  and  cold. 

Colder  thy  kiss; 

Truly  that  hour  foretold 

Sorrow  to  this! 

The  dew  of  the  morning 
Sunk  chill  on  my  brow; 
It  felt  hke  the  warning 
Of  what  I  feel  now. 


"Go,   Forget   Me"  9 S3 

Thy  vows  are  all  broken, 
And  light  is  thy  fame: 
I  hear  thy  name  spoken 
And  share  in  its  shame. 

They  name  thee  before  me, 
A  knell  to  mine  ear; 
A  shudder  comes  o'er  me — 
Why  wert  thou  so  dear? 
They  know  not  I  knew  thee 
Who  knew  thee  too  well: 
Long,  long  shall  I  rue  tjiee 
Too  deeply  to  tell. 

In  secret  we  met: 

In  silence  I  grieve 

That  thy  heart  could  forget, 

Thy  spirit  deceive. 

If  I  should  meet  thee 

After  long  years, 

How  should  I  greet  thee? — 

With  silence  and  tears. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [i 788-1824] 

"GO,   FORGET  ME" 

Go,  forget  me!    Why  should  sorrow 

O'er  that  brow  a  shadow  fling? 
Go,  forget  me, — and  to-morrow 

Brightly  smile  and  sweetly  sing. 
Smile — though  I  shall  not  be  near  thee. 
Sing — though  I  shall  never  hear  thee. 

May  thy  soul  with  pleasure  shine. 

Lasting  as  the  gloom  of  mine. 

Like  the  sun,  thy  presence  glowing 
Clothes  the  meanest  things  in  light; 

And  when  thou,  like  him,  art  going. 
Loveliest  objects  fade  in  night. 

All  things  looked  so  bright  about  thee. 

That  they  nothing  seem  without  thee; 


954  Poems  of  Love 

By  that  pure  and  lucid  mind 
Earthly  things  are  too  refined. 

Go,  thou  vision,  wildly  gleaming, 

Softly  on  my  soul  that  fell; 
Go,  for  me  no  longer  beaming — 

Hope  and  Beauty,  fare  ye  well! 
Go,  and  all  that  once  delighted 
Take — and  leave  me,  all  benighted, 

Glory's  burning,  generous  swell, 

Fancy,  and  the  poet's  shell. 

«  Charles  Wolfe  [i  791-1823] 


LAST  NIGHT 

I  SAT  with  one  I  love  last  night. 
She  sang  to  me  an  olden  strain; 
In  former  times  it  woke  delight, 
Last  night— but  pain. 

Last  night  we  saw  the  stars  arise. 
But  clouds  soon  dimmed  the  ether  blue: 
And  when  we  sought  each  other's  eyes 
Tears  dimmed  them  too! 

We  paced  along  our  favorite  walk, 
But  paced  in  silence  broken-hearted: 
Of  old  we  used  to  smile  and  talk; 
Last  night — we  parted. 

George  Darley  [i  795-1 846] 


ADIEU 

Let  time  and  chance  combine,  combine, 
Let  time  and  chance  combine; 

The  fairest  love  from  heaven  above, 
That  love  of  yours  was  mine. 

My  dear, 
That  love  of  yours  was  mine. 


Jeanie  Morrison  9SS 

The  past  is  fled  and  gone,  and  gone, 

The  past  is  fled  and  gone; 
If  naught  but  pain  to  me  remain, 

I'll  fare  in  memory  on. 
My  dear, 

I'll  fare  in  memory  on. 

The  saddest  tears  must  fall,  must  fall. 

The  saddest  tears  must  fall; 
In  weal  or  woe,  in  this  world  below, 

I  love  you  ever  and  all. 
My  dear, 

I  love  you  ever  and  all. 

A  long  road  full  of  pain,  of  pain, 

A  long  road  full  of  pain; 
One  soul,  one  heart,  sworn  ne'er  to  part, — 

We  ne'er  can  meet  again, 
My  dear. 

We  ne'er  can  meet  again. 

Hard  fate  will  not  allow,  allow, 

Hard  fate  will  not  allow; 
We  blessed  were  as  the  angels  are, — 
Adieu  forever  now. 

My  dear. 
Adieu  forever  now. 

Thomas  CarlyJe  [1795-1881] 


JEANIE  MORRISON 

I've  wandered  east,  I've  wandered  west, 

Through  mony  a  weary  way; 
But  never,  never  can  forget 

The  luve  o'  life's  young  day! 
The  fire  that's  blawn  on  Beltane  e'en, 

May  weel  be  black  gin  Yule; 
But  blacker  fa'  awaits  the  heart 

Where  first  fond  luve  grows  cule. 


c)^6  Poems  of  Love 

0  dear,  dear  Jeanie  Morrison, 
The  thochts  o'  bygane  years 

Still  fling  their  shadows  owre  my  path, 

And  blind  my  een  wi'  tears: 
They  blind  my  een  wi'  saut,  saut  tears, 

And  sair  and  sick  I  pine, 
As  Memory  idly  summons  up 

The  blithe  blinks  o'  langsyne. 

'Twas  then  we  luvit  ilk  ither  weel, 

'Twas  then  we  twa  did  part; 
Sweet  time,  sad  time! — twa  bairns  at  schule, 

Twa  bairns,  and  but  ae  heart! 
'Twas  then  we  sat  on  ae  laigh  bink, 

To  leir  ilk  ither  lear; 
And  tones,  and  looks,  and  smiles  were  shed, 

Remembered  e  verm  air. 

1  wonder,  Jeanie,  aften  yet, 
When  sitting  on  that  bink, 

Cheek  touchin'  cheek,  loof  locked  in  loof, 
What  our  wee  heads  could  think! 

When  baith  bent  doun  owre  ae  braid  page, 
Wi'  ae  bulk  on  our  knee. 

Thy  lips  were  on  thy  lesson,  but 
My  lesson  was  in  thee. 

Oh,  mind  ye  how  we  hung  our  heads, 

How  cheeks  brent  red  wi'  shame. 
Whene'er  the  schule-weans,  laughin',  said, 

We  cleek'd  thegither  hame? 
And  mind  ye  o'  the  Saturdays 

(The  schule  then  skail't  at  noon), 
When  we  ran  aff  to  speel  the  braes — 

The  broomy  braes  o'  June? 

My  head  rins  round  and  round  about, 

My  heart  flows  like  a  sea, 
As,  ane  by  ane,  the  thochts  rush  back 
O'  schule-time  and  o'  thee. 


Jeanie   Morrison  957 

Oh,  mornin'  life!  Oh,  mornin'  luve! 

Oh,  lichtsome  days  and  lang, 
When  hinnicd  hopes  around  our  hearts. 

Like  simmer  blossoms,  sprang! 

Oh,  mind  ye,  luve,  how  aft  we  left 

The  deavin'  dinsome  toun. 
To  wander  by  the  green  burnside, 

And  hear  its  waters  croon? 
The  simmer  leaves  hung  owre  our  heads, 

The  flowers  burst  round  our  feet, 
And  in  the  gloamin'  o'  the  wud 

The  throssil  whusslit  sweet. 

The  throssil  whusslit  in  the  wud, 

The  burn  sung  to  the  trees, 
And  we,  with  Nature's  heart  in  tune, 

Concerted  harmonies; 
And  on  the  knowe  abune  the  burn 

For  hours  thegither  sat 
In  the  silentness  o'  joy,  till  baith 

Wi'  very  gladness  grat. 

Ay,  ay,  dear  Jeanie  Morrison, 

Tears  trinkled  doun  your  cheek, 
Like  dew-beads  on  a  rose,  yet  nane 

Had  ony  power  to  speak! 
That  was  a  time,  a  blessed  time, 

When  hearts  were  fresh  and  young, 
Wlien  freely  gushed  all  feelings  forth, 

Unsyllabled — unsung ! 

I  marvel,  Jeanie  Morrison, 

Gin  I  hae  been  to  thee 
As  closely  twined  wi'  earliest  thochts 

As  ye  hae  been  to  me? 
Oh!  tell  me  gin  their  music  fills 

Thine  ear  as  it  does  mine; 
Oh!  say  gin  e'er  your  heart  grows  great 

Wi'  dreamings  o'  langsyne? 


^S^  Poems  of  Love 

I've  wandered  east,  I've  wandered  west, 

I've  borne  a  weary  lot; 
But  in  my  wanderings,  far  or  near. 

Ye  never  were  forgot. 
The  fount  that  first  burst  frae  this  heart. 

Still  travels  on  its  way; 
And  channels  deeper  as  it  rins 

The  luve  o'  life's  young  day. 

O  dear,  dear  Jeanie  Morrison, 

Since  we  were  sindered  young, 
I've  never  seen  your  face,  nor  heard 

The  music  o'  your  tongue; 
But  I  could  hug  all  v^^retchedness. 

And  happy  could  I  dee, 
Did  I  but  ken  your  heart  still  dreamed 

O'  bygane  days  and  me! 

William  Motherwell  {1797-1835] 


THE  SEA-LANDS 

Would  I  were  on  the  sea-lands. 
Where  winds  know  how  to  sting; 

And  in  the  rocks  at  midnight 
The  lost  long  murmurs  sing. 

Would  I  were  with  my  first  love 
To  hear  the  rush  and  roar 

Of  spume  below  the  doorstep 
And  winds  upon  the  door. 

My  first  love  was  a  fair  girl 

With  ways  forever  new; 
And  hair  a  sunlight  yellow, 

And  eyes  a  morning  blue. 

The  roses,  have  they  tarried 
Or  are  they  dun  and  frayed? 


Fair   Ines  ^r^ 

If  we  had  stayed  together, 
Would  love,  indeed,  have  stayed? 

Ah,  years  are  filled  with  learning, 

Ajid  days  are  leaves  of  change! 
And  I  have  met  so  many 

I  knew  .  .  .  and  found  them  strange. 

But  on  the  sea-lands  tumbled 

By  winds  that  sting  and  blind, 
The  nights  we  watched,  so  silent. 

Come  back,  come  back  to  mind  .  .  .' 

I  mind  about  my  first  love. 

And  hear  the  rush  and  roar 
Of  spume  below  the  doorstep 

And  winds  upon  the  door. 

Orrick  Johns  [1887- 


FAIR  INES 

O  SAW  ye  not  fair  Ines? 

She's  gone  into  the  West, 
To  dazzle  when  the  sun  is  down, 

And  rob  the  world  of  rest : 
She  took  our  daylight  with  her. 

The  smiles  that  we' love  best, 
With  morning  blushes  on  her  cheek, 

And  pearls  upon  her  breast. 

O  turn  again,  fair  Ines, 

Before  the  fall  of  night, 
For  fear  the  Moon  should  shine  alone. 

And  stars  unrivaled  bright; 
And  blessed  will  the  lover  be 

That  walks  beneath  their  light. 
And  breathes  the  love  against  thy  cheek 

I  dare  not  even  write! 


960  Poems  of  Love 

Would  I  had  been,  fair  Ines, 

That  gallant  cavalier, 
Who  rode  so  gaily  by  thy  side, 

And  whispered  thee  so  near! 
Were  there  no  bonny  dames  at  home, 

Or  no  true  lovers  here, 
That  he  should  cross  the  seas  to  win 

The  dearest  of  the  dear? 

I  saw  thee,  lovely  Ines, 

Descend  along  the  shore. 
With  bands  of  noble  gentlemen, 

And  banners  waved  before; 
And  gentle  youth  and  maidens  gay, 

And  snowy  plumes  they  wore: 
It  would  have  been  a  beauteous  dream, — 

If  it  had  been  no  more! 

Alas,  alas!  fair  Ines, 

She  went  away  with  song, 
With  Music  waiting  on  her  steps, 

And  shoutings  of  the  throng; 
But  some  were  sad,  and  felt  no  mirth. 

But  only  Music's  wrong, 
In  sounds  that  sang  Farewell,  farewell, 

To  her  you've  loved  so  long. 

Farewell,  farewell,  fair  Ines! 

That  vessel  never  bore 
So  fair  a  lady  on  its  deck. 

Nor  danced  so  light  before, — 
Alas  for  pleasure  on  the  sea. 

And  sorrow  on  the  shore! 
The  smile  that  blessed  one  lover's  heart 

Has  broken  many  more! 

Thomas  Hood  [1709-1845] 

A  VALEDICTION 

God  be  with  thee,  my  beloved, — God  be  with  thee! 
Else  alone  thou  goest  forth, 
Thy  face  unto  the  north, 


A  Valediction  (j6i 

Moor  and  pleasance  all  around  thee  and  beneath  thee 

Looking  equal  in  one  snow; 

While  I,  who  try  to  reach  thee, 

\'ainly  follow,  vainly  follow 

With  the  farewell  and  the  hollo, 

And  cannot  reach  thee  so. 

Alas,  I  can  but  teach  thee! 
God  be  with  thee,  my  beloved, — God  be  with  thee! 

Can  I  teach  thee,  my  beloved, — can  I  teach  thee? 

If  I  said,  "Go  left  or  right," 

The  counsel  would  be  light. 
The  wisdom,  poor  of  all  that  could  enrich  thee; 

My  right  would  show  like  left; 

My  raising  would  depress  thee, 

My  choice  of  light  would  blind  thee. 

Of  way — would  leave  behind  thee, 

Of  end — would  leave  bereft. 

Alas,  I  can  but  bless  thee! 
May  God  teach  thee,  my  beloved, — may  God  teach  thee! 

Can  I  bless  thee,  my  beloved, — can  I  bless  thee? 

What  blessing  word  can  I 

From  mine  own  tears  keep  dry? 
What  flowers  grow  in  my  field  wherewith  to  dress  thee? 

My  good  reverts  to  ill; 

My  calmnesses  would  move  thee, 

My  softnesses  would  prick  thee. 

My  bindings  up  would  break  thee, 

My  crownings  curse  and  kill. 

Alas,  I  can  but  love  thee ! 
May  God  bless  thee,  m.y  beloved, — may  God  bless  thee! 

Can  I  love  thee,  my  beloved, — can  I  love  thee? 

And  is  this  like  love,  to  stand 

W^ith  no  help  in  my  hand, 
When  strong  as  death  I  fain  would  watch  above  thee? 

My  love-kiss  can  deny 

No  tear  that  falls  beneath  it; 


962  Poems  of  Love 


Mine  oath  of  love  can  swear  thee 
From  no  ill  that  comes  near  thee, 
And  thou  diest  while  I  breathe  it, 
And  / — I  can  but  die! 
May  God  love  thee,  my  beloved, — may  God  love  thee! 
Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [1806-1861] 

FAREWELL 

Thou  goest;  to  what  distant  place  ;/J 

Wilt  thou  thy  sunlight  carry? 
I  stay  with  cold  and  clouded  face: 

How  long  am  I  to  tarry?  >ii'm  ariT 

Where'er  thou  goest,  morn  will  be;       'T 
Thou  leavest  night  and  gloom  to  me. 

The  night  and  gloom  I  can  but  take; 

I  do  not  grudge  thy  splendor: 
Bid  souls  of  eager  men  awake; 

Be  kind  and  bright  and  tender. 
Give  day  to  other  worlds;  for  me 
It  must  suffice  to  dream  of  thee. 

John  Addington  Symonds  [1840-1893] 

"I  DO  NOT  LOVE  THEE" 

I  DO  not  love  thee! — no!    I  do  not  love  thee! 
And  yet  when  thou  art  absent  I  am  sad; 

And  envy  even  the  bright  blue  sky  above  thee, 
Whose  quiet  stars  may  see  thee  and  be  glad. 

I  do  not  love  thee! — yet,  I  know  not  why, 
Whate'er  thou  dost  seems  still  well  done,  to  me: 

And  often  in  my  solitude  I  sigh 
That  those  I  do  love  are  not  more  like  thee! 

I  do  not  love  thee! — yet,  when  thou  art  gone, 
I  hate  the  sound  (though  those  who  speak  be  near) 

Which  breaks  the  lingering  echo  of  the  tone 
Thy  voice  of  music  leaves  upon  my  ear.  >j/1 


"  O  Swallow,  Swallow,  Flying  South  "    ^6^ 

I  do  not  love  thee! — yet  thy  speaking  eyes, 
With  their  deep,  bright,  and  most  expressive  blue, 

Between  me  and  the  midnight  heaven  arise, 
Oftener  than  an}'  eyes  I  ever  knew. 

I  know  I  do  not  love  thee!— yet,  alas! 
Others  will  scarcely  trust  my  candid  heart; 

And  oft  I  catch  them  smiling  as  they  pass, 
Because  they  see  me  gazing  where  thou  art. 

Caroline  Elizabeth  Sarah  Norton  [1808-1870] 


THE  TALM-TREE  AND   THE  PINE 

Beneath  an  Indian  palm  a  girl 

Of  other  blood  reposes, 
Her  cheek  is  clear  and  pale  as  pearl, 

Amid  that  wild  of  roses. 

Beside  a  northern  pine  a  boy 

Is  leaning  fancy-bound. 
Nor  listens  where  with  noisy  joy 

Awaits  the  impatient  hound. 

Cool  grows  the  sick  and  feverish  calm, — ■ 

Relaxed  the  frosty  twine, — 
The  pine-tree  dreameth  of  the  palm. 

The  palm-tree  of  the  pine. 

As  soon  shall  nature  interlace 

Those  dimly-visioned  boughs, 
As  these  young  lovers  face  to  face 

Renew  their  early  vows! 

Richard  Moncklon  Milnes  [1809-1885] 


"0  SWALLOW,   SWALLOW,  FLYING  SOUTH" 

From  "  The  Princess  " 

O  Swallow,  Swallow,  flying,  flying  South, 
Fly  to  her,  and  fall  upon  her  gilded  eaves. 
And  tell  her,  tell  her  what  I  tell  to  thee. 


c)6^  Poems  of  Love 

O,  tell  her,  Swallow,  thou  that  knowest  each, 
That  bright  and  fierce  and  fickle  is  the  South, 
And  dark  and  true  and  tender  is  the  North. 

O  Swallow,  Swallow,  if  I  could  follow,  and  light 
Upon  her  lattice,  I  would  pipe  and  trill, 
And  cheep  and  twitter  twenty  million  loves. 

O,  were  I  thou  that  she  might  take  me  in, 
And  lay  me  on  her  bosom,  and  her  heart 
Would  rock  the  snowy  cradle  till  I  died! 

Why  lingereth  she  to  clothe  her  heart  with  love, 
Delaying  as  the  tender  ash  delays 
To  clothe  herself,  when  all  the  woods  are  green? 

0,  tell  her,  Swallow,  that  thy  brood  is  flown; 
Say  to  her,  I  do  but  wanton  in  the  South, 
But  in  the  North  long  since  my  nest  is  made. 

O,  tell  her,  brief  is  life  but  love  is  long, 
And  brief  the  sun  of  summer  in  the  North, 
And  brief  the  moon  of  beauty  in  the  South. 

O  Swallow,  flying  from  the  golden  woods. 
Fly  to  her,  and  pipe  and  woo  her,  and  make  her  mine. 
And  tell  her,  tell  her,  that  I  follow  thee. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


THE  FLOWER'S  NAME 

Here's  the  garden  she  walked  across, 

Arm  in  my  arm,  such  a  short  while  since: 
Hark,  now  I  push  its  wicket,  the  moss 

Hinders  the  hinges  and  makes  them  wince! 
She  must  have  reached  this  shrub  ere  she  turned. 

As  back  with  that  murmur  the  wicket  swung; 
For  she  laid  the  poor  snail,  my  chance  foot  spurned. 

To  feed  and  forget  it  the  leaves  among. 


The  Flower's   Name  ^6^ 

Down  this  side  of  the  gravel-walk 

She  went  while  her  robe's  edge  brushed  the  box : 
And  here  she  paused  in  her  gracious  talk 

To  point  me  a  moth  on  the  milk-white  phlox. 
Roses,  ranged  in  valiant  row, 

I  will  never  think  that  she  passed  you  by! 
She  loves  you,  noble  roses,  I  know; 

But  yonder  see  where  the  rock-plants  lie!    - 

This  flower  she  stopped  at,  finger  on  lip, 

Stooped  over,  in  doubt,  as  settling  its  claim; 
Till  she  gave  me,  with  pride  to  make  no  slip, 

Its  soft  meandering  Spanish  name: 
What  a  name!    Was  it  love  or  praise? 

Speech  half-asleep,  or  song  half-awake? 
I  must  learn  Spanish,  one  of  these  days. 

Only  for  that  slow  sweet  name's  sake. 

Roses,  if  I  live  and  do  well, 

I  may  bring  her,  one  of  these  days. 
To  fix  you  fast  with  as  fine  a  spell, 

P'it  you  each  with  his  Spanish  phrase: 
But  do  not  detain  me  now;  for  she  lingers 

There,  like  sunshine  over  the  ground, 
And  ever  I  see  her  soft  white  fingers 

Searching  after  the  bud  she  found. 

Flower,  you  Spaniard,  look  that  you  grow  not, 

Stay  as  you  are  and  be  loved  forever! 
Bud,  if  I  kiss  you,  'tis  that  you  blow  not, 

Mind,  the  shut  pink  mouth  opens  never! 
For  while  it  pouts,  her  fingers  wrestle, 

Twinkling  the  audacious  leaves  between. 
Till  round  they  turn,  and  down  they  nestle — 

Is  not  the  dear  mark  still  to  be  seen? 

Where  I  find  her  not,  beauties  vanish; 

WTiither  I  follow  her,  beauties  flee; 
Ts  there  no  method  to  tell  her  in  Spanish 

June's  twice  June  since  she  breathed  it  with  me? 


^66  Poems  of  Love 

Come,  bud,  show  me  the  least  of  her  traces, 
Treasure  my  lady's  Ughtest  footfall! 

— Ah,  you  may  flout  and  turn  up  your  faces, — 
Roses,  you  are  not  so  fair  after  all! 

Robert  Browning  [i8i 2-1889] 

TO  MARGUERITE 

Yes:  in  the  sea  of  life  enisled, 

With  echoing  straits  between  us  thrown, 

Dotting  the  shoreless  watery  wild. 
We  mortal  millions  live  alone. 

The  islands  feel  the  enclasping  flow,  Ir  1' 

And  then  their  endless  bounds  they  know.)! 

But  when  the  moon  their  hollows  lights, 
And  they  are  swept  by  balms  of  spring,  ^      . 

And  in  their  glens,  on  starry  nights,  , , 

The  nightingales  divinely  sing; 

And  lovely  notes,  from  shore  to  shore. 

Across  the  sounds  and  channels  pour; 

O  then  a  longing  like  despair 
Is  to  their  farthest  caverns  sent! 

For  surely  once,  they  feel,  we  were 
Parts  of  a  single  continent. 

Now  round  us  spreads  the  watery  plain — 

O  might  our  marges  meet  again !    ■ 

Who  ordered  that  their  longing's  fire 

Should  be,  as  soon  as  kindled,  cooledi^   ^^ 

Who  renders  vain  their  deep  desire?^  -jj  ^uJT 
A  God,  a  God  their  severance  ruled; 

And  bade  betwixt  their  shores  to  be 

The  unplumbed,  salt,  estranging  sea. 

Matthew  Arnold  [jl8 2 2-^1888] 

SEPARATION  ^""  "^ 

Stop! — not  to  me,  at  this  bitter  departing,  '  '7 

Speak  of  the  sure  consolations  of  time! 
Fresh  be  the  wound,  still-renewed  be  its  smarting, 
'■' ...So  but  thy  image  endure  in  its  prime. 


Longing  967 


But,  if  the  steadfast  commandment  of  Nature 
Wills  that  remembrance  should  always  decay — 

If  the  loved  form  and  the  deep-cherished  feature 
Must,  when  unseen,  from  the  soul  fade  away — 

Me  let  no  half-effaced  memories  cumber! 

Fled,  fled  at  once,  be  all  vestige  of  thee! 
Deep  be  the  darkness  and  still  be  the  slumber — 

Dead  be  the  past  and  its  phantoms  to  me! 

Then,  when  we  meet,  and  thy  look  strays  towards  me, 
Scanning  my  face  and  the  changes  wrought  there: 

Who,  let  me  say,  is  this  stranger  regards  me, 
With  the  gray  eyes,  and  the  lovely  brown  hair  ? 

Matthew  Arnold  [1822-1888 

LONGING 

Come  to  me  in  my  dream.s,  and  then 
By  day  I  shall  be  well  again! 
For  then  the  night  will  more  than  pay 
The  hopeless  longing  of  the  day. 

Come,  as  thou  cam'st  a  thousand  times, 
A  messenger  from  radiant  climes, 
And  smile  on  thy  new  world,  and  be 
As  kind  to  others  as  to  me! 

Or,  as  thou  never  cam'st  in  sooth, 
Come  now,  and  let  me  dream  it  truth; 
And  part  my  hair,  and  kiss  my  brow. 
And  say:  My  love  !  why  suffer  est  thou  7 

Come  to  me  in  my  dreams,  and  then 
By  day  I  shall  be  well  again ! 
For  then  the  night  will  more  than  pay 
The  hopeless  longing  of  the  day. 

Matthew  Arnold  [1822-1888 


968  Poems  of  Love 


DIVIDED 


I 


An  empty  sky,  a  world  of  heather, 

Purple  of  foxglove,  yellow  of  broom;  '-"-^^ 

We  two  among  them  wading  together,  - 

Shaking  out  honey,  treading  perfume. 

Crowds  of  bees  are  giddy  with  clover, 

Crowds  of  grasshoppers  skip  at  our  feet,  ■ 

Crowds  of  larks  at  their  matins  hang  over, 
Thanking  the  Lord  for  a  life  so  sweet. 

Flusheth  the  rise  with  her  purple  favor, 
Gloweth  the  cleft  with  her  golden  ring, 

'Twixt  the  two  brown  butterflies  waver, 
Lightly  settle,  and  sleepily  swing. 

We  two  walk  till  the  purple  dieth, 

And  short  dry  grass  under  foot  is  brown. 

But  one  little  streak  at  a  distance  lieth 
Green  like  a  ribbon  to  prank  the  down. 


Over  the  grass  we  stepped  unto  it, 

And  God  He  knoweth  how  blithe  we  were! 

Never  a  voice  to  bid  us  eschew  it: 

Hey  the  green  ribbon  that  showed  so  fair! 

Hey  the  green  ribbon !  we  kneeled  beside  it, 
We  parted  the  grasses  dewy  and  sheen : 

Drop  over  drop  there  filtered  and  shded 
A  tiny  bright  beck  that  trickled  between. 

Tinkle,  tinkle,  sweetly  it  sung  to  us, 
Light  was  our  talk  as  of  fairy  bells; — 

Fairy  wedding-bells  faintly  rung  to  us 
Down  in  their  fortunate  parallels. 


Divided  969 


Hand  in  hand,  while  the  sun  peered  over, 

We  lapped  the  grass  on  that  youngHng  spring; 

Swept  back  its  rushes,  smoothed  its  clover,      . 
And  said,  "Let  us  follow  it  westering."      ,0  ) 

III 

A  dappled  sky,  a  world  of  meadows, 
Circling  above  us  the  black  rooks  fly 

Forward,  backward;  lo  their  dark  shadows 
Flit  on  the  blossoming  tapestry; — 

Flit  on  the  beck;  for  her  long  grass  parteth 
As  hair  from  a  maid's  bright  eyes  blown  back: 

And,  lo,  the  sun  like  a  lover  darteth 

His  flattering  smile  on  her  wayward  track. 

Sing  on!  we  sing  in  the  glorious  weather 
Till  one  steps  over  the  tiny  strand. 

So  narrow,  in  sooth,  that  still  together 
On  either  brink  we  go  hand  in  hand. 

The  beck  grows  wider,  the  hands  must  sever. 

On  either  margin,  our  songs  all  done. 
We  move  apart,  while  she  singeth  ever. 

Taking  the  course  of  the  stooping  sun. 

He  prays,  "Come  over," — I  may  not  follow; 

I  cry,  "Return," — but  he  cannot  come: 
We  speak,  we  laugh,  but  with  voices  hollow; 

Our  hands  are  hanging,  our  hearts  are  numb. 

IV 

A  breathing  sigh,  a  sigh  for  answer,  ! 

A  little  talking  of  outward  things: 
The  careless  beck  is  a  merry  dancer. 

Keeping  sweet  time  to  the  air  she  sings. 

A  little  pain  when  the  beck  grows  wider; 

"Cross  to  me  now;  for  her  wavelets  swell"; 
"I  may  not  cross," — and  the  voice  beside  her 

Faintly  reacheth,  though  heeded  well. 


970 


Poems  of  Love 


No  backward  path;  ah!  no  returning; 

No  second  crossing  that  ripple's  flow: 
"Come  to  me  now,  for  the  west  is  burning; 

Come  ere  it  darkens."— "Ah,  no!  ah,  no!" 

Then  cries  of  pain,  and  arms  outreaching, — 
The  beck  grows  wider  and  swift  and  deep: 

Passionate  words  as  of  one  beseeching: 

The  loud  beck  drowns  them:  we  walk,  and  weep. 


A  yellow  moon  in  splendor  drooping, 
A  tired  queen  with  her  state  oppressed, 

Low  by  rushes  and  swordgrass  stooping. 
Lies  she  soft  on  the  waves  at  rest. 

The  desert  heavens  have  felt  her  sadness; 

Her  earth  will  weep  her  some  dewy  tears; 
The  wild  beck  ends  her  tune  of  gladness, 

And  goeth  stilly  as  soul  that  fears. 

We  two  walk  on  in  our  grassy  places  ■;_ 

On  cither  marge  of  the  moonlit  flood,  ) 

With  the  moon's  own  sadness  in  our  faces,  /// 
Where  joy  is  withered,  blossom  and  bud. 

VI 

A  shady  freshness,  chafers  whirring; 

A  little  piping  of  leaf-hid  birds; 
A  flutter  of  wings,  a  fitful  stirring; 

A  cloud  to  the  eastward  snowy  as  curds. 

Bare  grassy  slopes,  where  kids  are  tethered, 
Round  valleys  like  nests  all  ferny-lined. 

Round  hills,  with  fluttering  tree-tops  feathered, 
Swell  high  in  their  freckled  robes  behind. 

A  rose-flush  tender,  a  thrill,  a  quiver, 

When  golden  gleams  to  the  tree-tops  glide; 

A  flashing  edge  for  the  mflk-white  river, 
The  beck,  a  river — with  still  sleek  tide. 


Divided  97,1 


Broad  and  white,  and  polished  as  silver, 

On  she  goes  under  fruit-laden  trees: 
Sunk  in  leafage  cooeth  the  culver. 

And  'plaineth  of  love's  disloyalties. 

Glitters  the  dew,  and  shines  the  river, 
Up  comes  the  lily  and  dries  her  bell; 

But  two  are  walking  apart  forever. 

And  wave  their  hands  for  a  mute  farewell. 

vu 

A  braver  swell,  a  swifter  sliding; 

The  river  hasteth,  her  banks  recede. 
Wing-like  sails  on  her  bosom  gliding 

Bear  down  the  lily,  and  drown  the  reed. 

Stately  prows  are  rising  and  bowing 
(Shouts  of  mariners  winnow  the  air) , 

And  level  sands  for  banks  endowing 

The  tiny  green  ribbon  that  showed  so  fair. 

While,  O  my  heart!  as  white  sails  shiver, 

And  clouds  are  passing,  and  banks  stretch  wide. 

How  hard  to  follow,  with  lips  that  quiver, 
That  moving  speck  on  the  far-off  side. 

Farther,  farther;  I  see  it,  know  it — 

JNIy  eyes  brim  over,  it  melts  away: 
Only  my  heart  to  my  heart  shall  show  it 

As  I  walk  desolate  day  by  day. 


And  yet  I  know  past  all  doubting,  truly,— 
A  knowledge  greater  than  grief  can  dim, — 

I  know,  as  he  loved,  he  will  love  me  duly,-- 
Yea,  better,  e'en  better  than  I  love  him. 

And  as  I  walk  by  the  vast  calm  river, 

The  awful  river  so  dread  to  see, 
I  say,  "Thy  breadth  and  thy  depth  forever 

Are  bridged  by  his  thoughts  that  cross  to  me." 

Jean  Ingclow  [1820-1897] 


97-  Poems  of  Love 

MY  PLAYMATE 

The  pines  were  dark  on  Ramoth  hill, 

Their  song  was  soft  and  low; 
The  blossoms  in  the  sweet  May  wind 

Were  falling  like  the  snow. 

The  blossoms  drifted  at  our  feet, 
The  orchard  birds  sang  clear; 

The  sweetest  and  the  saddest  day- 
It  seemed  of  all  the  year.  i . 

For,  more  to  me  than  birds  or  flowers,  // 

My  playmate  left  her  home, 
And  took  with  her  the  laughing  spring, 

The  music  and  the  bloom. 

She  kissed  the  lips  of  kith  and  kin, 

She  laid  her  hand  in  mine : 
What  more  could  ask  the  bashful  boy 

Who  fed  her  father's  kine? 

She  left  us  in  the  bloom  of  May: 

The  constant  years  told  o'er 
Their  seasons  with  as  sweet  May  morns.. 

But  she  came  back  no  more. 

I  walk,  with  noiseless  feet,  the  round 
Of  uneventful  years;  •     ■ 

Still  o'er  and  o'er  I  sow  the  spring 
And  reap  the  autumn  ears. 

She  lives  where  all  the  golden  yearf-forr:'  f 

Her  summer  roses  blow; 
The  dusk)'  children  of  the  sun 

Before  her  come  and  go. 

There  haply  with  her  jeweled  hands 
She  smooths  her  silken  gown, — 

No  more  the  homespun  lap  wherein 
I  shook  the  walnuts  down. 


My   Playmate  973 

The  wild  grapes  wait  us  by  the  brook, 

The  brown  nuts  on  the  hill, 
And  still  the  May-day  flowers  make  sweet 

The  woods  of  Folly  mill. 

The  lilies  blossom  in  the  pond, 

The  bird  builds  in  the  tree, 
The  dark  pines  sing  on  Ramoth  hill 

The  slow  song  of  the  sea. 

I  wonder  if  she  thinks  of  them, 

And  how  the  old  time  seems, — 
If  ever  the  pines  of  Ramoth  wood 

Are  sounding  in  her  dreams. 

I  see  her  face,  I  hear  her  voice: 

Does  she  remember  mine? 
And  what  to  her  is  now  the  boy 

Who  fed  her  father's  kine? 

What  cares  she  that  the  orioles  build 

For  other  eyes  than  ours, — 
That  other  laps  with  nuts  are  filled, 

And  other  hands  with  flowers? 

O  playmate  in  the  golden  time! 

Our  mossy  seat  is  green, 
Its  fringing  violets  blossom  yet, 

The  old  trees  o'er  it  lean. 

The  winds  so  sweet  with  birch  and  fern 

A  sweeter  memory  blow; 
And  there  in  spring  the  vceries  sing  '''^ 

The  song  of  long  ago. 

And  still  the  pines  of  Ramoth  wood 

Are  moaning  like  the  sea,— 
The  moaning  of  the  sea  of  change 

Betw^een  myself  and  thee! 

John  Grecnleaf  Wkitlier  [1807-1892] 


oy^  Poems  of  Love 


A  FAREWELL 

With  all  my  will,  but  much  against  my  heart, 

We  two  now  part. 

My  Very  Dear, 

Our  solace  is,  the  sad  road  lies  so  clear. 

It  needs  no  art. 

With  faint,  averted  feet 

And  many  a  tear. 

In  our  opposed  paths  to  persevere. 

Go  thou  to  East,  I  West. 

We  will  not  say 

There's  any  hope,  it  is  so  far  away. 

But,  O,  my  Best, 

When  the  one  darling  of  our  widowhead, 

The  nursling  Grief 

Is  dead. 

And  no  dews  blur  our  eyes 

To  see  the  peach-bloom  come  in  evening  skies, 

Perchance  we  may, 

Where  now  this  night  is  day, 

And  even  through  faith  of  still  averted  feet, 

Making  full  circle  of  our  banishment. 

Amazed  meet; 

The  bitter  journey  to  the  bourne  so  sweet 

Seasoning  the  termless  feast  of  our  content 

With  tears  of  recognition  never  dry. 

Coventry  PaUnore  [1823-185 


DEPARTURE 

It  was  not  like  your  great  and  gracious  ways! 

Do  you,  that  have  naught  other  to  lament, 

Never,  my  Love,  repent 

Of  how,  that  July  afternoon, 

You  went, 

With  sudden,  unintelligible  phrase, 

And  frightened  eye. 

Upon  your  journey  of  so  many  days 


A   Song  of  Parting  97^ 


Without  a  single  kiss,  or  a  good-bye? 

I  knew,  indeed,  that  you  were  parting  soon; 

And  so  we  sate,  within  the  low  sun's  rays, 

You  whispering  to  me,  for  your  voice  was  weak. 

Your  harrowing  praise. 

Well,  it  was  well 

To  hear  you  such  things  speak, 

And  I  could  tell 

What  made  your  eyes  a  glowing  gloom  of  love, 

As  a  warm  South-wind  sombers  a  March  grove. 

And  it  was  like  your  great  and  gracious  ways 

To  turn  your  talk  on  daily  things,  my  Dear, 

Lifting  the  luminous,  pathetic  lash 

To  let  the  laughter  flash, 

Whilst  I  drew  near, 

Because  you  spoke  so  low  that  I  could  scarcely  hear. 

But  all  at  once  to  leave  me  at  the  last, 

More  at  the  wonder  than  the  loss  aghast, 

With  huddled,  unintelligible  phrase. 

And  frightened  eye. 

And  go  your  journey  of  all  days 

With  not  one  kiss,  or  a  good-bye. 

And  the  only  loveless  look  the  look  with  which  you  passed: 

'Twas  all  unlike  your  great  and  gracious  ways. 

Coventry  Palmore  [1823-1896] 

A  SONG  OF  PARTING 

My  dear,  the  time  has  come  to  say 

Farewell  to  London  town, 
Farewell  to  each  familiar  street. 

The  room  where  we  looked  down 
Upon  the  people  going  by. 

The  river  flowing  fast : 
The  innumerable  shine  of  lamps, 

The  bridges  and — our  past. 

Our  past  of  London  days  and  nights, 
When  every  night  we  dreamed 


976  Poems  of  Love 

Of  Love  and  Art  and  Happiness, 
And  every  day  it  seemed 

Ah!  little  room,  you  held  my  life, 
In  you  I  found  my  all; 

A  white  hand  on  the  mantelpiece, 
A  shadow  on  the  wall. 

My  dear,  what  dinners  we  have  had. 

What  cigarettes  and  wine 
In  faded  corners  of  Soho, 

Your  fingers  touching  mine! 
And  now  the  time  has  come  to  say 

Farewell  to  London  town; 
The  prologue  of  our  play  is  done, 

So  ring  the  curtain  down. 

There  lies  a  crowded  life  ahead 

In  field  and  sleepy  lane, 
A  fairer  picture  than  we  saw 

Framed  in  our  window-pane. 
There'll  be  the  stars  on  summer  nights, 

The  white  moon  through  the  trees, 
Moths,  and  the  song  of  nightingales 

To  float  along  the  breeze. 

And  in  the  morning  we  shall  see 

The  swallows  in  the  sun. 
And  hear  the  cuckoo  on  the  hill 

Welcome  a  day  begun. 
And  life  will  open  with  the  rose 

For  me,  sweet,  and  for  you, 
And  on  our  hfe  and  on  the  rose 

How  soft  the  falling  dew! 

So  let  us  take  this  tranquil  path,  . 

But  drop  a  parting  tear 
For  town,  whose  greatest  gift  to  us 

Was  to  be  lovers  here. 

U.  C.  Comptoii  Mackenzie  [1883 


jVII 


Song  977 


SONG 

From  "The  Earthly  Paradise" 

Fair  is  the  night,  and  fair  the  day, 
Now  April  is  forgot  of  IMay, 
Now  into  June  May  falls  away: 
Fair  day!  fair  night!     O  give  me  back 
The  tide  that  all  fair  things  did  lack 
Except  my  Love,  except  my  Sweet! 

Blow  back,  O  wind!  thou  art  not  kind, 
Though  thou  art  sweet :  thou  hast  no  mind 
Her  hair  about  my  Sweet  to  bind. 

0  flovt'cry  sward!  though  thou  art  bright, 

1  praise  thee  not  for  thy  dehght, — 
Thou  hast  not  kissed  her  silver  feet. 

Thou  know'st  her  not,  O  rustling  tree! 
What  dost  thou  then  to  shadow  me. 
Whose  shade  her  breast  did  never  see? 
O  flowers!  in  vain  ye  bow  adown: 
Ye  have  not  felt  her  odorous  gown 
Brush  past  your  heads  my  lips  to  meet. 

Flow  on,  great  river!  thou  mayst  deem 
That  far  away,  a  summer  stream, 
Thou  saw'st  her  limbs  amidst  the  gleam, 
And  kissed  her  foot,  and  kissed  her  knee: 
Yet  get  thee  swift  unto  the  sea! 
With  naught  of  true  thou  wilt  me  greet. 

And  Thou  that  men  call  by  my  name! 
O  helpless  One !  hast  thou  no  shame 
That  thou  must  even  look  the  same 
As  while  agone,  as  while  agone 
When  Thou  and  She  were  left  alone, 
And  hands  and  lips  and  tears  did  meet? 

Grow  weak  and  pine,  lie  down  to  die, 
O  body!  in  thy  misery. 


9y8  Poems  of  Love 

Because  short  time  and  sweet  goes  by. 
O  foolish  heart!  how  weak  thou  art: 
Break,  break,  because  thou  needs  must  part 
From  thine  own  Love,  from  thine  own  Sweet! 

William  Morris  [183  4- 189  6] 

AT  PARTING 

For  a  day  and  a  night  Love  sang  to  us,  played  with  us, 

Folded  us  round  from  the  dark  and  the  light; 
And  our  hearts  were  fulfilled  of  the  music  he  made  with  us. 
Made  with  our  hearts  and  our  lips  while  he  stayed  with  us, 
Stayed  in  mid  passage  his  pinions  from  flight 
For  a  day  and  a  night. 

From  his  foes  that  kept  watch  with  his  v/ings  had  he  hidden 
us. 
Covered  us  close  from  the  eyes  that  would  smite, 
From  the  feet  that  had  tracked  and  the  tongues  that  had 

chidden  us 
Sheltering  in  shade  of  the  myrtles  forbidden  us 
Spirit  and  flesh  growing  one  with  delight 
For  a  day  and  a  night. 

But  his  wings  will  not  rest  and  his  feet  will  not  stay  for  us: 

Morning  is  here  in  the  joy  of  its  might; 
With  his  breath  has  he  sweetened  a  night  and  a  day  for  us: 
Now  let  him  pass,  and  the  myrtles  make  way  for  us; 
Love  can  but  last  in  us  here  at  his  height 
For  a  day  and  a  night. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [183 7- 1909] 

"IF   SHE  BUT  KNEW" 

If  she  but  knew  that  I  am  weeping 

Still  for  her  sake, 
That  love  and  sorrow  grow  with  keeping 

Till  they  must  break. 
My  heart  that  breaking  will  adore  her,  ■ 

Be  hers  and  die; 
If  she  might  hear  me  once  implore  her, 

Would  she  not  sigh? 


Robin  Adair  979 

If  she  but  knew  that  it  would  save  me 

Her  voice  to  hear, 
Saying  she  pitied  me,  forgave  me, 

Must  she  forbear? 
If  she  were  told  that  I  was  dying, 

Would  she  be  dumb? 
Could  she  content  herself  with  sighing? 

Would  she  not  come? 

Arthur  O'Shaughnessy  [1844-1881] 


KATHLEEN  MAVOURNEEN 

ELathleen  Mavourneen!  the  gray  dawn  is  breaking, 

The  horn  of  the  hunter  is  heard  on  the  hill; 
The  lark  from  her  light  wing  the  bright  dew  is  shaking,- 

Kathleen  Mavourneen!  what,  slumbering  stiU? 
Oh,  hast  thou  forgotten  how  soon  we  must  sever? 

Oh!  hast  thou  forgotten  this  day  we  must  part? 
It  may  be  for  years,  and  it  may  be  forever! 

Oh,  why  art  thou  silent,  thou  voice  of  my  heart? 
Oh!  why  art  thou  silent,  Kathleen  Mavourneen? 

Kathleen  Mavourneen,  awake  from  thy  slumbers! 

The  blue  mountains  glow  in  the  sun's  golden  light; 
Ah,  where  is  the  spell  that  once  hung  on  my  numbers? 

Arise  in  thy  beauty,  thou  star  of  my  night! 
Mavourneen,  Mavourneen,  my  sad  tears  are  falling. 

To  think  that  from  Erin  and  thee  I  must  part! 
It  may  be  for  years,  and  it  may  be  forever! 

Then  why  art  thou  silent,  thou  voice  of  my  heart? 
Then  why  art  thou  silent,  Kathleen  Mavourneen? 
Louisa  Macartney  Crawford  [18    - 


ROBIN  ADAIR 

What's  this  dull  town  to  me? 

Robin's  not  near, — 
He  whom  I  wished  to  see, 

Wished  for  to  hear; 


980 


Poems  of  Love 

Where's  all  the  joy  and  mirth 
Made  Hfe  a  heaven  on  earth? 
O,  they're  all  fled  with  thee, 
Robin  Adair! 

What  made  the  assembly  shine? 

Robin  Adair: 
What  made  the  ball  so  fine? 

Robin  was  there: 
What,  when  the  play  was  o'er, 
What  made  my  heart  so  sore? 
O,  it  was  parting  with 

Robin  Adair! 

But  now  thou  art  far  from  me^ 

Robin  Adair; 
But  now  I  never  see 

Robin  Adair; 
Yet  him  I  loved  so  well 
Still  in  my  heart  shall  dwell; 
O,  I  can  ne'er  forget 

Robin  Adair! 

Welcome  on  shore  again, 

Robin  Adair! 
Welcome  once  more  again, 

Robin  Adair! 
I  feel  thy  trembling  hand; 
Tears  in  thy  eyelids  stand. 
To  greet  thy  native  land, 

Robin  Adair! 

Long  I  ne'er  saw  thee,  love, 

Robin  Adair; 
Still  I  prayed  for  thee,  love, 

Robin  Adair; 
When  thou  wert  far  at  sea, 
Many  made  love  to  me, 
But  still  I  thought  on  thee, 

Robin  Adair! 


"If  You   Were   Here" 


981 


Come  to  my  heart  again, 

Robin  Adair; 
Never  to  part  again, 

Robin  Adair; 
And  if  thou  still  art  true, 
I  will  be  constant  too, 
And  will  wed  none  but  you, 

Robin  Adair! 

Caroline  Keppcl  [1735-    ?    ] 

"IF  YOU  WERE  HERE" 

A    SONG    IN    WINTER 

O  Love,  if  you  were  here 

This  dreary,  weary  day, — 
If  your  lips,  warm  and  dear,  i 

Found  some  sweet  word  to  say, — 
Then  hardly  would  seem  drear 

These  skies  of  wintry  gray. 

But  you  are  far  away, — 

How  far  from  me,  my  dear! 
What  cheer  can  warm  the  day? 

My  heart  is  chill  with  fear, 
Pierced  through  with  swift  dismay; 

A  thought  has  turned  Life  sere: 

If  you,  from  far  away, 

Should  come  not  back,  my  dear; 
If  I  no  more  might  lay 

My  hand  on  yours,  nor  hear 
That  voice,  now  sad,  now  gay, 

Caress  my  listening  ear; 

If  you,  from  far  away, 

Should  come  no  more,  my  dear, — 
Then  with  what  dire  dismay 

Year  joined  to  hostile  year 
Would  frown,  if  I  should  stay  ■y:v.\\  v^^f 

Where  memories  mock  and  jeer! 


982 


Poems  of  Love  1  '' 

But  I  would  come  away 

To  dwell  with  you,  my  dear; 
Through  unknown  worlds  to  stray, — 

Or  sleep;  nor  hope,  nor  fear, 
Nor  dream  beneath  the  clay 

Of  all  our  days  that  were. 

Philip  Bourke  Marsion  [1850-1887] 


"COME  TO  ME,   DEAREST" 

Come  to  me,  dearest,  I'm  lonely  without  thee; 
Daytime  and  night-time,  I'm  thinking  about  thee; 
Night-time  and  daytime,  in  dreams  I  behold  thee; 
Unwelcome  the  waking  which  ceases  to  fold  thee. 
Come  to  me,  darling,  my  sorrows  to  lighten. 
Come  in  thy  beauty  to  bless  and  to  brighten; 
Come  in  thy  womanhood,  meekly  and  lowdy. 
Come  in  thy  lovingncss,  queenly  and  holy. 

Swallows  will  flit  round  the  desolate  ruin,     ^ 
Telling  of  spring  and  its  joyous  renewing;  ' 
And  thoughts  of  thy  love  and  its  manifold  treasure. 
Are  circling  my  heart  with  a  promise  of  pleasure. 
O  Spring  of  my  spirit,  O  May  of  my  bosom, 
Sliine  out  on  my  soul,  till  it  bourgeon  and  blossom ; 
The  waste  of  my  life  has  a  rose-root  within  it. 
And  thy  fondness  alone  to  the  sunshine  can  win  it. 

Figure  that  moves  like  a  song  through  the  even; 
Features  lit  up  by  a  reflex  of  heaven; 
Eyes  like  the  skies  of  poor  Erin,  our  mother, 
Where  shadow  and  sunshine  are  chasing  each  other; 
Smiles  coming  seldom,  but  childlike  and  simple, 
Planting  in  each  rosy  cheek  a  sweet  dimple; — 
O,  thanks  to  the  Saviour,  that  even  thy  seeming 
Is  left  to  the  exile  to  brighten  his  dreaming. 

You  have  been  glad  when  you  knew  I  was  gladdened; 
Dear,  are  you  sad  now  to  hear  I  am  saddened? 


Song  983 

Our  hearts  ever  answer  in  tune  and  in  time,  love, 
As  octave  to  octave,  and  rhyme  unto  rhyme,  love: 
I  cannot  weep  but  your  tears  will  be  flowing, 
You  cannot  smile  but  my  cheek  will  be  glowing; 
I  would  not  die  without  you  at  my  side,  love, 
You  will  not  linger  when  I  shall  have  died,  love. 

Come  to  me,  dear,  ere  I  die  of  my  sorrow, 
Rise  on  my  gloom  like  the  sun  of  to-morrow; 
Strong,  swift,  and  fond  are  the  words  which  I  speak,  love, 
With  a  song  on  your  lip  and  a  smile  on  your  cheek,  love. 
Come,  for  my  heart  in  your  absence  is  weary, — 
Haste,  for  my  spirit  is  sickened  and  dreary, — 
Come  to  my  arms  which  alone  should  caress  thee, 
Come  to  the  heart  which  is  throbbing  to  press  thee! 

Joseph  Brenan  [1829-1857] 

SONG 

'Tis  said  that  absence  conquers  love! 

But,  oh!  believe  it  not; 
I've  tried,  alas!  its  power  to  prove. 

But  thou  art  not  forgot. 
Lady,  though  fate  has  bid  us  part, 

Yet  still  thou  art  as  dear, 
As  fixed  in  this  devoted  heart. 

As  when  I  clasped  thee  here. 

I  plunge  into  the  busy  crowd, 

And  smile  to  hear  thy  name; 
And  yet,  as  if  I  thought  aloud. 

They  know  me  still  the  same; 
And  when  the  wine-cup  passes  round, 

I  toast  some  other  fair, — 
But  when  I  ask  my  heart  the  sound, 

Thy  name  is  echoed  there. 

And  when  some  other  name  I  learn, 

And  try  to  whisper  love, 
Still  will  my  heart  to  thee  return 

Like  the  returning  dove. 


984  Poems  of  Love 

In  vain!    I  never  can  forget,  ri -...D 

And  would  not  be  forgot; 
For  I  must  bear  the  same  regret,  uilo  i 

Whate'er  may  be  my  lot.  •   o  r;oY 

1 
*     E'en  as  the  wounded  bird  will  seek  •  ' 

Its  favorite  bower  to  die, 
So,  lady!    I  would  hear  thee  speak, '     '   "n'>-' 

And  yield  my  parting  sigh.  ""  '"^  '^'''' 

'Tis  said  that  absence  conquers  love! 

But,  oh!  believe  it  not;  .     '      , 

I've  tried,  alas!  its  power  to  prove,  "^*^'*  •'^''""  ' 
But  thou  art  not  forgot. 

Frederick  William  Thomas  [1811-1864] 
'03  CM  araoJ 


PARTING 

Too  fair,  I  may  not  call  thee  mine: 

Too  dear,  I  may  not  see 
Those  eyes  with  bridal  beacons  shine; 

Yet,  Darling,  keep  for  me — 
Empty  and  hushed,  and  safe  apart, — 
One  little  corner  of  thy  heart. 

Thou  wilt  be  happy,  dear!  and  bless 

Thee :  happy  mayst  thou  be. 
I  would  not  make  thy  pleasure  less; 

Yet,  Darling,  keep  for  me — 
My  life  to  hght,  my  lot  to  leaven, — 
One  Httle  corner  of  thy  Heaven.   ..  t 

Good-by,  dear  heart!    I  go  to  dwell 

A  weary  way  from  thee; 
Our  first  kiss  is  our  last  farewell; 

Yet,  Darling,  keep  for  me — 
Who  wander  outside  in  the  night, — 
One  little  corner  of  thy  light. 

Gerald  Massey  [182S-1907] 


A  Song  of  Autumn  985 


THE  PARTING  HOUR 

Not  yet,  dear  love,  not  yet:  the  sun  is  high; 

You  said  last  night,  "At  sunset  I  will  go." 
Come  to  the  garden,  where  when  blossoms  die 

No  word  is  spoken;  it  is  better  so: 
Ah!  bitter  word  "Farewell." 

Hark!  how  the  birds  sing  sunn}'  songs  of  spring! 

Soon  they  will  build,  and  work  will  silence  them; 
So  we  grow  less  light-hearted  as  years  bring 

Life's  grave  responsibilities — and  then 
The  bitter  word  "Farewell." 

The  violets  fret  to  fragrance  'neath  your  feet. 
Heaven's  gold  sunlight  dreams  aslant  your  hair: 

No  flower  for  me!  your  mouth  is  far  more  sweet. 
0,  let  my  lips  forget,  while  lingering  there, 
Love's  bitter  word  "Farewell." 

Sunset  alread)'!  have  we  sat  so  long? 

The  parting  hour,  and  so  much  left  unsaid! 
The  garden  has  grown  silent — void  of  song. 
Our  sorrow  shakes  us  with  a  sudden  dread ! 
Ah!  bitter  word  "Farewell." 

Olive  Cuslance  [  1 874  - 


A  SONG  OF  AUTUMN 

All  through  the  golden  weather 

Until  the  autumn  fell, 
Our  lives  went  by  together 

So  wildly  and  so  well. 

But  autumn's  wind  uncloses 
The  heart  of  all  your  flowers; 

I  think,  as  with  the  roses. 
So  hath  it  been  with  ours. 


5)86  -"   Poems  of  Love 


Like  some  divided  river 

Your  ways  and  mine  will  be, 

To  drift  apart  for  ever, 
For  ever  till  the  sea. 

And  yet  for  one  word  spoken, 

One  whisper  of  regret, 
The  dream  had  not  been  broken. 

And  love  were  with  us  yet. 

Rennell  Rodd  [1858-     I 

THE   GIRL  I  LEFT  BEHIND   ME 

The  dames  of  France  are  fond  and  free, 

And  Flemish  lips  are  willing, 
And  soft  the  maids  of  Italy, 

And  Spanish  eyes  are  thrilling; 
Still,  though  I  bask  beneath  their  smile, 

Their  charms  fail  to  bind  me,  \ 

And  my  heart  falls  back  to  Erin's  Isle, 

To  the  girl  I  left  behind  me.  ;-,^j-^  J^rn'' 

For  she's  as  fair  as  Shannon's  side. 

And  purer  than  its  water, 
But  she  refused  to  be  my  bride 

Though  many  a  year  I  sought  her; 
Yet,  since  to  France  I  sailed  away. 

Her  letters  oft  remind  me 
That  I  promised  never  to  gainsay 

The  girl  I  left  behind  me. 

/-_ 

She  says,  "My  own  dear  love,  come  home. 

My  friends  are  rich  and  many, 
Or  else  abroad  with  you  I'll  roam, 

A  soldier  stout  as  any; 
If  you'll  not  come,  nor  let  me  go, 

I'll  think  you  have  resigned  me," — 
My  heart  nigh  broke  when  I  answered  "No," 

To  the  girl  I  left  behind  me. 


Remember  or  Forget  c^Sy 

For  never  shall  my  true  love  brave 

A  life  of  war  and  toiling, 
And  never  as  a  skulking  slave 

I'll  tread  my  native  soil  on; 
But,  were  it  free  or  to  be  freed. 

The  battle's  close  would  find  me 
To  Ireland  bound,  nor  message  need 

From  the  girl  I  left  behind  me. 

Unknown 


"WHEN  WE  ARE   PARTED" 

When  we  are  parted  let  me  lie 
In  some  far  corner  of  thy  heart, 
Silent,  and  from  the  world  apart, 

Like  a  forgotten  melody: 

Forgotten  of  the  world  beside, 
Cherished  by  one,  and  one  alone. 
For  some  loved  memory  of  its  own; 

So  let  me  in  thy  heart  abide 

When  we  are  parted. 

When  we  are  parted,  keep  for  me 

The  sacred  stillness  of  the  night ; 

That  hour,  sweet  Love,  is  mine  by  right; 
Let  others  claim  the  day  of  thee!   '  '^^  ^ 
The  cold  world  sleeping  at  our  feet^ 

My  spirit  shall  discourse  with  thine; — 

When  stars  upon  thy  pillow  shine, 
At  thy  heart's  door  I  stand  and  beat, 
Though  we  are  parted. 

HamiUo)i  Aide  [1826-1906] 


REMEMBER  OR   FORGET 


.'.'/ 


I  SAT  Ijeside  the  streamlet, 

I  watched  the  water  flow, 
As  we  together  watched  it 

One  little  year  ago:  ^ 


98^8  ^'-'  Poems  of  Love 

The  soft  rain  pattered  on  the  leaves, 

The  April  grass  was  wet. 
Ah!  folly  to  remember; 

'Tis  wiser  to  forget. 

The  nightingales  made  vocal 

June's  palace  paved  with  gold; 
I  watched  the  rose  you  gave  me 

Its  warm  red  heart  unfold; 
But  breath  of  rose  and  bird's  song 

Were  fraught  with  wild  regret. 
'Tis  madness  to  remember; 

'Twere  wisdom  to  forget. 

I  stood  among  the  gold  corn, 

Alas!  no  more,  I  knew,  : 

To  gather  gleaner's  measure 

Of  the  love  that  fell  from  you. 
For  me,  no  gracious  harvest — 

Would  God  we  ne'er  had  met ! 
'Tis  hard,  Love,  to  remember. 

But  'tis  harder  to  forget. 

The  streamlet  now  is  frozen, 

The  nightingales  are  fled. 
The  cornfields  are  deserted, 

And  every  rose  is  dead. 
I  sit  beside  my  lonely  fire, 

And  pray  for  wisdom  yet: 
For  calmness  to  remember, 

Or  courage  to  forget. 

Hamilton  Aidi  [i826-igo6] 

NANCY  DAWSON 

Nancy  Dawson,  Nancy  Dawson, 
Not  so  very  long  ago 

Some  one  wronged  you  from  sheer  love,  dear; 

Little  thinking  it  would  crush,  dear, 
All  I  cherished  in  you  so. 


My   Little   Love  989 

But  now,  what's  the  odds,  my  Nancy? 
Where's  the  guinea,  there's  the  fancy. 
Are  you  Nancy,  that  old  Nancy? 
Nancy  Dawson. 

Nancy  Dawson,  Nancy  Dawson, 
I  forget  you,  what  you  were; 
Till  I  feel  the  sad  hours  creep,  dear, 
O'er  my  heart;  as  o'er  my  cheek,  dear, 
Once  of  old,  that  old,  old  hair: 
And  then,  unawares,  my  Nancy, 
I  remember,  and  I  fancy 
You  are  Nancy,  that  old  Nancy; 
Nancy  Dawson. 

Herbert  P.  Home  [1S64- 


MY  LITTLE  LOVE 

God  keep  you  safe,  my  little  love. 

All  through  the  night. 
Rest  close  in  His  encircling  arms 

Until  the  light. 
]My  heart  is  with  you  as  I  kneel  to  pray, 
"Good  night!    God  keep  you  in  His  care  alway." 

Thick  shadows  creep  like  silent  ghosts 

About  my  bed. 
I  lose  myself  in  tender  dreams 

While  overhead 
The  moon  comes  stealing  through  the  window  bars. 
A  silver  sickle  gleaming  'mid  the  stars. 

For  1,  though  I  am  far  away, 

Feel  safe  and  strong. 
To  trust  you  thus,  dear  love,  and  yet  T 

The  night  is  long. 
I  say  with  sobbing  breath  the  old  fond  prayer, 
"Goodnight!    Sweet  dreams!    God  keep  you  everywhere ! ' 

Charles  B.  Hawley  [1858- 


990 


Poems  of  Love 


FOR  EVER  ' " 

Thrice  with  her  lips  she  touched  my  Hps, 

Thrice  with  her  hand  my  hand, 
And  three  times  thrice  looked  towards  the  sea, 

But  never  to  the  land: 
Then,  "Sweet,"  she  said,  "no  more  delay, 
For  Heaven  forbids  a  longer  stay." 

I,  with  my  passion  in  my  heart, 

Could  find  no  words  to  waste; 
But  striving  often  to  depart,  -,,/ 

I  strained  her  to  my  breast: 
Her  wet  tears  washed  my  weary  cheek ; 
I  could  have  died,  but  could  not  speak. 

The  anchor  swings,  the  sheet  flies  loose 

And,  bending  to  the  breeze. 
The  tall  ship,  never  to  return. 

Flies  through  the  foaming  seas: 
Cheerily  ho!  the  sailors  cry; —  51 

My  sweet  love  lessening  to  my  eye. 

0  Love,  turn  towards  the  land  thy  sightHsrn  booi  ' 
No  more  peruse  the  sea; 

Our  God,  who  severs  thus  our  hearts,  -\Ai\T 

Shall  surely  care  for  thee: 
For  me  let  waste-wide  ocean  swing, 

1  too  lie  safe  beneath  His  wing. 

William.  Caldwell  Roscoe  [1823-1859] 


AUF  WIEDERSEHEN  '  'i^'oni  ,i  -a,  i 
-  baB  aijse  h-rl 
The  little  gate  was  reached  at  last,;,^^  izuii  oT 

Half  hid  in  hlacs  down  the  lane;    j^.;,,  .,,pr 
She  pushed  it  wide,  and,  as  she  passed, 
'id  A  wistful  look  she  backward  cast,     ,:-Ji,,  jj^,,,  1  ' 

And  said, — "  Auf  wiedersehen  .'" 


"Forever  and  a   Day"  991 

With  hand  on  latch,  a  vision  white 

Lingered  reluctant,  and  again 
Half  doubting  if  she  did  aright. 
Soft  as  the  dews  that  fell  that  night, 

She  said, — "  Auf  zvicderseheu  /" 

The  lamp's  clear  gleam  flits  up  the  stair; 

I  linger  in  delicious  pain; 
Ah,  in  that  chamber,  whose  rich  air 
To  breathe  in  thought  I  scarcely  dare, 

Thinks  she, — "  Aiif  wicderschcn?"   .   .  . 

'Tis  thirteen  years;  once  more  I  press 

The  turf  that  silences  the  lane; 
I  hear  the  rustle  of  her  dress, 
I  smell  the  lilacs,  and — ah,  yes, 

I  hear, — "  Atif  wiedersehen  !" 

Sweet  piece  of  bashful  maiden  art! 

The  English  words  had  seemed  too  fain, 
But  these — they  drew  us  heart  to  heart. 
Yet  held  us  tenderly  apart; 

She  said, — "Auf  wiedersehen  /" 

James  Russell  Lowell  [1S19-1S91] 


"FOREVER  AND   A  DAY" 

I  LITTLE  know  or  care 

If  the  blackbird  on  the  bough 

Is  filling  all  the  air 

With  his  soft  crescendo  now; 
For  she  is  gone  away, 
And  when  she  went  she  took 
The  .springtime  in  her  look. 
The  peachblow  on  her  cheek. 
The  laughter  from  the  brook, 
The  blue  from  out  the  May — 
And  what  she  calls  a  week 
Is  forever  and  a  day! 


99^  Poems  of  Love 

It's  little  that  I  mind  .<'  r^rU 

How  the  blossoms,  pink  or  white, 
At  every  touch  of  wind 
Fall  a-trembling  with  delight; 

For  in  the  leafy  lane, 

Beneath  the  garden-boughs, 

And  through  the  silent  house 

One  thing  alone  I  seek. 

Until  she  come  again 

The  May  is  not  the  May, 

And  what  she  calls  a  week 

Is  forever  and  a  day! 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [1837-1007] 


OLD   GARDENS 

The  white  rose  tree  that  spent  its  musk 

For  lovers'  sweeter  praise, 
The  stately  walks  we  sought  at  dusk, 

Have  missed  thee  many  days. 

Again,  with  once-famihar  feet, 

I  tread  the  old  parterre — 
But,  ah,  its  bloom  is  now  less  sweet 

Than  when  thy  face  was  there. 

I  hear  the  birds  of  evening  call; 

I  take  the  wild  perfume; 
I  pluck  a  rose — to  let  it  fall 

And  perish  in  the  gloom. 

Arthur  Upson  [1877-iooS] 


FERRY  HINKSEY 

Beyond  the  ferry  water 
That  fast  and  silent  flowed, 
She  turned,  she  gazed  a  moment, 
Then  took  her  onward  road 


Wearyin'   fer  You  993 

Between  the  winding  willows     '^'"^ 
To  a  city  white  with  spires; 
It  seemed  a  path  of  pilgrims 
To  the  home  of  earth's  desires,     it 

Blue  shade  of  golden  branches 
Spread  for  her  journeying, 
Till  he  that  lingered  lost  her 
Among  the  leaves  of  Spring. 

Laurence  Binyoti  [i86g- 


WEARYIN'  FER  YOU 

Jest  a-wcaryin'  fer  you — 
All  the  time  a-feelin'  blue; 
Wishin'  fer  you — wonderin'  when 
You'll  be  comin' home  again; 
Restless — don't  know  "ivhat  to  do — 
Jest  a-wearyin'  fer  you! 

Keep  a-mopin'  day  by  day: 
Dull — in  everybody's  way; 
Folks  they  smile  an'  pass  along 
Wonderin'  what  on  earth  is  wrong; 
'Twouldn't  help  'em  if  they  knew — 
Jest  a-wearyin'  fer  you. 

Room's  so  lonesome,  with  your  chair 
Empty  by  the  fireplace  there, 
Jest  can't  stand  the  sight  o'  it! 
Go  outdoors  an'  roam  a  bit: 
But  the  woods  is  lonesome,  too, 
Jest  a-wearyin'  fer  you. 

Comes  the  wind  with  sounds  that'  jes' 
Like  the  rustlin'  o'  your  dress; 
An'  the  dew  on  flower  an'  tree 
Tinkles  like  your  steps  to  me! 
Violets,  like  your  eyes  so  blue — 
Jest  a-wearyin'  fer  you! 


994  Poems  ot   Love 

Mornin'  comes,  the  birds  awake    ''l 
(Them  that  sung  so  far  your  sake!), 
But  there's  sadness  in  the  notes 
That  come  thrilHn'  from  their  throats! 
Seem  to  feel  your  absence,  too — 
Jest  a-wearyin'  fer  you. 

Evenin'  comes:  I  miss  you  more     " 
When  the  dark  is  in  the  door; 
'Pears  jest  like  you  orter  be 
There  to  open  fer  me! 
Latch  goes  tinklin' — thrills  me  through, 
Sets  me  wearyin'  fer  you! 


Jest  a-wearyin'  fer  yoii — 
All  the  time  a-feelin'  blue!  ' 
Wishin'  fer  you — wonderin'  when 
You'll  be  comin'  home  again; 
Restless — don't  know  what  to  do — 
Jest  a-wearyin'  fer  you! 

Frank  L.  Stanton  [1857- 


THE  LOVERS  OF  MARCHAID 

Dominic  came  riding  down,  swofded,  straight  and  splendid, 
Drave  his  hilt  against  her  door,  flung  a  golden  chain. 
Said:  "I'll  teach  your  lips  a  song  sweet  as  his  that's  ended. 
Ere  the  white  rose  call  the  bee,  the  almond  flower  again." 

But  he  only  saw  her  head  bent  within  the  gloom 
Over  heaps  of  bridal  thread  bright  as  apple-bloom, 
Silver  silk  like  rain  that  spread  across  the  driving  loom. 

Dreaming  Fanch,  the  cobbler's  son,  took  his  tools  and  laces, 
Wrought  her  shoes  of  scarlet  dye,  shoes  as  pale  as  snow; 
"They  shall  lead  her  wildrose  feet  all  the  fairy  paces 
Danced  along  the  road  of  love,  the  road  such  feet  should 


Song  995 

But  he  only  saw  her  eyes  turning  from  his  gift 

Out  towards  the  silver  skies  where  the  white  clouds  drift, 

Where  the  wild  gerfalcon  flies,  where  the  last  sails  lift. 

Bran  has  built  his  homestead  high  where  the  hills  may  shield 

her, 
Where  the  young  bird  waits  the  spring,  where  the  dawns 

are  fair, 
Said:  "I'll  name  my  trees  for  her,  since  I  may  not  yield  her 
Stars  of  morning  for  her  feet,  of  evening  for  her  hair." 

But  he  did  not  see  them  ride^  seven  dim  sail  and  more,  .  ' 
All  along  the  harbor-side,  white  from  shore  to  shore,  i  i 
Nor  heard  the  voices  of  the  tide  crying  at  her  door. 

Jean-Marie  has  touched  his  pipe  down  beside  the  river 
When  the  young  fox  bends  the  fern,  when  the  folds  are 

stiU, 
Said:   "I  send  her  all  the  gifts  that  my  love  may  give 

her,— 
Golden  notes  hke  golden  birds  to  seek  her  at  my  will." 

■:  ■^•.'■'  ■  ^.V) 

But  he  only  found  the  waves,  heard  the  sea-gull's  cry. 
In  and  out  the  ocean  caves,  underneath  the  sky, 
All  above  the  wind-washed  graves  where  dead  seamen  lie. 
Marjoric  L.  C.  Pickthall  [1883- 
1-  :.  liO 

^lartobriG/.  ^m  IiJalJ 

SONG  -iaai 

She's  somewhere  in  the  sunlight  strong,^ 
. ,  Her  tears  are  in  the  falling  rain. 

She  calls  me  in  the  wind's  soft  song. 
And  with  the  flowers  she  comes  again. 

"  G3£  'jnJ , Yon  bird  is  but  her  messenger, 

io  S0U3B0     The  moon  is  but  her  silver  car;  '    ji-  ' 

Yea!  sun  and  moon  are  sent  by  her, 
i>J  ,ii£3H    And  every  wistful  waiting  star.      'vol  ym  02  ,rl/. 
Richard  Le  Gallicnnc  [1866-    ■ 


996  Poems  of  Love 

THE  LOVER  THINKS  OF  HIS  LADY  IN  THE'^ 
NORTH  ' 

Now  many  are  the  stately  ships  that  northward  steam  away, 
And  gray  sails  northward  blow  black  hulls,  and  many  more 
ef!    are  theypflw  .-gal 

And  myriads  of  viking  gulls  flap  to  the  northern  seas: 
But  Oh  my  thoughts  that  go  to  you  are  more  than  all  of 
these!  <j  <iitii6 


The  winds  blow  to  the  northward  like  a  million  eager  wings, 
The  driven  sea  a  million  white-capped  waves  to  northward 

flings: 
I  send  you  thoughts  more  many  than  the  waves  that  fleck 

the  sea. 
More  eager  than  tempestuous  winds,  O  Love  long  leagues 

from  me!  (lliji 

■'  T"   ■J,;n?. 

0  Love,  long  leagues  from  me,  I  would  I  trod  the  drenched 

deck 
Of  some  ship  speeding  to  the  North  and  staunch  against  all 
wreck, 

1  would  I  were  a  sea-gull  strong  of  wing  and  void  of  fear: 
Unfaltering  and  fleet  I'd  fly  the  long  way  to  my  Dear! 

0  if  I  were  the  sea,  upon  your  northern  land  I'd  beat 

Until  my  waves  flowed  over  all,  and  kissed  your  wandering 

feet; 
And  if  I  were  the  winds,  I'd  waft  you  perfumes  from  the 

South, 
And  give  my  pleadings  to  your  ears,  my  kisses  to  your  mouth. 

Though  many  ships  are  sailing,  never  one  will  carry  me, 

1  may  not  hurry  northward  with  the  gulls,  the  winds,  the  sea; 
But  fervid  thoughts  they  say  can  flash  across  long  leagues  of 

blue — 
Ah,  so  my  love  and  longing  must  be  known,  Dear  Heart,  to 
you! 

Shaemas  0  Shed  \  1 886  - 


Ad  Domnulam  Suam  997 


CHANSON  DE  ROSEMONDE 

The  dawn  is  lonely  for  the  sun, 

And  chill  and  drear; 
The  one  lone  star  is  pale  and  wan 

As  one  in  fear. 

But  when  day  strides  across  the  hills, 

The  warm  blood  rushes  through 

The  bared  soft  bosom  of  the  blue 
And  all  the  glad  east  thrills. 

Oh,  come,  my  King!     The  hounds  of  joy 

Are  waiting  for  thy  horn 
To  chase  the  doe  of  heart's  desire 

Across  the  heights  of  morn. 
Oh,  come,  my  Sun,  and  let  me  know 

The  rapture  of  the  day ! 
Oh,  come,  my  love!     Oh,  come,  my  love! 

Thou  art  so  long  away! 

Richard  Hovey  [1864-1  goo] 

AD  DOMNULAM   SUAM 

Little  lady  of  my  heart! 

Just  a  little  longer, 
Love  me:  we  will  pass  and  part. 

Ere  this  love  grow  stronger. 

I  have  loved  thee,  Child!  loo  well, 
To  do  aught  but  leave  thee: 

Nay!  my  lips  should  never  tell 
Any  tale  to  grieve  thee. 

Little  lady  of  my  heart! 

Just  a  little  longer 
I  may  love  thee:  we  will  part 

Ere  my  love  grow  stronger. 

Soon  thou  lea  vest  fairy-land; 

Darker  grow  thy  tresses: 
Soon  no  more  of  hand  in  hand; 

Soon  no  more  caresses! 


c^c^S  Poems  of  Love 

Little  lady  of  my  heart! 

Just  a  little  longer 
Be  a  child;  then  we  will  part, 

Ere  this  love  grow  stronger. 

Ernest  Dowson  [i 86 7-1  goo] 


MARIAN  DRURY 

Marian  Drury,  Marian  Drury, 
How  are  the  marshes  full  of  the  sea! 

Acadie  dreams  of  your  coming  home 

All  year  through,  and  her  heart  gets  free, — 

Free  on  the  trail  of  the  wind  to  travel, 
Search  and  course  with  the  roving  tide, 

All  year  long  where  his  hands  unravel 
Blossom  and  berry  the  marshes  hide. 

Marian  Drury,  Marian  Drury, 

How  are  the  marshes  full  of  the  surge! 

April  over  the  Norland  now 

Walks  in  the  quiet  from  verge  to  verge. 

Burying,  brimming,  the  building  billows 
Fret  the  long  dikes  with  uneasy  foam. 

Drenched  with  gold  weather,  the  idling  willows 
Kiss  you  a  hand  from  the  Norland  home. 

Marian  Drury,  Marian  Drury, 

How  are  the  marshes  full  of  the  sun! 

Blomidon  waits  for  your  coming  home. 
All  day  long  where  the  white  wings  run. 

All  spring  through  they  falter  and  follow, 
Wander,  and  beckon  the  roving  tide. 

Wheel  and  float  with  the  veering  swallow, 
Lift  you  a  voice  from  the  blue  hillside. 

Marian  Drury,  Marian  Drury, 

How  are  the  marshes  full  of  the  rain! 

April  over  the  Norland  now 

Bugles  for  rapture,  and  rouses  pain,^ 


Love's    Rosary  999 

Halts  before  the  forsaken  dwelling, 

Where  in  the  twilight,  too  spent  to  roam, 

Love,  whom  the  fingers  of  death  are  quelling, 
Cries  you  a  cheer  from  the  Norland  home. 

Marian  Drury,  Marian  Drury, 

How  are  the  marshes  filled  with  you! 
Grand  Pre  dreams  of  your  coming  home, — 

Dreams  while  the  rainbirds  all  night  through, 

Far  in  the  uplands  calling  to  win  you, 

Tease  the  brown  dusk  on  the  marshes  wide; 

And  never  the  burning  heart  within  you 
Stirs  in  your  sleep  by  the  roving  tide. 

Bliss  Carman  fi86i- 


LOVE'S  ROSARY 

All  day  I  tell  my  rosary 

For  now  my  love's  away: 
To-morrow  he  shall  come  to  me 

About  the  break  of  day; 
A  rosary  of  twenty  hours. 

And  then  a  rose  of  May; 
A  rosary  of  fettered  flowers. 

And  then  a  holy-day. 

All  day  I  tell  my  rosary, 

My  rosary  of  hours: 
And  here's  a  flower  of  memory, 

And  here's  a  hope  of  flowers. 
And  here's  an  hour  that  yearns  with  pain 

For  old  forgotten  years. 
An  hour  of  loss,  an  hour  of  gain, 

And  then  a  shower  of  tears. 

All  day  I  tell  my  rosary. 

Because  my  love's  away; 

And  never  a  whisper  comes  to  me, 
And  never  a  word  to  say; 


looo  Poems  of  Love 

But,  if  it's  parting  more  endears, 

God  bring  him  back,  I  pray; 

Or  my  heart  will  break  in  the  darkness 
Before  the  break  of  day. 

All  day  I  tell  my  rosary, 

My  rosary  of  hours, 
Until  an  hour  shall  bring  to  me 

The  hope  of  all  the  flowers  .  .,  . 
I  tell  my  rosary  of  hours, 

For  O,  my  love's  away; 
And — a  dream  may  bring  him  back  to  me 

About  the  break  of  day. 

Alfred  Noyes  [1880- 


WHEN  SHE  COMES  HOME 

When  she  comes  home  again!     A  thousand  ways 

I  fashion,  to  myself,  the  tenderness 

Of  my  glad  welcome:  I  shall  tremble — yes; 

And  touch  her,  as  when  first  in  the  old  days 

I  touched  her  girlish  hand,  nor  dared  upraise 

Mine  eyes,  such  was  my  faint  heart's  sweet  distress 

Then  silence:  and  the  perfume  of  her  dress: 

The  room  will  sway  a  little,  and  a  haze 

Cloy  eyesight — soul-sight,  even— for  a  space; 

And  tears — -yes;  and  the  ache  here  in  the  throat. 

To  know  that  I  so  ill  deserve  the  place 

Her  arms  make  for  me;  and  the  sobbing  note 

I  stay  with  kisses,  ere  the  tearful  face 

Again  is  hidden  in  the  old  embrace. 

James  Whitcomb  Riley  [1852-1916] 


THE  TRAGEDY  OF  LOVE 

SONG 

My  silks  and  fine  array, 

My  smiles  and  languished  air, 
By  Love  are  driven  away; 

And  mournful  lean  Despair 
Brings  me  yew  to  deck  my  grave: 
Such  end  true  lovers  have. 

His  face  is  fair  as  heaven 

When  springing  buds  unfold: 
O  why  to  him  was't  given, 

Whose  heart  is  wintry  cold? 
His  breast  is  Love's  all-worshipped  tomb, 
Where  all  Love's  pilgrims  come. 

Bring  me  an  ax  and  spade, 

Bring  me  a  winding-sheet; 
When  I  my  grave  have  made. 

Let  winds  and  tempests  beat : 
Then  down  I'll  he,  as  cold  as  clay: 
True  love  doth  pass  away! 

William  Blake  [1757-1827] 

THE   FLIGHT  OF  LOVE. 

When  the  lamp  is  shattered 
The  light  in  the  dust  lies  dead — 
When  the  cloud  is  scattered. 
The  rainbow's  glory  is  shed. 
When  the  lute  is  broken. 
Sweet  tones  are  remembered  not; 
When  the  lips  have  spoken. 
Loved  accents  are  soon  forgot. 


I002  Poems  of  Love 

As  music  and  splendor 

Survive  not  the  lamp  and  the  lute^, 

The  heart's  echoes  render 

No  song  when  the  spirit  is  mute — 

No  song  but  sad  dirges, 

Like  the  wind  through  a  ruined  cell, 

Or  the  mournful  surges 

That  ring  the  dead  seaman's  knell. 

When  hearts  have  once  mingled, 

Love  first  leaves  the  well-built  nest; 

The  weak  one  is  singled 

To  endure  what  it  once  possessed. 

O  Love!  who  bewailest 

The  frailty  of  all  things  here, 

Why  choose  you  the  frailest 

For  your  cradle,  your  home,  and  your  bier? 

Its  passions  will  rock  thee 

As  the  storms  rock  the  ravens  on  high; 

Bright  reason  will  mock  thee, 

Like  the  sun  from  a  wintry  sky. 

From  thy  nest  every  rafter 

Will  rot,  and  thine  eagle  home 

Leave  thee  naked  to  laughter. 

When  leaves  fall  and  cold  winds  come. 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [179 2-1 82 2] 


"FAREWELL!  IF  EVER  FONDEST  PRAYER' 

Farewell!  if  ever  fondest  prayer 

For  other's  weal  availed  on  high, 
Mine  will  not  all  be  lost  in  air. 

But  waft  thy  name  beyond  the  sky. 
'Twere  vain  to  speak,  to  weep,  to  sigh : 

Oh!  more  than  tears  of  blood  can  tell. 
When  wrung  from  guilt's  expiring  eye, 

Are  in  that  word — Farewell! — Farewell! 


Porphyria's   Lover  1003 

These  lips  are  mute;  these  eyes  are  dry: 

But  in  my  breast  and  in  my  brain 
Awake  the  pangs  that  pass  not  by, 

The  thought  that  ne'er  shall  sleep  again. 
JNIy  soul  nor  deigns  nor  dares  complain, 

Though  grief  and  passion  there  rebel: 
I  only  know  we  loved  in  vain — 

I  only  feel — Farewell! — Farewell! 

George  Gordon  Byron  [17S8-1824] 

PORPHYRIA'S   LOVER 

The  rain  set  early  in  to-night, 

The  sullen  wind  was  soon  awake, 
It  tore  the  elm-tops  down  for  spite, 

And  did  its  worst  to  vex  the  lake: 

I  listened  with  heart  fit  to  break. 
When  glided  in  Porphyria;  straight 

She  shut  the  cold  out  and  the  storm. 
And  kneeled  and  made  the  cheerless  grate 

Blaze  up,  and  all  the  cottage  warm; 

Which  done,  she  rose,  and  from  her  form 
Withdrew  the  dripping  cloak  and  shawl, 

And  laid  her  soiled  gloves  by,  untied 
Her  hat  and  let  the  damp  hair  fall, 

And,  last,  she  sat  down  by  my  side 

And  called  me.    When  no  voice  replied. 
She  put  my  arm  about  her  waist. 

And  made  her  smooth  white  shoulder  bare, 
And  all  her  yellow  hair  displaced. 

And,  stooping,  made  my  cheek  lie  there, 

And  spread,  o'er  all,  her  yellow  hair. 
Murmuring  how  she  loved  me — she 

Too  weak,  for  all  her  heart's  endeavor, 
To  set  its  struggling  passion  free 

From  pride,  and  vainer  ties  dissever, 

And  give  herself  to  me  for  ever. 
But  passion  sometimes  would  prevail, 

Nor  could  to-night's  gay  feast  restrain 
A  sudden  thought  of  one  so  pale 


I004  Poems  of  Love 

For  love  of  her,  and  all  in  vain: 

So,  she  was  come  through  wind  and  rain. 
Be  sure  I  looked  up  at  her  eyes 

Happy  and  proud;  at  last  I  knew 
Porphyria  worshipped  me;  surprise 

Made  my  heart  swell,  and  still  it  grew 

While  I  debated  what  to  do. 
That  moment  she  was  mine,  mine,  fair, 

Perfectly  pure  and  good:  I  found 
A  thing  to  do,  and  all  her  hair 

In  one  long  yellow  string  I  wound 

Three  times  her  little  throat  around, 
And  strangled  her.    No  pain  felt  she; 

I  am  quite  sure  she  felt  no  pain. 
As  a  shut  bud  that  holds  a  bee, 

I  warily  oped  her  lids:  again 

Laughed  the  blue  eyes  without  a  stain. 
And  I  untightened  next  the  tress 

About  her  neck;  her  cheek  once  more 
Blushed  bright  beneath  my  burning  kiss: 

I  propped  her  head  up  as  before, 

Only,  this  time  my  shoulder  bore 
Her  head,  which  droops  upon  it  still: 

The  smiling  rosy  little  head, 
So  glad  it  has  its  utmost  will. 

That  all  it  scorned  at  once  is  fled. 

And  I,  its  love,  am  gained  instead! 
Porphyria 's  love:  she  guessed  not  hov/ 

Her  darling  one  wish  would  be  heard. 
And  thus  we  sit  together  now. 

And  all  night  long  we  have  not  stirred, 

And  yet  God  has  not  said  a  word ! 

Robert  Browning  [i8i2-i{ 

MODERN   BEAUTY 

I  AM  the  torch,  she  saith,  and  what  to  me 
If  the  moth  die  of  me?    I  am  the  flame 
Of  Beauty,  and  I  burn  that  all  may  see 
Beauty,  and  I  have  neither  joy  nor  shame, 


La   Belle   Dame  Sans   Mcrci        1005 

But  live  with  that  clear  Hght  of  perfect  fire 
Which  is  to  men  the  death  of  their  desire. 

I  am  Yseult  and  Helen,  I  have  seen 

Troy  burn,  and  the  most  loving  knight  lies  dead. 

The  world  has  been  my  mirror,  time  has  been 

My  breath  upon  the  glass;  and  men  have  said, 

Age  after  age,  in  rapture  and  despair. 

Love's  poor  few  words,  before  my  image  there. 

I  live,  and  am  immortal;  in  my  eyes 
The  sorrow  of  the  world,  and  on  my  lips 
The  joy  of  life,  mingle  to  make  me  wise; 
Yet  now  the  day  is  darkened  with  eclipse: 
Who  is  there  lives  for  beauty?    Still  am  I 
The  torch,  but  where's  the  moth  that  still  dares  die? 
Arthur  Symons  [1865- 


LA  BELLE   DAME   SANS   MERCI 

O  WHAT  can  ail  thee,  knight-at-arms. 
Alone  and  palely  loitering? 

The  sedge  has  withered  from  the  lake, 
And  no  birds  sing. 

0  what  can  ail  thee,  knight-at-arms 
So  haggard  and  so  woe-begone? 

The  squirrel's  granary  is  full. 
And  the  harvest's  done. 

1  see  a  lily  on  thy  brow 

With  anguish  moist  and  fever-dew, 
And  on  thy  cheeks  a  fading  rose 
Fast  withereth  too. 

I  met  a  lady  in  the  meads, 

Full  beautiful — a  fairy's  child, 
Her  hair  was  long,  her  foot  was  light, 
,    And  her  eyes  were  wild. 


ioo6  Poems  of  Love 

I  made  a  garland  for  her  head, 

And  bracelets  too,  and  fragrant  zone; 

She  looked  at  me  as  she  did  love, 
And  made  sweet  moan. 

I  set  her  on  my  pacing  steed 

And  nothing  else  saw  all  day  long, 

For  sidelong  would  she  bend,  and  sing 
A  fairy's  song. 

She  found  me  roots  of  relish  sweet. 
And  honey  wild  and  manna-dew, 

And  sure  in  language  strange  she  said, 
"I  love  thee  true." 

She  took  me  to  her  elfin  grot, 

And  there  she  wept  and  sighed  full  sore; 

And  there  I  shut  her  wild,  wild  eyes 
With  kisses  four. 

And  there  she  lulled  me  asleep, 

And  there  I  dreamed — Ah!  woe  betide! 

The  latest  dream  I  ever  dreamed 
On  the  cold  hill's  side. 

I  saw  pale  kings  and  princes  too, 

Pale  warriors,  death-pale  were  they  all: 

They  cried — "La  belle  dame  sans  merci 
Hath  thee  in  thrall!" 

I  saw  their  starved  lips  in  the  gloam 
With  horrid  warning  gaped  wide, 

And  I  awoke  and  found  me  here 
On  the  cold  hill's  side. 

And  this  is  why  I  sojourn  here 

Alone  and  palely  loitering, 
Though  the  sedge  is  withered  from  the  lake. 

And  no  birds  sing. 

John  Keats  [1795-1821] 


Tantalus — Texas  loo 


TANTALUS— TEXAS 

"If  I  may  trust  your  love,"  she  cried, 
"And  you  would  have  me  for  a  bride, 
Ride  over  yonder  plain,  and  bring 
Your  flask  full  from  the  Mustang  spring; 
Fly,  fast  as  western  eagle's  wing, 
O'er  the  Llano  Estacado!" 

He  heard,  and  bowed  without  a  word, 
His  gallant  steed  he  lightly  spurred! 
He  turned  his  face,  and  rode  away 
Toward  the  grave  of  dying  day. 
And  vanished  with  its  parting  ray 
On  the  Llano  Estacado. 

Night  came,  and  found  him  riding  on, 
Day  came,  and  still  he  rode  alone. 
He  spared  not  spur,  he  drew  not  rein, 
Across  that  broad,  unchanging  plain. 
Till  he  the  Mustang  spring  might  gain, 
On  the  Llano  Estacado. 

A  little  rest,  a  little  draught, 
Hot  from  his  hand,  and  quickly  quaffed, 
His  flask  was  filled,  and  then  he  turned. 
Once  more  his  steed  the  maguey  spurned, 
Once  more  the  sky  above  him  burned. 
On  the  Llano  Estacado. 

How  hot  the  quivering  landscape  glowed! 
His  brain  seemed  boiling  as  he  rode — 
Was  it  a  dream,  a  drunken  one. 
Or  was  he  really  riding  on? 
Was  that  a  skull  that  gleamed  and  shone 
On  the  Llano  Estacado? 

"Brave  steed  of  mine,  brave  steed! "  he  cried, 
"So  often  true,  so  often  tried, 


ioo8  Poems  of  Love 

Bear  up  a  little  longer  yet!" 
His  mouth  was  black  with  blood  and  sweat — 
Heaven!  how  he  longed  his  lips  to  wet 
On  the  Llano  Estacado. 

And  still,  within  his  breast,  he  held 
The  precious  flask  so  lately  filled. 
Oh,  for  a  drink!    But  well  he  knew 
If  empty  it  should  meet  her  view, 
Her  scorn — but  still  his  longing  grew 
On  the  Llano  Estacado. 

His  horse  went  dov/n.    He  wandered  on,  ■ 
Giddy,  blind,  beaten,  and  alone.  ■ 

While  upon  cushioned  couch  you  lie, 
Oh,  think  how  hard  it  is  to  die. 
Beneath  the  cruel,  cloudless  sky 
On  the  Llano  Estacado. 

At  last  he  staggered,  stumbled,  fell. 
His  day  was  done,  he  knew  full  well, 
And  raising  to  his  lips  the  flask, 
The  end,  the  object  of  his  task. 
Drank  to  her-^more  she  could  not  ask. 
Ah,  the  Llano  Estacado! 

That  night  in  the  Presidio, 
Beneath  the  torchlight's  wavy  glow. 
She  danced — and  never  thought  of  him, 
The  victim  of  a  woman's  whim, 
Lying,  with  face  upturned  and  grim, 
On  the  Llano  Estacado. 

Joaquin  Miller  [1841-1913] 

ENCHAINMENT 

I  WENT  to  her  who  loveth  me  no  more, 

And  prayed  her  bear  with  me,  if  so  she  might; 

For  I  had  found  day  after  day  too  sore. 
And  tears  that  would  not  cease  night  after  night. 


Auld   Robin   Gray  1009 

Arid  s6  T  pf ayefd  her,  weeping,  that  she  bore 
To  let  me  be  with  her  a  Httle;  yea. 

To  soothe  myself  a  little  with  her  sight, 
Who  loved  me  once,  ah!  many  a  night  and  day. 

Then  she  who  loveth  me  no  more,  maybe 
•    She  pitied  somewhat:  and  I  took  a  chain 
To  bind  myself  to  her,  and  her  to  me; 

Yea,  so  that  I  might  call  her  mine  again. 
Lo!  she  forbade  me  not;  but  I  and  she 
Fettered  her  fair  limbs,  and  her  neck  more  fair, 
■^^'     Chained  the  fair  wasted  white  of  love's  domain. 
And  put  gold  fetters  on  her  golden  hair. 

Oh!  the  vain  joy  it  is  to  see  her  lie 

Beside  me  once  again;  beyond  release. 
Her  hair,  her  hand,  her  body,  till  she  die, 

All  mine,  for  me  to  do  with  what  I  please! 
For,  after  all,  I  find  no  chain  whereby 
To  chain  her  heart  to  love  me  as  before, 

Nor  fetter  for  her  lips,  to  make  them  cease 
From  saying  still  she  loveth  me  no  more. 

Arthur  O'Shaugknessy  [1844-1881] 


AULD   ROBIN   GRAY 

WiiEX  the  sheep  are  in  the  fauld,  and  the  kye  at  hame, 
And  a'  the  warld  to  rest  are  gane, 
The  waes  o'  my  heart  fa'  in  showers  frae  my  e'e, 
While  my  gudeman  lies  sound  by  me. 

Young  Jamie  lo'ed  me  weel,  and  sought  me  for  his  bride; 
But  saving  a  croun  he  had  naething  else  beside: 
To  make  the  croun  a  pund,  young  Jamie  gaed  to  sea; 
And  the  croun  and  the  pund  were  baith  for  me. 

He  hadna  been  awa'  a  week  but  only  twa. 
When  my  father  brak  his  arm,  and  the  kye  was  stown  awa'; 
My  mother  she  fell  sick, — and  my  Jamie  at  the  sea — 
And  auld  Robin  Gray  came  a-courtin'  me. 


lOTO 


Poems  of  Love 


My  father  couldna  work,  and  my  mother  couldna  spin; 
I  toiled  day  and  night,  but  their  bread  I  couldna  win; 
Auld  Rob  maintained  them  baith,  and  wi'  tears  in  his  e'e 
Said,  "Jennie,  for  their  sakes,  O,  marry  me!" 

My  heart  it  said  nay;  I  looked  for  Jamie  back; 
But  the  wind  it  blew  high,  and  the  ship  it  was  a  wrack; 
His  ship  it  was  a  wrack — Why  didna  Jamie  dee? 
Or  why  do  I  live  to  cry,  Wae's  me! 

My  father  urged  me  sair:  my  mother  didna  speak; 
But  she  looked  in  my  face  till  my  heart  was  like  to  break: 
They  gi'ed  him  my  hand,  though  my  heart  was  in  the  sea; 
Sae  auld  Robin  Gray  he  was  gudeman  to  me. 

I  hadna  been  a  wife  a  week  but  only  four. 
When  mournfu'  as  I  sat  on  the  stane  at  the  door, 
I  saw  my  Jamie's  wraith, — for  I  couldna  think  it  he, 
Till  he  said,  "I'm  come  hame  to  marry  thee." 

O,  sair,  sair  did  we  greet,  and  muckle  did  we  say; 
We  took  but  ae  kiss,  and  we  tore  ourselves  away: 
I  wish  that  I  were  dead,  but  I'm  no- like  to  dee; 
And  why  was  I  born  to  say,  Wae's  me! 

I  gang  like  a  ghaist,  and  I  carena  to  spin; 
I  daurna  think  on  Jamie,  for  that  wad  be  a  sin; 
But  I'll  do  my  best  a  gude  wife  aye  to  be, 
For  auld  Robin  Gray  he  is  kind  unto  me. 

Aujic  Barnard  [1750-1825] 

LOST  LIGHT 

My  heart  is  chilled  and  my  pulse  is  slow,  ■-,',[ 

But  often  and  often  wiU  memory  go,  ,  ,T 

Like  a  blind  child  lost  in  a  waste  of  snow,  ,/-. 
Back  to  the  days  when  I  loved  you  so — 

The  beautiful  long  ago.  '    ;f  oH 

I  sit  here  dreaming  them  through  and  through,       t/ 
The  blissful  moments  I  shared  with  you —  1/. 


A  Sigh  I  on 

The  sweet,  sweet  days  when  our  love  was  new, 
When  I  was  trustful  and  you  were  true — 
Beautiful  days,  but  few! 

Blest  or  wretched,  fettered  or  free, 
Why  should  I  care  how  your  life  may  be, 
Or  whether  you  wander  by  land  or  sea? 
I  only  know  you  are  dead  to  me, 
Ever  and  hopelessly. 

Oh,  how  often  at  day's  decline 
I  pushed  from  my  window  the  curtaining  vine, 
To  see  from  your  lattice  the  lamp-light  shine — 
Type  of  a  message  that,  half  divine, 

Flashed  from  your  heart  to  mine. 

Once  more  the  starlight  is  silvering  all; 
The  roses  sleep  by  the  garden  wall; 
The  night  bird  warbles  his  madrigal. 
And  I  hear  again  through  the  sweet  air  fall 
The  evening  bugle-call. 

'-'■"-1 
But  summers  will  vanish  and  years  will  wane, 

And  bring  no  light  to  your  window  pane;        .ult  IlitP. 

Nor  gracious  sunshine  nor  patient  rain 

Can  bring  dead  love  back  to  life  again: 

I  call  up  the  past  in  vain. 

My  heart  is  heavy,  my  heart  is  old. 
And  that  proves  dross  which  I  counted  gold; 
I  watch  no  longer  your  curtain's  fold; 
The  window  is  dark  and  the  night  is  cold. 
And  the  story  forever  told. 

Elizabelh  Akcrs  [183 2-19 ii] 

A   SIGH 

old  orll  J  It  was  nothing  but  a  rose  I  gave  her,-— 
Nothing  but  a  rose 
Any  wind  might  rob  of  half  its  saVor, 
Any  wind  that  blows. 


ion  Poems  of   Love 

When  she  took  it  from  my  trembling  fingers 

With  a  hand  as  chill  — 
Ah,  the  flying  touch  upon  them  hngers, 

Stays,  and  thrills  them  still! 

Withered,  faded,  pressed  between  the  pages. 

Crumpled  fold  on  fold, — 
Once  it  lay  upon  her  breast,  and  ages 

Cannot  make  it  old! 

Harriet  PrescoU  Spojford     [1835- 


HEREAFTER 

Love,  when  all  the  years  are  silent,  vanished  quite  and  laid 

to  rest, 
When  you  and  I  are  sleeping,  folded  breathless  breast  to 

breast, 
When  no  morrow  is  before  us,  and  the  long  grass  tosses  o'er 

us, 
And  our  grave  remains  forgotten,  or  by  alien  footsteps 

pressed — 

Still  that  love  of  ours  will  linger,  that  great  love  enrich  the 

earth. 
Sunshine  in  the  heavenly  azure,  breezes  blowing  joyous 

mirth ; 
Fragrance   fanning  off  from   flowers,   melody  of  summer 

showers. 
Sparkle  of  the  spicy  wood-fires  round  the  happy  autumn 

hearth. 

That's  our  love.  But  you  and  I,  dear — shall  we  linger  with 
it  yet. 

Mingled  in  one  dew-drop,  tangled  in  one  sunbeam's  golden 
net — 

On  the  violet's  purple  bosom,  I  the  sheen,  but  you  the  blos- 
som. 

Stream  on  sunset  winds,  and  be  the  haze  with  which  some 
hiU  is  wet? 


Endymion  ic>i3 

Or,   beloved — if  ascending — when   we   have  endowed   the 

world 
With  the  best  bloom  of  our  being,  whither  will  our  way  be 

whirled. 
Through  what  vast  and  starry  spaces,  toward  what  awful, 

holy  places. 
With  a  white  light  on  our  faces,  spirit  over  spirit  furled? 

Only  this  our  yearning  answers :  wheresoe'er  that  way  defile, 
Not  a  film  shall  part  us  through  the  eons  of  that  mighty 

while. 
In  the  fair  eternal  weather,  even  as  phantoms  still  together. 
Floating,  floating,  one  forever,  in  the  hght  of  God's  great 

smile. 

Harriet  Prescott  Spojford  [1835- 


ENDYMION 

The  apple  trees  are  hung  with  gold, 
And  birds  are  loud  in  Arcady, 

The  sheep  lie  bleating  in  the  fold, 

The  wild  goat  runs  across  the  wold, 

But  yesterday  his  love  he  tola, 
I  know  he  will  come  back  to  me. 

O  rising  moon!    O  Lady  moon! 

Be  you  my  lover's  sentinel,  "  '' 

You  cannot  choose  but  know  him  well, 

For  he  is  shod  with  purple  shoon. 

You  cannot  choose  but  know  my  love, 
For  he  a  shepherd's  crook  doth  bear, 

And  he  is  soft  as  any  dove, 

And  brown  and  curly  is  his  hair. 

The  turtle  now  has  ceased  to  call 
Upon  her  crimson-footed  groom. 

The  gray  wolf  prowls  about  the  stall, 

The  lily's  singing  seneschal 

Sleeps  in  the  lily-bell,  and  all 
The  violet  hills  are  lost  in  gloom. 


IOI4  Poems  of  Love 

0  risen  moon!    O  holy  moon!  n  i 
Stand  on  the  top  of  HeHce, 

And  if  my  own  true  love  you  see,  ,,-  lijjW 

Ah!  if  you  see  the  purple  shoon,  fv,- 

,iUi7,'L     The  hazel  crook,  the  lad's  brown  hair,  i  j; 

The  goat-skin  wrapped  about  his  arm, 
Tell  him  that  I  am  waiting  where 

The  rushlight  glimmers  in  the  Farm. 

:.  .iaO 
The  falling  dew  is  cold  and  chill,  .  yr 

And  no  bird  sings  in  Arcady, 
The  Uttle  fauns  have  left  the  hill, 
Ji.j;g  c.    Even  the  tired  daffodil 

Has  closed  its  gilded  doors,  and  still 

My  lover  comes  not  back  to  me. 
False  moon!    False  moon!    0  waning  moon! 

Where  is  my  own  true  lover  gone. 

Where  are  the  lips  vermilion. 
The  shepherd's  crook,  the  purple  shoon? 
Why  spread  that  silver  pavilion. 

Why  wear  that  veil  of  drifting  mist? 
Ah!  thou  hast  young  Endymion, 

Thou  hast  the  lips  that  should  be  kissed ! 

Oscar  Wilde  [1856-1900] 

"LOVE  IS  A  TERRIBLE  THING" 

1  WENT  out  to  the  farthest  meadow, 
I  lay  down  in  the  deepest  shadow; 

And  I  said  unto  the  earth,"  Hold  me," 
And  unto  the  night,  "O  enfold  me!" 

And  unto  the  wind  petulantly 

I  cried,  "You  know  not  for  you  are  free!" 

And  I  begged  the  little  leaves  to  lean 
Low  and  together  for  a  safe  screen; 

Then  to  the  stars  I  told  my  tale: 

"That  is  my  home-light,  there  in  the  vale, 

"And  0,  I  know  that  I  shall  return. 

But  let  me  lie  first  mid  the  unfeeling  fern; 


The   Ballad  of  the  Angel  1015 

"For  there  is  a  flame  that  has  blown  too  near, 
And  there  is  a  name  that  has  grown  too  dear, 
And  there  is  a  fear"  .... 

And  to  the  still  hills  and  cool  earth  and  far  sky  I  made  moan, 
"The  heart  in  my  bosom  is  not  my  own! 

"O  would  I  were  free  as  the  wind  on  wing; 
Love  is  a  terrible  thing!" 

Grace  Fallow  Norton  [i8    - 

THE  BALLAD   OF  THE  ANGEL 

"Who  is  it  knocking  in  the  night, 

That  fain  would  enter  in?" 
"The  ghost  of  Lost  Delight  am  I, 

The  sin  you  would  not  sin. 
Who  comes  to  look  in  your  two  eyes 

And  see  what  might  have  been." 

"Oh,  long  ago  and  long  ago 

I  cast  you  forth,"  he  said, 
"For  that  your  eyes  were  all  too  blue, 

Your  laughing  mouth  too  red, 
And  my  torn  soul  was  tangled  in 

The  tresses  of  your  head." 

"Now  mind  you  with  what  bitter  words 

You  cast  me  forth  from  you?  " 
"I  bade  you  back  to  that  fair  Hell 

From  whence  your  breath  you  drew. 
And  with  great  blows  I  broke  my  heart 

Lest  it  might  follow  too. 

"Yea,  from  the  grasp  of  your  white  hands 

I  freed  my  hands  that  day, 
And  have  I  not  climbed  near  to  God 

As  these  His  henchmen  may?" 
"Ah,  man, — ah,  man!  'twas  my  two  hands 

That  led  you  all  the  way." 


ioi6  Poems  of  Love 

"I  hid  my  eyes  from  your  two  eyes  _  .^^[^  lo'i" 
That  they  might  see  aright."        ,.  ^j  ^^^^^  ^^j., 

"Yet  think  you  'twas  a  star  that  led  ..-ofjj  fja/. 
Your  feet  from  height  to  height? 

It  was  the  fiame  of  my  two  eyes  ,r[j  oi  briA 

That  drew  you  through  the  night."     ,  ,,!   ,rlT 

With  trembling  hands  he  threw  the  door^'ir.'  <.j  ■ 
Then  fell  upon  his  knee:  -  a\  gvod 

■    "O,  Vision  armed  and  cloaked  in  light, 
Why  do  you  honor  me?  " 
"The  Angel  of  your  Strength  am  I 
Who  was  your  sin,"  quoth  she. 

"For  that  you  slew  me  long  ago 
My  hands  have  raised  you  high; 

For  that  mine  eyes  you  closed,  mine  eyes 
Are  lights  to  lead  you  by; 

And  'tis  my  touch  shall  swing  the  gates 
Of  Heaven  when  you  die!" 

Theodosia  Garrison    [1S74- 


"LOVE   CAME  BACK  AT   FALL  O'  PEW" 

Love  came  back  at  fall  o'  dew, 

Playing  his  old  part; 
But  I  had  a  word  or  two, 

That  would  break  his  heart. 

"He  who  comes  at  candlelight, 
•-'•"  That  should  come  before, 
Must  betake  him  to  the  night 
From  a  barred  door." 

This  the  word  that  made  us  part 

In  the  fall  o'  dew; 
This  the  word  that  brake  his  heart — 

Yet  it  brake  mine,  too! 

LizeUe  Woodworth  Reese  [1856- 


Outgrown  1017 

bsiB.j'nuq .,        I  SHALL  NOT  CARE  f'^- 

When  I  am  dead  and  over  me  bright  April  ,  ^ 

Shakes  out  her  rain-drenched  hair, 
Though  you  should  lean  above  me  broken-hearted, 

I  shall  not  care. 


iiH 


I  shall  have  peace,  as  leafy  trees  are  peaceful 

When  rain  bends  down  the  bough, 
And  I  shall  be  more  silent  and  cold-hearted 

Than  you  are  now.  Sara  Teasdalc  [1884- 

OUTGROWN 

')d  lovri  li 

Nay,  you  wrong  her,  my  friend,  she's  not  fickle;  her  love  she  ^ 

has  simply  outgrown: 
One  can  read  the  whole  matter,  translating  her  heart  by  the 

light  of  one's  own. 

Can  you  bear  me  to  talk  with  you  frankly?    There  is  much . 

that  my  heart  woidd  say; 
And  you  know  we  were  children  together,  have  quarreled 

and  "made  up"  in  play. 

And  so,  for  the  sake  of  old  friendship,  I  ventur,e  to  tell  you, , 
the  truth,—  „ri  .i,,.;/  -.rft 

As  plainly,  perhaps,  and  as  bluntly,  as  I  might  in  our  earlier 
youth. 

Five  summers  ago,  when  you  wooed  her,  you  stood  on  the 

selfsame  plane, 
Face  to  face,  heart  to  heart,  never  dreaming  your  souls 

should  be  parted  again. 

She  loved  you  at  that  time  entirely,  in  the  bloom  of  her  life's 

early  May; 
And  it  is  not  her  fault,  I  repeat  it,  that  she  does  not  love  you' 

to-day. 

Nature  never  stands  still,  nor  souls  either:  they  ever  go  up 

or  go  down ; 
And  hers  has  been  steadily  soaring — but  how  has  it  been 

with  your  own? 


ioi8  Poems   of  Love 

She  has  struggled  and  yearned  and  aspired,  grown  purer  and 
wiser  each  year: 

The  stars  are  not  farther  above  you  in  yon  luminous  atmos- 
phere ! 

For  she  whom  you  crowned  with  fresh  roses,  down  yonder, 

five  summers  ago, 
Has  learned  that  the  first  of  our  duties  to  God  and  ourselves 

is  to  grow. 

Her  eyes  they  are  sweeter  and  calmer:  but  their  vision  is 

clearer  as  well; 
Her  voice  has  a  tenderer  cadence,  but  is  pure  as  a  silver  bell. 

Her  face  has  the  look  worn  by  those  who  with  God  and  his 

angels  have  talked: 
The  white  robes  she  wears  are  less  white  than  the  spirits 

with  whom  she  has  walked. 

And  you?    Have  you  aimed  at  the  highest?    Have  you,  too, 

aspired  and  prayed? 
Have  you  looked  upon  evil  unsullied?    Have  you  conquered 

it  undismayed? 

Have  you,  too,  grown  purer  and  wiser,  as  the  months  and 

the  years  have  rolled  on? 
Did  you  meet  her  this  morning  rejoicing  in  the  triumph  of 

victory  won? 

Nay,  hear  me!    The  truth  cannot  harm  you.    When  to-day 

in  her  presence  you  stood 
Was  the  hand  that  you  gave  her  as  white  and  clean  as  that 

of  her  womanhood? 

Go  measure  yourself  by  her  standard;  look  back  on  the  years 

that  have  fled: 
Then  ask,  if  you  need,  why  she  tells  you  that  the  love  of  her 

girlhood  is  dead.  'jsb-o^ 

She  cannot  look  down  to  her  lover:  her  love,  like  her  soul, 

aspires; 
He  must  stand  by  her  side,  or  above  her,  who  would  kindle 

its  holy  fires. 


A  Tragedy  1019 

Now  farewell!    For  the  sake  of  old  friendship  I  have  ven- 
tured to  tell  you  the  truth, 

As  plainly,  perhaps,  and  as  bluntly  as  I  might  in  our  earlier 
youth. 

Julia  C.  R.  Dorr  [1825-1913] 


A  TRAGEDY 

Among  his  books  he  sits  all  day 

To  think  and  read  and  write; 
He  does  not  smell  the  new-mown  hay, 

The  roses  red  and  white. 

I  walk  among  them  all  alone, 

His  silly,  stupid  wife; 
The  world  seems  tasteless,  dead  and  done — 

An  empty  thing  is  life. 

At  night  his  window  casts  a  square 

Of  light  upon  the  lawn; 
I  sometimes  walk  and  watch  it  there 

Until  the  chill  of  dawn. 

I  have  no  brain  to  understand 

The  books  he  loves  to  read; 
I  only  have  a  heart  and  hand 

He  does  not  seiem  to  need. 

■  V/JIIJ  ill  i.- 

He  calls  me  "Child" — lays  on  my  hair 

Thin  fingers,  cold  and  mild; 
Oh!  God  of  Love,  who  answers  prayer, 

I  wish  I  were  a  child! 

And  no  one  sees  and  no  one  knows 

(He  least  would  know  or  see). 
That  ere  Love  gathers  next  year's  rose 

Death  will  have  gathered  me. 

Edith  Nc:>bit  [1858- 


I020  Poems   of  Love 


LEFT  BEHIND 

It  was  the  autumn  of  the  year; 
The  strawberry-leaves  were  red  and  sere; 
October's  airs  were  fresh  and  chill, 
When,  pausing  on  the  windy  hill, 
The  hill  that  overlooks  the  sea, 
You  talked  confidingly  to  me, — 
Me  whom  your  keen,  artistic  sight 
Has  not  yet  learned  to  read  aright, 
Since  I  have  veiled  my  heart  from  you, 
And  loved  you  better  than  you  knew. 

You  told  me  of  your  toilsome  past; 
The  tardy  honors  won  at  last, 
The  trials  borne,  the  conciuests  gained, 
The  longed-for  boon  of  Fame  attained ; 
I  knew  that  every  victory 
But  lifted  you  away  from  me, 
That  every  step  of  high  emprise 
But  left  me  lowlier  in  your  eyes; 
I  watched  the  distance  as  it  grew, 
And  loved  you  better  than  you  knew. 

You  did  not  see  the  bitter  trace 
Of  anguish  sweep  across  my  face; 
You  did  not  hear  my  proud  heart  beat, 
Heavy  and  slow,  beneath  your  feet; 
You  thought  of  triumphs  still  unwon, 
Of  glorious  deeds  as  yet  undone; 
And  I,  the  while  you  talked  to  me, 
I  watched  the  gulls  float  lonesomely, 
Till  lost  amid  the  hungry  blue. 
And  loved  you  better  than  you  knew. 

You  walk  the  sunny  side  of  fate; 

The  wise  world  smiles,  and  calls  you  great; 

The  golden  fruitage  of  success 

Drops  at  your  feet  in  plenteousness; 

And  you  have  blessings  manifold: — 

Renown  and  power  and  friends  and  gold, — 


The   Forsaken   Merman  102 1 

They  build  a  wall  between  us  twain, 
Which  may  not  be  thrown  down  again, 
Alas!  for  I,  the  long  years  through, 
Have  loved  you  better  than  you  knew. 

Your  life's  proud  aim,  your  art's  high  truth, 
Have  kept  the  promise  of  your  youth; 
And  while  you  won  the  crown,  which  now 
Breaks  into  bloom  upon  your  brow. 
My  soul  cried  strongly  out  to  you 
Across  the  ocean's  yearning  blue. 
While,  unremembered  and  afar, 
I  watched  you,  as  I  watch  a  star 
Through  darkness  struggling  into  view, 
And  loved  you  better  than  you  knew. 

I  used  to  dream  in  all  these  years 

Of  patient  faith  and  silent  tears, 

That  Love's  strong  hand  would  put  aside 

The  barriers  of  place  and  pride. 

Would  reach  the  pathless  darkness  through, 

And  draw  me  softly  up  to  you; 

But  that  is  past.    If  you  should  stray 

Beside  my  grave,  some  future  day. 

Perchance  the  violets  o'er  my  dust 

Will  half  betray  their  buried  trust, 

And  say,  their  blue  eyes  full  of  dew, 

"She  loved  you  better  than  you  knew." 

Elizabeth  A  kers  [  1 83  2- 1  g  1 1  ] 

THE  FORSAKEN  MERMAN 

Come,  dear  children,  let  us  away; 

Down  and  away  below! 
Now  my  brothers  call  from  the  bay. 
Now  the  great  winds  shoreward  blow, 
Now  the  salt  tides  seaward  flow; 
Now  the  wild  white  horses  play, 
Champ  and  chafe  and  toss  in  the  spray. 

Children  dear,  let  us  away! 
This  way,  this  way! 


I02  2  >■'    Poems  of  Love 

Call  her  once  before  you  go. — 

Call  once  yet! 
In  a  voice  that  she  will  know: 

"Margaret!  Margaret!" 
Children's  voices  should  be  dear 
(Call  once  more)  to  a  mother's  ear; 
Children's  voices,  wild  with  pain, — 

Surely  she  will  come  again! 
Call  her  once  and  come  away; 

This  way,  this  way! 
"Mother  dear,  we  cannot -stay! 
The  wild  white  horses  foam  and  fret." 

Margaret!  Margaret! 

Come,  dear  children,  come  away  down; 

Call  no  more! 
One  last  look  at  the  white-walled  town. 
And  the  httle  gray  church  on  the  windy  shore; 

Then  come  down! 
She  will  not  come,  though  you  call  all  day; 
.    Come  away,  come  away! 

Children  dear,  was  it  yesterday 

We  heard  the  sweet  bells  over  the  bay? 

In  the  caverns  where  we  lay, 

Through  the  surf  and  through  the  swell, 

The  far-off  sound  of  a  silver  bell? 

Sand-strewn  caverns,  cool  and  deep. 

Where  the  winds  are  all  asleep; 

Where  the  spent  lights  quiver  and  gleam, 

Where  the  salt  weed  sways  in  the  stream, 

Where  the  sea-beasts,  ranged  all  round, 

Feed  in  the  ooze  of  their  pasture-ground; 

Where  the  sea-snakes  coil  and  twine, 

Dry  their  mail  and  bask  in  the  brine; 

Where  great  whales  come  sailing  by, 

Sail  and  sail,  with  unshut  eye, 

Round  the  world  for  ever  and  aye?  .i  ■ 

When  did  music  come  this  way? 

Children  dear,  was  it  yesterday? 


The   Forsaken   Merman  iO-3 

Children  dear,  was  it  yesterday 
(Call  yet  once)  that  she  went  away? 
Once  she  sate  with  you  and  me,  (t-j 

On  a  red  gold  throne  in  the  heart  of  the  sea, 
And  the  youngest  sate  on  her  knee. 
She  combed  its  bright  hair,  and  she  tended  it  well, 
When  down  swimg  the  sound  of  the  far-off  bell. 
She  sighed,  she  looked  up  through  the  clear  green  sea; 
She  said:  "I  must  go,  for  my  kinsfolk  pray 
In  the  little  gray  church  on  the  shore  to-day. 
'Twill  be  Easter-time  in  the  world, — ah  me! 
And  I  lose  my  poor  soul,  Merman,  here  with  thee." 
I  said:  "Go  up,  dear  heart,  through  the  waves: 
Say  thy  prayer,  and  come  back  to  the  kind  sea-caves!" 
She  smiled,  she  went  up  through  the  surf  in  the  bay. 
Children  dear,  was  it  yesterday? 

Children  dear,  were  we  long  alone? 
"The  sea  grows  stormy,  the  little  ones  moan; 
Long  prayers,"  I  said,  "in  the  world  they  say; 
Come! "  I  said,  and  we  rose  through  the  surf  in  the  bay. 
We  went  up  the  beach,  by  the  sandy  down 
Where  the  sea-stocks  bloom,  to  the  white-walled  town,^ 
Through  the  narrow  paved  streets,  where  all  was  still. 
To  the  little  gray  church  on  the  windy  hill. 
From  the  church  came  a  murmur  of  folk  at  their  prayers, 
But  we  stood  without  in  the  cold  blowing  airs. 
We    climbed    on    the   graves,    on    the    stones  worn   with 

rains. 
And   we    gazed    up    the   aisle   through   the   small   leaded 
panes. 
She  sate  by  the  pillar;  we  saw  her  clear:  •/• 

"Margaret,  hist!  come  quick,  we  are  here! 
Dear  heart,"  I  said,  "we  are  long  alone; 
The  sea  grows  stormy,  the  little  ones  moan." 
But,  ah,  she  gave  me  never  a  look. 
For  her  eyes  were  sealed  to  the  holy  book! 

Loud  prays  the  priest;  shut  stands  the  door. 
Come  away,  children,  call  no  more! 
Come  away,  come  down,  call  no  more! 


I024  -'f' Poems  of  Love 

Down,  down,  down!  :,..->■- ij-n"^ 

Down  to  the  depths  of  the  sea! 
She  sits  at  her  wheel  in  the  humming  town,  •. ) 

Singing  most  joyfully.  O 

Hark  what  she  sings:  "O  joy,  O  joy. 
From  the  humming  street,  and  the  child  with  its  toy!     - 
From  the  priest,  and  the  bell,  and  the  holy  well; 

From  the  wheel  where  I  spun. 

And  the  blessed  light  of  the  sun!" 

And  so  she  sings  her  fill. 

Singing  most  joyfully. 

Till  the  spindle  drops  from  her  hand, 

And  the  whizzing  wheel  stands  still. 
She  steals  to  the  window,  and  looks  at  the  sand, 

And  over  the  sand  at  the  sea; 

And  her  eyes  are  set  in  a  stare, 

And  anon  there  breaks  a  sigh. 

And  anon  there  drops  a  tear. 

From  a  sorrow-clouded  eye. 

And  a  heart  sorrow-laden, 
A  long,  long  sigh; 
For  the  cold  strange  eyes  of  a  little  Mermaiden, 
And  the  gleam  of  her  golden  hair. 

Come  away,  away,  children;  [' 

Come,  children,' come  down!  ' 

The  hoarse  wind  blows  colder; 
'-'  Lights  shine  in  the  town.  / 

She  will  start  from  her  slumber 
When  gusts  shake  the  door; 
She  will  hear  the  winds  howling, 
Will  hear  the  waves  roar.  i  ; 

We  shall  see,  while  above  us  1/  '* 

The  waves  roar  and  whirl,  ...  .j.jGC 

A  ceiling  of  amber,  Bsa  arlT- 

A  pavement  of  pearl.  '         " 

Singing:  "Here  came  a  mortal, 
But  faithless  was  she! 
And  alone  dwell  for  ever 
The  kings  of  the  sea." 


The  Portrait  1025 

But,  children,  at  midnight, 

When  soft  the  winds  blow, 

When  clear  falls  the  moonlight,  ,  j 

When  spring-tides  are  low ; 

When  sweet  airs  come  seaward 

From  heaths  starred  with  broom, 

And  high  rocks  throw  mildly 

On  the  blanched  sands  a  gloom;  j 

Up  the  still,  glistening  beaches, 

Up  the  creeks  we  will  hie; 

Over  banks  of  bright  seaweed 

The  ebb-tide  leaves  dry. 

We  will  gaze,  from  the  sand-hills, 

At  the  white,  sleeping  town ; 

At  the  church  on  the  hillside — 

And  then  come  back  down. 

Singing:  "There  dwells  a  loved  one, 

But  cruel  is  she! 

She  left  lonely  for  ever 

The  kings  of  the  sea." 

Matthew  Arnold  [1822-1888] 


THE  PORTRAIT 

Midnight  past!    Not  a  sound  of  aught 

Through  the  silent  house,  but  the  wind  at  his  prayers. 
I  sat  by  the  dying  fire,  and  thought 

Of  the  dear  dead  woman  up-stairs. 

A  night  of  tears!  for  the  gusty  rain 

Had  ceased,  but  the  eaves  were  dripping  yet; 

And  the  moon  looked  forth,  as  though  in  pain, 
With  her  face  all  white  and  wet: 

Nobody  with  me,  m}'  watch  to  keep. 

But  the  friend  of  my  bosom,  the  man  I  love: 

And  grief  had  sent  him  fast  to  sleep 
In  the  chamber  up  above. 


I026  Poems  of  Love 

Nobody  else,  in  the  country  place 

All  round,  that  knew  of  my  loss  beside. 

But  the  good  young  Priest  with  the  Raphael-face, 
Who  confessed  her  when  she  died. 

That  good  young  Priest  is  of  gentle  nerve, 
And  my  grief  had  moved  him  beyond  control; 

For  his  lip  grew  white,  as  I  could  observe, 
When  he  speeded  her  parting  soul. 

I  sat  by  the  dreary  hearth  alone: 

I  thought  of  the  pleasant  days  of  yore: 

I  said,  "The  staff  of  my  life  is  gone: 
The  woman  I  loved  is  no  more. 

"On  her  cold  dead  bosom  my  portrait  lies. 
Which  next  to  her  heart  she  used  to  wear — 

Haunting  it  o'er  with  her  tender  eyes 
When  my  own  face  was  not  there. 

"It  is  set  all  round  with  rubies  red, 
And  pearls  Avhich  a  Peri  might  have  kept. 

For  each  rub}'  there  my  heart  hath  bled: 
For  each  pearl  my  eyes  have  wept." 

And  I  said — "The  thing  is  precious  to  me: 

They  will  bury  her  soon  in  the  churchyard  clay; 

It  lies  on  her  heart,  and  lost  must  be 
If  I  do  not  take  it  away." 

I  lighted  my  lamp  at  the  dying  flame,     ''^  ^'■'^  in'^'sn 
And  crept  up  the  stairs  that  creaked  for  fright,' 

Till  into  the  chamber  of  death  I  came, 
Where  she  lay  all  in  white. 

The  moon  shone  over  her  winding-sheet. 
There  stark  she  lay  on  her  carven  bed: 

Seven  burning  tapers  about  her  feet,  ■  ■jt-iy..  i-'iu 

And  seven  about  her  head.  idmudi  grf}  nl 


The   Portrait  loi' 

As  I  stretched  my  hand,  I  held  my  breath; 

I  turned  as  I  drew  the  curtains  apart: 
I  dared  not  look  on  the  face  of  death: 

I  knew  where  to  find  her  heart. 

I  thought  at  first,  as  my  touch  fell  there, 
It  had  warmed  that  heart  to  life,  with  love; 

For  the  thing  I  touched  was  warm,  I  swear, 
And  I  could  feel  it  move. 

'Twas  the  hand  of  a  man,  that  was  moving  slow 
O'er  the  heart  of  the  dead, — from  the  other  side: 

And  at  once  the  sweat  broke  over  my  brow: 
"Who  is  robbing  the  corpse?"  I  cried. 

Opposite  me  by  the  tapers'  light, 

The  friend  of  my  bosom,  the  man  I  loved, 

Stood  over  the  corpse,  and  all  as  white, 
And  neither  of  us  moved. 

"^^^lat  do  you  here,  my  friend?".  .  .     The  man 
Looked  first  at  me,  and  then  at  the  dead. 

"There  is  a  portrait  here,"  he  began: 
"There  is.    It  is  mine,"  I  said. 

Said  the  friend  of  my  bosom,  "Yours,  no  doubt;, 

The  portrait  was,  till  a  month  ago, 
When  this  suffering  angel  took  that  out, 

And  placed  mine  there,  I  know." 

"This  woman,  she  loved  me  well,"  said  I. 

"A  month  ago,"  said  my  friend  to  me: 
"And  in  your  throat,"  I  groaned,  "yoii  lie!" 

He  answered,  .  .  .  "Let  us  see." 

"Enough!"  I  returned,  "let  the  dead  decide: 

And  whosesoever  the  portrait  prove, 
His  shall  it  be,  when  the  cause  is  tried. 

Where  Death  is  arraigned  by  Love." 


I02  8  Poems  of  Love 

We  found  the  pro  trait  there,  in  its  place: 

We  opened  it  by  the  tapers'  shine: 
The  gems  were  all  unchanged:  the  face 

Was — neither  his  nor  mine. 

"One  nail  drives  out  another,  at  least! 

The  face  of  the  portrait  there,"  I  cried, 
"Is  our  friend's,  the  Raphael-faced  young  Priest, 

Who  confessed  her  when  she  died." 

The  setting  is  all  of  rubies  red, 
And  pearls  which  a  Peri  might  have  kept. 

For  each  ruby  there  my  heart  hath  bled: 
For  each  pearl  my  eyes  have  wept. 

Edward  Robert  Biilwer  Lytton  [1831-1891] 

m  3Ji«oq(!'  • 
THE  ROSE  AND  THORN 

She's  loveliest  of  the  festal  throng 
In  delicate  form  and  Grecian  face, — 

A  beautiful,  incarnate  song, 
A  marvel  of  harm.onious  grace; 

And  yet  I  know  the  truth  I  speak: 

From  those  gay  groups  she  stands  apart, 

A  rose  upon  her  tender  cheek, 
A  thorn  within  her  heart. 

Though  bright  her  eyes'  bewildering  gleams, 
Fair  tremulous  lips  and  shining  hair, 

A  something  born  of  mournful  dreams 
Breathes  round  her  sad  enchanted  air; 

No  blithesome  thoughts  at  hide  and  seek 
From  out  her  dimples  smiling  start; 

If  still  the  rose  be  on  her  cheek, 
A  thorn  is  in  her  heart. 

Young  lover,  tossed  'twixt  hope  and  fear, 
Your  whispered  vow  and  yearning  eyes 

Yon  marble  Clytie  pillared  near 
Could  move  as  soon  to  soft  replies; 


A   Light  Woman  1029 

Or,  if  she  thrill  at  words  you  speak,     :,v  '  :  ,/ 

Love's  memory  prompts  the  sudden  start; 
The  rose  has  paled  upon  her  cheek. 
The  thorn  has  pierced  her  heart. 

Paul  Hamillon  Hayiic  [i  830-1 886] 


TO  HER— UNSPOKEN 

Go  to  him,  ah,  go  to  him,  and  hft  your  eyes  aglow  to  him; 

Fear  not  royally  to  give  whatever  he  may  claim; 
All  your  spirit's  treasury  scruple  not  to  show  to  him. 

He  is  noble;  meet  him  with  a  pride  too  high  for  shame. 

Say  to  him,  ah,  say  to  him,  that  soul  and  body  sway  to  him; 

Cast  away  the  cowardice  that  counsels  you  to  flight. 
Lest  you  turn  at  last  to  find  that  you  have  lost  the  way  to 
him. 

Lest  you  stretch  your  arms  in  vain  across  a  starless  night. 

Be  to  him,  ah,  be  to  him,  the  key  that  sets  joy  free  to  him; 

Teach  him  all  the  tenderness  that  only  love  can  know, 
And  if  ever  there  should  come  a  memory  of  me  to  him, 

Bid  him  judge  me  gently  for  the  sake  of  long  ago. 

Amelia  Josephine  Burr  [1878- 


A  LIGHT  WOMAN 

So  far  as  our  story  approaches  the  end, 
Which  do  you  pity  the  most  of  us  three? — 

My  friend,  or  the  mistress  of  my  friend 
With  her  wanton  eyes,  or  me? 

My  friend  was  already  too  good  to  lose, 

And  seemed  in  the  way  of  improvement  yet. 

When  she  crossed  his  path  with  her  hunting-noose, 
And  over  him  drew  her  net. 

When  I  saw  him  tangled  in  her  toils, 
A  shame,  said  I,  if  she  adds  just  him 

To  her  nine-and-ninety  other  spoils, 
The  hundredth  for  a  whim! 


1030  Poems  of  Love 

And  before  my  friend  be  wholly  hers, 

How  easy  to  prove  to  him,  I  said. 
An  eagle's  the  game  her  pride  prefers, 

Though  she  snaps  at  a  wren  instead! 

So,  I  gave  her  eyes  my  own  eyes  to  take, 
My  hand  sought  hers  as  in  earnest  need, 

And  round  she  turned  for  my  noble  sake, 
And  gave  me  herself  indeed. 

The  eagle  am  I,  with  my  fame  in  the  world, 
The  wren  is  he,  with  his  maiden  face. 

— You  look  away  and  your  lip  is  curled? 
Patience,  a  moment's  space! 

For  see,  my  friend  goes  shaking  and  white; 

He  eyes  me  as  the  basilisk: 
I  have  turned,  it  appears,  his  day  to  night, 

Eclipsing  his  sun's  disk. 

And  I  did  it,  he  thinks,  as  a  very  thief: 

"  Though  I  love  her — that,  he  comprehends — 

One  should  master  one's  passions,  (love,  in  chief) 
And  be  loyal  to  one's  friends!" 

And  she, — she  lies  in  my  hand  as  tame 

As  a  pear  late  basking  over  a  wall; 
Just  a  touch  to  try  and  of?  it  came; 

'Tis  mine, — can  I  let  it  fall? 

With  no  mind  to  eat  it,  that's  the  worst! 

Were  it  thrown  in  the  road,  would  the  case  assist? 
'Twas  quenching  a  dozen  blue-flies'  thirst 

When  I  gave  its  stalk  a  twist. 

And  I, — what  I  seem  to  my  friend,  you  see:         IJ 
What  I  soon  shall  seem  to  his  love,  you  guess: 

What  I  seem  to  myself,  do  you  ask  of  me? 
No  hero,  I  confess. 


From   the  Turkish  103  ^ 

'Tis  an  awkward  thing  to  play  with  souls, 
And  matter  enough  to  save  one's  own: 

Yet  think  of  my  friend,  and  the  i^urning  coals 
He  played  with  for  bits  of  stone! 

One  likes  to  show  the  truth  for  the  truth; 

That  the  woman  was  light  is  very  true: 
But  suppose  she  says, — Never  mind  that  youth! 

What  wrong  have  I  done  to  you? 

Well,  anyhow,  here  the  story  stays, 

So  far  at  least  as  I  understand; 
And,  Robert  Browning,  you  writer  of  plays. 

Here's  a  subject  made  to  your  hand ! 

Robert  Browning  [1S12-1889] 

FROM  THE  TURKISH 

The  chain  I  gave  was  fair  to  view, 

The  lute  I  added  sweet  in  sound, 
The  heart  that  offered  both  was  true. 

And  ill  deserved  the  fate  it  found. 

These  gifts  were  charmed  by  secret  spell 

Thy  truth  in  absence  to  divine; 
And  they  have  done  their  duty  well, 

Alas!  they  could  not  teach  thee  thine. 

That  chain  was  firm  in  every  link. 

But  not  to  bear  a  stranger's  touch; 

That  lute  was  sweet — till  thou  couldst  think 
In  other  hands  its  notes  were  such. 

Let  him,  who  from  thy  neck  unbound 

The  chain  which  shivered  in  his  grasp. 

Who  saw  that  lute  refuse  to  sound, 

Restring  the  chords,  renew  the  clasp. 

When  thou  wert  changed,  they  altered  too; 

The  chain  is  broke,  the  music  mute: 
'Tis  past — to  them  and  thee  adieu — 

False  heart,  frail  chain,  and  silent  lute. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [  1 7 88- 1 8 24] 


I03-  Poems  of  Love 


A  SUMMER  WOOING 

The  wind  went  wooing  the  rose, 

For  the  rose  was  fair. 
How  the  rough  wind  won  her,  who  knows? 

But  he  left  her  there. 
Far  away  from  her  grave  he  blows: 

Does  the  free  wind  care? 

Louise  Chandler  Moullon  [i83S-igo8] 


BUTTERFLIES 

At  sixteen  years  she  knew  no  care; 

How  could  she,  sweet  and  pure  as  light? 
And  there  pursued  her  everywhere 

Butterflies  all  white. 

A  lover  looked.  She  dropped  her  eyes 
That  glowed  like  pansies  wet  with  dew; 

And  io,  there  came  from  out  the  skies 
Butterflies  all  blue. 

Before  she  guessed  her  heart  was  gone; 

The  tale  of  love  was  swiftly  told; 
And  all  about  her  wheeled  and  shone 

Butterflies  all  gold. 

Then  he  forsook  her  one  sad  morn; 

She  wept  and  sobbed,  "Oh,  love,  come  back!" 
There  only  came  to  her  forlorn 

Butterflies  all  black. 

John  Davidson  [185  7- 1909] 

UNSEEN   SPIRITS 

The  shadows  lay  along  Broadwa}^, 
'Twas  near  the  twilightrtide. 

And  slowly  there  a  lady  fair 
Was  walking  in  her  pride. 

Alone  walked  she;  but,  viewlessly, 
Walked  spirits  at  her  side. 


*' Grandmither,  Think   Not  1    Forget"     1033 

Peace  charmed  the  street  beneath  her  feet, 

And  Honor  charmed  the  air; 
And  all  astir  looked  kind  on  her, 

And  called  her  good  as  fair, — 
For  all  God  ever  gave  to  her 

She  kept  with  chary  care. 

She  kept  with  care  her  beauties  rare 

From  lovers  warm  and  true,  ,[ )' 

For  her  heart  was  cold  to  all  but  gold. 
And  the  rich  came  not  to  woo — 

But  honored  well  are  charms  to  sell 
If  priests  the  selling  do. 

Now  walking  there  was  one  more  fair — 

A  slight  girl,  lily-pale; 
And  she  had  unseen  company 

To  make  the  spirit  quail: 
'Twixt  Want  and  Scorn  she  walked  forlorn, 

And  nothing  could  avail. 

No  mercy  now  can  clear  her  brow 

For  this  world's  peace  to  pray; 
For,  as  love's  wild  prayer  dissolved  in  air, 

Her  woman's  heart  gave  way! — 
But  the  sin  forgiven  by  Christ  in  heaven 

By  man  is  cursed  alway! 

Nathaniel  Parker  Willis  [1806-1867] 


" GRAND MITHER,  THINK  NOT  I  FORGET" 

Grandmither,  think  not  I  forget,  when  I  come  back  to  town, 
An'  wander  the  old  ways  again,  an'  tread  them  up  and  down. 
I  never  smell  the  clover  bloom,  nor  see  the  swallows  pass. 
Without  I  mind  how  good  ye  were  unto  a  little  lass. 
I  never  hear  the  winter  rain  a-pelting  all  night  through, 
Without  I  think  and  mind  me  of  how  cold  it  falls  on  you. 
And  if  I  come  not  often  to  your  bed  beneath  the  thyme. 
Mayhap  'tis  that  I'd  change  wi'  ye,  and  gie  my  bed  for  thine, 
Would  like  to  sleep  in  thine. 


I034  Poems  of  Love 

I  never  hear  the  summer  winds  among  the  roses  blow, 
Without  I  wonder  why  it  was  ye  loved  the  lassie  so. 
Ye  gave  me  cakes  and  lollipops  and  pretty  toys  a  store, — 
I  never  thought  I  should  come  back  and  ask  ye  now  for  more. 
Grandmither,  gie  me  your  still,  white  hands,  that  lie  upon 

your  breast. 
For  mine  do  beat  the  dark  all  night,  and  never  find  me 

rest ; 
They  grope  among  the  shadows,  an'  they  beat  the  cold  black 

air, 
They  go  seekin'  in  the  darkness,  an'  they  never  find  him 

there, 

They  never  find  him  there. 

Grandmither,  gie  me  your  sightless  eyes,  that  I  may  never 
see 

His  own  a-burnin'  full  o'  love  that  must  not  shine  for  me. 

Grandmither,  gie  me  your  peaceful  lips^  white  as  the  kirk- 
yard  snow. 

For  mine  be  tremblin'  wi'  the  wish  that  he  must  never 
know. 

Grandmither,  gie  me  your  clay-stopped  ears,  that  I  may 
never  hear 

My  lad  a-singin'  in  the  night  when  I  am  sick  wi'  fear; 

A-singin'  when  the  moonlight  over  a'  the  land  is  white — 

Ah,  God!  I'll  up  an'  go  to  him  a-singin'  in  the  night, 
A-callin'  in  the  night. 

Grandmither,  gie  me  your  clay-cold  heart  that  has  forgot  to 

ache. 
For  mine  be  fire  within  my  breast  and  yet  it  cannot  break. 
Wi'  every  beat  it's  callin'  for  things  that  must  not  be, — 
An'  can  ye  not  let  me  creep  in  an'  rest  awhile  by  ye?-''-''  "-^^ 
A  little  lass  afeard  o'  dark  slept  by  ye  years  agone— ^  '   '"  ^ 
An'  she  has  found  what  night  can  hold  'twixt  sundown  an' 

the  dawn! 
So  when  I  plant  the  rose  an'  rue  above  your  grave  for  ye,  ^' 
Ye'll  know  it's  under  rue  an'- rose  that  I  would  like  to  be,''- 
That  I  would  like  to  be.  '  ''- 

WUla  Siberi  Gather  [1^75- 


Little  Wild   Baby  1035 


LITTLE  WILD   BABY 

Through  the  fierce  fever  I  nursed  him,  and  then  he  said 

I  was  the  woman — I! — that  he  would  wed; 

He  sent  a  boat  with  men  for  his  own  white  priest, 

And  he  gave  my  father  horses,  and  made  a  feast. 

I  am  his  wife:  if  he  has  forgotten  me, 

I  will  not  live  for  scorning  eyes  to  see. 

(Little  wild  baby,  that  knowcst  not  where  thou  art  going, 

Lie  still !  lie  still !     Thy  mother  will  do  the  rowing.) 

Three  moons  ago — it  was  but  three  moons  ago-4-' 

He  took  his  gun,  and  started  across  the  snow; 

For  the  river  was  frozen,  the  river  that  still  goes  down 

Every  day,  as  I  watch  it,  to  find  the  town; 

The  town  whose  name  I  caught  from  his  sleeping  lips, 

A  place  of  many  people  and  many  ships. 

{Little  wild  baby,  that  knowcst  not  ivherc  thou  art  going. 

Lie  still !  lie  still !     Thy  mother  will  do  the  rowing.) 

I  to  that  town  am  going,  to  search  the  place. 
With  his  little  white  son  in  my  arms,  till  I  see  his  face. 
Only  once  shall  I  need  to  look  in  his  eyes, 
To  see  if  his  soul,  as  I  knew  it,  lives  or  dies. 
If  it  lives,  we  live,  and  if  it  is  dead,  we  die. 
And  the  soul  of  my  baby  will  never  ask  me  why. 
{Little  wild  baby,  that  knowest  not  where  thou  art  going, 
Lie  still !  lie  still !     Thy  mother  will  do  the  roiving.) 

I  have  asked  about  the  river:  one  answered  me,,  -. 

That  after  the  town  it  goes  to  find  the  sea; 

That  great  waves,  able  to  break  the  stoutest  bark, 

Are  there,  and  the  sea  is  very  deep  and  dark. 

If  he  is  happy  without  me,  so  best,  so  best; 

I  will  take  his  baby  and  go  away  to  my  rest. 

{Little  wild  baby,  that  knowest  not  where  thou  art  going, 

Lie  still !  lie  still !     Thy  mother  zvill  do  the  rowing. 

The  river  flows  swiftly,  the  sea  is  dark  and  deep: 

Little  wild  baby,  lie  still !    Lie  still  and  sleep.) 

Margaret  Thomson  Janvier  [1845- 1913] 


1036  Poems  of  Love 


A  CRADLE   SONG 

Come  little  babe,  come  silly  soul, 

Thy  father's  shame,  thy  mother's  grief, 

Born  as  I  doubt  to  all  our  dole, 

And  to  thyself  unhappy  chief: 
Sing  lullaby,  and  lap  it  warm, 
Poor  soul  that  thinks  no  creature  harm. 

Thou  little  think'st  and  less  dost  know 
The  cause  of  this  thy  mother's  moan; 
Thou  want'st  the  wit  to  wail  her  woe. 
And  I  myself  am  all  alone: 

Why  dost  thou  weep?  why  dost  thou  wail? 

And  know'st  not  yet  what  thou  dost  ail. 

Come,  little  wretch — ah,  silly  heart! 

Mine  only  joy,  what  can  I  more? 

If  there  be  any  wrong  thy  smart. 

That  may  the  destinies  implore: 
'Twas  I,  I  say,  against  my  will, 
I  wail  the  time,  but  be  thou  still. 

And  dost  thou  smile?     O,  thy  sweet  face! 
Would  God  Himself  He  might  thee  see! — 
No  doubt  thou  wouldst  soon  purchase  grace, 
I  know  right  well,  for  thee  and  me: 

But  come  to  mother,  babe,  and  play, 

For  father  false  is  fled  away. 

Sweet  boy,  if  it  by  fortune  chance 
Thy  father  home  again  to  send. 
If  death  do  strike  me  with  his  lance. 
Yet  may'st  thou  me  to  him  commend: 
If  any  ask  thy  mother's  name. 
Tell  how  by  love  she  purchased  blame. 

Then  will  his  gentle  heart  soon  yield: 
I  know  him  of  a  noble  mind: 
Although  a  lion  in  the  field, 
A  lamb  in  town  thou  shalt  him  find: 


Lady  Anne   Bothwell's   Lament     1037 

Ask  blessing,  babe,  be  not  afraid, 
His  sugared  words  hath  me  betrayed. 

Then  may'st  thou  joy  and  be  right  glad; 
Although  in  woe  I  seem  to  moan, 
Thy  father  is  no  rascal  lad, 
A  noble  youth  of  blood  and  bone: 

His  glancing  looks,  if  he  once  smile, 

Right  honest  women  may  beguile. 

Come,  little  boy,  and  rock  asleep; 
Sing  lullaby  and  be  thou  still; 
I,  that  can  do  naught  else  but  weep, 
Will  sit  by  thee  and  wail  my  fill: 

God  bless  my  babe,  and  lullaby 

From  this  thy  father's  quality. 

Nicholas  Breton  [iS4s?-i626?] 


LADY  ANNE  BOTHWELL'S  LAMENT 

Balow,  my  babe,  lie  still  and  sleep! 
It  grieves  me  sore  to  sec  thee  weep. 
Wouldst  thou  be  quiet  I'sc  be  glad, 
Thy  mourning  makes  my  sorrow  sad: 
Balow  my  boy,  thy  mother's  joy. 
Thy  father  breeds  me  great  annoy — 
Balow,  la-low! 

When  he  began  to  court  my  love. 
And  with  his  sugared  words  me  move, 
His  feignings  false  and  flattering  cheer 
To  me  that  time  did  not  appear: 
But  now  I  see  most  cruelly 
He  cares  ne  for  my  babe  nor  me — 
Balow,  la-lov/! 

Lie  still,  my  darling,  sleep  awhile, 

And  when  thou  wak'st  thou'll  sweetly  smile: 

But  smile  not  as  thy  father  did. 

To  cozen  maids:  nay,  God  forbid! 


lojS  Poems  of  Love 


But  yet  I  fear  thou  wilt  go  near 
Thy  father's  heart  and  face  to  bear — 
Balow,  la-low! 

I  cannot  choose  but  ever  will  - 

Be  loving  to  thy  father  still; 
Where'er  he  go,  where'er  he  ride, 
My  love  with  him  doth  still  abide; 
In  weal  or  woe,  where'er  he  go, 
My  heart  shall  ne  'er  depart  him  fro — 
Balow,  la-low! 

But  do  not,  do  not,  pretty  mine. 
To  feignings  false  thy  heart  incline! 
Be  loyal  to  thy  lover  true, 
And  never  change  her  for  a  new: 
If  good  or  fair,  of  her  have  care 
For  women's  banning's  wondrous  sair — 
Balow,  la-low! 

Bairn,  by  thy  face  I  will  beware; 
Like  Sirens'  words,  I'll  come  not  near; 
My  babe  and  I  together  will  live; 
He'll  comfort  me  when  cares  do  grieve. 
My  babe  and  I  right  soft  will  lie. 
And  ne'er  respect  man's  cruelty — 
Balow,  la-low! 

Farewell,  farewell,  the  falsest  youth 
That  ever  kissed  a  woman's  mouth!  "  ','" 
I  wish  all  maids  be  warned  by  me 
Never  to  trust  man's  courtesy; 
For  if  we  do  but  chance  to  bow, 
They'll  use  us  then  they  care  not  how — 
Balow,  la-low! 

Unknown 

A  WOMAN'S  LOVE 

-    I'A 
A  SENTINEL  angel,  sitting  high  in  glory. 
Heard  this  shrill  wail  ring  out  from  Purgatory: 
"Have  mercy,  mighty  angel,  hear  my  story! 


A   Woman's   Love 


1039 


"I  loved, — and,  blind  with  passionate  love,  I  fell. 
Love  brought  me  down  to  death,  and  death  to  Hell; 
For  God  is  just,  and  death  for  sin  is  well. 

\n 

"I  do  not  rage  against  His  high  decree,  |)f,/_ 

Nor  for  myself  do  ask  that  grace  shall  be;         / 
But  for  my  love  on  earth  w-ho  mourns  for  me. 

"'"Great  Spirit!     Let  me  see  my  love  again         "^ 
And  comfort  him  one  hour,  and  I  were  fain       '"'^ 
To  pay  a  thousand  years  of  fire  and  pain." 


J 


Then  said  the  pitying  angel,    "Nay,  repent 
That  wild  vow!     Look,  the  dial-finger's  bent 
Down  to  the  last  hour  of  thy  punishment!" 

But  still  she  wailed,  "I  pray  thee,  let  me  go! 
I  cannot  rise  to  peace  and  leave  him  so. 
O,  let  me  soothe  him  in  his  bitter  woe!" 

The  brazen  gates  ground  sullenly  ajar, 
And  upwards,  joyous,  like  a  rising  star. 
She  rose  and  vanished  in  the  ether  far. 

But  soon  adown  the  dying  sunset  sailing, 
And  like  a  wounded  bird  her  pinions  trailing. 
She  fluttered  back,  with  broken-hearted  wailing, 

She  sobbed,   "I  found  him  by  the  summer  sea 

Reclined,  his  head  upon  a  maiden's  knee, — 

She  curled  his  hair  and  kissed  him.     Woe  is  me!" 

She  wept,  "Now  let  my  punishment  begin! 
I  have  been  fond  and  foolish.     Let  me  in 
To  expiate  my  sorrow  and  my  sin." 

The  angel  answered,  "Nay,  sad  soul,  go  higher! 
To  be  deceived  in  your  true  heart's  desire 
Was  bitterer  than  a  thousand  years  of  fire!" 

John  Hay  [1838-1905] 


1 040  Poems  of  Love 


A  TRAGEDY  ,.,( 

She  was  only  a  woman,  famished  for  loving,         ' 
Mad  with  devotion,  and  such  shght  things; 

And  he  was  a  very  great  musician, 
And  used  to  finger  his  fiddle-strings. 

Her  heart's  sweet  gamut  is  cracking  and  breaking 
For  a  look,  for  a  touch, — for  such  slight  things; 

But  he's  such  a  very  great  musician 

Grimacing  and  fingering  his  fiddle-strings. 

Theophilc  Marzials  [1850- 

' MOTHER,   I  CANNOT  MIND   MY  WHEEL" 

Mother,  I  cannot  mind  my  wheel; 

My  fingers  ache,  my  lips  are  dry: 
O,  if  you  felt  the  pain  I  feel! 

But  O,  who  ever  felt  as  I? 

No  longer  could  I  doubt  him  true — 

All  other  men  may  use  deceit; 
He  always  said  my  eyes  were  blue. 

And  often  swore  my  lips  were  sweet. 

Walter  Savage  Laitdor  [17 75-1864] 

AIRLY  BEACON 

Airly  Beacon,  Airly  Beacon; 

O  the  pleasant  sight  to  see 
Shires  and  towns  from  Airly  Beacon, 

While  my  love  climbed  up  to  me! 

Airly  Beacon,  Airly  Beacon; 

O  the  happy  hours  we  lay 
Deep  in  fern  on  Airly  Beacon,  ,     - 

Courting  through  the  summer's  day! 

Airly  Beacon,  Airly  Beacon; 

O  the  weary  haunt  for  me,  '^nn  orlT 

All  alone  on  Airly  Beacon, 

With  his  baby  on  my  knee! 

Charles  Kingsley  [1819-1875] 


From   the   Harbor   Hill  1041 


A   SEA   CHILD 

The  lover  of  child  Marjory 

Had  one  white  hour  of  life  brim  full; 
Now  the  old  nurse,  the  rocking  sea, 

Hath  him  to  lull. 

The  daughter  of  child  Marjory- 
Hath  in  her  veins,  to  beat  and  run, 

The  glad  indomitable  sea, 
The  strong  white  sun. 

Bliss  Carman  fiSi 


FROM  THE  HARBOR  HILL 

"Is  it  a  sail?"  she  asked. 
"No,"  I  said. 
"Only  a  white  sea-gull  with  its  pinions  spread." 

"Is  it  a  spar?"  she  asked. 
"No,"  said  I. 
"Only  the  slender  light-house  tower  against  the  sky." 

"Flutters  a  pennant  there?" 
"No,"  I  said. 
"Only  a  shred  of  cloud  in  the  sunset  red." 

"Surely  a  hull,  a  hull!" 
"Where?"  I  cried. 
"Only  a  rock  half-bared  by  the  ebbing  tide." 

"Wait  you  a  ship?"  I  asked. 
"Aye!"  quoth  she. 
"The  Harbor  Belle;  her  mate  comes  home  to  marry  me. 

"Surely  the  good  ship  hath 
]\Iet  no  harm?" 
Was  it  the  west  wind  wailed  or  the  babe  on  her  arm? 

"The  Harbor  Belle!"  she  urged. 
Naught  said  I. — 
For  I  knew  o  'er  the  grave  o'  the  Harbor  Belle  the  sea-gulls  fly. 

Guslav  Kohbe  [1857- 


1042  '      Poems  of  Love 


ALLAN  WATER 

On  the  banks  of  Allan  Water, 
When  the  sweet  spring-time  did  fall, 
Was  the  miller's  lovely  daughter, 
Fairest  of  them  all. 

For  his  bride  a  soldier  sought  her. 
And  a  winning  tongue  had  he, 
On  the  banks  of  Allan  Water, 

None  so  gay  as  she. 

On  the  banks  of  Allan  Water, 
When  brown  autumn  spread  his  store. 
There  I  saw  the  miller's  daughter. 
But  she  smiled  no  more. 

For  the  summer  grief  had  brought  her. 
And  the  soldier  false  was  he, 
On  the  banks  of  Allan  Water, 
None  so  sad  as  she. 

On  the  banks  of  Allan  Water, 
When  the  winter  snow  fell  fast. 
Still  was  seen  the  miller's  daughter, 
Chilling  blew  the  blast. 

But  the  miller's  lovely  daughter, 
Both  from  cold  and  care  was  free; 
On  the  banks  of  Allan  Water, 
There  a  corse  lay  she. 

Matthew  Gregory  Lewis  [i 775-1815 


FORSAKEN 

O  WALY  waly  up  the  bank. 
And  waly  waly  down  the  brae. 

And  waly  waly  yon  burn-side 

Where  I  and  my  Love  wont  to  gae! 


Forsaken  1043 


1  leaned  my  back  unto  an  aik, 

I  thought  it  was  a  trusty  tree; 
But  first  it  bowed,  and  syne  it  brak, 

Sae  my  true  Love  did  h'chlly  me. 

O  waly  waly,  but  love  be  bonny 

A  little  while  when  it  is  new; 
But  when  'tis  auld,  it  waxeth  cauld 

And  fades  aw^a'  like  morning  dew. 
O  wherefore  should  I  busk  my  head? 

Or  wherefore  should  I  kame  my  hair? 
For  my  true  Love  has  me  forsook, 

And  says  he'll  never  loe  me  mair. 

Now  Arthur-seat  sail  be  my  bed ; 

The  sheets  shall  ne'er  be  pressed  by  me: 
Saint  Anton's  well  sail  be  my  drink, 

Since  my  true  Love  has  forsaken  me. 
Martinmas  wind,  when  wilt  thou  blaw 

And  shake  the  green  leaves  aff  the  tree? 

0  gentle  Death,  when  wilt  thou  come? 
For  of  my  life  I  am  wearie. 

'Tis  not  the  frost,  that  freezes  fell, 

Nor  blawing  snaw's  inclemencie; 
'Tis  not  sic  cauld  that  makes  me  cry, 

But  my  Love's  heart  grown  cauld  to  me. 
When  we  cam  in  by  Glasgow  town 

We  v/ere  a  comely  sight  to  see; 
My  Love  was  clad  in  black  velvet. 

And  I  mysel  in  cramasie. 

But  had  I  wist,  before  I  kissed. 
That  love  had  been  sae  ill  to  win; 

1  had  locked  my  heart  in  a  case  of  gowd 
And  pinned  it  with  a  siller  pin. 

And,  O!  if  my  young  babe  were  born, 

And  sat  upon  the  nurse's  knee, 
And  I  mysei  were  dead  and  gane, 

And  the  green  grass  growing  over  me! 

Unknown 


I044  Poems  of  Love 


BONNIE  BOON 

Ye  banks  and  braes  o'  bonnie  Doon, 

How  can  ye  bloom  sae  fair! 
How  can  ye  chant,  ye  little  birds, 

And  I  sae  fu'  o'  care! 

Thou  11  break  my  heart,  thou  bonnie  bird 

That  sings  upon  the  bough; 
Thou  minds  me  o'  the  happy  days 

When  my  fause  Luve  was  true. 

Thou'll  break  my  heart,  thou  bonnie  bird 

That  sings  beside  thy  mate; 
For  sae  I  sat,  and  sae  I  sang, 

And  wist  na  o'  my  fate. 

Aft  hae  I  roved  by  bonnie  Doon 

To  see  the  woodbine  twine. 
And  ilka  bird  sang  o'  its  love; 

And  sae  did  I  o'  mine. 

Wi'  lightsome  heart  I  pu'd  a  rose, 

Frae  aff  its  thorny  tree; 
And  my  fause  luver  staw  the  rose. 

But  left  the  thorn  wi'  me. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


THE  TWO  LOVERS 

The  lover  of  her  body  said: 

"She  is  more  beautiful  than  night., — 
But  like  the  kisses  of  the  dead 

Is  my  despair  and  my  delight." 

The  lover  of  her  soul  replied: 

"She  is  more  wonderful  than  death,- 
But  bitter  as  the  aching  tide 

Is  all  the  speech  of  love  she  saith." 


The   Vampire  1^45 


The  lover  of  her  body  said : 

"To  know  one  secret  of  her  heart, 
For  all  the  joy  that  I  have  had, 

Is  past  the  reach  of  all  my  art." 

The  lover  of  her  soul  replied : 

"The  secrets  of  her  heart  are  mine, — 

Save  how  she  lives,  a  riven  bride, 
Between  the  dust  and  the  divine." 

The  lover  of  her  body  sware: 

"Though  she  should  hate  me,  wit  you  well, 
Rather  than  yield  one  kiss  of  her 

I  give  my  soul  to  burn  in  hell." 

The  lover  of  her  soul  cried  out: 

"Rather  than  leave  her  to  your  greed, 

I  would  that  I  were  walled  about 
With  death, — and  death  were  death  indeed!" 

The  lover  of  her  body  wept, 

And  got  no  good  of  all  his  gain. 
Knowing  that  in  her  heart  she  kept 

The  penance  of  the  other's  pain. 

The  lover  of  her  soul  went  mad. 

But  when  he  did  himself  to  death, 
Despite  of  all  the  woe  he  had, 

He  smiled  as  one  who  vanquisheth. 

Richard  Ilovey  [1864-1900] 

THE   VAMPIRE 

AS  SUGGESTED  BY  THE  PAINTING  BY  PHILIP  BURNE-JONES 

A  FOOL  there  was  and  he  made  his  prayer 

(Even  as  you  and  I!) 
To  a  rag  and  a  bone  and  a  hank  of  hair 
(We  called  her  the  woman  who  did  not  care). 
But  the  fool  he  called  her  his  lady  fair 

(Even  as  you  and  I !) 


1 046  Poems  of  Love 

Oh  the  years  we  zvaste  and  Ihc  tears  we  waste, 

And  the  work  of  our  head  and  hand, 
Belong  to  the  woman  who  did  not  know 
{And  now  we  know  that  she  never  coidd  know) 

And  did  not  understand. 

A  fool  there  was  and  his  goods  he  spent 

(Even  as  you  and  I!) 
Honor  and  faith  and  a  sure  intent 
(And  it  wasn't  the  least  what  the  lady  meant), 
But  a  fool  must  follow  his  natural  bent 

(Even  as  you  and  I!) 

■  ■[ 

Oh  the  toil  we  lost  and  the  spoil  we  lost, 

And  the  excellent  things  we  planned, 
Belong  to  the  woman  who  didn't  know  why 
{And  now  we  know  she  never  knew  why) 

And  did  not  understand. 

The  fool  was  stripped  to  his  foolish  hide 

(Even  as  you  and  I !) 
Which  she  might  have  seen  when  she  threw  him  aside,- 
(But  it  isn't  on  record  the  lady  tried) 
So  some  of  him  lived  but  the  most  of  him  died — 

(Even  as  you  and  I!) 

And  it  isn't  the  shame  and  it  isn't  the  blame 

That  stings  like  a  white-hot  brand. 
It's  coming  to  know  that  she  never  knew  why 
{Seeing  at  last  she  could  never  know  why) 

And  never  could  understand. 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 

AGATHA 

She  wanders  in  the  April  woods, 
That  glisten  with  the  fallen  shower; 

She  leans  her  face  against  the  buds,  / ) 

She  stops,  she  stoops,  she  plucks  a  flower. 
She  feels  the  ferment  of  the  hour; 


"A  Rose  Will  Fade"  1047 

She  broodeth  when  the  ringdove  broods; 
The  sun  and  flying  clouds  have  power 
Upon  her  cheek  and  changing  moods. 
She  cannot  think  she  is  alone, 

As  o'er  her  senses  warmly  steal 
Floods  of  unrest  she  fears  to  own. 
And  almost  dreads  to  feel. 

Along  the  summer  woodlands  wide 

Anew  she  roams,  no  more  alone; 
The  joy  she  feared  is  at  her  side, 

Spring's  blushing  secret  now  is  known, 

The  primrose  and  its  mates  have  flown, 
The  thrush's  ringing  note  hath  died; 

But  glancing  eye  and  glowing  tone 
Fall  on  her  from  her  god,  her  guide. 

She  knows  not,  asks  not,  what  the  goal. 
She  only  feels  she  moves  towards  bliss, 

And  yields  her  pure  unquestioning  soul 
To  touch  and  fondling  kiss. 

And  still  she  haunts  those  woodland  ways, 

Though  all  fond  fancy  finds  there  now 
To  mind  of  spring  or  summ^er  days, 
Are  sodden  trunk  and  songless  bough. 
The  past  sits  widowed  on  her  brow, 
Homeward  she  wends  with  wintry  gaze, 

To  walls  that  house  a  hollow  vow. 
To  hearth  where  love  hath  ceased  to  blaze: 
Watches  the  clammy  twilight  wane, 

With  grief  too  fixed  for  woe  or  tear; 
And,  with  her  forehead  'gainst  the  pane, 
Envies  the  dying  year. 

Alfred  Austin  [1835-1913] 

"A  ROSE  WILL   FADE" 

You  were  always  a  dreamer,  Rose — red  Rose, 
As  you  swung  on  your  perfumed  spray, 

Swinging,  and  aU  the  world  was  true. 

Swaying,  what  did  it  trouble  you? 
A  rose  will  fade  in  a  day. 


1048  Poems  of  Love 

Why  did  you  smile  to  his  face,  red  Rose, 
As  he  whistled  across  your  way? 

And  all  the  world  went  mad  for  you, 

AU  the  world  it  knelt  to  woo. 
A  rose  will  bloom  in  a  day. 

I  gather  your  petals,  Rose — red  Rose, 

The  petals  he  threw  away. 
And  all  the  world  derided  you; 
Ah!  the  world,  how  well  it  knew 

A  rose  will  fade  in  a  day! 

Dora  Sigerson  Shorlzr  [18    - 

AFFAIRE  D'AMOUR 

One  pale  November  day 
Flying  Summer  paused. 

They  say: 
And  growing  bolder, 
.  O'er  rosy  shoulder 

Threw  her  lover  such  a  glance 
That  Autumn's  heart  began  to  dance. 
(0  happy  lover!) 

A  leafless  peach-tree  bold 
Thought  for  him  she  smiled, 

I'm  told; 
And,  stirred  by  love, 
His  sleeping  sap  did  move, 
Decking  each  naked  branch  with  green 
To  show  her  that  her  look  was  seen! 
(Alas,  poor  lover!) 

But  Summer,  laughing  fled. 
Nor  knew  he  loved  her! 
'Tis  said 
The  peach-tree  sighed. 
And  soon  he  gladly  died: 
And  Autumn,  weary  of  the  chase. 
Came  on  at  Winter's  sober  pace 
(0  careless  lover!) 

Margaret  Deland  [1857- 


The  Way  of  It  I049 

A  CASUAL  SONG 

She  sang  of  lovers  met  to  play 
"Under  the  may  bloom,  under  the  may," 
But  when  I  sought  her  face  so  fair, 
I  found  the  set  face  of  Despair. 

She  sang  of  woodland  leaves  in  spring, 
And  joy  of  young  love  dallying; 
But  her  young  eyes  were  all  one  moan, 
And  Death  weighed  on  her  heart  like  stone. 

I  could  not  ask,  I  know  not  now, 
The  story  of  that  mournful  brow; 
It  haunts  me  as  it  haunted  then, 
A  flash  from  fire  of  hellhound  men. 

Roilen  Noel  I1834-1894I 

THE  WAY  OF  IT 

The  wind  is  awake,  pretty  leaves,  pretty  leaves, 
Heed  not  what  he  says;  he  deceives,  he  deceives: 

Over  and  over 

To  the  lowly  clover 
He  has  lisped  the  same  love  (and  forgotten  it,  too) 
He  will  soon  be  lisping  and  pledging  to  you. 

The  boy  is  abroad,  pretty  maid,  pretty  maid, 
Beware  his  soft  words;  I'm  afraid,  I'm  afraid: 

He  has  said  them  before 

Times  many  a  score, 
Ay,  he  died  for  a  dozen  ere  his  beard  pricked  through, 
And  the  very  same  death  he  will  die  for  you. 

The  way  of  the  boy  is  the  way  of  the  wind. 
As  light  as  the  leaves  is  dainty  maid-kind; 

One  to  deceive, 

And  one  to  believe — 
That  is  the  way  of  it,  year  to  year; 
But  I  know  you  will  learn  it  too  late,  my  dear. 

John  Vance  Cheney  [1848- 


1050  Poems  of  Love 

"WHEN  LOVELY  WOMAN  STOOPS  TO  FOLLY" 

From  ■'  The  Vicar  of  Wakefield  " 

When  lovely  woman  stoops  to  folly 
And  finds  too  late  that  men  betray, — 

What  charm  can  soothe  her  melancholy, 
What  art  can  wash  her  guilt  away? 

The  only  art  her  guilt  to  cover, 
To  hide  her  shame  from  every  eye, 

To  give  repentance  to  her  lover 
And  wring  his  bosom,  is — to  die. 

Oliver  Goldsmith  [1728-1774] 

FOLK-SONG 

Back  she  came  through  the  trembling  dusk; 

And  her  mother  spoke  and  said: 
"What  is  it  makes  you  late  to-day, 
And  why  do  you  smile  and  sing  as  gay 

As  though  you  just  were  wed?" 
"O/z  mother,  my  hen  that  never  had  chicks 

Has  hatched  out  six! " 

Back  she  came  through  the  flaming  dusk; 

And  her  mother  spoke  and  said: 
"What  gives  your  eyes  that  dancing  light, 
What  makes  your  lips  so  strangely  bright. 

And  why  are  your  cheeks  so  red?" 
"Oh  mother,  the  berries  I  ate  in  the  lane 

Have  left  a  stain." 

Back  she  came  through  the  faltering  dusk; 

And  her  mother  spoke  and  said: 
"You  are  weeping;  your  footstep  is  heavy  with  care — 
What  makes  you  totter  and  cling  to  the  stair, 

And  why  do  you  hang  your  head?" 

"Oh  mother — oh  mother— you  never  can  know — 

/  loved  him  so!" 
'■■■■■  Louis  Untermeyer  [1885- 


She  Was  Young  and  Blithe  and  Fair"    1051 


A  VERY  OLD  SONG 

"Daughter,  thou  art  come  to  die: 

Sound  be  thy  sleeping,  lass." 
"Well:  without  lament  or  cry, 

Mother,  let  me  pass." 

"What  things  on  mould  were  best  of  all? 

(Soft  be  thy  sleeping,  lass.) " 
"The  apples  reddening  till  they  fall 
In  the  sun  beside  the  convent  wall. 

Let  me  pass." 

"Whom  on  earth  hast  thou  loved  best?^^ 
(Sound  be  thy  sleeping,  lass.) " 

"Him  that  shared  with  me  thy  breast; 

Thee  and  a  knight  last  year  our  guest. 

He  hath  an  heron  to  his  crest. 
Let  me  pass." 

"What  lea  vest  thou  of  fame  or  hoard? 

(Soft  be  thy  sleeping,  lass.)" 
"My  far-blown  shame  for  thy  reward; 
To  my  brother,  gold  to  get  him  a  sword. 

Let  me  pass." 

"But  what  wilt  leave  thy  lover,  Grim? 

(Sound  be  thy  sleeping,  lass.)" 

"The  hair  he  kissed  to  strangle  him. 

Mother,  let  me  pass." 

William  Laird  [1888- 


"SHE  WAS  YOUNG  AND  BLITHE  AND   FAIR" 

She  was  young  and  blithe  and  fair, 
Firm  of  purpose,  sweet  and  strong; 
Perfect  was  her  crown  of  hair, 
Perfect  most  of  all  her  song. 

Yesterday  beneath  an  oak, 
She  was  chanting  in  the  wood: 


1052  Poems  of  Love 

Wandering  harmonies  awoke; 
Sleeping  echoes  understood. 

To-day  without  a  song,  without  a  word, 
She  seems  to  drag  one  piteous  fallen  wing 
Along  the  ground,  and,  hke  a  wounded  bird, 
Move  silent,  having  lost  the  heart  to  sing. 

She  was  young  and  bhthe  and  fair, 
Firm  of  purpose,  sweet  and  strong; 
Perfect  was  her  crown  of  hair. 
Perfect  most  of  all  her  song. 

Harold  Monro  [iSyg- 

THE  LASS  THAT  DIED  OF  LOVE 

Life  is  not  dear  or  gay 

Till  lovers  kiss  it. 
Love  stole  my  life  away 

Ere  I  might  miss  it. 
In  sober  March  I  vowed 

I'd  have  no  lover. 
Love  laid  me  in  my  shroud 

Ere  June  was  over. 

I  felt  his  body  take 

My  body  to  it. 
And  knew  my  heart  would  break 

Ere  I  should  rue  it ; 
June  roses  are  not  sad 

When  dew-drops  steep  them, 
My  moments  were  so  glad 

I  could  not  keep  them. 

Proud  was  I  love  had  made 

Desire  to  fill  me, 
I  shut  my  eyes  and  prayed 

That  he  might  kill  me. 
I  saw  new  wonders  wreathe 

The  stars  above  him. 
And  oh,  I  could  not  breathe 

For  kissing  of  him. 


The  Passion-FIower  ^'^53 

Is  love  too  sweet  to  last, 

Too  fierce  to  cherish, 
Can  kisses  fall  too  fast 

And  lovers  perish? 
Who  heeds  since  love  disarms 

Death,  ere  we  near  him? 
Within  my  lover's  arms 

I  did  not  fear  him! 

But  since  I  died  in  sin 

And  all  unshriven, 
They  would  not  let  me  win 

Into  their  heaven; 
They  would  not  let  my  bier 

Into  God's  garden, 
But  bade  me  tarry  here 

And  pray  for  pardon. 

I  lie  and  wait  for  grace 

That  shall  surround  rne, 
His  kisses  on  my  face. 

His  arms  around  me; 
And  sinless  maids  draw  near 

To  drop  above  me 
A  virginal  sad  tear 

For  envy  of  me. 

Richard  Middleton  [1882-1911] 


THE  PASSION-FLOWER 

My  love  gave  me  a  passion-flower. 
I  nursed  it  well — so  brief  its  hour! 
My  eyelids  ache,  my  throat  is  dry: 
He  told  me  that  it  would  not  die. 

My  love  and  I  are  one,  and  yet 
Full  oft  my  cheeks  with  tears  are  wet- 
So  sweet  the  night  is  and  the  bower! 
My  love  gave  me  a  passion-flower. 


I054  Poems  of  Love 

So  sweet !     Hold  fast  my  hands.     Can  God 
Make  all  this  joy  revert  to  sod, 
And  leave  to  me  but  this  for  dower— 
My  love  gave  me  a  passion-flower. 

Margaret  Fuller  [1871- 

NORAH 

I  KNEW  his  house  by  the  poplar-trees, 
Green  and  silvery  in  the  breeze; 

"A  heaven-high  hedge,"  were  the  words  he  said, 
"And  holly-hocks,  pink  and  white  and  red.  .  .  .' 

It  seemed  so  far  from  McChesney's  Hall — 
Where  first  he  told  me  about  it  all. 

A  long  path  runs  inside  from  the  gate, — 
He  still  can  take  it,  early  or  late; 

But  where  in  the  world  is  the  path  for  me 
Except  the  river  that  runs  to  the  sea! 

Zo'e  Akins  [1886- 

OF  JOAN'S  YOUTH 

I  WOULD  unto  my  fair  restore 

A  simple  thing: 

The  flushing  cheek  she  had  before! 

Out-velveting 

No  more,  no  more. 

On  our  sad  shore, 

The  carmine  grape,  the  moth's  auroral  wing. 

Ah,  say  how  winds  in  flooding  grass 

Unmoor  the  rose; 

Or  guileful  ways  the  salmon  pass 

To  sea,  disclose; 

For  so,  alas,  >•'- 

With  Love,  alas. 

With  fatal,  fatal  Love  a  girlhood  goes. 

Louise  Imogen  Giiiney  [1861- 


Goethe  and   Frederika  ^'^SS 


THERE'S  WISDOM  IN  WOMEN 

"Oh  love  is  fair,  and  love  is  rare;"  my  dear  one  she  said, 
"But  love  goes  lightly  over."    I  bowed  her  foolish  head, 
And  kissed  her  hair  and  laughed  at  her.    Such  a  child  was 

she; 
So  new  to  love,  so  true  to  love,  and  she  spoke  so  bitterly. 

But  there's  wisdom  in  women,  of  more  than  they  have 

known. 
And  thoughts  go  blowing  through  them,  are  wiser  than  their 

own. 
Or  how  should  my  dear  one,  being  ignorant  and  young. 
Have  cried  on  love  so  bitterly,  with  so  true  a  tongue? 

Rupert  Brooke  [1887-1915] 

GOETHE  AND  FREDERIKA 

Wandek,  oh,  wander,  maiden  sweet, 

In  the  fairy  bower,  while  yet  you  may; 

See  in  rapture  he  lies  at  your  feet; 

Rest  on  the  truth  of  the  glorious  youth. 

Rest — for  a  summer  day. 

That  great  clear  spirit  of  flickering  fire 

You  have  lidled  awhile  in  magic  sleep, 

But  you  cannot  fill  his  wide  desire. 

His  heart  is  tender,  his  eyes  are  deep, 

His  words  divinely  flow; 

But  his  voice  and  his  glance  are  not  for  you; 

He  never  can  be  to  a  maiden  true; 

Soon  will  he  wake  and  go. 

Well,  well,  'twere  a  piteous  thing 

To  chain  forever  that  strong  young  wing. 

Let  the  butterfly  break  for  his  own  sweet  sake 

The  gossamer  threads  that  have  bound  him; 

Let  him  shed  in  free  flight  his  rainbow  light. 

And  gladden  the  world  around  him. 

Short  is  the  struggle  and  slight  is  the  strain ; 

Such  a  web  was  made  to  be  broken. 

And  she  that  wove  it  may  weave  again 


1056  Poems  of  Love 

Or,  if  no  power  of  love  to  bless 
Can  heal  the  wound  in  her  bosom  true, 
It  is  but  a  lorn  heart  more  or  less, 
And  hearts  are  many  and  poets  few, 
So  his  pardon  is  lightly  spoken. 

Henry  Sidgwick  [1838-igoi] 

THE  SONG  OF  THE  KING'S  MINSTREL 

I  SING  no  longer  of  the  skies,  ,        , 

And  the  swift  clouds  like  driven  ships,    ..  ^,,  r^ 
For  there  is  earth  upon  my  eyes 

And  earth  between  my  singing  Ups. 
Because  the  King  loved  not  my  song 

That  he  had  found  so  sweet  before, 
I  lie  at  peace  the  whole  night  long. 

And  sing  no  more. 

The  King  liked  well  my  song  that  night;    . 

Upon  the  palace  roof  he  lay 
With  his  fair  Queen,  and  as  I  might 

I  sang,  until  the  morning's  gray 
Crept  o'er  their  faces,  and  the  King, 

Mocked  by  the  breaking  dawn  above,    . 
Clutched  at  his  youth  and  bade  me  sing 

A  song  of  love. 

Well  it  might  be — the  King  was  old, 

And  though  his  Queen  was  passing  fair. 
His  dull  eyes  might  not  catch  the  gold 

That  tangled  in  her  wayward  hair. 
It  had  been  much  to  see  her  smile, 

But  with  my  song  I  made  her  weep. 
;   Our  heavens  last  but  a  little  while, 

So  now  I  sleep. 

More  than  the  pleasures  that  I  had 
I  would  have  flung  away  to  know 

My  song  of  love  could  make  her  sad. 
Her  sweet  eves  fill  and  tremble  so. 


Annie   Shore  and  Johnnie   Doon      1057 

What  were  my  paltry  store  of  years, 

My  body's  wretched  Hfe  to  stake, 
Against  the  treasure  of  her  tears, 

For  my  love's  sake? 

Not  lightly  is  a  King  made  wise; 

My  body  ached  beneath  his  whips. 
And  there  is  earth  upon  my  eyes. 

And  earth  between  my  singing  lips. 
But  I  sang  once — and  for  that  grace 

I  am  content  to  lie  and  store 
The  vision  of  her  dear,  wet  face, 

And  sing  no  more. 

Richard  Middldon  [1882-1911] 

ANNIE  SHORE  AND  JOHNNIE  DOON 

Annie  Shore,  'twas,  sang  last  night 
If      Down  in  South  End  saloon; 
A  tawdry  creature  in  the  light, 
Painted  cheeks,  eyes  over  bright, 
Singing  a  dance-hall  tune. 

,  I'd  be  forgetting  Annie's  singing — 

I'd  not  have  thought  again — 
But  for  the  thing  that  cried  and  fluttered 

Through  all  the  shrill  refrain: 
Youth  crying  above  foul  words,  cheap  music, 

And  innocence  in  pain. 

They  sentenced  Johnnie  Doon  today 

For  murder,  stark  and  grim : 
Death's  none  too  dear  a  price,  they  say, 
For  such-like  men  as  him  to  pay: 

No  need  to  pity  him! 

And  Johnnie  Doon  I'd  not  be  pitying — 

I  could  forget  him  now — 
But  for  the  childish  look  of  trouble 

That  fell  across  his  brow. 
For  the  twisting  hands  he  looked  at  dumbly 

As  it  they'd  sinned,  he  knew  not  how. 

Patrick  Orr  [18 


1058  Poems  ot   Love 


EMMY 

Emmy's  exquisite  youth  and  her  virginal  air, 
Eyes  and  teeth  in  the  flash  of  a  musical  smile, 
Come  to  me  out  of  the  past,  and  I  see  her  there 
As  I  saw  her  once 'for  a  whUe. 

Emmy's  laughter  rings  in  my  ears,  as  bright, 
Fresh  and  sweet  as  the  voice  of  a  mountain  brook, 
And  still  I  hear  her  telling  us  tales  that  night. 
Out  of  Boccaccio's  book. 

There,  in  the  midst  of  the  villainous  dancing-hall. 
Leaning  across  the  table,  over  the  beer, 
While  the  music  maddened  the  whirling  skirts  of  the  ball, 
As  the  midnight  hour  drew  near, 

There  with  the  women,  haggard,  painted  and  old. 
One  fresh  bud  in  a  garland  withered  and  stale. 
She,  with  her  innocent  voice  and  her  clear  eyes,  told 
Tale  after  shameless  tale. 

And  ever  the  witching  smile,  to  her  face  beguiled. 
Paused  and  broadened,  and  broke  in  a  ripple  of  fun. 
And  the  soul  of  a  child  looked  out  of  the  eyes  of  a  child, 
Or  ever  the  tale  was  done. 

O  my  child,  who  wronged  you  first,  and  began 

First  the  dance  of  death  that  you  dance  so  well?  ,/ 

Soul  for  soul:  and  I  think  the  soul  of  a  man 

Shall  answer  for  yours  in  hell. 

Arlkur  Syinons  [1865- 

THE  B.\LLAD  OF  CAMDEN  TOWN 

I  WALKED  with  Maisie  long  years  back 

The  streets  of  Camden  Town, 
I  splendid  in  my  suit  of  black. 

And  she  divine  in  brown. 

Hers  was  a  proud  and  noble  face, 

A  secret  heart  and  eyes 
Like  water  in  a  lonely  place 

Beneath  unclouded  skies. 


,1'1 


The   Ballad   of  Camden   Town       1059 

A  bed,  a  chest,  a  faded  mat, 

And  broken  chairs  a  few. 
Were  all  we  had  to  grace  our  flat 

In  Hazel  Avenue. 

But  I  could  walk  to  Hampstead  Heath, 

And  crown  her  head  with  daisies, 
And  watch  the  streaming  world  beneath, 

And  men  with  other  Maisies. 

When  I  was  ill  and  she  was  pale 

And  empty  stood  our  store. 
She  left  the  latchkey  on  its  nail. 

And  saw  me  nevermore. 

Perhaps  she  cast  herself  away 

Lest  both  of  us  should  drown: 
Perhaps  she  feared  to  die,  as  they 

Who  die  in  Camden  Town. 

What  came  of  her?    The  bitter  nights 

Destroy  the  rose  and  lily. 
And  souls  arc  lost  among  the  lights 

Of  painted  Piccadilly. 

What  came  of  her?    The  river  flows 
.     So  deep  and  wide  and  stilly. 
And  waits  to  catch  the  fallen  rose 
And  clasp  the  broken  lily. 


I  dream  she  dwells  in  London  still 
And  breathes  the  evening  air. 

And  often  walk  to  Primrose  Hill, 
And  hope  to  meet  her  there. 


■I'f 


Once  more  together  we  will  live, 

For  I  will  find  her  yet: 
I  have  so  little  to  forgive; 

So  much,  I  can't  forget. 

James  Elruy  Flecker  [1884-1915] 


LOVE  AND  DEATH 

HELEN  OF  KIRCONNELL 

I  WISH  I  were  where  Helen  lies, 
Night  and  day  on  me  she  cries; 
O  that  I  were  where  Helen  lies, 
On  fair  Kirconnell  lea! 

Cursed  be  the  heart  that  thought  the  thought, 
And  cursed  the  hand  that  fired  the  shot, 
When  in  my  arms  burd  Helen  dropped, 
And  died  to  succor  me! 

0  think  na  ye  my  heart  was  sair, 

When  my  Love  dropped  and  spak  nae  mair! 
There  did  she  swoon  wi'  meikle  care. 
On  fair  Kirconnell  lea. 

As  I  went  down  the  water  side, 
None  but  my  foe  to  be  my  guide. 
None  but  my  foe  to  be  my  guide. 
On  fair  Kirconnell  lea; 

1  lighted  down  my  sword  to  draw, 
I  hacked  him  in  pieces  sma', 

I  hacked  him  in  pieces  sma', 
For  her  sake  that  died  for  me. 

O  Helen  fair,  beyond  compare! 
I'll  mak  a  garland  o'  thy  hair, 
Shall  bind  my  heart  for  evermair. 
Until  the  day  I  dee! 

O  that  I  were  where  Helen  lies! 
Night  and  day  on  me  she  cries; 
Out  of  my  bed  she  bids  me  rise, 
Says,  "Hasts,  and  come  to  me!" 
1060 


Willy   Drowned  in   Yarrow         1061, 

0  Helen  fair!     O  Helen  chaste! 
If  I  were  with  thee,  I'd  be  blest, 
Where  thou  lies  low  and  taks  thy  rest, 

On  fair  Kirconnell  lea. 

1  wish  my  grave  were  growing  green, 
A  winding-sheet  drawn  owre  my  e'en, 
And  I  in  Helen's  arms  lying. 

On  fair  Kirconnell  lea. 

I  wish  I  were  where  Helen  lies! 
Night  and  day  on  me  she  cries; 
And  I  am  weary  of  the  skies, 
For  her  sake  that  died  for  me. 

Unknown 


WILLY  DROWNED   IN  YARROW 

"Willy's  rare,  and  Willy's  fair. 
And  Willy's  wondrous  bonny; 
.  And  Willy  hecht  to  marry  me, 
Gin  e'er  he  married  ony. 

"Yestreen  I  made  my  bed  fu'  braid, 

This  night  I'll  make  it  narrow; 
For  a'  the  livelang  winter  night 

I  lie  twined  of  my  marrow. 

"Oh  came  you  by  yon  water-side? 

Pu'd  you  the  rose  or  lily? 
Or  came  you  by  yon  meadow  green? 

Or  saw  you  my  sweet  Willy?" 

She  sought  him  east,  she  sought  him  west. 
She  sought  him  braid  and  narrow; 

Syne  in  the  cleaving  of  a  craig, 

She  found  him  drowned  in  Yarrow. 

Unknown 


io62  Poems  of  Love 


ANNAN  WATER 

"  Annan  Water's  wading  deep, 

And  my  Love  Annie's  wondrous  bonny; 

And  I  am  laith  she  should  wet  her  feet, 
Because  I  love  her  best  of  ony." 

He's  loupen  on  his  bonny  gray, 

He  rade  the  right  gate  and  the  ready; 

For  all  the  storm  he  wadna  stay. 
For  seeking  of  his  bonny  lady. 

And  he  has  ridden  o'er  field  and  fell, 

Through  moor,  and  moss,  and  many  a  mire; 

His  spurs  of  steel  were  sair  to  bide. 
And  from  her  four  feet  flew  the  fire. 

"My  bonny  gray,  now  play  your  part! 

If  ye  be  the  steed  that  wins  my  dearie, 
With  corn  and  hay  ye '11  be  fed  for  aye. 

And  never  spur  shall  make  you  wearie." 

The  gray  was  a  mare,  and  a  right  gude  mare; 

But  when  she  wan  the  Annan  Water, 
She  could  not  have  ridden  the  ford  that  night 

Had  a  thousand  merks  been  wadded  at  her. 

"O  boatman,  boatman,  put  off  your  boat, 
Put  off  your  boat  for  golden  money! " 

But  for  all  the  gold  in  fair  Scotland, 

He  dared  not  take  him  through  to  Annie. 

"Oh,  I  was  sworn  so  late  yestreen. 

Not  by  a  single  oath,  but  mony! 
I'll  cross  the  drumly  stream  tonight. 

Or  never  could  I  face  my  honey." 

The  side  was  stey,  and  the  bottom  deep. 
From  bank  to  brae  the  water  pouring; 
The  bonny  gray  mare  she  swat  for  fear, 
'     For  she  heard  the  water-kelpy  roaring. 


The   Lament  of  the   Border  Widow     1063 

He  spurred  her  forth  into  the  flood, 

I  wot  she  swam  both  strong  and  steady; 

But  the  stream  was  broad,  and  her  strength  did  fail, 
And  he  never  saw  his  bonny  lady ! 

Unknown 


THE  LAMENT  OF  THE  BORDER  WIDOW 

My  love  he  built  me  a  bonnie  bower, 
And  clad  it  a'  wi'  lily  flower; 
A  brawer  bower  ye  ne'er  did  see. 
Than  my  true-love  he  built  for  me. 

There  came  a  man,  by  middle  day. 
He  spied  his  sport,  and  went  away; 
And  brought  the  king  that  very  night. 
Who  brake  my  bower,  and  slew  my  knight. 

He  slew  my  knight,  to  me  sae  dear; 
He  slew  my  knight,  and  poin'd  his  gear: 
My  servants  all  for  life  did  flee. 
And  left  me  in  extremitie. 

I  sewed  his  sheet,  making  my  mane; 
I  watched  the  corpse,  mysel  alane; 
I  watched  his  body  night  and  day; 
No  living  creature  came  that  way. 

I  took  his  body  on  my  back, 

And  whiles  I  gaed,  and  whiles  I  sat; 

I  digged  a  grave,  and  laid  him  in, 

And  happed  him  with  the  sod  sae  green. 

But  think  na  ye  my  heart  was  sair. 
When  I  laid  the  moul'  on  his  yellow  hair? 
O,  think  na  ye  my  heart  was  wae, 
When  I  turned  about,  away  to  gae? 

Nae  living  man  I'll  love  again. 
Since  that  my  lovely  knight  is  slain; 
Wi'  ae  lock  o'  his  yellow  hair 
I'll  chain  my  heart  for  cvcrmair. 

Unknown 


1064  Poems  of  Love 


ASPATIA'S   SONG  / 

From  "  The  Maid's  Tragedy  " 

Lay  a  garland  on  my  hearse 

Of  the  dismal  yew; 
Maidens,  willow  branches  bear; 

Say,  I  died  true.  ■ .  i  L 

My  love  was  false,  but  I  was  firm  ,^ 

From  my  hour  of  birth. 
Upon  my  buried  body  lie 

Lightly,  gentle  earth! 

John  Fletcher  [1579-1625] 

A   BALLAD 

From  the  "  What-d'ye-call-it  " 

'TwAS  when  the  seas  were  roaring 

With  hollow  blasts  of  wind, 
A  damsel  lay  deploring. 

All  on  a  rock  reclined. 
Wide  o'er  the  foaming  billows 

She  cast  a  wistful  look; 
Her  head  was  crowned  with  willows, 

That  trembled  o'er  the  brook. 

"Twelve  months  are  gone  and  over, 

And  nine  long  tedious  days; 
Why  didst  thou,  venturous  lover, 

Why  didst  thou  trust  the  seas? 
Cease,  cease  thou  cruel  ocean, 

And  let  my  lover  rest; 
Ah!  what's  thy  troubled  motion 

To  that  within  my  breast? 

"The  merchant  robbed  of  pleasure. 

Sees  tempests  in  despair; 
But  what's  the  loss  of  treasure, 

To  losing  of  my  dear? 


The   Braes  of  Yarrow  1065 


Should  you  some  coast  he  laid  on,  ^ 

Where  gold  and  diamonds  grow, 

You'd  find  a  richer  maiden, 
But  none  that  loves  you  so. 

"How  can  they  say  that  nature 

Has  nothing  made  in  vain; 
Why  then,  beneath  the  water, 

Should  hideous  rocks  remain? 
No  eyes  the  rocks  discover 

That  lurk  beneath  the  deep. 
To  wreck  the  wandering  lover, 

And  leave  the  maid  to  weep." 

All  melancholy  lying, 

Thus  wailed  she  for  her  dear; 
Repaid  each  blast  with  sighing, 

Each  billow  with  a  tear. 
When,  o'er  the  white  wave  stooping. 

His  floating  corpse  she  spied, 
Then,  like  a  lily  drooping, 

She  bowed  her  head,  and  died. 

John  Gay  [1685-1732] 


THE  BRAES   OF  YARROW 

Thy  braes  were  bonnie.  Yarrow  stream. 

When  first  on  them  I  met  my  lover: 
Thy  braes  how  dreary,  Yarrow  stream, 

When  now  thy  waves  his  body  cover! 
Forever  now,  O  Yarrow  stream! 

Thou  art  to  me  a  stream  of  sorrow; 
For  never  on  thy  banks  shall  I 

Behold  my  love,  the  flower  of  Yarrow. 

He  promised  me  a  milk-white  steed, 
To  bear  me  to  his  father's  bowers; 

He  promised  me  a  little  page. 
To  squire  me  to  his  father's  towers; 


io66  Poems  of  Love 

He  promised  me  a  wedding-ring, — 

The  wedding-day  was  lixed  to-morrow; 

^ow  he  is  wedded  to  his  grave, 
Alas!  his  watery  grave,  in  Yarrow. 

Sweet  were  his  words  when  last  we  met: 

My  passion  I  as  freely  told  him: 
Clasped  in  his  arms,  I  little  thought 

That  I  should  never  more  behold  him! 
Scarce  was  he  gone,  I  saw  his  ghost ; 

It  vanished  with  a  shriek  of  sorrow; 
Thrice  did  the  water-wraith  ascend, 

And  gave  a  doleful  groan  through  Yarrow. 

His  mother  from  the  window  looked, 

With  all  the  longing  of  a  mother; 
His  little  sister  weeping  walked 

The  greenwood  path  to  meet  her  brother. 
They  sought  him  east,  they  sought  him  west, 

They  sought  him  all  the  forest  thorough; 
They  only  saw  the  cloud  of  night, 

They  only  heard  the  roar  of  Yarrow! 

No  longer  from  thy  window  look, — 

Thou  hast  no  son,  thou  tender  mother! 
No  longer  walk,  thou  little  maid; 

Alas!  thou  hast  no  more  a  brother. 
No  longer  seek  him  east  or  west, 

And  search  no  more  the  forest  thorough; 
For.  wandering  in  the  night  so  dark, 

He  fell  a  lifeless  corse  in  Yarrow. 

The  tear  shall  never  leave  my  cheek, 

No  other  youth  shall  be  my  marrow: 
I'll  seek  thy  body  in  the  stream, 

And  then  with  thee  I'll  sleep  in  Yarrow. 
The  tear  did  never  leave  her  check, 

No  other  youth  became  her  marrow; 
She  found  his  body  in  the  stream, 

And  now  with  him  she  sleeps  in  Yarrow. 

John  Logan  [1748-17J 


The   Churchyard   on   the   Sands      1067 


THE  CHURCHYARD  ON  THE  SANDS 

My  love  lies  in  the  gates  of  foam, 
The  last  dear  wreck  of  shore; 

The  naked  sca-inarsh  binds  her  home, 
The  sand  her  chamber  door. 

The  gray  gull  flaps  the  written  stones, 

The  ox-birds  chase  the  tide; 
And  near  that  narrow  field  of  bones' 

Great  ships  at  anchor  ride. 

Black  piers  with  crust  of  dripping  green, 

One  foreland,  like  a  hand. 
O'er  intervals  of  grass  between 

Dim  lonely  dunes  of  sand. 

A  church  of  silent  weathered  looks, 

A  breezy  reddish  tower, 
A  yard  whose  mounded  resting-nooks 

Are  tinged  with  sorrel  flower. 

In  peace  the  swallow's  eggs  are  laid 

Along  the  belfry  walls; 
The  tempest  does  not  reach  her  shade. 

The  rain  her  silent  halls. 

But  sails  are  sweet  in  summer  sky, 
The  lark  throws  down  a  lay;'"""  J'-'^ 

The  long  salt  levels  steam  and  dry. 
The  cloud-heart  melts  away. 

But  patches  of  the  sea-pink  sliinc, 
The  pied  crows  poise  and  come; 

The  mallow  hangs,  the  bind-wceds  twine, 
Where  her  sweet  lips  are  dumb. 

The  passion  of  the  wave  is  mute; 

No  sound  or  ocean  shock; 
No  music  save  the  trilling  flute 

That  marks  the  curlew  flock. 


io68     zbn^^     Poems  of  Love  '  ? 

But  yonder  when  the  wind  is  keen, 
And  rainy  air  is  clear,  :  i  \J 

The  merchant  city's  spires  are  seen, 
The  toil  of  men  grows  near. 

Along  the  coast-way  grind  the  wheels 

Of  endless  carts  of  coal; 
And  on  the  sides  of  giant  keels 

The  shipyard  hammers  roll.  ?' 

The  world  creeps  here  upon  the  shout. 
And  stirs  my  heart  to  pain; 

The  mist  descends  and  blots  it  out, 
And  I  am  strong  again. 

Strong  and  alone,  my  dove,  with  thee; 

And  though  piine  eyes  be  wet, 
There's  nothing  in  the  world  to  me 

So  dear  as  my  regret. 

I  would  not  change  my  sorrow  sweet 

For  others'  nuptial  hours; 
I  love  the  daisies  at  thy  feet 

More  than  their  orange  flowers. 

My  hand  alone  shall  tend  thy  tomb 

From  leaf-bud  to  leaf -fall, 
And  wreathe  around  each  season's  bloom 

Till  autumn  ruins  ah. 

Let  snowdrops  early  in  the  year 
Droop  o'er  her  silent  breast; 

And  bid  the  later  cowslip  rear 
The  amber  of  its  crest. 

Come  hither,  linnets  tufted-red; 

Drift  by,  O  waihng  tern; 
Set  pure  vale  lilies  at  her  head, 

At  her  feet  lady-fern. 

Grow,  samphire,  at  the  tidal  brink. 
Wave  pansies  of  the  shore. 

To  whisper  how  alone  I  think 
Of  her  for  evermore. 


The   Churchyard  on   the   Sands      1069 

Bring  blue  sea-hollies  thorny,  keen, 

Long  lavender  in  flower; 
Gray  wormwood  like  a  hoary  queen, 

Stanch  mullein  like  a  tower. 

O  sea-wall,  mounded  long  and  low, 

Let  iron  bounds  be  thine; 
Nor  let  the  salt  wave  overflow 

That  breast  I  held  divine. 

Nor  float  its  sea- weed  to  her  hair, 

Nor  dim  her  eyes  with  sands; 
No  fluted  cockle  burrow  where 

Sleep  folds  her  patient  hands. 

Though  thy  crest  feel  the  wild  sea's  breath, 

Though  tide-weight  tear  thy  root, 
Oh,  guard  the  treasure-house,  where  death 

Has  bound  my  Darling  mute. 

Though  cold  her  pale  lips  to  reward 

With  love's  own  mysteries, 
Ah,  rob  no  daisy  from  her  sward, 

Rough  gale  of  eastern  seas! 

Ah,  render  sere  no  silken  bent 

That  by  her  head-stone  w'aves; 
Let  noon  and  golden  summer  blent 

Pervade  these  ocean  graves. 

And,  ah,  dear  heart,  in  thy  still  nest, 

Resign  this  earth  of  woes. 
Forget  the  ardors  of  the  west, 

Neglect  the  morning  glows. 

Sleep  and  forget  all  things  but  one. 

Heard  in  each  wave  of  sea, — 
How  lonely  all  the  years  will  run 

Until  I  rest  by  thee. 

John  Byrne  Leicester  Warren  [1835-1895] 


loyo  Poems  of  Love 


THE  MINSTREL'S   SONG 

Trom  "^lla" 

Oh  sing  unto  my  roundelay; 

Oh  drop  the  briny  tear  with  me; 
Dance  no  more  at  hoHday; 
Like  a  running  river  be! 
My  love  is  dead, 
Gone  to  his  death-bed, 
All  under  the  willow  tree! 

Black  his  hair  as  the  winter  night, 
White  his  throat  as  the  summer  snow. 

Red  his  cheek  as  the  morning  light. 
Cold  he  lies  in  the  grave  below. 

Sweet  his  tongue  as  the  throstle's  note; 

Quick  in  dance  as  thought  can  be; 
Deft  his  tabor,  cudgel  stout. 

Oh,  he  lies  by  the  willow  tree. 

Hark !  the  raven  flaps  his  wing 

In  the  briery  dell  below; 
Hark!  the  death-owl  loud  doth  sing, 

To  the  night-mares  as  they  go. 

See!  the  white  moon  shines  on  high; 

Whiter  is  my  true  love's  shroud; 
Whiter  than  the  morning  sky. 

Whiter  than  the  evening  cloud. 

Here,  upon  my  true  love's  grave. 
Shall  the  barren  flowers  be  laid; 

Not  one  holy  saint  to  save 
All  the  coldness  of  a  maid. 

With  my  hands  I'll  twist  the  briers 
Round  his  holy  corpse  to  gre; 

Elfin  fairy,  light  your  fires. 
Here  my  body  still  shall  be. 


Highland  Mary  1071 

Come,  with  acorn-cup  and  thorn, 

Drain  my  heartes  blood  away; 
Life  and  all  its  good  I  scorn, 

Dance  by  night,  or  feast  by  day. 

Water-witches,  crowned  with  reeds, 

Bear  me  to  your  deadly  tide. 
I  die!  I  come!  my  true  love  waits! — 

Thus  the  damsel  spake,  and  died. 

Thomas  Challcrlon  [1752-1770] 


HIGHLAND   MARY 

Ye  banks  and  braes  and  streams  around 

The  castle  o'  Montgomery, 
Green  be  your  woods,  and  fair  your  flowers, 

Your  waters  never  drumlie! 
There  simmer  first  unfauld  her  robes, 

And  there  the  langest  tarry; 
For  there  I  took  the  last  fareweel 

O'  my  sweet  Highland  Mary. 

How  sweetly  bloomed  the  gay  green  birk. 

How  rich  the  hawthorn's  blossom, 
As  underneath  their  fragrant  shade 

I  clasped  her  to  my  bosom ! 
The  golden  hours  on  angel's  wings 

Flew  o'er  me  and  my  dearie; 
For  dear  to  me  as  light  and  life 

Was  my  sweet  Highland  Mary. 

Wi'  mony  a  vow  and  locked  embrace 

Our  parting  was  fu'  tender; 
And,  pledging  aft  to  meet  again. 

We  tore  oursels  asunder; 
But,  O!  fell  Death's  untimely  frost, 

That  nipped  my  flower  sae  early! 
Now  green's  the  sod,  and  cauld's  the  clay, 

That  wraps  my  Highland  Mary! 


1072  Poems  of  Love 

O  pale,  pale  now,  those  rosy  lips, 

I  aft  hae  kissed  sae  fondly! 
And  closed  for  aye  the  sparkling  glance 

That  dwelt  on  me  sae  kindly; 
And  moldering  now  in  silent  dust 

That  heart  that  lo'ed  me  dearly! 
But  still  within  my  bosom's  core 

Shall  live  my  Highland  Mary. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


TO   MARY   IN   HEAVEN 

Thou  hngering  star,  with  lessening  ray. 

That  lov'st  to  greet  the  early  morn. 
Again  thou  usher'st  in  the  day 

My  Mary  from  my  soul  was  torn. 
O  Maryl  dear  departed  shade! 

Where  is  thy  place  of  blissful  rest? 
See'st  thou  thy  lover  lowly  laid? 

Hear'st  thou  the  groans  that  rend  his  breast? 

That  sacred  hour  can  I  forget, 

Can  I  forget  the  hallowed  grove. 
Where  by  the  winding  Ayr  we  met. 

To  live  one  day  of  parting  love! 
Eternity  will  not  efface 

Those  records  dear  of  transports  past; 
Thy  image  at  our  last  embrace, — 

Ah!  little  thought  we  'twas  our  last! 

Ayr,  gurgling,  kissed  his  pebbled  shore, 

O'erhung  with  wild  woods,  thickening  green; 
The  fragrant  birch,  and  hawthorn  hoar, 

Twined  amorous  round  the  raptured  scene; 
The  flowers  sprang  wanton  to  be  pressed, 

The  birds  sang  love  on  every  spray,—; 
Till  soon,  too  soon,  the  glowing  west        oZ 

Proclaimed  the  speed  of  winged  day. '  1 


Lucy  1073 

Still  o'er  these  scenes  my  memory  wakes, 

And  fondly  broods  with  miser  care!  ' 

Time  but  the  impression  stronger  makes, 

As  streams  their  channels  deeper  wear. 
My  Mary!  dear  departed  shade! 

Where  is  thy  place  of  blissful  rest? 
See'st  thou  thy  lover  lowly  laid? 

Hcar'st  thou  the  groans  that  rend  his  breast? 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


LUCY 
I 

Strange  fits  of  passion  have  I  known: 
And  I  will  dare  to  tell, 
But  in  the  lover's  ear  alone, 
What  once  to  me  befell. 

When  she  I  loved  looked  every  day 
Fresh  as  a  rose  in  June, 
I  to  her  cottage  bent  my  way, 
Beneath  an  evening  moon. 

Upon  the  moon  I  fixed  my  eye. 

All  over  the  wide  lea; 

With  quickening  pace  my  horse  drew  nigh 

Those  paths  so  dear  to  me. 

And  now  we  reached  the  orchard-plot; 
And,  as  we  climbed  the  hill, 
The  sinking  moon  to  Lucy's  cot 
Came  near,  and  nearer  still. 

In  one  of  those  sweet  dreams  I  slept,     ;/ 
Kind  Nature's  gentlest  boon! 
And  all  the  while  my  eyes  I  kept 
On  the  descending  moon. 


I074  Poems  of  Love 

My  horse  moved  on;  hoof  after  hoof 
He  raised,  and  never  stopped: 
When  down  behind  the  cottage  roof, 
At  once,  the  bright  moon  dropped. 

What  fond  and  wayward  thoughts  will  sHde 

Into  a  lover's  head! 

"O  mercy!"  to  myself  I  cried, 

"If  Lucy  should  be  dead!" 

II 

She  dwelt  among  the  untrodden  ways 

Beside  the  springs  of  Dove, 
A  Maid  whom  there  were  none  to  praise 

And  very  few  to  love: 

A  violet  by  a  mossy  stone 

Half  hidden  from  the  eye! 
Fair  as  a  star,  when  only  one 

Is  shining  in  the  sky. 

She  lived  unknown,  and  few  could  know 

When  Lucy  ceased  to  be; 
But  she  is  in  her  grave,  and  oh, 

The  difference  to  me! 

Ill 

I  traveled  among  unknown  men, 

In  lands  beyond  the  sea; 
Nor,  England!  did  I  know  till  then 

What  love  I  bore  to  thee. 

'Tis  past,  that  melancholy  dream! 

Nor  will  I  quit  thy  shore 
A  second  time;  for  still  I  seem 

To  love  thee  more  and  more. 

Among  thy  mountains  did  I  feel 

The  joy  of  my  desire; 
And  she  I  cherished  turned  her  wheel 

Beside  an  English  fire. 


Lucy  lo; 

Thy  mornings  showed,  thy  nights  concealed, 

The  bowers  where  Lucy  played; 
And  thine  too  is  the  last  green  field 

That  Lucy's  eyes  surveyed. 

IV 

Three  years  she  grew  in  sun  and  shower; 
Then  Nature  said,  "A  lovelier  flower 

On  earth  was  never  sown; 
This  child  I  to  myself  will  take; 
She  shall  be  mine,  and  I  will  make 

A  lady  of  my  own. 

"Myself  will  to  my  darling  be 
Both  law  and  impulse:  and  with  me 

The  girl,  in  rock  and  plain, 
In  earth  and  heaven,  in  glade  and  bower, 
Shall  feel  an  overseeing  power 

To  kindle  or  restrain. 

"She  shall  be  sportive  as  the  fawn 
That  wild  with  glee  across  the  lawn 

Or  up  the  mountain  springs; 
And  hers  shall  be  the  breathing  balm, 
And  hers  the  silence  and  the  calm 

Of  mute  insensate  things. 

"The  floating  clouds  their  state  shall  lend 
To  her;  for  her  the  willow  bend; 

Nor  shall  she  fail  to  see 
Even  in  the  motions  of  the  storm 
Grace  that  shall  mold  the  maiden's  form 

By  silent  sympathy. 

"The  stars  of  midnight  shall  be  dear 
To  her;  and  she  shall  lean  her  ear 

In  many  a  secret  place 
Where  rivulets  dance  their  wayward  round, 
And  beauty  born  of  murmuring  sound 

Shall  pass  into  her  face. 


1076  Poems  of  Love 

"And  vital  feelings  of  delight  ' 

Shall  rear  her  form  to  stately  height, 

Her  virgin  bosom  swell; 
Such  thoughts  to  Lucy  I  will  give 
While  she  and  I  together  live 

Here  in  this  happy  dell." 

Thus  Nature  spake — The  work  was  done 
How  soon  my  Lucy's  race  was  run ! 

She  died,  and  left  to  me 
This  heath,  this  calm  and  quiet  scene; 
The  memory  of  what  has  been, 

And  never  more  will  be. 


A  slumber  did  my  spirit  seal; 

I  had  no  human  fears: 
She  seemed  a  thing  that  could  not  feel 

The  touch  of  earthly  years. 

No  motion  has  she  now,  or  force; 

She  neither  hears  nor  sees; 
Rolled  round  in  earth's  diurnal  course. 

With  rocks,  and  stones,  and  trees. 

William  Wordsworth  [i 770-1850] 


PROUD   MAISIE 

From  "  The  Heart  of  Midlothian  " 

Proud  Maisie  is  in  the  wood, 

Walking  so  early; 
Sweet  Robin  sits  on  the  bush, 

Singing  so  rarely. 


"Tell  me,  thou  bonny  bird, 
When  shall  I  marry  me?" 

— "When  six  braw  gentlemen 
Kirkward  shall  carry  ye." 


The   Maid's   Lament  1077 

"Who  makes  the  bridal  bed, 

Birdie,  say  truly?" 
— "The  gray-headed  sexton 

That  delves  the  grave  duly. 

>rl7/  \:>i[i] 

"The  glow-worm  o'er  grave  and  stone 
Shall  light  thee  steady; 
•  The  owl  from  the  steeple  sing 
Welcome,  proud  lady!" 

Walter  Scotl  [1771-1832] 

SONG 

Earl  March  looked  on  his  dying  child, 

And,  smit  with  grief  to  view  her — 
The  youth,  he  cried,  whom  I  exiled 

Shall  be  restored  to  woo  her. 

She's  at  the  window  many  an  hour 

His  coming  to  discover; 
And  he  looked  up  to  Ellen's  bower 

And  she  looked  on  her  lover — ■ 

But  ah!  so  pale,  he  knew  her  not, 

Though  her  smile  on  him  was  dwelling! 

And  I  am  then  forgot — forgot? 
It  broke  the  heart  of  Ellen. 

In  vain  he  weeps,  in  vain  he  sighs. 

Her  cheek  is  cold  as  ashes;  j  JucI 

Nor  love's  own  kiss  shall  wake  those  eyes  o'l 

To  lift  their  silken  lashes. 

Thoma 9  Ca niphcll  [1777-1844] 

THE  MAID'S  LAMENT 

From  "The  Examination  of  Shakespeare" 

I  LOVED  him  not ;  and  yet  now  he  is  gone 

I  feel  I  am  alone. 
I  checked  him  while  he  spoke;  yet  could  he  speak, 

Alas!    I  would  not  check. 


loyS  Poems  of  Love 

For  reasons  not  to  love  him  once  I  sought, 

And  wearied  all  my  thought 
To  vex  myself  and  him :  I  now  would  give 

My  love,  could  he  but  live 
Who  lately  lived  for  me,  and  when  he  found 

'Twas  vain,  in  holy  ground 
He  hid  his  face  amid  the  shades  of  death. 

I  waste  for  him  my  breath 
Who  wasted  his  for  me;  but  mine  returns, 
.61     And  this  lorn  bosom  burns 
With  stifling  heat,  heaving  it  up  in  sleep. 

And  waking  me  to  weep 
Tears  that  had  melted  his  soft  heart:  for  years 

Wept  he  as  bitter  tears. 
Merciful  God  !    Such  was  his  latest  prayer. 

These  may  she  never  share  ! 
Quieter  is  his  breath,  his  breast  more  cold. 

Than  daisies  in  the  mold. 
Where  children  spell,  athwart  the  churchyard  gate. 

His  name  and  life's  brief  date.         '  t  , ' 
Pray  for  him,  gentle  souls,  whoe'er  you  be, 

And,  oh!  pray  too  for  me! 

Walter  Savage  Lander  [1775-1864] 


"SHE   IS   FAR   FROM   THE   LAND" 

She  is  far  from  the  land  where  her  young  hero  sleeps, 

And  lovers  are  round  her,  sighing: 
But  coldly  she  turns  from  their  gaze,  and  weeps. 

For  her  heart  in  his  grave  is  lying. 

She  sings  the  wild  songs  of  her  dear  native  plains, 
Every  note  which  he  loved  awaking; — 

Ah!  little  they  think,  who  delight  in  her  strains. 
How  the  heart  of  the  minstrel  is  breaking. 

He  had  lived  for  his  love,  for  his  country  he  died, 
They  were  all  that  to  life  had  entwined  him; 

Nor  soon  shall  the  tears  of  his  country  be  dried, 
Nor  long  will  his  love  stay  behind  him. 


On   a    Picture   by   Poussin  1079 

Oh!  make  her  a  grave  where  the  sunbeams  rest, 

When  they  promise  a  glorious  morrow; 
They'll  shine  o'er  her  sleep,  like  a  smile  from  the  West, 

From  her  own  loved  island  of  sorrow. 

Thomas  Moore  [1770-1852] 

"AT  THE   MID   HOUR  OF   NIGHT" 

At  the  mid  hour  of  night,  when  stars  are  weeping,  I  fly 
To  the  lone  vale  we  loved,  when  life  shone  warm  in  thine  eye; 
And  I  think  oft,  if  spirits  can  steal  from  the  regions  of  air 
To  revisit  past  scenes  of  delight,  thou  wilt  come  to  me 
there, 
And  tell  me  our  love  is  remembered  even  in  the  sky. 

Then  I  sing  the  wild  song  'twas  once  such  rapture  to  hear. 
When  our  voices  commingling  breathed  like  one  on  the  ear; 
And,  as  Echo  far  off  through  the  vale  my  sad  orison  rolls, 
I  think,  O  my  love!  'tis  thy  voice  from  the  Kingdom  of 
Souls  \  \oyi\jUi. 

Faintly  answering  still  the  notes  that  once  were  so  dear. 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 

ON    A    PICTURE    BY    POUSSIN    REPRESENTING 
SHEPHERDS  IN  ARCADIA 

Ah,  happy  youths,  ah,  happy  maid, 

Snatch  present  pleasure  while  ye  may; 
Laugh,  dance,  and  sing  in  sunny  glade. 

Your  limbs  are  light,  your  hearts  are  gay; 
Ye  little  think  there  comes  a  day 

('Twill  come  to  you,  it  came  to  me) 
When  love  and  life  shall  pass  away: 

I,  too,  once  dwelt  in  Arcady. 

Or  listless  lie  by  yonder  stream. 

And  muse  and  watch  the  ripples  play, 
Or  note  their  noiseless  flow,  and  deem 

That  life  thus  gently  glides  away — 
That  love  is  but  a  sunny  ray 

To  make  our  years  go  smiling  by. 
I  knew  that  stream,  I  too  could  dream, 

I,  too,  once  dwelt  in  Arcady. 


io8o  Poems   of  Love 

Sing,  shepherds,  sing;  sweet  lady,  listen;     ' 

Sing  to  the  music  of  the  rill. 
With  happy  tears  her  bright  eyes  glisten,  '  '  '  ' 

For,  as  each  pause  the  echoes  fill,         ^^ 
They  waft  her  name  from  hill  to  hill — 

So  listened  my  lost  love  to  me, 
The  voice  she  loved  has  long  been  still; 

I,  too,  once  dwelt  in  Arcady. 

John  Addington  Symonds  [i 840-1 893] 

.  X  uiit. 

■n  uT 
THRENODY 

There's  a  grass-grown  road  from  the  valley — 
A  winding  road  and  steep —  ■  ill 

That  leads  to  the  quiet  hill-top,  ( // 

Where  lies  your  love  asleep.  ...  ^'v^-  c.t,  .biiA 
While  mine  is  lying,  God  knows  where,' 'i  ,-''ii  fj  1 
A  hundred  fathoms  deep. 

I  saw  you  kneel  at  a  grave-side — 

How  still  a  grave  can  be. 

Wrapped  in  the  tender  starlight,  '^^O. 

Far  from  the  moaning  sea! 

But  through  all  dreams  and  starlight, 

The  breakers  call  to  me. 

Oh,  steep  is  your  way  to  Silence —   ■ 

But  steeper  the  ways  I  roam, 

For  never  a  road  can  take  me 

Beyond  the  wind  and  foam,  y 

And  never  a  road  can  reach  him 

Who  lies  so  far  from  home. 

Ruth  Ciithrie  Harding  [18S2- 


STRONG  AS  DEATH 

O  DEATH,  when  thou  shalt  come  to  me^' 
From  out  thy  dark,  where  she  is  now, 

Come  not  with  graveyard  smell  on  thee,    ' 
Or  withered  roses  on  thy  brow. 


"I   Shall  Not  Cry   Return"        1081 

Come  not,  O  Death,  with  hollow  tone. 
And  soundless  step,  and  clammy  hand — 

Lo,  I  am  now  no  less  alone 

Than  in  thy  desolate,  doubtful  laAd; 

But  with  that  sweet  and  subtle  scent 

That  ever  clung  about  her  (such 
As  with  all  things  she  brushed  was  blent) ; 

And  with  her  quick  and  tender  touch. 

With  the  dim  gold  that  lit  her  hair, 

Crown  thyself,  Death;  let  fall  thy  tread 

So  light  that  I  may  dream  her  there, 
And  turn  upon  my  dying  bed. 

And  through  my  chilling  veins  shall  flame 
My  love,  as  though  beneath  her  breath; 

And  in  her  voice  but  call  my  name, 
And  I  will  follow  thee,  O  Death. 

Henry  Cuyler  Bnnner  [1855-1896] 


"I  SHALL  NOT  CRY  RETURN" 

I  SHALL  not  cry  Return!  Return! 

Nor  weep  my  years  away; 
But  just  as  long  as  sunsets  burn. 

And  dawns  make  no  delay, 
I  shall  be  lonesome — I  shall  miss 
Your  hand,  your  voice,  your  smile,  your  kiss. 

Not  often  shall  I  speak  your  name. 

For  what  would  strangers  care 
That  once  a  sudden  tempest  came 

And  swept  my  gardens  bare. 
And  then  you  passed,  and  in  your  place 
Stood  Silence  with  her  lifted  face. 

Not  always  sliall  this  parting  be, 
For  though  1  travel  slow, 


io82  Poems  of  Love 

I,  too,  may  claim  eternity 

And  find  the  way  you  go; 
And  so  I  do  my  task  and  wait 
The  opening  of  the  outer  gate. 

Ellen  M.  H.  Gales  [1835- 


'OH!   SNATCHED   AWAY  IN  BEAUTY'S   BLOOM" 

Oh!  snatched  away  in  beauty's  bloom, 
On  thee  shall  press  no  ponderous  tomb; 
But  on  thy  turf  shall  roses  rear 
Their  leaves,  the  earliest  of  the  year; 
And  the  wild  cypress  wave  in  tender  gloom: 

And  oft  by  yon  blue  gushing  stream 
Shall  Sorrow  lean  her  drooping  head, 
And  feed  deep  thought  with  many  a  dream, 
And  lingering  pause  and  lightly  tread; 
Fond  wretch!  as  if  her  step  disturbed  the  dead! 

Away!  we  know  that  tears  are  vain, 
That  Death  nor  heeds  nor  hears  distress: 
Will  this  unteach  us  to  complain? 
Or  make  one  mourner  weep  the  less? 
And  thou, — who  tell'st  me  to  forget, 
Thy  looks  are  wan,  thine  eyes  are  wet. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [i 788-1 824] 

TO   MARY 

If  I  had  thought  thou  couldst  have  died, 

I  might  not  weep  for  thee;  '■   '" 

But  I  forgot,  when  by  thy  side, 

That  thou  couldst  mortal  be: 
It  never  through  my  mind  had  passed 

The  time  -would  e'er  be  o'er. 
And  I  on  thee  should  look  my  last. 

And  thou  shouldst  smile  no  more! 


My   Heart  and   I  1083 

And  still  upon  that  face  I  look, 

And  think  'twill  smile  again; 
And  still  the  thought  I  will  not  brook, 

That  I  must  look  in  vain. 
But  when  I  speak — thou  dost  not  say 

What  thou  ne'er  left'st  unsaid; 
And  now  I  feel,  as  well  I  may, 

Sweet  Mary,  thou  art  dead! 

If  thou  wouldst  stay,  e'en  as  thou  art, 

All  cold  and  all  serene, 
I  still  might  press  thy  silent  hearty  >  inAN 

And  where  thy  smiles  have  been. 
While  e'en  thy  chill,  bleak  corse  I  have, .?! 

Thou  seemest  still  mine  own; 
But  there  I  lay  thee  in  thy  grave, — 

And  I  am  now  alone! 

I  do  not  think,  where'er  thou  art, 

Thou  hast  forgotten  me; 
And  I,  perhaps,  may  soothe  this  heart 

In  thinking,  too,  of  thee; 
Yet  there  was  round  thee  such  a  dawn 

Of  light  ne'er  seen  before. 
As  fancy  never  could  have  drawn, 

And  never  can  restore! 

Charles  Wolfe  [1791-1823] 

MY  HEART  AND   I 

Enough!  we're  tired,  my  heart  and  I.^  d^iiI 
We  sit  beside  the  headstone  thus. 
And  wish  that  name  were  carved  for  us. 

The  moss  reprints  more  tenderly 

The  hard  types  of  the  mason's  knife, 
As  Heaven's  sweet  life  renews  earth's  life 

With  which  we're  tired,  my  heart  and  I.     " 

You  see  we're  tired,  my  heart  and  I.  •/ 

We  dealt  with  books,  we  trusted  men, 
And  in  our  own  blood  drenched  the  pen, 


1084  Poems  of  Love 

As  if  such  colors  could  not  fly. 

We  walked  too  straight  for  fortune's  end, 
We  loved  too  true  to  keep  a  friend; 

At  last  we're  tired,  my  heart  and  I. 

How  tired  we  feel,  my  heart  and  I! 

We  seem  of  no  use  in  the  world; 

Our  fancies  hang  gray  and  uncurled 
About  men's  eyes  indifferently; 

Our  voice  which  thrilled  you  so,  will  let 

You  sleep;  our  tears  are  only  wet: 
What  do  we  here,  my  heart  and  I? 

So  tired,  so  tired,  my  heart  and  I! 
It  was  not  thus  in  that  old  time 
When  Ralph  sat  with  me  'neath  the  lime 

To  watch  the  sunset  from  the  sky. 

"Dear  love,  you're  looking  tired,"  he  said: 
I,  smiling  at  him,  shook  my  head. 

'Tis  now  we're  tired,  my  heart  and  I. 

So  tired,  so  tired,  my  heart  and  I ! 

Though  now  none  takes  me  on  his  arm 
To  fold  me  close  and  kiss  me  warm 

Till  each  quick  breath  end  in  a  sigh 
Of  happy  languor.    Now,  alone, 
^'' '"    We  lean  upon  this  graveyard  stone, 

Uncheered,  unkissed,  my  heart  and  I.    - 

Tired  out  we  are,  my  heart  and  I. 
Suppose  the  world  brought  diadems 
To  tempt  us,  crusted  with  loose  gems 

Of  powers  and  pleasures?    Let  it  try. 
We  scarcely  care  to  look  at  even 
A  pretty  child,  or  God's  blue  heaven, 

We  feel  so  tired,  my  heart  and  I. 

Yet  who  complains?    My  heart  and  I? 
In  this  abundant  earth  no  doubt 
Is  little  room  for  things  worn  out: 


Rosalind's  Scroll  1085 

Disdain  them,  break  them,  throw  them  by! 
And  if  before  the  days  grew  rough 
We  once  were  loved,  used, — well  enough, 

I  think,  we've  fared,  my  heart  and  I. 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Brou<>ung  [1806-1861] 


ROSALIND'S   SCROLL 

From  "The  Poet's  Vow" 

I  LEFT  thee  last,  a  child  at  heart, 

A  woman  scarce  in  years: 
I  come  to  thee,  a  solemn  corpse 

Which  neither  feels  nor  fears. 
I  have  no  breath  to  use  in  sighs; 
They  laid  the  dead-weights  on  mine  eyes 

To  seal  them  safe  from  tears. 

Look  on  me  with  thine  own  calm  look: 

I  meet  it  calm  as  thou. 
No  look  of  thine  can  change  this  smile, 

Or  break  thy  sinful  vow: 
I  tell  thee  that  my  poor  scorned  heart 
Is  of  thine  earth — thine  earth,  a  part: 

It  cannot  vex  thee  now. 

But  out,  alas!  these  words  are  writ 

By  a  living,  loving  one, 
Adown  whose  cheeks  the  proofs  of  life, 

The  warm  quick  tears  do  run: 
Ah,  let  the  unloving  corpse  control 
Thy  scorn  back  from  the  loving  soul 

.Whose  place  of  rest  is  won. 

I  have  prayed  for  thee  with  bursting  sob 
When  passion's  course  was  free; 

I  have  prayed  for  thee  with  silent  lips 
In  the  anguish  none  could  sec; 

They  whispered  oft,  "She  sleepeth  soft"- 
But  I  only  prayed  for  Ihee. 


jo86  Poems  of  Love 

Go  to!    I  pray  for  thee  no  more: 

The  corpse's  tongue  is  still; 
Its  folded  fingers  point  to  heaven, 

But  point  there  stiff  and  chill: 
No  farther  wrong,  no  farther  woe 
Hath  license  from  the  sin  below 

Its  tranquil  heart  to  thrill. 

I  charge  thee,  by  the  living's  prayer, 

And  the  dead's  silentness. 
To  wring  from  out  thy  soul  a  cry 

Which  God  shall  hear  and  bless! 
Lest  Heaven's  own  palm  droop  in  my  hand, 
And  pale  among  the  saints  I  stand, 

A  saint  companionless. 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Broivning  [1806-1861 

LAMENT  OF  THE  IRISH  EMIGRANT 

I'm  sittin'  on  the  stile,  Mary, 

Where  we  sat  side  by  side 
On  a  bright  May  mornin'  long  ago. 

When  first  you  were  my  bride. 
The  corn  was  springin'  fresh  and  green, 

And  the  lark  sang  loud  and  high. 
And  the  red  was  on  your  lip,  Mary, 

And  the  love-hght  in  your  eye. 

The  place  is  little  changed,  Mary,  ^ 

The  day  is  bright  as  then. 
The  lark's  loud  song  is  in  my  ear,         , , 

And  the  corn  is  green  again; 
But  I  miss  the  soft  clasp  of  your  hand. 

And  your  breath,  warm  on  my  cheek: 
And  I  still  keep  list'nin'  for  the  words 

You  never  more  will  speak. 

'Tis  but  a  step  down  yonder  lane. 
And  the  little  church  stands  near — 

The  church  where  we  were  wed,  Mary; 
I  see  the  spire  from  here. 


Lament  of  the   Irish   Emigrant      1087 

But  the  graveyard  lies  between,  Mary, 
And  my  step  might  break  your  rest — 

For  I've  laid  you,  darling,  down  to  sleep, 
With  your  baby  on  your  breast. 

I'm  very  lonely  now,  Mary, 

For  the  poor  make  no  new  friends; 
But,  oh!  they  love  the  better  still 

The  few  our  Father  sends. 
And  you  were  all  I  had,  Mary, 

My  blessin'  and  my  pride: 
There's  nothin'  left  to  care  for  now, 

Since  my  poor  Mary  died. 

Yours  was  the  good,  brave  heart,  Mary, 
''      That  still  kept  hoping  on. 
When  the  trust  in  God  had  left  my  soul, 

And  my  arm's  young  strength  was  gone;      ' 
There  was  comfort  ever  on  your  lip,  ^ 

And  the  kind  look  on  your  brow — 
I  bless  you,  Mary,  for  that  same, 

Though  you  cannot  hear  me  now. 

I  thank  you  for  the  patient  smile 

When  your  heart  was  fit  to  break,  - 

When  the  hunger  pain  was  gnawin'  there, 

And  you  hid  it  for  my  sake; 
I  bless  you  for  the  pleasant  word. 

When  your  heart  was  sad  and  sore — 
Oh!  I'm  thankful  you  are  gone,  Mary,  ' 

Where  grief  can't  reach  you  more! 

I'm  biddin'  you  a  long  farewell, 

My  Mary — kind  and  true! 
But  I'll  not  forget  you,  darling. 

In  the  land  I'm  goin'  to: 
They  say  there's  bread  and  work  for  all,         ' 

And  the  sun  shines  alwaj's  there. 
But  I'll  not  forget  old  Ireland, 

Were  it  fifty  times  as  fair! 


io88  Poems  of  Love  ^^^ 


mh,  i 


And  often  in  those  grand  old  woods     .-,  .,^a- 

I'll  sit,  and  shut  my  eyes, 
And  my  heart  will  travel  back  again 

To  the  place  where  Mary  lies; 
And  I'll  think  I  see  the  httle  stile 

Where  we  sat  side  by  side,  t  ^  ^ 

And  the  springin'  corn,  and  the  bright  May  morn, 

When  lirst  you  were  my  bride. 

Helen  Selina  Sheridan  [1807-1867] 

THE   KING  OF  DENMARK'S   RIDE 

Word  was  brought  to  the  Danish  king 

(Hurry!) 
That  the  love  of  his  heart  lay  suffering. 
And  pined  for  the  comfort  his  voice  would  bring; 

(O,  ride  as  though  you  were  flying!) 
Better  he  loves  each  golden  curl 
On  the  brow  of  that  Scandinavian  girl 
Than  his  rich  crown  jewels  of  ruby  and  pearl: 
And  his  rose  of  the  isles  is  dying! 

Thirty  nobles  saddled  with  speed; 

(Hurry!) 
Each  one  mounting  a  gallant  steed 
Which  he  kept  for  battle  and  days  of  need; 

(O,  ride  as  though  you  were  flying!) 
Spurs  were  struck  in  the  foaming  flank; 
Worn-out  chargers  staggered  and  sank; 
Bridles  were  slackened,  and  girths  were  burst; 
But  ride  as  they  would,  the  king  rode  first, 
For  his  rose  of  the  isles  lay  dying! 

His  nobles  are  beaten,  one  by  one; 

(Hurry!) 
They  have  fainted,  and  faltered,  and  homeward  gone; 
His  little  fair  page  now  follows  alone. 

For  strength  and  for  courage  trying! 
The  king  looked  back  at  that  faithful  child; 
Wan  was  the  face  that  answering  smiled; 


The  Watcher  1089 

They  passed  the  drawbridge  \Vith  clattering  din, 
Then  he  dropped ;  and  only  the  king  rode  in 
Where  his  rose  of  the  isles  lay  dying! 

The  king  blew  a  blast  on  his  bugle  horn; 

(Silence!) 
No  answer  came;  but  faint  and  forlorn 
An  echo  returned  on  the  cold  gray  morn, 

Like  the  breath  of  a  spirit  sighing. 
The  castle  portal  stood  grimly  wide; 
None  welcomed  the  king  from  that  weary  ride; 
For  dead,  in  the  light  of  the  dawning  day, 
The  pale  sweet  form  of  the  welcomer  lay, 
Who  had  yearned  for  his  voice  while  dying! 

The  panting  steed,  with  a  drooping  crest. 

Stood  weary. 
The  king  returned  from  her  chamber  of  rest, 
The  thick  sobs  choking  in  his  breast; 

And,  that  dumb  companion  eyeing, 
The  tears  gushed  forth  which  he  strove  to  check; 
He  bowed  his  head  on  his  charger's  neck: 
"O  steed,  that  every  nerve  didst  strain, 
Dear  steed,  our  ride  hath  been  in  vain 
To  the  halls  where  my  love  lay  dying!" 

Caroline  Elizabeth  Sarah  Norton  [1808-1870] 

THE  WATCHER 

A  ROSE  for  a  young  head, 

A  ring  for  a  bride, 

Joy  for  the  homestead 

Clean  and  wide —  ,    . ; , .      ,  ^ , 

Who's  that  waiting 

In  the  rain  outside? 

A  heart  for  an  old  friend, 
A  hand  for  the  new : 
Love  can  to  earth  lend 
Heaven's  hue — 

Who's  that  standing 

In  the  silver  dew? 


1090  Poems  of  Love 

A  smile  for  the  parting, 

A  tear  as  they  go, 

God's  sweethearting 

Ends  just  so — 

Who's  that  watching  |-(jj[  3f[x 

Where  the  black  winds  blow?  :-m 

He  who  is  waiting 

In  the  rain  outside, 

He  who  is  standing 

Where  the  dew  drops  wide,  ■ ' 

He  who  is  watching 

In  the  wind  must  ride 

(Though  the  pale  hands  cling)         '  - 

With  the  rose 

And  the  ring 

And  the  bride, 
Must  ride 
With  the  red  of  the  rose, 
And  the  gold  of  the  ring, 
And  the  lips  and  the  hair  of  the  bride. 
James  Stephens  [18 

THE  THREE  SISTERS 

Gone  are  those  three,  those  sisters  rare  \''^ 
With  wonder-lips  and  eyes  ashine. 
One  was  wise  and  one  was  fair, 
And  one  was  mine. 

Ye  mourners,  weave  for  the  sleeping  hair 
Of  only  two  your  ivy  vine. 
For  one  was  wise  and  one  was  fair. 
But  one  was  mine. 

Arthur  Davison  Ficke  [1883- 

BALLAD 

He  said:  "The  shadows  darken  down, 
The  night  is  near  at  hand. 

Now  who's  the  friend  will  follow  me 
Into  the  sunless  land? 


Ballad  1091 

"  For  I  have  vassals  leal  and  true, 

And  I  have  comrades  kind, 
And  wheresoe'er  my  soul  shall  speed, 

They  will  not  stay  behind." 

He  sought  the  brother  young  and  blithe 

Who  bore  his  spear  and  shield: 
"In  the  long  chase  you've  followed  me, 

And  in  the  battle-field. 

"Few  vows  you  make;  but  true's  your  heart, 

And  you  with  me  will  win." 
He  said:  "God  speed  you,  brother  mine. 

But  I  am  ne.xt  of  kin." 

He  sought  the  friar,  the  gray  old  priest 

Who  loved  his  father's  board. 
The  friar  he  turned  him  to  the  east 

And  reverently  adored. 

He  said:  "A  godless  name  you  bear, 

A  godless  life  you've  led. 
And  whoso  wins  along  with  you, 

His  spirit  shall  have  dread. 

"Oh,  hasten,  get  your  guilty  soul 

From  every  burden  shriven; 
Yet  you  are  bound  for  flame  and  dole, 

But  I  am  bound  for  heaven." 

He  sought  the  lady  bright  and  proud, 

Who  sate  at  his  right  hand: 
"Make  haste,  O  Love,  to  follow  me 

Into  the  sunless  land." 

She  said:  ":\nd  pass  you  in  your  prime? 

Heaven  give  me  days  of  cheer! 
And  keep  me  from  the  sunless  clime 

Many  and  many  a  year." 


1092  Poems  of  Love 

All  heavily  the  sun  sank  down 
Among  black  clouds  of  fate. 

There  came  a  woman  fair  and  wan 
Unto  the  castle  gate. 

Through  gazing  vassals,  idle  serfs, 

So  silently  she  sped! 
The  winding  staircase  echoed  not 

Unto  her  light,  light  tread. 

Jij]o;lHis  lady  eyed  her  scornfully. 
She  stood  at  his  right  hand; 
She  said:  "And  I  will  follow  you 
Into  the  sunless  land. 

"There  is  no  expiation,  none.  .1  ] 

A  bitter  load  I  bore: 
Now  I  shall  love  you  nevermore,         f 

Never  and  nevermore. 

"  There  is  no  touch  or  tone  of  yours  ^n 
Can  make  the  old  love  wake." 

She  said:  "But  I  will  follow  you, 
Even  for  the  old  love's  sake." 

Oh,  he  has  kissed  her  on  the  brow, 

He  took  her  by  the  hand: 
Into  the  sunless  land  they  went, 

Into  the  starless  land. 

May  Kendall  [1861- 


'^O  THAT   'TWERE   POSSIBLE" 

From  "Maud" 

O  THAT  'twere  possible 
After  long  grief  and  pain 

To  find  the  arms  of  my  true  love 
Round  me  once  again! 


"Home  They  Brought  Her  Warrior"    1093 

When  I  was  wont  to  meet  her 

In  the  silent  moody  places 
Of  the  land  that  gave  me  birth, 

We  stood  tranced  in  long  embraces 
Mixed  with  kisses  sweeter,  sweeter 

Than  anything  on  earth. 

A  shadow  flits  before  me, 

Not  thou,  but  like  to  thee. 
Ah,  Christ,  that  it  were  possible 

For  one  short  hour  to  see 
The  souls  we  loved,  that  they  might  tell  us 

What  and  where  they  be ! 

Alfred  Tennyson  [i8og-i892] 


"HOME  THEY  BROUGHT  HER  WARRIOR 
DEAD  " 

From  "  The  Princess  " 

Home  they  brought  her  warrior  dead; 

She  nor  swooned,  nor  uttered  cry. 
All  her  maidens,  watching,  said, 

"She  must  weep  or  she  will  die." 

,  jI)iW  0?.   |i':)Vj7  >' 

Then  they  praised  him,  soft  and  low, 

Called  him  worthy  to  be  loved, 
Truest  friend  and  noblest  foe; 

Yet  she  neither  spoke  nor  moved. 

Stole  a  maiden  from  her  pjlace, 

Lightly  to  the  warrior  stepped, 
Took  the  face-cloth  from  the  face; 

Yet  she  neither  moved  nor  wept 

Rose  a  nurse  of  ninety  years. 

Set  his  child  upon  her  knee, — 
Like  summer  tempest  came  her  tears, 

"Sweet  my  child,  I  live  for  thee." 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


I094        Poems  of  Love 


EVELYN  HOPE 

Beautiful  Evelyn  Hope  is  dead! 

Sit  and  watch  by  her  side  an  hour. 
That  is  her  book-shelf,  this  her  bed; 

She  plucked  that  piece  of  geranium-flower, 
Beginning  to  die  too,  in  the  glass. 

Little  has  yet  been  changed,  I  think: 
The  shutters  are  shut,  no  light  may  pass 

Save  two  long  rays  through  the  hinge's  chink. 

Sixteen  years  old  when  she  died! 

Perhaps  she  had  scarcely  heard  my  name; 
It  was  not  her  time  to  love;  beside, 

Her  life  had  many  a  hope  and  aim, 
Duties  enough  and  little  cares. 

And  now  was  quiet,  now  astir. 
Till  God's  hand  beckoned  unawares, — 

And  the  sweet  white  brow  is  all  of  her. 

Is  it  too  late,  then,  Evelyn  Hope? 

What,  your  soul  was  pure  and  true, 
The  good  stars  met  in  your  horoscope, 

Made  you  of  spirit,  fire,  and  dew — 
And,  just  because  I  was  thrice  as  old. 

And  our  paths  in  the  world  diverged  so  wide, 
Each  was  naught  to  each,  must  I  be  told? 

We  were  fellow  mortals,  naught  beside? 

No,  indeed!  for  God  above 

Is  great  to  grant,  as  mighty  to  make, 
And  creates  the  love  to  reward  the  love: 

I  claim  you  still,  for  my  own  love's  sake! 
Delayed,  it  may  be,  for  more  lives  yet, 

Through  worlds  I  shall  traverse,  not  a  few: 
Much  is  to  learn,  much  to  forget 

Ere  the  time  be  come  for  taking  you. 

But  the  time  will  come, — at  last  it  will, 

When,  Evelyn  Hope,  what  meant  (I  shall  say) 

In  the  lower  earth,  in  the  years  long  still. 
That  body  and  soul  so  pure  and  gay? 


Remembrance  109^ 

Why  your  hair  was  amber,  I  shall  divine, 

And  your  mouth  of  your  own  geranium's  red, — 

And  what  you  would  do  with  me,  in  fine-, 
In  the  new  life  come  in  the  old  one's  stead. 

I  have  lived  (I  shall  say)  so  much  since  then, 

Given  up  myself  so  many  times. 
Gained  me  the  gains  of  various  men, 

Ransacked  the  ages,  spoiled  the  climes; 
Yet  one  thing,  one,  in  my  soul's  full  scope, 

Either  I  missed  or  itself  missed  me: 
And  I  want  and  find  you,  Evelyn  Hope! 

What  is  the  issue?  let  us  see! 

I  loved  you,  Evelyn,  all  the  while! 

My  heart  seemed  full  as  it  could  hold ; 
There  was  place  and  to  spare  for  the  frank  young  smile, 

And  the  red  young  mouth,  and  the  hair's  young  gold. 
So,  hush, — I  will  give  you  this  leaf  to  keep: 

See,  I  shut  it  inside  the  sweet,  cold  hand! 
There,  that  is  our  secret:  go  to  sleep! 

You  will  wake,  and  remember,  and  understand. 

Robert  Browning  [181 2-1889] 


REMEMBRANCE 

Cold  in  the  earth — and  the  deep  snow  piled  above  thee, 
Far,  far  removed,  cold  in  the  dreary  grave! 

Have  I  forgot,  my  only  Love,  to  love  thee, 
Severed  at  last  by  Time's  all-severing  wave? 

Now,  when  alone,  do  my  thoughts  no  longer  hover 
Over  the  mountains,  on  that  northern  shore, 

Resting  their  wings  where  heath  and  fern-leaves  cover 
Thy  noble  heart  for  ever,  ever  more? 

Cold  in  the  earth — and  fifteen  wild  Decembers, ' 
From  those  brown  hills,  have  melted  into  spring: 

Faithful,  indeed,  is  the  spirit  that  remembers 
After  such  years  of  change  and  suffering! 


1096  Poems  of  Love 

Sweet  Love  of  youth,  forgive,  if  I  forget  thee, 
While  the  world's  tide  is  bearing  me  along; 

Other  desires  and  other  hopes  beset  me, 

Hopes  which  obscure,  but  cannot  do  thee  wrong! 

No  later  light  has  lightened  up  my  heaven,    ;)  .,.,-,.,[  j 
No  second  morn  has  ever  shone  for  me; 

All  my  life's  bliss  from  thy  dear  hfe  was  given. 
All  my  life's  bliss  is  in  the  grave  with  thee. 

But,  when  the  days  of  golden  dreams  had  perished. 
And  even  Despair  was  powerless  to  destroy; 

Then  did  I  learn  how  existence  could  be  cherished, 
Strengthened,  and  fed  without  the  aid  of  joy. 

Then  did  I  check  the  tears  of  useless  passion — 

Weaned  my  young  soul  from  yearning  after  thine; 
Sternly  denied  its  burning  wish  to  hasten 

Down  to  that  tomb  already  more  than  mine. 

■    or! 

And,  even  yet,  I  dare  not  let  it  languish,  •: 

Dare  not  indulge  in  memory's  rapturous  pain; 

Once  drinking  deep  of  that  divinest  anguish, 
How  could  I  seek  the  empty  world  again? 

Emily  Bronte  [18 18-1848] 

SONG 

The  linnet  in  the  rocky  dells. 

The  moor-lark  in  the  air, 
The  bee  among  the  heather  bells 

That  hide  my  lady  fair: 

The  wild  deer  browse  above  her  breast; 

The  wild  birds  raise  their  brood; 
And  they,  her  smiles  of  love  caressed. 

Have  left  her  solitude. 

I  ween  that,  when  the  grave's  dark  wall 

Did  first  her  form  retain, 
They  thought  their  hearts  could  ne'er  recall 

The  light  of  joy  again. 


Song  of  the  Old   Love  I097 

They  thought  the  tide  of  grief  would  flow 

Unchecked  through  future  years; 
But  where  is  all  their  anguish  now, 

And  where  are  all  their  tears? 

Well,  let  them  fight  for  honor's  breath, 

Or  pleasure's  shade  pursue: 
The  dweller  in  the  land  of  death 

Is  changed  and  careless  too. 

And,  if  their  eyes  should  watch  and  weep 

Till  sorrow's  source  were  dry. 
She  would  not,  in  her  tranquil  sleep, 

Return  a  single  sigh. 

Blow,  west-wind,  by  the  lonely  mound, 

And  murmur,  summer  streams! 
There  is  no  need  of  other  sound 

To  soothe  my  lady's  dreams. 

Emily  Broiile  [i 818-1848] 

SONG  OF  THE  OLD  LOVE 

From  "Supper  at  the  Mill" 

When  sparrows  build,  and  the  leaves  break  forth, 

My  old  sorrow  wakes  and  cries. 
For  I  know  there  is  dawn  in  the  far,  far  north. 

And  a  scarlet  sun  doth  rise; 
Like  a  scarlet  fleece  the  snow-field  spreads. 

And  the  icy  founts  run  free, 
And  the  bergs  begin  to  bow  their  heads, 

And  plunge,  and  sail  in  the  sea. 

O  my  lost  love,  and  my  own,  own  love, 

And  my  love  that  loved  me  so! 
Is  there  never  a  chink  in  the  world  above 

Where  they  listen  for  words  from  below? 
Nay,  I  spoke  once,  and  I  grieved  thee  sore, 

I  remember  all  that  I  said. 
And  now  thou  wilt  hear  me  no  more — no  more 

Till  the  sea  gives  up  her  dead. 


1098  Poems  of  Love 

Thou  didst  set  thy  foot  on  the  ship,  and  sail 

To  the  ice-fields  and  the  snow; 
Thou  wert  sad,  for  thy  love  did  naught  avail, 

And  the  end  I  could  not  know; 
How  could  I  tell  I  should  love  thee  to-day. 

Whom  that  day  I  held  not  dear? 
How  could  I  know  I  should  love  thee  away 

When  I  did  not  love  thee  anear? 

We  shall  walk  no  more  through  the  sodden  plain 

W'ith  the  faded  bents  o'erspread, 
Wc  shall  stand  no  more  by  the  seething  main 

While  the  dark  wrack  drives  o'erhead ; 
We  shall  part  no  more  in  the  wind  and  the  rain, 

Where  thy  last  farewell  was  said; 
But  perhaps  I  shall  meet  thee  and  know  thee  again 

When  the  se^i  gives  up  her  dead. 

Jean  Ingelow  [1820-1897] 

REQUIESCAT 

Strew  on  her  roses,  roses. 

And  never  a  spray  of  yew! 
In  quiet  she  reposes: 

Ah!  would  that  I  did  too. 

Her  mirth  the  world  required: 
She  bathed  it  in  smiles  of  glee. 

But  her  heart  was  tired,  tired, 
And  now  they  let  her  be. 

Her  life  was  turning,  turning, 
In  mazes  of  heat  and  sound. 

But  for  peace  her  soul  was  yearning. 
And  now  peace  laps  her  round. 

Her  cabined,  ample  Spirit, 

It  fluttered  and  failed  for  breath. 

To-night  it  doth  inherit 
The  vasty  hall  of  Death. 

Matthew  Arnold  [1822-1888] 


Four  Years  1^99 


TOO  LATE 

"dOWGLAS,  D0WGLA6,  TENDIR  AND  TREU" 

Could  yc  come  back  to  me,  Douglas,  Douglas, 

In  the  old  likeness  that  I  knew, 
I  would  be  so  faithful,  so  loving,  Douglas, 

Douglas,  Douglas,  tender  and  true. 

Never  a  scornful  word  should  grieve  ye, 
I'd  smile  on  ye  sweet  as  the  angels  do: 

Sweet  as  your  smile  on  me  shone  ever, 
Douglas,  Douglas,  tender  and  true. 

Oh,  to  call  back  the  days  that  are  not! 

My  eyes  were  blinded,  your  words  were  few: 
Do  you  know  the  truth  now,  up  in  heaven, 

Douglas,  Douglas,  tender  and  true? 

I  never  was  worthy  of  you,  Douglas; 

Not  half  worthy  the  like  of  you: 
Now  all  men  beside  seem  to  mc  like  shadows — 

I  love  you,  Douglas,  tender  and  true. 

Stretch  out  your  hand  to  me,  Douglas,  Douglas, 
Drop  forgiveness  fi'om  heaven  like  dew; 

As  I  lay  my  heart  on  your  dead  heart,  Douglas, 
Douglas,  Douglas,  tender  and  true! 

Dinah  Maria  Miilock  Craik  [i 826-1 S87] 

FOUR  YEARS 

At  the  Midsummer,  when  the  hay  was  down. 
Said  I  mournful — Though  my  life  be  in  its  prime, 
Bare  lie  my  meadows  all  shorn  before  their  time. 
O'er  my  sere  woodlands  the  leaves  are  turning  brown; 
It  is  the  hot  Midsummer,  when  the  hay  is  down. 

At  the  Midsummer,  when  the  hay  was  down. 
Stood  she  by  the  brooklet,  young  and  very  fair. 
With  the  first  white  bindweed  twisted  in  her  hair — - 
Hair  that  drooped  like  birch-boughs,  all  in  her  simple  gown- 
That  eve  in  high  Midsummer,  when  the  hay  was  down. 


Tioo  Poems  of  Love 

At  the  Midsummer,  when  the  hay  was  down, 
Crept  she  a  wilHng  bride  close  into  my  breast; 
Low-piled  the  thunder-cloud9»had  sunk  into  the  west. 
Red-eyed  the  sun  out-glared  like  knight  from  leaguered  town; 
It  was  the  high  Midsummer,  and  the  sun  was  down. 

It  is  Midsummer — all  the  hay  is  down. 
Close  to  her  forehead  press  I  dying  eyes, 
Praying  God  shield  her  till  we  meet  in  Paradise, 
Bless  her  in  love's  name  who  was  my  joy  and  crown, 
And  I  go  at  Midsummer,  wlien  the  hay  is  down. 

Dinah  Maria  Mulock  Craik  [1826-1S87] 

BARBARA 

On  the  Sabbath-day, 
Through  the  churchyard  old  and  gray. 
Over  the  crisp  and  yellow  leaves,  I  held  my  rustling  way; 
And  amid  the  words  of  mercy,  falling  on  my  soul  like  balms; 
'Mid  the  gorgeous  storms  of  music — in  the  mellow  organ- 
calms, 
'Mid  the  upward  streaming  prayers,  and  the  rich  and  solemn 
psalms, 
I  stood  careless,  Barbara. 

My  heart  was  otherwhere 

While  the  organ  shook  the  air. 

And  the  priest,  with  outspread  hands,  blessed  the  people 

with  a  prayer; 
But,  when  rising  to  go  homeward,  with  a  mild  and  saint-like 

shine 
Gleamed  a  face  of  airy  beauty  with  its  heavenly  eyes  on 

mine — 
Gleamed  and  vanished  in  a  moment — O  that  face  was  surely 

thine  'it  is  O 

Out  of  heaven,  Barbara!  ■  '^ 

O  pallid,  pallid  face! 

O  earnest  eyes  of  grace!  rfj  vd  orie  booJ8 

When  last  I  saw  thee,  dearest,  it  was  in  another  place.'  " 
You  came  running  forth  to  meet  me  with  my  love-gift  on 
your  wrist : 


3 vo.  Barbara  i  loi 

The  flutter  of  a  long  white  dress,  then  all  was  lost  in  mist — 

A  purple  stain  of  agony  was  on  the  mouth  I  kissed, 

That  wild  morning,  Barbara! 

.flT 
I  searched  in  my  despair,  ,^.^  q 

Sunny  noon  and  midnight  air; 

I  could  not  drive  away  the  thought  that  you  were  lingering 

there. 

0  many  and  many  a  winter  night  I  sat  when  you  were  gone, 
My  worn  face  buried  in  my  hands,  beside  the  fire  alone. 
Within  the  dripping  churchyard,  the  rain  plashing  on  your 

stone, 
You  were  sleeping,  Barbara. 

'Mong  angels,  do  you  think 
Of  the  precious  golden  link 

1  clasped  around  your  happy  arm  while  sitting  by  yon 

brink? 
Or  when  that  night  of  gliding  dance,  of  laughter  and  guitars, 
Was  emptied  of  its  music,  and  we  watched,  through  lattice- 
bars,  dlhbii. 

The  silent  midnight  heaven  creeping  o'er  us  with  its  stars. 
Till  the  day  broke,  Barbara? 

In  the  years  I've  changed; 
Wild  and  far  my  heart  has  ranged. 

And  many  sins  and  errors  now  have  been  on  me  avenged; 
But  to  you  I  have  been  faithful,  whatsoever  good  I  lacked: 
I  loved  you,  and  above  my  life  still  hangs  that  love  intact — 
Your  love  the  trembling  rainbow,  I  the  reckless  cataract. 
Still  I  love  you,  Barbara! 

Yet,  love,  I  am  unblest; 

With  many  doubts  oppressed, 

I  wander  like  a  desert  wind,  without  a  place  of  rest. 

Could  I  but  win  you  for  an  hour  from  off  that  starry  shore, 

The  hunger  of  my  soul  were  stilled,  for  Death  hath  told  you 

more 
Than  the  melancholy  world  doth  know;  things  deeper  than 

all  lore 
Will  you  teach  me,  Barbara? 


II02  Poems  of  Love 

In  vain,  in  vain,  in  vain! 

You  will  never  come  again. 

There  droops  upon  the  dreary  hills  a  mourntul  fringe  of  rain; 

The  gloaming  closes  slowly  round,  loud  winds  are  in  the  tree, 

Round  selfish  shores  for  ever  moans  the  hurt  and  wounded 

sea, 
There  is  no  rest  upon  the  earth,  peace  is  with  Death  and  thee, 
Barbara! 

Alexander  Smith  [i 830-1 867] 


SONG 

When  I  am  dead,  my  dearest, 

Sing  no  sad  songs  for  me; 
Plant  thou  no  roses  at  my  head, 

Nor  shady  cypress-tree: 
Be  the  green  grass  above  me 

With  showers  and  dewdrops  wet; 
And  if  thou  wilt,  remember, 

And  if  thou  wilt,  forget. 

I  shall  not  see  the  shadows, 

I  shall  not  feel  the  rain; 
I  shall  not  hear  the  nightingale  '^^^X  ^^^  "I 

Sing  on,  as  if  in  pain:       -'^fJ  V^  ■'^"1  '^"B  bltW 
And  dreaming  through  the  twilight        '■■■'••  *  ■■'A 

That  doth  not  rise  nor  set,  '''^ 

Haply  I  may  remember 

And  haply  may  forget. 

Christina  Georgina  Rossetti  [18J0-1S94] 

>r 

I 
HELEN  [AuuD 

The  autumn  seems  to  cry  for  thee,  -    '"  ^"■'■ 

Best  lover  of  the  autumn  days!  aiora 

Each  scarlet-tipped  and  wine-red  tree, 
Each  russet  branch  and  branch  of  gold, 


Helen  1103 

Gleams  through  its  veil  of  shimmering  haze, 

And  seeks  thee  as  they  sought  of  old: 
For  all  the  glory  of  their  dress, 
They  wear  a  look  of  wistfulness. 

In  every  wood  I  sec  thee  stand, 

The  ruddy  boughs  above  thy  head, 
And  heaped  in  either  slender  hand 

The  frosted  white  and  amber  ferns, 
The  sumach's  deep,  resplendent  red, 

Which  like  a  fiery  feather  burns, 
And,  over  all,  thy  happy  eyes, 
Shining  as  clear  as  autumn  skies. 

I  hear  thy  call  upon  the  breeze, 

Gay  as  the  dancing  wind,  and  sweet, 

And,  underneath  the  radiant  trees, 
O'er  lichens  gray  and  darkhng  moss. 

Follow  the  trace  of  those  light  feet 
Which  never  were  at  fault  or  loss. 

But,  by  some  forest  instinct  led. 

Knew  where  to  turn  and  how  to  tread. 

Where  art  thou,  comrade  true  and  tried? 

The  woodlands  call  for  thee  in  vain. 
And  sadly  burns  the  autumn-tide 

Before  my  eyes,  made  dim  and  blind 
By  blurring,  puzzling  mists  of  pain. 

I  look  before,  I  look  behind; 
Beauty  and  loss  seem  everywhere,  '.  f,y 

And  grief  and  glory  fill  the  air. 

Already,  in  these  few  short  weeks, 

A  hundred  things  I  leave  unsaid,  ^^, , 

Because  there  is  no  voice  that  speaks 

In  answer,  and  no  listening  ear. 
No  one  to  care  now  thou  art  dead! 

And  month  by  month,  and  year  by  year, 
I  shall  but  miss  thee  more,  and  go 
With  half  my  thought  untold,  I  know. 


II04  Poems  of  Love 

I  do  not  think  thou  hast  forgot, 

I  know  that  I  shall  not  forget, 
And  some  day,  glad,  but  wondering  not, 

We  two  shall  meet,  and,  face  to  face, 
In  still,  fair  fields  unseen  as  yet, 

Shall  talk  of  each  old  time  and  place, 
And  smile  at  pain  interpreted 
By  wisdom  learned  since  we  were  dead. 

Sarah  Chauncey  Woolsey  [1845-1905] 


LOVE  AND   DEATH 

In  the  wild  autumn  weather,  when  the  rain  was  on  the  sea, 
And  the  boughs  sobbed  together.  Death  came  and  spake  to 

me: 
"Those  red  drops  of  thy  heart  I  have  come  to  take  from 

thee; 
As  the  storm  sheds  the  rose,  so  thy  love -shall  broken  be," 
Said  Death  to  me. 

Then  I  stood  straight  and  fearless  while  the  rain  was  in  the 

wave. 
And  I  spake  low  and  tearless:  "When  thou  hast  made  my 

grave. 
Those  red  drops  from  my  heart  then  thou  shalt  surely  have ; 
But  the  rose  keeps  its  bloom,  as  I  my  love  will  save 
All  for  my  grave." 

In  the  wild  autumn  weather  a  dread  sword  slipped  from  its 

sheath; 
While  the  boughs  sobbed  together,  I  fought  a  fight  with 

Death, 
And  I  vanquished  him  with  prayer,  and  I  vanquished  him 

by  faith:  '  ^'  ^^^^^  -^^u^oH 

Now  the  summer  air  is  sweet  with  the  rose's  fi-agrant  breath 
That  conquered  Death. 

Rosa  Mvlholland  [18    - 

idgt/oriJ  \m  llfiri  dJiW 


Annabel   Lee  1105 


TO  ONE  IN  PARADISE, 

Thou  wast  all  that  to  me,  love, 

For  which  my  soul  did  pine: 
A  green  isle  in  the  sea,  love,  'ii7/ 

A  fountain  and  a  shrine 
All  wreathed  with  fairy  fruits  and  flowers, 

And  all  the  flowers  were  mine. 

Ah,  dream  too  bright  to  last! 

Ah,  starry  Hope,  that  didst  arise 
But  to  be  overcast! 

A  voice  from  out  of  the  Future  cries, 
"On!  on!"— but  o'er  the  Past  ,,         ,    ,   , 

(Dim  gulf!)  my  spirit  hovering  liesj  gjrf ^  ^,j 
Mute,  motionless,  aghast. 

For,  alas!  alas!  with  me 

The  light  of  Life  is  o'er! 

No  more — no  more — no  more — 
(Such  language  holds  the  solemn  sea 

To  the  sands  upon  the  shore) 
Shall  bloom  the  thunder-blasted  tree, 

Or  the  stricken  eagle  soar. 


;rir 


And  all  my  days  are  trances. 

And  all  my  nightly  dreams 
Are  where  thy  dark  eye  glances,  ■  •"  •■■<'■^- 

And  where  thy  footstep  gleams —  "iO>I 

In  what  ethereal  dances, 

By  what  eternal  streams. 

Edgar  Allan  Poe  [i8og-i84g] 

ANNABEL  LEE 

It  was  many  and  many  a  year  ago. 

In  a  kingdom  by  the  sea, 
That  a  maiden  there  lived  whom  you  may  know 

By  the  name  of  Annabel  Lee; 
And  this  maiden  she  lived  with  no  other  thought 

Than  to  love  and  be  loved  by  me. 


iio6  Poems  of  Love 

I  was  a  child  and  she  was  a  child. 

In  this  kingdom  by  the  sea, 
But  we  loved  with  a  love  that  was  more  than  love, 

I  and  my  Annabel  Lee; 
With  a  love  that  the  winged  seraphs  of  heaven 

Coveted  her  and  me.  , 

And  this  was  the  reason  that,  long  ago, 

In  this  kingdom  by  the  sea, 
A  wind  blew  out  of  a  cloud,  chilling 

My  beautiful  Annabel  Lee; 
So  that  her  highborn  kinsmen  came 

And  bore  her  away  from  me, 
To  shut  her  up  in  a  sepulcher 

In  this  kingdom  by  the  sea. 

The  angels,  not  half  so  happy  in  heaven. 

Went  envying  her  and  me; 
Yes!  that  was  the  reason  (as  all  men  know, 

In  this  kingdom  by  the  sea) 
That  the  wind  came  out  of  the  cloud  by  night, 

Chilling  and  killing  my  Annabel  Lee. 

But  our  love  it  was  stronger  by  far  than  the  love 

Of  those  who  were  older  than  we, 

Of  many  far  wiser  than  we; 
And  neither  the  angels  in  heaven  above, 

Nor  the  demons  down  under  the  sea, 
Can  ever  dissever  my  soul  from  the  soul 

Of  the  beautiful  Annabel  Lee: 

For  the  moon  never  beams,  without  bringing  me  dreams 

Of  the  beautiful  Annabel  Lee; 
And  the  stars  never  rise,  but  I  feel  the  bright  eyes 

Of  the  beautiful  Annabel  Lee; 
And  so,  all  the  night-tide,  I  lie  down  by  the  side 
Of  my  darling — my  darling — my  life  and  my  bride, 

In  the  sepulcher  there  by  the  sea, 

In  her  tomb  by  the  sounding  sea. 

Edgar  Allan  Foe  [1S09-1849] 


For  Annie  1107 


FOR  ANNIE 

Thank  Heaven!  the  crisis — 

The  danger  is  past, 
And  the  Hngering  illness 

Is  over  at  last — 
And  the  fever  called  "Living" 

Is  conquered  at  last. 

Sadly,  I  know 

I  am  shorn  of  my  strength, 
And  no  muscle  I  move 

As  I  lie  at  full  length: 
But  no  matter — I  feel 

I  am  better  at  length. 

And  I  rest  so  composedly 

Now,  in  my  bed, 
That  any  beholder 

Might  fancy  me  dead — 
Might  start  at  beholding  me, 

Thinking  me  dead. 

The  moaning  and  groaning, 
The  sighing  and  sobbing, 

Are  quieted  now, 

With  that  horrible  throbbing 

At  heart — ah,  that  horrible, 
Horrible  throbbing! 

The  sickness — the  nausea — 

The  pitiless  pain — 
Have  ceased,  with  the  fever 

That  maddened  my  brain — ■ 
With  the  fever  called  "Living" 

That  burned  in  my  brain. 

And  O!  of  all  tortures 
That  torture  the  worst 

Has  abated — the  terrible 
Torture  of  thirst 


iio8  Poems  of  Love 

For  the  naphthaline  river 
Of  Passion  accurst — 

I  have  drunk  of  a  water 
That  quenches  all  thirst, 

— Of  a  water  that  flows, 
With  a  lullaby  sound. 

From  a  spring  but  a  very  few 
Feet  under  ground — 

From  a  cavern  not  very  far 
Down  under  ground.         '^- 

And  ah!  let  it  never 

Be  foolishly  said 
That  my  room  it  is  gloomy, 

And  narrow  my  bed; 
For  man  never  slept 

In  a  different  bed — 
And,  to  sleep,  you  must  slumber 

In  just  such  a  bed. 

My  tantalized  spirit 
Here  blandly  reposes, 

Forgetting,  or  never 
Regretting,  its  roses — 

Its  old  agitations 

Of  myrtles  and  roses: 

For  now,  while  so  quietly 

Lying,  it  fancies 
A  holier  odor 

About  it,  of  pansies — 
A  rosemary  odor, 

Commingled  with  pansies— 
With  rue  and  the  beautiful    - 

Puritan  pansies. 

And  so  it  lies  happily. 

Bathing  in  many 
A  dream  of  the  truth 

And  the  beauty  of  Annie— ^ 
Drowned  in  a  bath 

Of  the  tresses  of  Annie. 


Telling  the   Bees  1109 

She  tenderly  kissed  me, 

She  fondly  caressed, 
And  then  I  fell  gently  "lA 

To  sleep  on  her  breast — 
Deeply  to  sleep 

From  the  heaven  of  her  breast. 

When  the  light  was  extinguished, 

She  covered  me  warm, 
And  she  prayed  to  the  angels 

To  keep  me  from  harm — 
To  the  queen  of  the  angels 

To  shield  me  from  harm. 

And  I  lie  so  composedly, 

Now,  in  my  bed 
(Knowing  her  love). 

That  you  fancy  me  dead — 
And  I  rest  so  contentedly, 

Now,  in  my  bed 
(With  her  love  at  my  breast), 

That  you  fancy  me  dead — 
That  you  shudder  to  look  at  me, 

Thinking  me  dead. 

But  my  heart  it  is  brighter 

Than  all  of  the  many 
Stars  in  the  sky. 

For  it  sparkles  with  Annie — 
It  glows  with  the  light 

Of  the  love  of  my  Annie — 
With  the  thoi^ht  of  the  light 

Of  the  eyes  of  my  Annie.  '^     ''^ 

Edgar  Allan  Poc  [1S09-1849] 

TELLING  THE  BEES 

Here  is  the  place;  right  over  the  hill 

Runs  the  path  I  took; 
You  can  see  the  gap  in  the  old  wall  still, 

And  the  stepping-stones  in  the  shallow  brook. 


I  no  Poems  of  Love 

There  is  the  house,  with  the  gate  red-barred, 

And  the  poplars  tall; 
And  the  barn's  brown  length,  and  the  cattlc-yard. 

And  the  white  horns  tossing  above  the  wall. 

There  are  the  beehives  ranged  in  the  sun; 

And  down  by  the  brink 
Of  the  brook  are  her  poor  flowers,  weed-o'errun, 

Pansy  and  daffodil,  rose  and  pink. 

A  year  has  gone,  as  the  tortoise  goes, 

Heavy  and  slow; 
And  the  same  rose  blows,  and  the  same  sun  glows, 

And  the  same  brook  sings  of  a  }car  ago. 

There's  the  same  sweet  clover-smell  in  the  breeze; 

And  the  June  sun  warm 
Tangles  his  wings  of  fire  in  the  trees. 

Setting,  as  then,  over  Fernside  farm. 

I  mind  me  how  with  a  lover's  care 

From  my  Sunday  coat 
I  brushed  off  the  burrs,  and  smoothed  my  hair, 

And  cooled  at  the  brooksidc  my  brow  and  throat. 

Since  we  parted,  a  month  had  passed, — . 

To  love,  a  year; 
Down  through  the  beeches  I  looked  at  last 

On  the  little  red  gate  and  the  well-sweep  near. 

I  can  see  it  all  now, — the  slantwise  rain 

Of  light  through  the  leaves, 
The  sundown's  blaze  on  her  window-pane, 

The  bloom  of  her  roses  under  the  eaves. 

Just  the  same  as  a  month  before, — 

The  house  and  the  trees. 
The  barn's  brown  gable,  the  vine  by  the  door, — 
.Nothing  changed  but  the  hives  of  bees. 


A  Tryst  mi 

Before  them,  under  the  garden  wall, 

Forward  and  back, 
Went  drearily  singing  the  chore-girl  small, 

Draping  each  hive  with  a  shred  of  black. 

Trembling,  I  listened:  the  summer  sun 

Had  the  chill  of  snow; 
For  I  knew  she  was  telling  the  bees  of  one 

Gone  on  the  journey  we  all  must  go! 

Then  I  said  to  myself,  "JNIy  Mary  weeps 

For  the  dead  to-day: 
Haply  her  blind  old  grandsire  sleeps 

The  fret  and  the  pain  of  his  age  away." 

But  her  dog  whined  low;  on  the  doorway  sill 

With  his  cane  to  his  chin, 
The  old  man  sat;  and  the  chore-girl  still 

Sung  to  the  bees  stealing  out  and  in. 

And  the  song  she  was  singing  ever  since 

In  my  ears  sounds  on: — 
"Stay  at  home,  pretty  bees,  fly  not  hence! 

Mistress  Mary  is  dead  and  gone!" 

John  CreenleaJ  Whiltier  [1807-1892] 

A  TRYST 

I  WILL  not  break  the  tryst,  my  dear. 

That  we  have  kept  so  long, 
Though  winter  and  its  snows  are  here. 

And  I've  no  heart  for  song. 

You  went  into  the  voiceless  night; 

Your  path  led  far  away. 
Did  you  forget  me,  Heart's  Delight, 

As  night  forgets  the  day? 

Sometimes  I  think  that  you  would  speak 

If  still  you  held  me  dear; 
But  space  is  vast,  and  I  am  weak — 

Perchance  I  do  not  hear. 


1 1 1 2  Poems  of  Love 

Surely,  howe'er  remote  the  star 
Your  wandering  feet  may  tread, 

When  I  shall  pass  the  sundering  bar 
Our  souls  must  still  be  wed. 

Louise  Chandler  Moulton  [1835-1908] 

LOVE'S   RESURRECTION  DAY 

Round  among  the  quiet  graves, 

When  the  sun  was  low. 
Love  went  grieving, — Love  who  saves: 

Did  the  sleepers  know? 

At  his  touch  the  flowers  awoke, 

At  his  tender  call 
Birds  into  sweet  singing  broke, 

And  it  did  befall 

From  the  blooming,  bursting  sod 

AU  Love's  dead  arose. 
And  went  flying  up  to  God 

By  a  way  Love  knows. 

Louise  Chandler  Moulton  [1835-1008] 

HEAVEN 

Only  to  find  Forever,  blest 
By  thine  encircling  arm; 
Only  to  lie  beyond  unrest 
In  passion's  dreamy  calm! 

Only  to  meet  and  never  part, 
To  sleep  and  never  wake, — 
Heart  unto  heart  and  soul  to  soul, 
Dead  for  each  other's  sake. 

Martha  Gilbert  Dickinson  [18     - 

JANETTE'S  HAIR 

Oh,  loosen  the  snood  that  you  wear,  Janette, 
Let  me  tangle  a  hand  in  your  hair — my  pet; 


Janette's  Hair  1 1 13 

For  the  world  to  me  had  no  daintier  sight 
Than  your  brown  hair  veihng  3'our  shoulders  white; 
Your  beautiful  dark  brown  hair — my  pet. 

It  was  brown  with  a  golden  gloss,  Janette, 
It  was  finer  than  silk  of  the  floss — my  pet; 
'Twas  a  beautiful  mist  falling  down  to  your  wrist, 
'Twas  a  thing  to  be  braided,  and  jewelled,  and  kissed — 
'Twas  the  loveliest  hair  in  the  world — my  pet. 

My  arm  was  the  arm  of  a  clown,  Janette, 
It  was  sinewy,  bristled,  and  brown — my  pet; 
But  warmly  and  softly  it  loved  to  caress 
Your  round  white  neck  and  your  wealth  of  tress, 
Your  beautiful  plenty  of  hair — my  pet. 

Your  eyes  had  a  swimming  glory,  Janette. 
Revealing  the  old,  dear  story — my  pet; 
They  v/ere  gray  with  that  chastened  tinge  of  the  sky 
When  the  trout  leaps  quickest  to  snap  the  fly, 

And  they  matched  with  your  golden  hair — my  pet. 

Your  lips — but  I  have  no  words,  Janette — 
They  were  fresh  as  the  twitter  of  birds — mj'  pet. 
When  the  spring  is  young,  and  the  roses  are  wet. 
With  the  dewdrops  in  each  red  bosom  set, 

And  they  suited  your  gold  brown  hair — my  pet. 

Oh,  you  tangled  my  life  in  your  hair,  Janette, 
'Twas  a  silken  and  golden  snare — my  i^et; 
But,  so  gentle  the  bondage,  my  soul  did  implore 
The  right  to  continue  your  slave  evermore, 

With  my  fingers  enmeshed  in  your  hair — my  pet. 

Thus  ever  I  dream  what  you  were,  Janette, 
With  your  lips,- and  your  eyes,  and  your  hair — my  pet, 
In  the  darkness  of  desolate  years  I  moan. 
And  my  tears  fall  bitterly  over  the  stone 
That  covers  your  golden  hair — my  pet. 

Charles  (Jraharn  Halpine  [i 829-1 86S] 


1 1 14  Poems  of  Love 


THE  DYING  LOVER 

The  grass  that  is  under  me  now 

Will  soon  be  over  me,  Sweet; 
When  you  walk  this  way  again 

I  shall  not  hear  your  feet. 

You  may  walk  this  way  again, 

And  shed  your  tears  hke  dew; 
They  will  be  no  more  to  me  then 

Than  mine  are  now  to  you! 

Richard  Henry  Stoddard  [i82S-igo3] 


"WHEN  THE  GRASS  SHALL  COVER  ME" 

When  the  grass  shall  cover  me, 
Head  to  foot  where  I  am  lying; 

When  not  any  wind  that  blows. 
Summer  blooms  nor  winter  snows, 
.      Shall  awake  me  to  your  sighing: 
Close  above  me  as  you  pass, 
You  will  say,  "How  kind  she  was," 
You  will  say,  "How  true  she  was," 
When  the  grass  grows  over  me. 

When  the  grass  shall  cover  me, 
Holden  close  to  earth's  warm  bosom, — 
While  I  laugh,  or  weep,  or  sing, 
Nevermore,  for  anything, 
You  will  find  in  blade  and  blossom, 
Sweet  small  voices,  odorous, 
Tender  pleaders  in  my  cause. 
That  shall  speak  me  as  I  was — 
When  the  grass  grows  over  me. 


,l-j< 


When  the  grass  shall  cover  me! 
Ah,  beloved,  in  my  sorrow 
Very  patient,  I  can  wait. 
Knowing  that,  or  soon  or  late, 


■.'lit 


Give   Love  To-day  1 1 1 5 

There  will  dawn  a  clearer  morrow: 

When  your  heart  will  moan  "Alas! 
Now  I  know  how  true  she  was; 
Now  I  know  how  dear  she  was" — 
When  the  grass  grows  over  me ! 

Ina  Coolbrith  [1844- 


GIVE  LOVE  TO-DAY 

When  the  lean,  gray  grasses 
Cover  me,  bury  me  deep, 

No  sea  wind  that  passes 
Shall  break  my  sleep. 

Wlien  you  come,  my  lover, 

Sorrowful-eyed  to  me, 
Earth  mine  eyes  will  cover; 

I  shall  not  see. 

Though  with  sad  words  splendid, 
Praising,  you  call  me  dear, 

It  will  be  all  ended; 
I  shall  not  hear. 


You  may  live  love's  riot 
Laughingly  over  my  head, 

But  I  shall  lie  quiet 
With  the  gray  dead. 

Love,  you  will  not  wake  me 
With  all  your  singing  carouse. 

Nor  your  dancing  shake  me 
^n  my  dark  house. 


I 


Though  you  should  go  weeping, 
Sorrowful  for  my  sake, 

Fain  to  break  my  sleeping, 
I  could  not  wake. 


iii6  Poems  of  Love 

Now,  ere  time  destroy  us — 
'•  r,  A  •    Shadows  beneath  and  above; 
Death  has  no  song  joyous, 
Nor  dead  men  love — 

Now,  while  deep-eyed,  golden, 
Love  on  the  mountain  sings, 

Let  him  be  close  holden; 
Fetter  his  wings. 

Love,  nor  joy  nor  sorrow 
Troubles  the  end  of  day. 

Leave  the  Fates  to-morrow; 
Give  Love  to-day. 

Ethel  Talbot  [ 


UNTIL  DEATH 

Make  me  no  vows  of  constancy,  dear  friend. 
To  love  me,  though  I  die,  thy  whole  life  longj 

And  love  no  other  till  thy  days  shall  end — 
Nay,  it  were  rash  and  wrong. 

If  thou  canst  love  another,  be  it  so; 

I  would  not  reach  out  of  my  quiet  grave 
To  bind  thy  heart,  if  it  should  choose  to  go — 

Love  should  not  be  a  slave. 

My  placid  ghost,  I  trust,  will  walk  serene 

In  clearer  light  than  gilds  those  earthly  morns, 

Above  the  jealousies  and  envies  keen. 
Which  sow  this  life  with  thorns. 

Thou  wouldst  not  feel  my  shadowy  caress; 

If,  after  death,  my  soul  should  linger  here; 
Men's  hearts  crave  tangible,  close  tenderness, 

Love's  presence,  warm  and  near. 


Florence  Vane  i  ]  i  7 

It  would  not  make  me  sleep  more  peacefully 
That  thou  wert  wasting  all  thy  life  in  woe 

For  my  poor  sake;  what  love  thou  hast  for  me, 
Bestow  it  ere  I  go. 

Carve  not  upon  a  stone  when  I  am  dead 
The  praises  which  remorseful  mourners  give 

To  women's  graves — a  tardy  recompense — 
But  speak  them  while  I  live. 

Heap  not  the  heavy  marble  o'er  my  head 
To  shut  away  the  sunshine  and  the  dew; 

Let  small  blooms  grow  there,  and  let  grasses  wave, 
And  raindrops  filter  through. 

Thou  wilt  meet  many  fairer  and  more  gay 
Than  I;  but,  trust  me,  thou  canst  never  find 

One  who  will  love  and  serve  thee  night  and  day 
With  a  more  single  mind. 

Forget  me  when  I  die!     The  violets 

Above  my  breast  will  blossom  just  as  blue. 

Nor  miss  thy  tears;  e'en  nature's  self  forgets; 
But  while  I  live,  be  true. 

Elizabeth  Akers  [183 2- 19 n] 

FLORENCE  VANE 

I  LOVED  thee  long  and  dearly, 

Florence  Vane; 
My  life's  bright  dream  and  early 

Hath  come  again; 
I  renew  in  my  fond  vision. 

My  heart's  dear  pain — 
My  hopes,  and  thy  derision, 

Florence  Vane. 

The  ruin,  lone  and  hoary, 

The  ruin  old, 
Where  thou  didst  hark  my  story, 

At  even  told — 


hi: 


Poems  of  Love 

That  spot — the  hues  Elysian 
■:         Of  sky  and  plain — 
.  •  n  I  treasure  in  my  vision, 
Florence  Vane. 

Thou  wast  lovelier  than  the  roses 
iivi         In  their  prime; 

Thy  voice  excelled  the  closes 

Of  sweetest  rhyme; 
Thy  heart  was  as  a  river 

Without  a  main. 
Woidd  I  had  loved  thee  never, 

Florence  Vane! 

But,  fairest,  coldest  wonder! 

Thy  glorious  clay 
Lieth  the  green  sod  under — 

Alas,  the  day! 
And  it  boots  not  to  remember 

Thy  disdain, 
To  quicken  love's  pale  ember, 

Florence  Vane. 

The  lilies  of  the  valley 

By  young  graves  weep; 
The  daisies  love  to  dally 

Where  maidens  sleep. 
May  their  bloom,  in  beauty  vying, 

Never  wane 
Where  thine  earthly  part  is  lying, 

Florence  Vane! 

Philip  Pendleton  Cooke  [1816-1850] 

"IF   SPIRITS  WALK" 

If  spirits  walk,  love,  when  the  night  climbs  slow 
The  slant  footpath  where  we  were  wont  to  go, 
Be  sure  that  I  shall  take  the  selfsame  way 
To  the  hill-crest,  and  shoreward,  down  the  gray, 
Sheer,  graveled  slope,  where  vetches  straggling  grow. 


Requiescat  1 1 1 9 

Look  for  me  not  when  gusts  of  winter  blow, 
When  at  thy  pane  beat  hands  of  sleet  and  snow; 
I  would  not  come  thy  dear  eyes  to  affray, 
If  spirits  walk. 

But  when,  in  June,  the  pines  are  whispering  low, 
And  when  their  breath  plays  with  thy  bright  hair  so 
As  some  one's  fingers  once  were  used  to  play — 
That  hour  when  birds  leave  song,  and  children  pray, 
Keep  the  old  tryst,  sweetheart,  and  thou  shalt  know 
If  spirits  walk. 

Sophie  Jeivctt  [1861-1909] 

REQUIESCAT 

Tread  lightly,  she  is  near, 

Under  the  snow; 
Speak  gently,  she  can  hear 

The  daisies  grow. 

All  her  bright  golden  hair 

Tarnished  with  rust, 
She  that  was  young  and  fair 

Fallen  to  dust. 

Lily-like,  white  as  snow, 

She  hardly  knew 
She  was  a  woman,  so 

Sweetly  she  grew. 

Coffin-board,  heavy  stone, 

Lie  on  her  breast; 
I  vex  my  heart  alone, 

She  is  at  rest. 

Peace,  peace;  she  cannot  hear 

Lyre  or  sonnet; 
All  my  life's  buried  here — 

Heap  earth  upon  it. 

Oscar  Wilde  [1856-1900] 


II20  Poems  of  Love 


-I  -r.l   tIooJ 
riV/ 


LYRIC 

Ah,  dans  ces  mornes  sejours 

Les  jamais  sont  les  toujours. — Paul  Verlaine 

You  would  have  understood  me,  had  you  waited; 

I  could  have  loved  you,  dear!  as  well  as  he: 
Had  we  not  been  impatient,  dear!  and  fated 
Always  to  disagree. 

What  is  the  use  of  speech?  Silence  were  fitter: 
f.  Lest  we  should  still  be  v/ishing  things  unsaid. 
Though  all  the  words  we  ever  spake  were  bitter, 


Shall  I  reproach  you,  dead 


Nay,  let  this  earth,  your  portion,  likewise  cover 

All  the  old  anger,  setting  us  apart: 
Always,  in  all,  in  truth  was  I  your  lover; 
Always,  I  held  your  heart. 

I  have  met  other  women  who  were  tender, 

As  you  were  cold,  dear!  with  a  grace  as  rare. 
Think  you  I  turned  to  them,  or  made  surrender, 
I  who  had  found  you  fair? 

Had  we  been  patient,  dear!  ah,  had  you  waited, 

I  had  fought  death  for  you,  better  than  he: 
But  from  the  very  first,  dear!  we  were  fated 
Always  to  disagree. 

Late,  late,  I  come  to  you,  now  death  discloses 

Love  that  in  life  was  not  to  be  our  part: 
On  your  low-lying  mound  between  the  roses. 
Sadly  I  cast  my  heart. 

I  would  not  waken  you:  nay!  this  is  fitter; 

Death  and  the  darkness  give  you  unto  me; 
Here  we  who  loved  so,  were  so  cold  and  bitter. 
Hardly  can  disagree. 

Ernest  Dowson  [i 867-1900] 


Good-Night  1 121 


ROMANCE 

My  Love  dwelt  in  a  Northern  land. 

A  gray  tower  in  a  forest  green 
Was  hers,  and  far  on  either  hand 

The  long  wash  of  the  waves  was  seen, 
And  leagues  and  leagues  of  yellow  sand,  , 

The  woven  forest  boughs  between! 

And  through  the  silver  Northern  night  '^^ 

The  sunset  slowly  died  away, 
And  herds  of  strange  deer,  lily-white, 

Stole  forth  among  the  branches  gray; 
About  the  coming  of  the  light, 

They  fled  like  ghosts  before  the  day! 

I  know  not  if  the  forest  green 

Still  girdles  round  that  castle  gray; 

I  know  not  if  the  boughs  between  L 

The  white  deer  vanish  ere  the  day; 

Above  my  Love  the  grass  is  green, 
My  heart  is  colder  than  the  clay! 

Andrew  Lang  [1844-1912] 

GOOD-NIGHT 

Good-night,  dear  friend!     I  say  good-night  to  thee 
Across  the  moonbeams,  tremulous  and  white, 

Bridging  all  space  between  us,  it  may  be. 

Lean  low,  sweet  friend;  it  is  the  last  good-night. 

For,  lying  low  upon  my  couch,  and  still. 
The  fever  flush  evanished  from  my  face, 

I  heard  them  whisper  softly,  "  'Tis  His  will; 
Angels  will  give  her  happier  resting-place!" 

And  so  from  sight  of  tears  that  fell  like  rain, 
And  sounds  of  sobbing  smothered  close  and  low, 

I  turned  my  white  face  to  the  window-pane. 
To  say  good-night  to  thee  before  I  go. 


1 122  Poems   of  Love 

Good-night!  good-night!     I  do  not  fear  the  end, 
The  conflict  with  the  billows  dark  and  high; 

And  yet,  if  I  could  touch  thy  hand,  my  friend, 
I  think  it  would  be  easier  to  die; 

If  I  could  feel  through  all  the  quiet  waves 
Of  my  deep  hair  thy  tender  breath  a-thrill, 

I  could  go  downward  to  the  place  of  graves 
With  eyes  a-shine  and  pale  lips  smiling  still; 

Or  it  may  be  that,  if  through  all  the  strife 
And  pain  of  parting  I  should  hear  thy  call, 

I  would  come  singing  back  to  sweet,  sweet  life, 
And  know  no  mystery  of  death  at  all. 

It  may  not  be.     Good-night,  dear  friend,  good-night! 

And  when  you  see  the  violets  again, 
And  hear,  through  boughs  with  swollen  buds  a-white, 

The  gentle  falling  of  the  April  rain, 

Remember  her  whose  young  life  held  thy  name 
With  all  things  holy,  in  its  outward  flight. 

And  turn  sometimes  from  busy  haunts  of  men 
To  hear  again  her  low  good-night!  good-night! 
Hester  A.  Benedict  [i8     - 

REQUIESCAT 

Bury  me  deep  when  I  am  dead, 

Far  from  the  woods  where  sweet  birds  sing; 

Lap  me  in  sullen  stone  and  lead, 

Lest  my  poor  dust  should  feel  the  Spring. 

Never  a  flower  be  near  me  set. 
Nor  starry  cup  nor  slender  stem, 
Anemone  nor  violet. 
Lest  my  poor  dust  remember  them. 


.Off  I 

I A 


And  you — wherever  you  may  fare — 
Dearer  than  birds,  or  flowers,  or  dew — 
Never,  ah  me,  pass  never  there. 
Lest  my  poor  dust  should  dream  of  you. 

Rosamund  Marriott  Watson  [1863-1911] 


The   King's  Ballad  1123 


THE  FOUR  WINDS 

Wind  of  the  North, 

Wind  of  the  Norland  snows, 

Wind  of  the  winnowed  skies  and  sharp,  clear  stars — 

Blow  cold  and  keen  across  the  naked  hills, 

And  crisp  the  lowland  pools  with  crystal  films, 

And  blur  the  casement-squares  with  glittering  ice, 

But  go  not  near  my  love. 

Wind  of  the  West, 

Wind  of  the  few,  far  clouds. 

Wind  of  the  gold  and  crimson  sunset  lands — 

Blow  fresh  and  pure  across  the  peaks  and  plains, 

And  broaden  the  blue  spaces  of  the  heavens. 

And  sway  the  grasses  and  the  mountain  pines, 

But  let  my  dear  one  rest.  4- 

Wind  of  the  East, 

Wind  of  the  sunrise  seas. 

Wind  of  the  clinging  mists  and  gray,  harsh  rains — 

Blow  moist  and  chill  across  the  wastes  of  brine. 

And  shut  the  sun  out,  and  the  moon  and  stars. 

And  lash  the  boughs  against  the  dripping  eaves, 

Yet  keep  thou  from  my  love. 

But  thou,  sweet  wind! 

Wind  of  the  fragrant  South, 

Wind  from  the  bowers  of  jasmine  and  of  rose! — 

Over  magnolia  glooms  and  lilied  lakes 

And  flowering  forests  come  with  dewy  wings, 

And  stir  the  petals  at  her  feet,  and  kiss 

The  low  mound  where  she  lies. 

Charles  Henry  Liiders  [i  858-1 891] 

THE   KING'S   BALLAD 

Good  my  King,  in  your  garden  close, 

(Hark  to  the  thrush's  trilling) 
Why  so  sad  when  the  maiden  rose 

Love  at  your  feet  is  spilling? 


1124  Poems  of  Love 

Golden  the  air  and  honey-sweet, 
Sapphire  the  sky,  it  is  not  meet 
Sorrowful  faces  should  flowers  greet, 
(Hark  to  the  thrush's  trilling). 

All  alone  walks  the  King  to-day. 
(Hark  to  the  thrush's  trilling) 
Far  from  his  throne  he  steals  away 
Loneness  and  quiet  willing. 
Roses  and  tulips  and  lilies  fair 
Smile  for  his  pleasure  everywhere, 
Yet  of  their  joyance  he  takes  no  share, 
(Hark  to  the  thrush's  trilling). 

Ladies  wait  in  the  palace,  Sire, 

(Hark  to  the  thrush's  trilling) 
Red  and  white  for  the  king's  desire. 
Love- warm  and  sweet  and  thrilling; 

Breasts  of  moonshine  and  hair  of  night, 
Glances  amorous,  soft  and  bright. 
Nothing  is  lacking  for  your  dehght, 
(Hark  to  the  thrush's  trilling). 

Kneels  the  King  in  a  grassy  place, 

(Hark  to  the  thrush's  trilling) 
Little  flowers  under  his  face 
With  his  warm  tears  are  filling. 

Says  the  King,  "Here  my  heart  lies  dead 
Where  my  fair  love  is  buried, 
Would  I  were  lying  here  instead!" 
(Hark  to  the  thrush's  trilling). 

Joyce  Kilmer  [i8So~ 


HELIOTROPE 

Amid  the  chapel's  chequered  gloom 

She  laughed  with  Dora  and  Avith  Flora, 

And  chattered  in  the  lecture-room, — 
That  saucy  little  sophomora! 


Heliotrope  1125 

Yet  while,  as  in  her  other  schools, 
•y-       She  was  a  privileged  transgressor, 

She  never  broke  the  simple  rules  A 

Of  one  Darticular  professor. 

But  when  he  spoke  of  varied  lore, 

Paroxytoncs  and  modes  potential, 
She  listened  with  a  face  that  wore 
A  look  half  fond,  half  reverential. 

To  her,  that  earnest  voice  was  sweet,       f 
And,  though  her  love  had  no  confessor, 
Her  girlish  heart  lay  at  the  feet 
Of  that  particular  professor. 

And  he  had  learned,  among  his  books 

That  held  the  lore  of  ages  olden. 
To  watch  those  ever-changing  looks, 
The  wistful  eyes,  the  tresses  golden, 

That  stirred  his  pulse  with  passion's  pain 

And  thrilled  his  soul  with  soft  desire, 
And  bade  fond  youth  return  again, 
Crowned  with  its  coronet  of  lire. 

Her  sunny  smile,  her  winsome  ways. 

Were  more  to  him  than  all  his  knowledge, 
And  she  preferred  his  words  of  praise 
To  all  the  honors  of  the  college. 
Yet  "What  am  foolish  I  to  him?" 

She  whispered  to  her  heart's  confessor. 
"She  thinks  me  old  and  gray  and  grim," 
In  silence  pondered  the  professor. 

Yet  once  when  Christmas  bells  were  rung 

Above  ten  thousand  solemn  churches. 
And  swelling  anthems  grandly  sung 

Pealed  through  the  dim  cathedral  arches, — 
Ere  home  returning,  filled  with  hope. 
Softly  she  stole  by  gate  and  gable. 
And  a  sweet  spray  of  heliotrope 
Left  on  his  littered  study-table. 


1 1 26  Poems  of  Love 

Nor  came  she  more  from  day  to  day 

Like  sunshine  through  the  shadows  rifting: 
Above  her  grave,  far,  far  away. 

The  ever-silent  snows  were  drifting; 

And  those  who  mourned  her  winsome  face 

Found  in  its  stead  a  swift  successor 
And  loved  another  in  her  place- 
All,  save  the  silent  old  professor. 

But,  in  the  tender  twilight  gray, 

Shut  from  the  sight  of  carping  critic, 
His  lonely  thoughts  would  often  stray 
From  Vedic  verse  and  tongues  Semitic, 
Bidding  the  ghost  of  vanished  hope 

Mock  with  its  past  the  sad  possessor 
Of  the  dead  spray  of  heliotrope 

That  once  she  gave  the  old  professor. 

Harry  Thurston  Peck  [1856-1914] 

"LYDIA  IS   GONE  THIS   MANY   A  YEAR" 

Lydia  is  gone  this  many  a  year, 

Yet  when  the  lilacs  stir, 
In  the  old  gardens  far  or  near, 

This  house  is  full  of  her. 

They  climb  the  twisted  chamber  stair; 

Her  picture  haunts  the  room; 
On  the  carved  shelf  beneath  it  there, 

They  heap  the  purple  bloom. 

A  ghost  so  long  has  Lydia  been, 

Her  cloak  upon  the  wall,  ,•3^'' 

Broidered,  and 'gilt,  and  faded  green, 
Seems  not  her  cloak  at  all. 

The  book,  the  box  on  mantle  laid, 
,-  The  shells  in  a  pale  row, 
Are  those  of  some  dim  little  maid, 
A  thousand  years  ago. 


Memories  1127 

And  yet  the  house  is  full  of  her-, 

She  goes  and  comes  again; 
And  longings  thrill,  and  memories  stir, 

Like  lilacs  in  the  rain. 

Out  in  their  yards  the  neighbors  walk, 

Among  the  blossoms  tall; 
Of  Anne,  of  PhyUis  do  they  talk, 

Of  Lydia  not  at  all. 

Lizette  Woodworth  Reese  [1856- 

AFTER 

Oh,  the  littles  that  remain! 
Scent  of  mint  out  in  the  lane; 
Flare  of  window,  sound  of  bees; — 
These,  but  these. 

Three  times  sitting  down  to  bread; 
One  time  climbing  up  to  bed; 
Table-setting  o'er  and  o'er; 
Drying  herbs  for  winter's  store; 
This  thing;  that  thing; — nothing  more. 

But  just  now  out  in  the  lane, 
Oh,  the  scent  of  mint  was  plain! 

Lizelle  Woodworth  Reese  [1S56- 

MEMORIES 

Of  my  ould  loves,  of  their  ould  ways, 
I  sit  an'  think,  these  bitther  days-. 

(I've  kissed — 'gainst  rason  an'  'gainst  rhyme — 
More  mouths  than  one  in  my  mad  time!) 

Of  their  soft  ways  an'  words  I  dream. 
But  far  off  now,  in  faith,  they  seem. 

Wid  betther  hves,  wid  betther  men, 
They've  all  long  taken  up  again! 


1 128  Poems  of  Love 

For  me  an'  mine  they're  past  an'  done — 
Aye,  all  but  one — yes,  all  but  one! 

.  Since  I  kissed  her  'neath  Tullagh  Hill 
That  one  gerrl  stays  dose  wid  me  still. 

Och!  up  to  mine  her  face  still  lifts. 
An'  round  us  still  the  white  May  drifts; 

An'  her  soft  arm,  in  some  ould  way. 
Is  here  beside  me,  night  an'  day; 

But,  faith,  'twas  her  they  buried  deep, 
Wid  all  that  love  she  couldn't  keep, 

Aye,  deep  an'  cold,  in  Killinkere, 
This  many  a  year — this  many  a  year! 

Arthur  Stringer  [187^- 

TO  DIANE 

The  ruddy  poppies  bend  and  bow, 

Diane!  do  you  remember? 
The  sun  you  knew  shines  proudly  now. 
The  lake  still  lists  the  breezes  vow. 
Your  towers  are  fairer  for  their  stains. 
Each  stone  you  smiled  upon  remains. 
Sing  low — where  is  Diane? 
Diane!  do  you  remember? 

I  come  to  find  you  through  the  years, 

Diane!  do  you  remember? 
For  none  may  rule  my  love's  soft  fears. 
The  ladies  now  are  not  your  peers, 
I  seek  you  through  your  tarnished  halls, 
Pale  sorrow  on  my  spirit  falls,  /'I) 

High,  low — where  is  Diane? 
Diane!  do  you  remember? 

I  crush  the  poppies  where  I  tread,       >  r 

Diane!  do  you  remember? 
Your  flower  of  life,  so  bright,  so  red^ 
She  does  not  hear — Diane  is  dead,     if 


Her  Dwelling-Place  1129 

I  pace  the  sunny  bowers  alone 
Where  naught  of  her  remains  but  stone. 
Sing  low — where  is  Diane? 
Diane  does  not  remember. 

Helen  Hay  Whitney  [i8    - 


"MUSIC  I  HEARD" 

IMusic  I  heard  with  you  was  more  than  music, 
And  bread  I  broke  with  you  was  more  than  bread. 
Now  that  I  am  without  you,  all  is  desolate, 
All  that  was  once  so  beautiful  is  dead. 

Your  hands  once  touched  this  table  and  this  silver, 
And  I  have  seen  your  fingers  hold  this  glass. 
These  things  do  not  remember  you,  beloved: 
And  yet  your  touch  upon  them  will  not  pass. 

For  it  was  in  my  heart  you  moved  among  them, 
And  blessed  them  with  your  hands  and  with  your  eyes. 
And  in  my  heart  they  will  remember  always: 
They  knew  you  once,  O  beautiful  and  wise ! 

Conrad  Aiken  [1889- 


HER  DWELLING-PLACE 

Amid  the  fairest  things  that  grow 
My  lady  hath  her  dweUing-place; 

Where  runneis  flow,  and  frail  buds  blow 
As  shy  and  pallid  as  her  face. 

The  wild,  bright  creatures  of  the  wood 
About  her  fearless  flit  and  spring; 

To  light  her  dusky  solitude 
Comes  April's  earliest  offering. 

The  calm  Night  from  her  urn  of  rest 
Pours  downward  an  unbroken  stream; 

All  day  upon  her  mother's  breast 
My  lady  lieth  in  a  dream. 


1130  Poems  of  Love 

Love  could  not  chill  her  low,  soft  bed 
With  any  sad  memorial  stone; 

He  put  a  red  rose  at  her  head — • 
A  flame  as  fragrant  as  his  own. 

Ada  Foster  Murray  [18 


THE  WIFE   FROM   FAIRYLAND 

Her  talk  was  all  of  woodland  things. 

Of  little  lives  that  pass 
Away  in  one  green  afternoon, 

Deep  in  the  haunted  grass; 

For  she  had  come  from  fairyland. 

The  morning  of  a  day 
When  the  world  that  still  was  April 

Was  turning  into  May. 

Green  leaves  and  silence  and  two  eyes- 
'Twas  so  she  seemed  to  me, 

A  silver  shadow  of  the  woods, 
Whisper  and  mystery. 

I  looked  into  her  woodland  eyes. 
And  all  my  heart  was  hers, 

And  then  I  led  her  by  the  hand 
Home  up  my  marble  stairs; 

And  all  my  granite  and  my  gold 

Was  hers  for  her  green  eyes, 
•  And  all  my  sinful  heart  was  hers 
From  sunset  to  sunrise; 

I  gave  her  all  delight  and  ease 
That  God  had  given  to  me, 

I  listened  to  fulfil  her  dreams. 
Rapt  with  expectancy. 

But  all  I  gave,  and  all  I  did, 
Brought  but  a  weary  smile 

Of  gratitude  upon  her  face; 
As  though  a  little  while, 


In  the   Fall  o'   Year  1131 

She  loitered  in  magnificence 

Of  marble  and  of  gold, 
And  waited  to  be  home  again 

When  the  dull  tale  was  told. 

Sometimes,  in  the  chill  galleries, 

Unseen,  she  deemed,  unheard, 
I  found  her  dancing  like  a  leaf 

And  singing  like  a  bird. 

So  lone  a  thing  I  never  saw 

In  lonely  earth  or  sky, 
So  merry  and  so  sad  a  thing, 

One  sad,  one  laughing,  eye. 

There  came  a  day  when  on  her  heart 

A  wild  wood  blossom  lay, 
And  the  world  that  still  was  April 

Was  turning  into  May. 

In  the  green  eyes  I  saw  a  smile 

That  turned  my  heart  to  stone: 
My  wife  that  came  from  fairyland 

No  longer  was  alone. 

For  there  had  come  a  Httle  hand 

To  show  the  green  way  home. 
Home  through  the  leaves,  home  through  the  dew, 

Home  through  the  greenwood — home. 

Richard  Lc  G allien nc  [1866- 


IN  THE   FALL  O'   YEAR 

I  WENT  back  an  old-time  lane 

In  the  fall  o'  year. 
There  was  wind  and  bitter  rain 

And  the  leaves  were  sere. 

Once  the  birds  were  lilting  high 

In  a  far-off  J\Iay — 
I  remember,  you  and  I 

Were  as  glad  as  they. 


1132  Poems  of  Love 

But  the  branches  now  are  bare 

And  the  lad  you  knew, 
Long  ago  was  buried  there — 

Long  ago,  with  you! 

Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr.  [1S82- 


THE  INVISIBLE  BRIDE 

The  low-voiced  girls  that  go 

In  gardens  of  the  Lord, 
Like  flowers  of  the  field  they  grow 

In  sisterly  accord. 

Their  whispering  feet  are  white 

Along  the  leafy  ways; 
They  go  in  whirls  of  light 

Too  beautiful  for  praise. 

And  in  their  band  forsooth 

Is  one  to  set  me  free — 
The  one  that  touched  my  youth— 

The  one  God  gave  to  me. 

She  kindles  the  desire  '         i.iH 

Whereby  the  gods  survive —  .H 

The  white  ideal  fire 
That  keeps  my  soul  alive. 

Now  at  the  wondrous  hour, 

She  leaves  her  star  supreme. 
And  comes  in  the  night's  still  power, 

To  touch  me  with  a  dream. 

Sibyl  of  mystery 

On  roads  beyond  our  ken, 
Softly  she  comes  to  me, 

And  goes  to  God  again. 

Edwin  Markham  [1852- 


Rain  on  a  Grave  ^^33 

RAIN  ON  A  GRAVE 

Clouds  spout  upon  her 

Their  waters  amain 

In  ruthless  disdain, — 
Her  who  but  lately 

Had  shivered  with  pain 
As  at  touch  of  dishonor 
If  there  had  ht  on  her 
So  coldly,  so  straightly 

Such  arrows  of  rain. 

She  who  to  shelter 

Her  delicate  head 
Would  quicken  and  quicken 

Each  tentative  tread 
If  drops  chanced  to  pelt  her 

That  summertime  spills 

In  dust-paven  rills 
When  thunder-clouds  thicken 

And  birds  close  their  bills. 

Would  that  I  lay  there 

And  she  were  housed  here! 
Or  better,  together 
Were  folded  away  there 
Exposed  to  one  weather 
We  both, — -who  would  stray  there 
When  sunny  the  day  there^giq  yarij  aA 

Or  evening  was  clear       t  ;,  ,/ 

At  the  prime  of  the  year. 

Soon  will  be  growing 

Green  blades  from  her  mound, 
And  daisies  be  showing 

Like  stars  on  the  ground, 
Till  she  form  part  of  them — ■  ' 

Ay — the  sweet  heart  of  them, 
Loved  beyond  measure 
With  a  child's  pleasure 

All  her  life's  round. 

Thomas  Hardy  [1840- 


1 134  Poems   of  Love 


PATTERNS 

I  WALK  down  the  garden  paths, 

And  all  the  daffodils 

Are  blowing,  and  the  bright  blue  squills. 

I  walk  down  the  patterned  garden-paths 

In  my  stiff,  brocaded  gown. 

With  my  powdered  hair  and  jewelled  fan, 

I  too  am  a  rare 

Pattern.    As  I  wander  down 

The  garden  paths. 

My  dress  is  richly  figured, 

And  the  train 

Makes  a  pink  and  silver  stain 

On  the  gravel,  and  the  thrift 

Of  the  borders. 

Just  a  plate  of  current  fashion, 

Tripping  by  in  high-heeled,  ribboned  shoes. 

Not  a  softness  anywhere  about  me, 

Only  whale-bone  and  brocade. 

And  I  sink  on  a  seat  in  the  shade 

Of  a  lime-tree.    For  my  passion 

Wars  against  the  stiff  brocade. 

The  daffodils  and  squills 

Flutter  in  the  breeze 

As  they  please. 

And  I  weep; 

For  the  lime-tree  is  in  blossom 

And  one  small  flower  has  dropped  upon  my  bosom. 

And  the  plashing  of  waterdrops 

In  the  marble  fountain 

Comes  down  the  garden-paths. 

The  dripping  never  stops. 

Underneath  my  stiffened  gown 

Is  the  softness  of  a  woman  bathing  in  a  marble  basin, 

A  basin  in  the  midst  of  hedges  grown 

So  thick,  she  cannot  see  her  lover  hiding. 


Patterns  1135 

But  she  guesses  he  is  near,  Mm  vfi  ,-.?,»,  f,,T,    ■  • 

And  the  sliding  of  the  water 

Seems  the  stroking  of  a  dear 

Hand  upon  her.  ' 

What  is  Summer  in  a  fine  brocaded  gown! 

I  should  like  to  see  it  lying  in  a  heap  upon  the  ground. 

All  the  pink  and  silver  crumpled  upon  the  ground. 

I  would  be  the  pink  and  silver  as  I  ran  along  the  paths,,'; 

And  he  would  stumble  after, 

Bewildered  by  my  laughter. 

I  should  see  the  sun  flashing  from  his  sword-hilt  and  the 

buckles  on  his  shoes. 
I  would  choose 

To  lead  him  in  a  maze  along  the  patterned  paths, 
A  bright  and  laughing  maze  for  my  heavy-booted  lover. 
Till  he  caught  me  in  the  shade, 
And  the  buttons  of  his  waistcoat  bruised  my  body  as  he 

clasped  me. 
Aching,  melting,  unafraid. 

With  the  shadows  of  the  leaves  and  the  sundrops. 
And  the  plopping  of  the  waterdrops. 
All  about  us  in  the  open  afternoon  — 
I  am  very  like  to  swoon 
With  the  weight  of  this  brocade. 
For  the  sun  sifts  through  the  shade.  „  ciJifjpc  adi' 

Underneath  the  fallen  blossom 

In  my  bosom. 

Is  a  letter  I  have  hid. 

It  was  brought  to  me  this  morning  by  a  rider  from  the  Duke. 

"Madam,  we  regret  to  inform  you  that  Lord  Hart  well 

Died  in  action  Thursday  se'nnight."  .  i_ 

As  I  read  it  in  the  white,  morning  sunlight,  ,-_,^^_,  y^ 

The  letters  squirmed  like  snakes.  3fjj  -jo^ 

"Any  answer,  Madam?"  said  my  footman^jj  njjy;  anildail 

"No,"  I  told  him.  ,-,   ,.jjq  g  ^I 

"See  that  the  messenger  takes  some  refreshment.     ijghdD 

No,  no  answer." 

And  I  walked  into  the  garden, 


>| flj6  Poems  of  Love 

Up  and  down  the  patterned  paths,        "  xl  aagggi;^  grfg  iuE 
In  my  stifif,  correct  brocade.  ■  gnibila  oili  bnA 

The  blue  and  yellow  flowers  stood  up  proudly  in  the  sun,'^ 
Each  one.  ^  I 

I  stood  upright  too, 
Held  rigid  to  the  pattern 
By  the  stiffness  of  my  gown. 
Up  and  down  I  walked, 
Up  and  down. 

In  a  month  he  would  have  been  my  husband. 

In  a  month,  here,  underneath  this  lime. 

We  would  have  broke  the  pattern; 

He  for  me,  and  I  for  him, 

He  as  Colonel,  I  as  Lady, 

On  this  shady  seat. 

He  had  a  whim 

That  sunlight  carried  blessing.  J  od.;  Iml. 

And  I  answered,  "It  shall  be  as  you  have  said."  'l-  '-f  j 

Now  he  is  dead. 

In  Summer  and  in  Winter  I  shall  walk  'In  odi  bnA 

Up  and  down  '  '^^  ^lA 

The  patterned  garden-paths  .   •  •^  rftB  I 

In  my  stiff,  brocaded  gown.  -v  adJ  diifJ 

The  squills  and  dafTodils 

Will  give  place  to  pillared  roses,  and  to  asters,  and  to  snow. 
I  shall  go  iJjs'jin-jba'J 

Up  and  down,  '•"f'  '■'■'  i"'^ 

In  my  gown.  t 

Gorgeously  arrayed. 
Boned  and  stayed. 

And  the  softness  of  my  body  will  be  guarded  from  embrace 
By  each  button,  hook,  and  lace.  ■    -  - 

For  the  man  who  should  loose  me  is  dead,  '*i  ^"T 

Fighting  with  the  Duke  in  Flanders,      ^ ■  - ^'-  .TJ'^iHB  xn^." 
In  a  pattern  called  a  war.  ^"''^  '"''''•  ^  "  <^^^" 

Christ!    What  are  patterns  for? 

Amy  Lowell-  {1874-:^, ,  .  ,  /I 
ij  oJni  bailfiv/  I  briA 


Dust  1137 


voii:J  li'v.oflT 
DUST  o  lo  Juo  lO 

When  the  white  name  in  us  is  gone,-    .^.^^^  .^^^ 
And  we  that  lost  the  world's  delight 

Stiffen  in  darkness,  left  alone 

To  crumble  in  our  separate  night; 


u<_ 


<) 


When  your  swift  hair  is  quiet  in  death,  ''^ 

And  through  the  lips  corruption  thrust 

Has  stilled  the  labor  of  my  breath^ 

When  we  are  dust,  when  we  are  dust! —    nA 

Not  dead,  not  undesirous  yet, 

Still  sentient,  still  unsatisfied, 
We'll  ride  the  air,  and  shine,  and  flit, 

Around  the  places  where  we  died, 

And  dance  as  dust  before  the  sun. 
And  hght  of  foot,  and  unconfined, 

Hurry  from  road  to  road,  and  run 
About  the  errands  of  the  wind. 

And  every  mote,  on  earth  or  air. 

Will  speed  and  gleam,  down  later  days, 

And  like  a  secret  pilgrim  fare 
By  eager  and  invisible  ways, 

Nor  ever  rest,  nor  ever  lie. 

Till,  beyond  thinking,  out  of  view,     r 
One  mote  of  all  the  dust  that's  I 

Shall  meet  one  atom  that  was  you. 

Then  in  some  garden  hushed  from  wind, 

Warm  in  a  sunset's  afterglow. 
The  lovers  in  the  flowers  will  find 

A  sweet  and  strange  unquiet  grow 

Upon  the  peace;  and,  past  desiring, 

So  high  a  beauty  in  the  air, 
And  such  a  light,  and  such  a  quiring. 

And  such  a  radiant  ecstasy  there, 


1 138  Poems  of  Love 

They'll  know  not  if  it's  fire,  or  dew, 
Or  out  of  earth,  or  in  the  height, 

Singing,  or  flame,  or  scent,  or  hue, 
Or  two  that  pass,  in  hght,  to  Hght, 

Out  of  the  garden,  higher,  higher.  .  .  . 

But  in  that  instant  they  shall  learn 
The  shattering  ecstasy  of  our  fire,  t  ■) 

And  the  weak  passionless  hearts  ^^ill  burn 

And  faint  in  that  amazing  glow, 

Until  the  darkness  close  above; 
And  they  will  know — ^poor  fools,  they'll  know!- 

One  moment,  what  it  is  to  love. 

Rupert  Brooke  [1887- 


BALLAD 

The  roses  in  my  garden 

Were  white  in  the  noonday  sun, 
But  they  were  dyed  with  crimson 

Before  the  day  was  done. 

All  clad  in  golden  armor, 

To  fight  the  Saladin, 
He  left  me  in  my  garden. 

To  weep,  to  sing,  and  spin. 

When  fell  the  dewy  twilight 
I  heard  the  wicket  grate, 

There  came  a  ghost  who  shivered 
Beside  my  garden  gate. 

All  clad  in  golden  armor. 
But  dabbled  with  red  dew; 

He  did  not  Hft  his  vizor. 
And  yet  his  face  I  knew. 


Dirge  1139 

And  when  he  left  my  garden 

The  roses  all  were  red 
And  dyed  in  a  fresh  crimson; 

Only  my  heart  was  dead. 

The  roses  in  my  garden 

Were  white  in  the  noonday  sun; 
But  they  were  dyed  with  crimson 

Before  the  day  was  done. 

MQurice  Baring  [1874-1916] 


"THE  LITTLE  ROSE  IS  DUST,  MY  DEAR" 

The  little  rose  is  dust,  my  dear; 

The  elfin  wind  is  gone 
That  sang  a  song  of  silver  words 

And  cooled  our  hearts  with  dawn. 

:  i  And  what  is  left  to  hope,  my  dear, 

Or  what  is  left  to  say? 
The  rose,  the  little  wind  and  you 
Have  gone  so  far  away. 

Grace  Hazard  Conkling  [18 


DIRGE 

Never  the  nightingale, 

Oh,  my  dear. 
Never  again  the  lark 
Thou  wilt  hear; 
Though  dusk  and  the  morning  still 
Tap  at  thy  window-sill, 
Though  ever  love  call  and  call 
Thou  wilt  not  hear  at  all, 
My  dear,  my  dear. 

Adelaide  Crapsey  [1878-1914] 


1 140  Poems  of  Love 

'    "  '  -  ■  -^'>riw  bnA 

■ri  y  rJT 

iTHE  ROSARY 

The  hours  I  spent  with  thee,  dear  heart, 

Are  as  a  string  of  pearls  to  me;      ■  - 
I  count  them  over,  every  one  apart/ 
My  rosary. 

Each  hour  a  pearl,  each  pearl  a  prayer, 

To  still  a  heart  in  absence  wrung; 

I  tell  each  bead  unto  the  end  and  there 

A  cross  is  hung. 

Oh  memories  that  bless — and  burn! 
Oh  barren  gain — and  bitter  loss! 
I  kiss  each  bead,  and  strive  at  last  to  learn 
To  kiss  the  cross, 
Sweetheart, 

To  kiss  the  cross. 
Robert  Cameron  Rogers  [1863-1912J 


If]  r 


LOVE'S  FULFILMENT 

"MY  TRUE-LOVE   HATH  MY  HEART" 

From  the  "Arcadia" 

My  true-love  hath  my  heart,  and  I  have  his, 

Bj'  just  exchange  one  for  the  other  given: 
I  hold  his  dear,  and  mine  he  cannot  miss; 

There  never  was  a  better  bargain  driven: 
His  heart  in  me  keeps  him  and  me  in  one, 

My  heart  in  him  his  thoughts  and  senses  guides: 
He  loves  my  heart,  for  once  it  was  his  own, 

I  cherish  his,  because  in  mc  it  bides.  ;    ^ 

His  heart  his  wound  received  from  my  sight; 

My  heart  was  wounded  from  his  wounded  heart; 
For  as  from  me,  on  him  his  hurt  did  light. 

So  stiU  me  thought  in  me  his  heart  did  smart: 
Both  equal  hurt,  in  this  change  sought  our  bliss, 
My  true  love  hath  my  heart,  and  I  have  his.  . 

Philip  Sidney  [1554-1586] 

SONG 

O  SWEET  delight,  O  more  than  human  bliss. 
With  her  to  live  that  ever  loving  is! 
To  hear  her  speak  whose  words  are  so  well  placed 
That  she  by  them,  as  they  in  her  are  graced: 
Those  looks  to  view  that  feast  the  viewer's  eye, 
How  blest  is  he  that  may  so  live  and  die! 

Such  love  as  this  the  Golden  Times  did  know, 
When  all  did  reap,  yet  none  took  care  to  sow; 
Such  love  as  this  an  endless  summer  makes. 
And  all  distaste  from  frail  affection  takes. 
So  loved,  so  blest,  in  my  beloved  am  I: 
Which  till  their  eyes  ache,  let  iron  men  envy! 

Thomas  Campion  [    ?    -1619] 
1141 


1 142  Poems  of  Love 


THE   GOOD-MORROW 

I  WONDER,  by  my  troth,  what  thou  and  I 

Did,  till  we  loved?  were  we  not  weaned  till  then? 

But  sucked  on  country  pleasures,  childishly? 

Or  snored  we  in  the  Seven  Sleepers'  den? 

'Twas  so;  but  this,  all  pleasures  fancies  be;-  ' 

If  ever  any  beauty  I  did  see, 

Which  I  desired,  and  got,  'twas  but  a  dream  of  thee. 

And  now  good-morrow  to  our  waking  souls. 

Which  watch  not  one  another  out  of  fear; 

For  love  all  love  of  other  sights  controls. 

And  makes  one  little  room  an  everywhere. 

Let  sea-discoverers  to  new  worlds  have  gone; 

Let  maps  to  other,  worlds  on  worlds  have  shown. 

Let  us  possess  one  world;  each  hath  one,  and  is  one. 

My  face  in  thine  eye,  thine  in  mine  appears, 

And  true  plain  hearts  do  in  the  faces  rest ; 

Where  can  we  find  two  fitter  hemispheres 

Without  sharp  north,  without  declining  west? 

Whatever  dies,  was  not  mixed  equally; 

If  aur  two  loves  be  one,  or  thou  and  I 

Love  just  alike  in  all,  none  of  these  loves  can  die. 

John  Donne  [1573-1631] 

"THERE'S   GOWD   IN  THE  BREAST" 

There's  gowd  in  the  breast  of  the  primrose  pale, 

An'  siller  in  every  blossom; 
There's  riches  galore  in  the  breeze  of  the  vale, 
,  ' '    And  health  in  the  wild  wood's  bosom. 
Then  come,  my  love,  at  the  hour  of  joy, 

When  warbling  birds  sing  o'er  us; 
Sweet  nature  for  us  has  no  alloy, 

And  the  world  is  all  before  us. 

The  courtier  jo3'S  in  bustle  and  power, 
The  soldier  in  war-steeds  bounding,,^./^!  Qg 

The  miser  in  hoards  of  treasured  ore,     ■  ; ,f7/- 
The  proud  in  their  pomp  surrounding: 


Refuge  1 1 43 

But  we  hae  yon  heaven  sae  bonnie  and  blue, 

And  laverocks  skimming  o'er  us; 
The  breezes  of  health,  and  the  valleys  of  dew — 

Oh,  the  world  is  all  before  us! 

James  Hogg  [17 7°- 183 5] 


THE  BEGGAR  MAID 

Her  arms  across  her  breast  she  laid; 

She  was  more  fair  than  words  can  say: 
Bare-footed  came  the  beggar  maid 

Before  the  king  Cophetua. 
In  robe  and  crown  the  king  stepped  down, 

To  meet  and  greet  her  on  her  way; 
"It  is  no  wonder,"  said  the  lords, 

"She  is  more  beautiful  than  day." 

As  shines  the  moon  in  clouded  skies, 

She  in  her  poor  attire  was  seen: 
One  praised  her  ankles,  one  her  eyes, 

One  her  dark  hair  and  lovesome  mien. 
So  sweet  a  face,  such  angel  grace. 

In  all  that  land  had  never  been: 
Cophetua  sware  a  royal  oath: 

"This  beggar  maid  shall  be  my  queen!" 

Alfred  Tennyson  [i 809-1 


REFUGE 

Twilight,  a  timid  fawn,  went  glimmering  by. 
And  Night,  the  dark-blue  hunter,  followed  fast, 

Ceaseless  pursuit  and  flight  were  in  the  sky. 
But  the  long  chase  had  ceased  for  us  at  last. 

We  watched  together  while  the  driven  fawn 

Hid  in  the  golden  thicket  of  the  day. 
We,  from  whose  hearts  pursuit  and  flight  were  gone, 

Knew  on  the  hunter's  breast  her  refuge  lay. 

A.  E.  {George  William  Russell)  [1867- 


1 144  Poems  of  Love 

AT  SUNSET        •  (  i,ffA 

.    '  ' '  'Clasp  her  and  hold  her  and  love  her,  " 
Here  in  the  arching  green 
■  Of  boughs  that  bend  above  her 

With  belts  of  blue  between. 

Clasp  her  and  hold  her  and  love  her, 
Swift!    Ere  the  splendor  dies; 

The  blue  grows  black  above  her, 
The  earth  in  shadow  lies. 

Flowers  of  dream  enfold  her. 

Soft!    Let  me  bend  above, 
Clasp  her  and  love  her  and  hold  her, 

Clasp  her  and  hold  and  love. 

Louis  V.  Ledoux  [1880- 


"ONE   MORNING,   OH!   SO  EARLY" 

One  morning,  oh!  so  early,  my  beloved,  my  beloved, 

All  the  birds  were  singing  blithely,  as  if  never  they  would 

cease ; 
'Twas  a  thrush  sang  in  my  garden,  "Hear  the  story,  hear  the 
story!" 
fio8i-i'  And  the  lark  sang,  "Give  us  glory!" 
And  the  dove  said,  "Give  us  peace!" 

Then  I  hearkened,  oh!  so  early,  my  beloved,  my  beloved, 
To  that  murmur  from  the  woodland  of  the  dove,  my  dear, 

the  dove;  i;t  f.'innj  a  .mulJi 

When  the  nightingale  came  after,  "Give  us  ftoe  to 'sweeten 
duty!" 

When  the  wren  sang,  "Give  us  beauty!" 
She  made  answer,  "Give  us  love!" 

Sweet  is  spring,  and  sweet  the  morning,  rny  beloved,  my 

,  beloved;         :'[  hnis  Jiusiuq  ?JxB3rf  oaodw  moil  ,oV/' 
Now  for  us  doth  spring,  doth  morning,  wait  upon  the  year's 
increase, 


May    Margaret  ii45 

And  my  prayer  goes  up,  "Oh,  give  us,  crowned  in  youth  with 
marriage  glory. 

Give  for  all  our  life's  dear  story,      .,  ,   ,, 
Give  us  love,  and  give  us  peace!"    |  ,/r 

Jean  Ingelow  [1820-1897] 


ACROSS  THE  DOOR 

The  fiddles  were  playing  and  playing, 
The  couples  were  out  on  the  floor; 

From  converse  and  dancing  he  drew  me, 
And  across  the  door. 

Ah!  strange  were  the  dim,  wide  meadows. 
And  strange  was  the  cloud-strewn  sky, 

And  strange  in  the  meadows  the  corncrakes, 
And  they  making  cry! 

The  hawthorn  bloom  was  by  us, 
Around  us  the  breath  of  the  south. 

While  hawthorn,  strange  in  the  night-time — 
His  kiss  on  my  mouth! 

Padraic  Col  urn  [1881- 


MAY   JNIARGARET-T'iRff  t^K  ^m??.ili 

If  you  be  that  May  Margaret 

That  lived  on  Kendal  Green, 
Then  where's  that  sunny  hair  of  yours 

That  crowned  you  like  a  queen?  '-'  ^-'  ' 

That  sunny  hair  is  dim,  lad, 

They  said  was  like  a  crown — ■ 
The  red  gold  turned  to  gray,  lad, 

The  night  a  ship  went  down.  '■'-' 

JI 
If  you  be  yet  May  Margaret,  ,  fj 

May  Margaret  now  as  then,  ae-jlnU 

Then  where's  that  bonny  smile  of  yours 

That  broke  the  hearts  of  men? 


1 1 46  Poems  of  Love 

The  bonny  smile  is  wan,  lad, 

That  once  was  glad  as  day — 
And  oh!  'tis  weary  smiling 

To  keep  the  tears  away. 

If  you  be  that  May  Margaret, 

As  yet  you  swear  to  me, 
Then  where's  that  proud,  coldJieart  of  yours 

That  sent  your  love  to  sea? 
Ah,  me!  that  heart  is  broken. 

The  proud,  cold  heart  has  bled 
For  one  light  word  outspoken,  1 

For  all  the  love  unsaid. 

Then  Margaret,  my  Margaret, 

If  all  you  say  be  true, 
Your  hair  is  yet  the  sunniest  gold, 

Your  eyes  the  sweetest  blue. 
And  dearer  yet  and  fairer  yet 

For  all  the  coming  years — 
The  fairer  for  the  waiting, 

The  dearer  for  the  tears ! 

Theophile  Marzials  [1850- 

RONDEL 

Kissing  her  hair,  I  sat  against  her  feet. 
Wove  and  unwove  it;  wound  and  found  it  sweet; 
Made  fast  therewith  her  hands,  drew  down  her  eyes, 
Deep  as  deep  flowers  and  dreamy  like  dim  skies; 
With  her  own  tresses  bound  and  found  her  fair, 
Kissing  her  hair. 

Sleep  were  no  sweeter  than  her  face  to  me, 
Sleep  of  cold  sea-bloom  under  the  cold  sea; 
What  pain  could  get  between  my  face  and  hers? 
What  new  sweet  thing  would  love  not  relish  worse? 
Unless,  perhaps,  white  death  had  kissed  me  there, 
Kissing  her  hair. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1909] 


The   Brookside  Ii47 


A  SPRING  JOURNEY 

We  journeyed  through  broad  woodland  ways, 

My  Love  and  I. 
The  maples  set  the  shining  fields  ablaze. 

The  blue  May  sky 
Brought  to  us  its  great  Spring  surprise; 
While  we  saw  all  things  through  each  other's  eyes. 

And  sometimes  from  a  steep  hillside 

Shone  fair  and  bright 
The  shadbush,  like  a  young  June  bride,  / 

Fresh  clothed  in  white. 
Sometimes  came  glimpses  glad  of  the  blue  sea; 
But  I  smiled  only  on  my  Love;  he  smiled  on  me. 

The  violets  made  a  field  one  mass  of  blue — 

Even  bluer  than  the  sky; 
The  httle  brook  took  on  that  color  too, 

And  sang  more  merrily. 
"  Your  dress  is  blue,"  he  laughing  said.    "Your  eyes," 
My  heart  sang,  "sweeter  than  the  bending  skies." 

We  spoke  of  poets  dead  so  long  ago, 

And  their  wise  words; 
We  glanced  at  apple-trees,  like  drifted  snow; 

We  watched  the  nesting  birds,— 
Only  a  moment!    Ah,  how  short  the  day! 
Yet  all  the  winters  cannot  blow  its  sweetness  quite  away. 
AliCii  Freeman  Palmer  [1855-1002] 

THE  BROOKSIDE 

I  WANDERED  by  the  brookside, 
I  wandered  by  the  mill; 
I  could  not  hear  the  brook  flow, — 
The  noisy  wheel  was  still;  '  •  ''''•-'■ 

"."       There  was  no  burr  of  grasshopper*,^  ^ 
No  chirp  of  any  bird. 
But  the  beating  of  my  own  heart 
Was  all  the  sound  I  heard. 


1 148  Poems  of  Love 

I  sat  beneath  the  elm-tree; 

I  watched  the  long,  long  shade, 

And,  as  it  grew  still  longer, 

I  did  not  feel  afraid; 

For  I  listened  for  a  footfall, 

I  listened  for  a  word, — 

But  the  beating  of  my  own  heart 

Was  all  the  sound  I  heard. 


jmuoi;  aY/ 
/oJ  xM 
.AqBm  srlT 
ouldoAT 
ot  Jd^ijoiff 


He  came  not, — no,  he  came  not, — -oraiJaraba  bn/> 

The  night  came  on  alone, —  ''  "''■*  '^"-^f^^ 

The  little  stars  sat,  one  by  one, 

Each  on  his  golden  throne; 

The  evening  wind  passed  by  my  cheek, 

The  leaves  above  were  stirred, —  Uma  I  3uii 

But  the  beating  of  my  own  heart  ,  .       ,_, 

ITT       11    1  1  T  1        J  bloiv  sriT 

Was  all  the  sound  1  heard.  ,  .        _ 

id  xiava 

:  aliJil  3riT 
Fast  silent  tears  were  flowing,  ■     ■ 

When  something  stood  behind; 

A  hand  was  on  my  shoulder, — 

I  knew  its  touch  was  kind: 

It  drew  me  nearer, — nearer, —  '"  '~*  '* 

We  did  not  speak  one  word,  '  • 

For  the  beating  of  our  own  hearts 

Was  all  the  sound  we  heard. 

Richard  Monckton  Milnes  [1800-1885] 


SONG 

For  me  the  jasmine  buds  unfold      j 
And  silver  daisies  star  the  lea,  t 

The  crocus  hoards  the  sunset  gold 
And  the  wild  rose  breathes  for  me. 

I  feel  the  sap  through  the  bough  returning, 
I  share  the  skylark's  transport  fine, 

I  know  the  fountain's  wayward  yearning; 
I  love,  and  the  world  is  mine'. 


What   My   Lover  Said  ii49 

I  love,  and  thoughts  that  sometime  grieved, 
Still  well  remembered,  grieve  not  me; 

From  all  that  darkened  and  deceived 
Upsoars  my  spirit  free.  :T 

For  soft  the  hours  repeat  one  story, 
Sings  the  sea  one  strain  divine,  l  j 

My  clouds  arise  all  flushed  with  glory; 
I  love,  and  the  world  is  mine! 

Florence  Earle  Coates  [1850- 

WHAT  MY  LOVER   SAID 

By  the  merest  chance,  in  the  twihght  gloom, 

In  the  orchard  path  he  met  me; 
In  the  tall,  wet  grass,  with  its  faint  perfume, 
And  I  tried  to  pass,  but  he  made  no  room, 

Oh,  I  tried,  but  he  would  not  let  me. 
So  I  stood  and  blushed  till  the  grass  grew  red,    of 

With  my  face  bent  down  above  it. 
While  he  took  my  hand  as  he  whispering  said — 
(How  the  clover  lifted  each  pink,  sweet  head, 
To  listen  to  all  that  my  lover  said; 

Oh,  the  clover  in  bloom,  I  love  it!) 

In  the  high,  wet  grass  went  the  path  to  hide, 

And  the  low,  wet  leaves  hung  over; 
But  I  could  not  pass  upon  either  side, 
For  I  found  myself,  when  I  vainly  tried. 

In  the  arms  of  my  steadfast  lover.  ^^  j- 

And  he  held  mc  there  and  he  raised  my  head, 

While  he  closed  the  path  before  me, 
And  he  looked  down  into  my  eyes  and  said — 
(How  the  leaves  bent  down  from  the  boughs  o'erhead 
To  listen  to  all  that  my  lover  said, 

Oh,  the  leaves  hanging  lowly  o'er  me!) 

Had  he  moved  aside  but  a  little  way, 

I  could  surely  then  have  passed  him; 
And  he  knew  I  never  could  wish  to  stay, 
And  would  not  have  heard  what  he  had  to  say, 


1 1 50  Poems  of  Love 

Could  I  only  aside  have  cast  him. 
It  was  almost  dark,  and  the  moments  sped, 

And  the  searching  night  wind  found  us, 
But  he  drew  me  nearer  and  softly  said — 
(How  the  pure,  sweet  wind  grew  still,  instead, 
To  listen  to  all  that  my  lover  said; 

Oh,  the  whispering  wind  around  us!) 

I  am  sure  he  knew  when  he  held  me  fast. 

That  I  must  be  all  unwilling; 
For  I  tried  to  go,  and  I  would  have  passed. 
As  the  night  was  come  with  its  dew,  at  last. 

And  the  sky  with  its  stars  was  filling. 
But  he  clasped  me  close  when  I  would  have  fled, 

And  he  made  me  hear  his  story,  ' ' 

And  his  soul  came  out  from  his  lips  and  said — 
(How  the  stars  crept  out  where  the  white  moon  led. 
To  listen  to  all  that  my  lover  said; 

Oh,  the  moon  and  the  stars  in  glory!) 

I  know  that  the  grass  and  the  leaves  will  not  tell, 

And  I'm  sure  that  the  wind,  precious  rover, 
Will  carry  my  secret  so  safely  and  well         '■'  * 

That  no  being  shall  ever  discover 
One  word  of  the  many  that  rapidly  fell  '^- 

From  the  soul-speaking  lips  of  my  lover; 

And  the  moon  and  the  stars  that  looked  over 
Shall  never  reveal  what  a  fairy-like  spell  ^^  '^ 

They  wove  round  about  us  that  night  in  the  dell. 

In  the  path  through  the  dew-laden  clover, 
Nor  echo  the  whispers  that  made  my  heart  swell 

As  they  fell  from  the  lips  of  my  lover. 

Homer  Greene  [1853- 

.   t_)j    11:.' j'-;  I!    '     : 

MAY-MUSIC  -  ''^'  -^^ 

Oh!  lose  the  winter  from  thine  heart,  the  darkness  from  thine 

eyes. 
And   from  the  low  hearth-chair  of  dreams,  my  Love-o'- 

May,  arise; 


Song      -     '  1 151 


And  let  the  maidens  robe  thee  like  a  white  white-lilac  tree, 
Oh!   hear   the   call  of   Spring,   fair   Soul, — and  wilt   thou 
come  with  me? 

Even  so,  and  even  so!  rl 

Whither  thou  goest,  I  will  go. 
I  will  follow  thee. 

Then  wilt  thou  see  the  orange  trees  star-flowering  over  Spain, 
Or  arched  and  mounded   Kaiser-towns  that   molder  mid 

Almain, 
Or  through  the  cypress-gardens  go  of  magic  Italy? 
Oh!  East  or  West  or  South  or  North,  say,  wilt  thou  come 

with  me? 

Even  so,  or  even  so!  • 

Whither  thou  goest,  I  will  go. 
I  will  follow  thee. 

But  wilt  thou  farther  come  with  me  through  hawthorn  red 

and  white 
Until  we  find  the  wall  that  hides  the  Land  of  Heart'sDelight? 
The  gates  all  carved  with  olden  things  are  strange  and 

dread  to  see: 
But  I  will  lift  thee  through,  fair  Soul.    Arise  and  come  with 

me! 

Even  so,  Love,  even  so! 
Whither  thou  goest,  I  will  go! 
Lo,  I  follow  thee. 

Rachel  Aniiaiid  Taylor  [18     - 


SONG 

Flame  at  the  core  of  the  world, 

And  flame  in  the  red  rose-tree; 
The  one  is  the  fire  of  the  ancient  spheres, 

The  other  is  Junes  to  be;  .,jf(  j   \\]  [' 

And,  oh,  there's  a  flame  that  is  both  their  flames 

Here  at  the  heart  of  me! 


11^2  Poems  of  Love 

,-'ij  ,.  As  strong  as  the  fires  of  stars,  ,   ;jn;i.ii)riA 

uodi   JJiw     As  the  prophet  rose-tree  true,         ,ft  ic.^d   trfO 
The  fire  of  my  life  is  tender  and  wild,        ,-,<,o 

Its  beauty  is  old  and  new; 
For  out  of  the  infinite  past  it  came 
With  the  love  in  the  eyes  of  you! 

Arthur  Upson  [1877-1008] 

,nir>qaT)vo  -  ,  ^   MEMORY  .  uaauorfJiliwnsrfT 

Lira   vjbiom   Jj:;i.  iiijorri  bnfi  barfoiji  lO 

The  Night  walked  down  the  sky  niximlA 

With  the  moon  in  her  hand;  . ,  .f^jj^^jij  ^q 

.,^  By  the  light  of  that  yellow  lantern  ^..^^  ,  jq 

I  saw  you  stand.  ,;,„ 

The  hair  that  swept  your  shoulders 

Was  yellow,  too, 

Your  feet  as  they  touched  the  grasses 

Shamed  the  dew. 
h^l  aiodUn.ii  11  ■  liil 

The  Night  wore  all  her  jewels, 

And  you  wore  none, 

But  your  gown  had  the  odor  of  lilies  «  ^"  ^ 

Drenched  with  sun.  '^^ 

uili'mliua. 

And  never  was  Eve  of  the  Garden 

Or  Mary  the  Maid 
More  pure  than  you  as  you  stood  there 

Bold,  yet  afraid. 

■  And  the  sleeping  birds  woke,  trembling, 
And  the  folded  flowers  were  aware, 
And  my  senses  were  faint  with  the  fragrant 
Gold  of  your  hair. 

And  our  lips  found  ways  of  speaking 

What  words  cannot  say. 
Till  a  hundred  nests  gave  music, 

And  the  East  was  gray. 

Frederic  Lawrence  Knowles  [i  869-1 Q05] 


lU 


Lines  l i 53 


LOVE  TRIUMPHANT 

Helen's  lips  are  drifting  dust; 

Ilion  is  consumed  with  rust ; 

All  the  galleons  of  Greece 

Drink  the  ocean's  dreamless  peace; 

Lost  was  Solomon's  purple  show 

Restless  centuries  ago; 

Stately  empires  wax  and  wane — 

Babylon,  Barbary,  and  Spain; — 

Only  one  thing,  undefaced. 

Lasts,  though  all  the  worlds  lie  waste 

And  the  heavens  are  overturned. 

— Dear,  how  long  ago  we  learned! 

There's  a  sight  that  blinds  the  sun,  '  'f 

Sound  that  lives  when  sounds  are  done, 

Music  that  rebukes  the  birds, 

Language  lovelier  than  words, 

Hue  and  scent  that  shame  the  rose,  : T 

Wine  no  earthly  vineyard  knows, 

Silence  stiller  than  the  shore 

Swept  by  Charon's  stealthy  oar, 

Ocean  more  divinely  free  iinujj  ruo 

Than  Pacific's  boundless  sea,-^^' 

Ye  who  love  have  learned  it  true. 

— Dear,  how  long  ago  we  knew! 

Frederic  Lawrence  Knowlcs  [1869-1905] 


LINES 

Love  within  the  lover's  breast 
Burns  hke  Hesper  in  the  West, 
O'er  the  ashes  of  the  sun. 
Till  the  day  and  night  are  done; 
Then,  when  dawn  drives  up  his  car — 
Lo!  it  is  the  morning  star. 

Love!  thy  love  pours  down  on  mine, 
As  the  sunlight  on  the  vine, 


1 1 54  Poems  of  Love 

As  the  snow  rill  on  the  vale, 
As  the  salt  breeze  on  the  sail; 
As  the  song  unto  the  bird 
On  my  lips  thy  name  is  heard. 

As  a  dewdrop  on  the  rose 
In  thy  heart  my  passion  glows; 
As  a  skylark  to  the  sky, 
Up  into  thy  breast  I  fly; 
As  a  sea-shell  of  the  sea 
Ever  shall  I  sing  of  thee. 

George  Meredith  [1828-1909] 


LOVE  AMONG  THE  RUINS 

Where  the  quiet-colored  end  of  evening  smiles 

Miles  and   miles 
On  the  solitary  pastures  where  our  sheep 

Half-asleep 
Tinkle  homeward  through  the  twilight,  stray  or  stop 

As  they  crop — 
Was  the  site  once  of  a  city  great  and  gay, 

(So  they  say) 
Of  our  country's  very  capital,  its  prince 

Ages  since 
Held  his  court  in,  gathered  councils,  wielding  far 

Peace  or  war. 

Now, — the  country  does  not  even  boast  a  tree, 

As  you  see, 
To  distinguish  slopes  of  verdure,  certain  rills 

From  the  hills 
Intersect  and  give  a  name  to  (else  they  run 

Into  one), 
Where  the  domed  and  daring  palace  shot  its  spires 

Up  like  fires 
O'er  the  hundred-gated  circuit  of  a  wall 

Bounding  all, 
Made  of  marble,  men  might  march  on  nor  be  pressed. 

Twelve  abreast. 


Love  Among  the  Ruins  ^^SS 

And  such  plenty  and  perfection,  see,  of  grass 

Never  was! 
Such  a  carpet  as,  this  summer-time,  o'erspreads 

And  embeds 
Every  vestige  of  the  city,  guessed  alone. 

Stock  or  stone — 
Where  a  multitude  of  men  breathed  joy  and  woe 

Long  ago; 
Lust  of  glory  pricked  their  hearts  up,  dread  of  shame 

Struck  them  tame; 
And  that  glory  and  that  shame  alike,  the  gold 

Bought  and  sold. 

Now, — the  single  little  turret  that  remains 

On  the  plains. 
By  the  caper  overrooted,  by  the  gourd 

Overscored, 
While  the  patching  houseleck's  head  of  blossom  winks 

Through  the  chinks — 
Marks  the  basement  whence  a  tower  in  ancient  time 

Sprang  sublime. 
And  a  burning  ring,  all  round,  the  chariots  traced  ^^ 

As  they  raced, 
And  the  monarch  and  his  minions  and  his  dames 

Viewed  the  games. 

And  I  know,  while  thus  the  quiet-colored  eve 

Smiles  to  leave 
To  their  folding,  all  our  many-tinkling  fleece 

In  such  peace. 
And  the  slopes  and  rills  in  undistinguished  gray 

Melt  away — 
That  a  girl  with  eager  eyes  and  yellow  hair 

Waits  me  there 
In  the  turret  whence  the  charioteers  caught  soul 

For  the  goal,  ' 

When  the  king  looked,  where  she  looks  now,  breathless,  dumb. 

Till  I  come. 

But  he  looked  upon  the  city,  every  side, 
Far  and  wide, 


1 1 56  '''    Poems  of  Love       ' 

All  the  mountains  topped  with  temples,  all  the  glades'   /. 

Colonnades, 
All  the  causeys,  bridges,  aqueducts, — and  then,     b  dou2 

All  the  men! 
When  I  do  come,  she  will  speak  not,  she  will  stand,  yiavS 

Either  hand  ,  . 

On  my  shoulder,  give  her  eyes  the  first  embrace      TrorfW 

Of  my  face. 
Ere  we  rush,  ere  we  extinguish  sight  and  speech 

Each  on  each. 

In  one  year  they  sent  a  million  fighters  forth 

South  and  North, 
And  they  built  their  gods  a  brazen  pillar  high 

As  the  sky, 
Yet  reserved  a  thousand  chariots  in  full  force —  '^ 

Gold,  of  course. 
Oh  heart!  oh  blood  that  freezes,  blood  that  burns!  ^^iai// 

Earth's  returns 
For  whole  centuries  of  folly,  noise  and  sin!  i'*- 

Shut  them  in. 
With  their  triumphs  and  their  glories  and  the  rest! 

Love  is  best! 

Robert  Browning  [181 2-1889]  A 

EARL   MERTOUN'S   SONG 

From  "The  Blot  in  the  'Scutcheon" 

There's  a  woman  like  a  dewdrop,  she's  so  purer  than  the 
purest ; 

And  her  noble  heart's  the  noblest,  yes,  and  her  sure  faith's 
the  surest: 

And  her  eyes  are  dark  and  humid,  like  the  depth  on  depth 
of  luster 

Hid  i'  the  harebell,  while  her  tresses,  sunnier  than  the  wild- 
grape  cluster. 

Gush  in  golden- tinted  plenty  down. |ier  neck's  rose-misted 
marble : 

Then  her  voice's  music  .  .  .  call  it  the  well's  bubbling,  the 
bird's  warble! 


Parting  at   Morning  ii57 

And  this  woman  says,  "My  days  were  sunless  and  my  nights 

were  moonless, 
Parched  the  pleasant  April  herbage,  and  the  lark's  heart's 

outbreak  tuneless, 
If  you  loved  me  not! "    And  I  who  (ah,  for  words  of  flame!) 

adore  her, 
Who  am  mad  to  lay  my  spirit  prostrate  palpably  before 

her — 
I  may  enter  at  her  portal  soon,  as  now  her  lattice  takes 

me. 
And  by  noontide  as  by  midnight  make  her  mine,  as  hers  she 

makes  me! 

Robert  Broivning  [i8i2-i88g] 


MEETING  AT  NIGHT 

The  gray  sea  and  the  long  black  land; 
And  the  yellow  half-moon  large  and  low; 
And  the  startled  little  vv^aves  that  leap 
In  fiery  ringlets  from  their  sleep, 
As  I  gain  the  cove  with  pushing  prow. 
And  quench  its  speed  in  the  slushy  sand. 

Then  a  mile  of  warm  sea-scented  beach; 

Three  fields  to  cross  till  a  farm  appears; 

A  tap  at  the  pane,  the  quick  sharp  scratch 

And  blue  spirt  of  a  lighted  match, 

And  a  voice  less  loud,  through  its  joys  and  fears, 

Than  the  two  hearts  beating  each  to  each ! 

Robert  Browning  [iSi 2-1889] 

.ri, 
PARTING  AT  MORNING 

Round  the  cape  of  a  sudden  came  the  sea, 
And  the  sun  looked  over  the  mountain's  rim: 
And  straight  was  a  path  of  gold  for  him. 
And  the  need  of  a  world  of  men  for  me. 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1889] 


1 1 58  Poems  of  Love 


in  bam-':  /-h  vl/T"  .---.-i  rtmicv/auh  hn. 

THE  TURN  OF  THE   ROAD  * 

Soft,  gray  buds  on  the  willow, 

Warm,  moist  winds  from  the  bay, 
Sea-guUs  out  on  the  sandy  beach, 
And  a  road  my  eager  feet  would  reach. 

That  leads  to  the  Far-away. 

Dust  on  the  wayside  flower, 

The  meadow-lark's  luring  tone 
■Is  silent  now,  from  the  grasses  tipped 
With  dew  at  the  dawn,  the  pearls  have  slipped — 

Far  have  I  fared  alone. 

And  then,  by  the  alder  thicket 

The  turn  of  the  road — and  you! 
Though  the  earth  he  white  in  the  noonday  heat, 
Or  the  swift  storm  follow  our  hurrying  feet 

What  do  we  care — we  two! 

Alice  RollH  Coe  [18    - 

"MY   DELIGHT  AND   THY  DELIGHT" 

My  delight  and  thy  dehght 
Walking,  like  two  angels  white. 
In  the  gardens  of  the  night: 

My  desire  and  thy  desire 
Twining  to  a  tongue  of  fire, 
Leaping  live,  and  laughing  higher; 

Through  the  everlasting  strife 
In  the  mystery  of  life.     * ' 

Love,  from  whom  the  world  begun, 
Hath  the  secret  of  the  sun. 

Love  can  tell,  and  love  alone. 
Whence  the  million  stars  were  strown, 
Why  each  atom  knows  its  own. 
How,  in  spite  of  woe  and  death, 
Gay  is  life,  and  sweet  is  breath: 


Love  at  Sea  ^^59 

This  he  taught  us,  this  we  knew, 
Happy  in  his  science  true, 
Hand  in  hand  as  we  stood 
'Neath  the  shadows  of  the  wood, 
Heart  to  heart  as  we  lay 
In  the  dawning  of  the  day. 

Robert  Bridges  [1844- 

"0,   SAW  YE  THE  LASS" 

O,  SAW  ye  the  lass  wi'  the  bonny  blue  een? 
Her  smile  is  the  sweetest  that  ever  was  seen; 
Her  cheek  like  the  rose  is,  but  fresher,  T  ween; 
She's  the  loveliest  lassie  that  trips  on  the  green. 
The  home  of  my  love  is  below  in  the  valley, 
Where  wild-flowers  welcome  the  wandering  bee; 
But  the  sweetest  of  flowers  in  that  spot  that  is  seen 
Is  the  maid  that  I  love  wi'  the  bonny  blue  een. 

When  night  overshadows  her  cot  in  the  glen. 
She'll  steal  out  to  meet  her  loved  Donald  again; 
And  when  the  moon  shines  on  the  valley  so  green, 
I'll  welcome  the  lass  wi'  the  bonny  blue  een. 
As  the  dove  that  has  wandered  away  from  his  nest 
Returns  to  the  mate  his  fond  heart  loves  the  best, 
I'll  fly  from  the  world's  false  and  vanishing  scene, 
To  my  dear  one,  the  lass  wi'  the  bonny  blue  een. 

Richard  Ryan  [1706-1840] 

LOVE  AT  SEA 

IMITATED   FROM   THEOPHII.E    GAUTIER 

We  are  in  love's  land  to-day; 

Where  shall  we  go? 
Love,  shall  we  start  or  stay, 

Or  sail  or  row? 
There's  many  a  wind  and  way. 
And  never  a  May  but  May; 
We  are  in  love's  hand  to-day; 

Where  shall  we  go? 


ii6o  Poems  of  Love 

Our  land-wind  is  the  breath.-f  .i;fT 
Of  sorrows  kissed  to  death 

And  joys  that  were; 
Our  ballast  is  a  rose; 
Our  way  lies  where  God  knows 

And  love  knows  where. 

We  are  in  love's  hand  to-day— = 

Our  seamen  are  fledged  Loves, 
Our  masts  are  bills  of  doves, 

Our  decks  fine  gold; 
Our  ropes  are  dead  maids'  hair, 
Our  stores  are  love-shafts  fair 

And  manifold. 

We  are  in  love's  land  to-day — 

Where  shall  we  land  you,  sweet? 
On  fields  of  strange  men's  feet, 

Or  fields  near  home?  ■  i 

Or  where  the  fire-flowers  blow, 
Or  where  the  flowers  of  snow 

Or  flowers  of  foam? 

We  are  in  love's  hand  to-day — 

Land  me,  she  says,  where  love 
.J,  .      Shows  but  one  shaft,  one  dove,  vj 

One  heart,  one  hand,—  T 

A  shore  like  that,  my  dear. 
Lies  where  no  man  will  steer. 
No  maiden  land. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [183 7-1 909] 

MARY  BEATON'S  SONG 

From  "Chastelard" 

Between  the  sunset  and  the  sea 
My  love  laid  hands  and  lips  on  me; 
Of  sweet  came  sour,  of  day  came  night, 
Of  long  desire  came  brief  delight: 
Ah  love,  and  what  thing  came  of  thee 
Between  the  sea-downs  and  the  sea? 


'>,'o.  Plighted  1161 

Between  the  sea-mark  and  the  sea 
Joy  grew  to  grief,  grief  grew  to  me; 
Love  turned  to  tears,  and  tears  to  fire, 
And  dead  delight  to  new  desire;  iq?:  A" 

Love's  talk,  love's  touch  there  seemed  to  be 
Between  the  sea-sand  and  the  sea. 

Between  the  sundown  and  the  sea 
Love  watched  one  hour  of  love  with  me; 
Then  down  the  all-golden  water-ways 
His  feet  flew  after  yesterday's; 
I  saw  them  come  and  saw  them  flee 
Between  the  sea-foam  and  the  sea. 

Between  the  sea-strand  and  the  sea 
Love  fell  on  sleep,  sleep  fell  on  me; 
The  first  star  sdw  twain  turn  to  one 
Between  the  moonrise  and  the  sun; 
The  next,  that  saw  not  love,  saw  me 
Between  the  sea-banks  and  the  sea. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [183 7- 1909] 


PLIGHTED 

Mine  to  the  core  of  the  heart,  my  beauty! 
Mine,  all  mine,  and  for  love,  not  duty: 
Love  given  willingly,  full  and  free. 


Love  for  love's  sake, — as  mine  to  thee. 

Duty's  a  slave  that  keeps  the  keys,  ^ 

But  Love,  the  master,  goes  in  and  out 
Of  his  goodly  chambers  with  song  and  shout, 

Just  as  he  please, — just  as  he  please. 

Mine,  from  the  dear  head's  crown,  brown-golden, 
To  the  silken  foot  that's  scarce  beholden; 
Give  to  a  few  friends  hand  or  smile, 
Like  a  generous  lady,  now  and  awhile,  ^ 

But  the  sanctuary  heart,  that  none  dare  win, 
Keep  holiest  of  holiest  evermore;  .  // 

The  crowd  in  the  aisles  may  watch  the  door. 

The  high-priest  only  enters  in. 


'h-d 


1 1 62  Poems  of  Love 

Mine,  my  own,  without  doubts  or  terrors,  '• 
With  all  thy  goodnesses,  all  thy  errors, 
Unto  me  and  to  me  alone  revealed, 
"A  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed." 

Many  may  praise  thee, — praise  mine  as  thine, 
Many  may  love  thee, — I'll  love  them  too; 
But  thy  heart  of  hearts,  pure,  faithful,  and  true, 

Must  be  mine,  mine  wholly,  and  only  mine. 

v 
Mine! — God,  I  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  given 

Something  all  mine  on  this  side  heaven: 

Something  as  much  myself  to  be 

As  this  my  soul  which  I  lift  to  Thee: 

Flesh  of  my  flesh,  bone  of  my  bone. 
Life  of  my  life,  whom  Thou  dost  make 
Two  to  the  world  for  the  world's  work's  sake, — 

But  each  unto  each,  as  in  Thy  sight,  one. 

Dinah  Maria  Mulock  Craik  [1826-1887] 


A  WOMAN'S  QUESTION 

Before  I  trust  my  fate  to  thee. 

Or  place  my  hand  in  thine, 
Before  I  let  thy  future  give 

Color  and  form  to  mine, 
Before  I  peril  all  for  thee,  question  thy  soul  to-night  for  me. 

I  break  all  slighter  bonds,  nor  feel 

A  shadow  of  regret: 
Is  there  one  link  within  the  past 
That  holds  thy  spirit  yet? 
Or  is  thy  faith  as  clear  and  free  as  that  which  I, can  pledge  to 
thee?  ■  noilia  arij  o'l 

Does  there  within  thy  dimmest  dreams 

A  possible  future  shine. 
Wherein  thy  life  could  henceforth  breathe, 

Untouched,  unshared  by  mine? 
If  so,  at  any  pain  or  cost,  O,  tell  me  before  all  is  lost. 


"Dinna  Ask   Me"  ii  63 

Look  deeper  still.     If  thou  canst  feel, 

Within  thy  inmost  soul. 
That  thou  hast  kept  a  portion  back, 

While  I  have  staked  the  whole, 
Let  no  false  pity  spare  the  blow,  but  in  true  mercy  tell  me  so. 

Is  there  within  thy  heart  a  need 

That  mine  cannot  fulfil? 
One  chord  that  any  other  hand 
Could  better  wake  or  still? 
Speak  now — lest  at  some  future  day  my  whole  life  wither  and 
decay. 

Lives  there  within  thy  nature  hid 

The  demon-spirit  change, 
Shedding  a.  passing  glory  still 
On  all  things  new  and  strange? 
It  may  not  be  thy  fault  alone, — but  shield  my  heart  against 
thy  own. 

Couldst  thou  withdraw  thy  hand  one  day 

And  answer  to  my  claim, 
That  Fate,  and  that  to-day's  mistake — 
Not  thou — had  been  to  blame? 
Some  soothe  their  conscience  thus;  but  thou  wilt  surely 
warn  and  save  me  now. 

Nay,  answer  not, — I  dare  not  hear, 
The  words  would  come  too  late; 
Yet  I  would  spare  thee  all  remorse. 
So,  comfort  thee,  my  Fate, — 
Whatever  on  my  heart  may  fall — remember,  I  would  risk  it 
all! 

Adelaide  Anne  Procter  [1825-1864] 

"DINNA  ASK  ME" 

O,  DINNA  ask  mc  gin  I  lo'e  ye: 

Troth,  I  daurna  toll! 
Dinna  ask  me  gin  I  lo'e  yc, — 
■  1 '  !  Ask  it  o'  yoursel'. 


J 1 54  Poems  of  Love 

O,  dinna  look  sae  sair  at  me, 

For  weel  ye  ken  me  true; 
O,  gin  ye  look  sae  sair  at  me,  rCf 

I  daurna  look  at  you. 

When  ye  gang  to  yon  hraw,  braw  town, 

And  bonnier  lassies  see, 
O,  dinna,  Jamie,  look  at  them. 

Lest  ye  should  mind  na  me. 

For  I  could  never  bide  the  lass 

That  ye'd  lo'e  mair  than  me; 
And  O,  I'm  sure  my  heart  wad  brak, 

Gin  ye'd  prove  fause  to  me! 

JohnDimlop  [1755-1820] 

A  SONG 

Sing  me  a  sweet,  low  song  of  night  , 

Before  the  rnoon  is  risen, 
A  song  that  tells  of  the  stars'  delight 

Escaped  from  day's  bright  prison, 
A  song  that  croons  with  the  cricket's  voice, 

That  sleeps  with  the  shadowed  trees,i  ..^1']' 
A  song  that  shall  bid  my  heart  rejoice 

At  its  tender  mysteries!  .?, 

And  then  when  the  song  is  ended,  love,''"-''*^*'^ 

Bend  down  your  head  unto  me, 
Whisper  the  word  that  was  born  above  - 

Ere  the  moon  had  swayed  the  sea; 
Ere  the  oldest  star  began  to  shine, 
,.  Or  the  farthest  sun  to  burn, —  .*rrfW 

The  oldest  of  words,  O  heart  of  mine. 
Yet  newest,  and  sweet  to  learn. 

Hildegardc  Hawthorne  [18     - 

THE  REASON 

Oh,  hark  the  pulses  of  the  night, 

The  crickets  hidden  in  the  fieW, 
That  beat  out  music  of  delight 

Till  summoned  dawn  stands  half  revealed! 


"My  Own   Cailin    Donn  "  1165 

Oh,  mark  above  the  bearded  corn 

And  the  green  wheat  and  bending  rye, 

Tuned  to  the  earth,  and  calHng  morn, 
The  stars  vibrating  in  the  sky! 

And  know,  divided  soul  of  me, 
Here  in  the  meadow,  sweet  in  speech, 

This  perfect  night  could  never  be 
Were  we  not  mated  each  to  each. 

James  Oppciihciii!  [1882- 


MY  OWN   CAILIN  DONN" 

The  blush  is  on  the  flower,  and  the  bloom  is  on  the  tree, 
And  the  bonnie,  bonnie  sweet  birds  are  caroling  their  glee; 
And  the  dews  upon  the  grass  are  made  diamonds  by  the  sun, 
All  to  deck  a  path  of  glory  for  my  own  CaiHn  Donn! 

Oh  fair  she  is!     Oh  rare  she  is!     Oh  dearer  still  to  me, 
More  welcome  than  the  green  leaf  to  winter-stricken  tree! 
More  welcome  than  the  blossom  to  the  vveary,  dusty  bee, 
Is  the  coming  of  my  true  love — my  own  Cailin  Donn! 

O  sycamore!  O  sycamore!  wave,  wave  your  banners  green! 
Let  all  your  pennons  flutter,  O  beech!  before  my  queen! 
Ye  fleet  and  honeyed  breezes,  to  kiss  her  hand  ye  run ; 
But  my  heart  has  passed  before  ye  to  my  own  Cailin  Donn. 

Ring  out,  ring  out,  O  linden,  your  merry  leafy  bells! 
Unveil  your  brilliant  torches,  O  chestnut!  to  the  dells; 
Strew,  strew  the  glade  with  splendor,  for  morn  it  cometh  on! 
Oh,  the  morn  of  all  delight  to  me — my  own  Caflin  Donn! 

She  is  coming,  where  we  parted,  where  she  wanders  every 
day;  .-  ,.„^  ttSY^ 

There's  a  gay  surprise  before  her  who  thinks  me  far  away; 

Oh,  like  hearing  bugles  triumph  when  the  fight  of  freedom's 
won , 

Is  the  joy  around  your  footsteps,  my  own  Cailin  Donn! 

George  S  igcrson  [1839- 


1 1 66  Poems  of  Love 


NOCTURNE 

All  the  earth  a  hush  of  white, 

White  with  moonhght  all  the  skies; 

Wonder  of  a  winter  night — 
And  .  .  .  your  eyes. 

Hues  no  palette  dares  to  claim 
Where  the  spoils  of  sunken  ships 

Leap  to  light  in  singing  flame — 
And  .  .  .  your  lips. 

Darkness  as  the  shadows  creep 
Where  the  embers  sigh  to  rest; 

Silence  of  a  world  asleep — 
And  .  .  .  your  breast. 

Amelia  Josephine  Burr  [li 


SURRENDER 

As  I  look  back  upon  your  first  embrace 
I  understand  why  from  your  sudden  touch 
Angered  I  sprang,  and  struck  you  in  the  face. 
You  asked  at  once  too  little  and  too  much. 
But  now  that  of  my  spirit  you  require 
Love's  very  soul  that  unto  death  endures. 
Crown  as  you  will  the  cup  of  your  desire — 
I  am  all  yours. 

Amelia  Josephine  Burr  [1S78- 


"BY  YON  BURN  SIDE" 

We'll  meet  beside  the  dusky  glen,  on  yon  burn  side. 
Where  the  bushes  form  a  cosie  den,  on  yon  burn  side; 

Though  the  broomy  knowes  be  green, 

And  there  we  may  be  seen. 
Yet  we'll  meet — we'll  meet  at  e'en,  down  by  yon  burn  side. 


A   Pastoral  1167 

I'll  lead  thee  to  the  birken  bovver,  on  yon  burn  side, 
Sae  sweetly  wove  wi'  woodbine  flower,  on  yon  burn  side; 

There  the  busy  prying  eye, 

Ne'er  disturbs  the  lover's  joy, 
While  in  ithcr's  arms  they  lie,  down  by  yon  burn  side. 

Awa',  ye  rude,  unfeeling  crew,  frae  yon  burn  side, 
Those  fairy  scenes  are  no  for  you,  by  yon  burn  side; 

There  fancy  smooths  her  theme. 

By  the  sweetly  murmuring  stream. 
And  the  rock-lodged  echoes  skim,  down  by  yon  burn  side. 

Now  the  plantin'  taps  are  tinged  wi'  goud,  on  yon  burn  side, 
And  gloamin'  draws  her  foggy  shroud  o'er  yon  burn  side; 
Far  frae  the  noisy  scene, 
I'll  through  the  fields  alane. 
There  we'll  meet,  my  ain  dear  Jean,  down  by  yon  burn 
side. 

Robert  Tannahill  [i 774-1810] 


A  PASTORAL 

Flower  of  the  medlar, 

Crimson  of  the  quince, 
I  saw  her  at  the  blossom-time, 

And  loved  her  ever  since! 
She  swept  the  draughty  pleasance, 

The  blooms  had  left  the  trees. 
The  whilst  the  birds  sang  canticles, 

In  cherry  symphonies. 

WTiiteness  of  the  white  rose. 

Redness  of  the  red, 
She  went  to  cut  the  blush-rose  buds 

To  tie  at  the  altar-head; 
And  some  she  laid  in  her  bosom, 

And  some  around  her  brows. 
And,  as  she  passed,  the  lily-heads 

All  becked  and  made  their  bows. 


1 1 68  Poems  of  Love 

Scarlet  of  the  poppy,  ''^R'jf  H'T 

Yellow  of  the  corn, 
The  men  were  at  the  garnering, 

A-shouting  in  the  morn; 
I  chased  her  to  a  pippin-tree, —  '  "'■•■''i  " 

The  waking  birds  all  whist, — 
And  oh !  it  was  the  sweetest  kiss 

That  I  have  ever  kissed. 


t.'— 


Marjorie,  mint,  and  violets 

A-drying  round  us  set,  ■'rf;l  baA 

'Twas  all  done  in  the  faience-room 

A-spicing  marmalet; 
On  one  tile  was  a  satyr,  a." 

On  one  a  nymph  at  bay, 
Methinks  the  birds  will  scarce  be  home 

To  wake  our  wedding-day!  f! T 

Theophile  Marzials  [1850- 

"WHEN  DEATH  TO   EITHER  SHALL  COME" 

When  Death  to  either  shall  come, — 

I  pray  iL  be  first  to  me, — 
Be  happy  as  ever  at  home, 

If  so,  as  I  wish,  it  be. 

Possess  thy  heart,  my  own; 

And  sing  to  thy  child  on  thy  knee, 
Or  read  to  thyself  alone 

The  songs  that  I  made  for  thee. 

Robert  Bridges  [1S44- 

THE  RECONCILIATION 

From  "The  Princess" 

As  through  the  land  at  eve  we  went, 

And  plucked  the  ripened  ears, 
We  fell  out,  my  wife  and  I, 
O,  wc  fell  out,  I  know  not  why. 

And  kissed  again  with  tears. 


'J         Song  1 1 69 

And  blessings  on  the  falling  out 

That  all  the  more  endears, 
When  we  fall  out  with  those  we  love 

And  kiss  again  with  tears! 

For  when  we  came  where  hes  the  child 

We  lost  in  other  years, 
There  above  the  little  grave, 
O,  there  above  the  little  grave, 

We  kissed  again  with  tears. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


SONG 

Wait  but  a  little  while — 

The  bird  will  bring 
A  heart  in  tune  for  melodies 

Unto  the  spring, 
Till  he  who's  in  the  cedar  there 
Is  moved  to  trill  a  song  so  rare, 
And  pipe  her  fair. 

Wait  but  a  little  while — 

The  bud  will  break; 
The  inner  rose  will  open  and  glow 

For  summer's  sake; 
Fond  bees  will  lodge  within  her  breast 
Till  she  herself  is  plucked  and  pressed 
Where  I  would  rest. 

Wait  but  a  little  while — 

The  maid  will  grow 
Gracious  with  lips  and  hands  to  thee, 

With  breast  of  snow. 
To-day  Love's  mute,  but  time  hath  sown 
A  soul  in  her  to  match  thine  own. 
Though  yet  ungrown. 

Norman  Gale  [1862- 


iiyo  Poems  of  Love 


CONTENT 

Though  singing  but  the  shy  and  sweet 

Untrod  by  multitudes  of  feet, 

Songs  bounded  by  the  brook  and  wheat, 

I  have  not  failed  in  this, 
The  only  lure  my  woodland  note, 
To  win  all  England's  whitest  throat! 
O  bards  in  gold  and  fire  who  wrote, 

Be  yours  all  other  bliss! 

Norman  Gale  [1862- 

CHE  SARA  SARA 

Preach  wisdom  unto  him  who  understands! 

When  there's  such  lovely  longing  in  thine  eyes, 
And  such  a  pulse  in  thy  small  clinging  hands. 

What  is  the  good  of  being  great  or  wise? 

What  is  the  good  of  beating  up  the  dust 

On  the  world's  highway,  vexed  with  droughty  heat? 
Oh,  I  grow  fatalist — what  must  be  must, 

Seeing  that  thou,  beloved,  art  so  sweet! 

Victor  Plarr  [1863- 

"BID   ADIEU  TO   GIRLISH  DAYS" 

Bid  adieu,  adieu,  adieu, 

Bid  adieu  to  girlish  days, 
Happy  Love  is  come  to  woo 

Thee  and  woo  thy  girlish  ways — 
The  zone  that  doth  become  thee  fair, 
The  snood  upon  thy  yellow  hair. 

When  thou  hast  heard  his  name  upon 
The  bugles  of  the  cherubim, 
''  '    Begin  thou  softly  to  unzone 

Thy  girlish  bosom  unto  him, 
And  softly  to  undo  the  snood 
That  is  the  sign  of  maidenhood. 

James  Joyce  [1882- 


Advice  to  a   Lover  1171 


TO  F.  C. 

Fast  falls  the  snow,  O  lady  mine, 
Sprinkling  the  lawn  with  crystals  fine, 
But  by  the  gods  we  won't  repine 

While  we're  together, 
We'll  chat  and  rhyme,  and  kiss  and  dine, 

Defying  weather. 

So  stir  the  fire  and  pour  the  wine, 
And  let  those  sea-green  eyes  divine 
Pour  their  iove-madness  into  mine: 

I  don't  care  whether 
'Tis  snow  or  sun  or  rain  or  shine 

If  we're  together. 

Mortimer  Collins  [1827-1876] 

SPRING  PASSION 

Blue  sky,  green  fields,  and  lazy  yellow  sun! 

Why  should  I  hunger  for  the  burning  South, 
Where  beauty  needs  no  travail  to  be  won, 

Now  I  may  kiss  her  pure  impassioned  mouth? 

Winds  rippling  with  the  rich  delight  of  spring! 

Why  should  I  yearn  for  myriad-colored  skies, 
Lit  by  auroral  suns,  when  I  may  sing 

The  flame  and  rapture  of  her  starry  eyes? 

Oh,  song  of  birds,  and  flowers  fair  to  see! 

Why  should  I  thirst  for  far-off  Eden-isles,  , 
When  I  may  hear  her  discourse  melody. 

And  bask,  a  dreamer,  in  her  dreamy  smiles? 
Joel  Elias  Spin  gam  [1875- 

ADVICE  TO  A  LOVER 

Oh,  if  you  love  her. 

Show  her  the  best  of  you; 
So  will  you  move  her 

To  bear  with  the  rest  of  you. 


iij'i  Poems  of  Love 

Coldness  and  jealousy 

Cannot  but  seem  to  her 
Signs  that  a  tempest  lurks 

Where  was  sunbeam  to  hen 
Patience  and  tenderness 

Still  will  awake  in  her 
Hopes  of  new  sunshine, 

Though  the  storm  break  for  her° 
Love,  she  will  know,  for  her, 

Like  the  blue  firmament, 
Under  the  tempest  lies 

Gentle  and  permanent. 
Nor  will  she  ever 

Gentleness  find  the  less 
When  the  storm  overblown 

Leaveth  clear  kindliness. 
Deal  with  her  tenderly, 

Skylike  above  her, 
Smile  on  her  waywardness, 

Oh,  if  you  love  her! 

S.  Charles  JeUicoe  [i8 

"YES" 

They  stood  above  the  world, 

Li  a  world  apart; 
And  she  dropped  her  happy  eyes, 
And  stilled  the  throbbing  pulses 

Of  her  happy  heart. 
And  the  moonlight  fell  above  her. 
Her  secret  to  discover; 

And  the  moonbeams  kissed  her  hair, 
As  though  no  human  lover 

Had  laid  his  kisses  there. 

"Look  up,  brown  eyes,"  he  said, 

"And  answer  mine; 
Lift  up  those  silken  fringes 
That  hide  a  happy  light 

Almost  divine." 


Love        1  117; 

The  jealous  moonlight  drifted 
To  the  finger  half-uphfted, 

Where  shone  the  opal  ring- 
Where  the  colors  danced  and  shifted 

On  the  pretty,  changeful  thing. 

Just  the  old,  old  story 

Of  light  and  shade, 
Love  like  the  opal  tender, 
Like  it  may  be  to  vary— 

May  be  to  fade. 
Just  the  old  tender  story, 
Just  a  glimpse  of  morning  glory 

In  an  earthly  Paradise, 
With  shadowy  reflections 

In  a  pair  of  sweet  brown  eyes. 

Brown  eyes  a  man  might  well 

Be  proud  to  win! 
Open  to  hold  his  image, 
Shut  under  silken  lashes. 

Only  to  shut  him  in. 
O  glad  eyes,  look  together, 
For  life's  dark,  stormy  weather 

Grows  to  a  fairer  thing 
When  young  eyes  look  upon  it 

Through  a  slender  wedding  ring. 

Richard  Doddridge  Blackmore  [i 825-1  goo] 

LOVE 

All  thoughts,  all  passions,  all  delights, 
Whatever  stirs  this  mortal  frame. 
All  are  but  ministers  of  Love, 
And  feed  his  sacred  flame. 

Oft  in  my  waking  dreams  do  I 
Live  o'er  again  that  happy  hour. 
When  midway  on  the  mount  I  laj'', 
Beside  the  ruined  tower. 


1 1 74  Poems  of  Love 

The  moonshine,  stealing  o'er  the  scene, 
Had  blended  with  the  hghts  of  eve; 
And  she  was  there,  my  hope,  my  joy, 
My  own  dear  Genevieve! 

She  leaned  against  the  armed  man, 
The  statue  of  the  armed  Knight; 
She  stood  and  listened  to  my  lay. 
Amid  the  lingering  light. 

Few  sorrows  hath  she  of  her  own, 
My  hope!  my  joy!  my  Genevieve! 
She  loves  me  best  whene'er  I  sing 
The  songs  that  make  her  grieve. 

I  played  a  soft  and  doleful  air; 
I  sang  an  old  and  moving  story — 
An  old  rude  song,  that  suited  well 
That  ruin  wild  and  hoary. 

She  listened  with  a  flitting  blush, 
With  downcast  eyes,  and  modest  grace; 
For  well  she  knew  I  could  not  choose 
But  gaze  upon  her  face. 

I  told  her  of  the  Knight  that  wore 
Upon  his  shield  a  burning  brand; 
And  that  for  ten  long  years  he  wooed 
The  Lady  of  the  Land. 

I  told  her  how  he  pined :  and  ah ! 
The  deep,  the  low,  the  pleading  tone 
With  which  I  sang  another's  loyc,jj^,,. 
Interpreted  my  own.  [-,.-„.-,  k,,a 

She  listened  with  a  flitting  blush. 
With  downcast  eyes,  and  modest  grace; 
And  she  forgave  me,  that  I  gazed 
Too  fondly  on  her  face! 


Love  "liy^ 


But  when  I  told  the  cruel  scorn 
That  crazed  that  bold  and  lovely  Knight, 
And  that  he  crossed  the  mountain-woods, 
Nor  rested  day  nor  night; 

That  sometimes  from  the  savage  den, 
And  sometimes  from  the  darksome  shade, 
And  sometimes  starting  up  at  once 
In  green  and  sunny  glade — 

There  came  and  looked  him  in  the  face 
An  angel  beautiful  and  bright; 
And  that  he  knew  it  was  a  Fiend, 
This  miserable  Knight! 

And  that,  unknowing  what  he  did. 
He  leaped  amid  a  murderous  band, 
And  saved  from  outrage  worse  than  death 
The  Lady  of  the  Land; — 

And  how  she  wept  and  clasped  his  knees; 
And  how  she  tended  him  in  vain — 
And  ever  strove  to  expiate 

The  scorn  that  crazed  his  brain; — 

And  that  she  nursed  him  in  a  cave; 
And  how  his  madness  went  away, 
When  on  the  yellow  forest-leaves 
A  d3ang  man  he  lay; — 

His  dying  words — but  when  I  reached 
That  tenderest  strain  of  all  the  ditty. 
My  faltering  voice  and  pausing  harp 
Disturbed  her  soul  with  pity! 

All  impulses  of  soul  and  sense 
Had  thrilled  my  guileless  Genevieve; 
The  music  and  the  doleful  tale, 
The  rich  and  balmy  eve; 


1 1 76  Poems  of  Love 

And  hopes,  and  fears  that  kindle  hope, 
An  undistinguishable  throng, 
And  gentle  wishes  long  subdued, 
Subdued  and  cherished  long! 

She  wept  with  pity  and  delight, 
She  blushed  with  love  and  virgin-shame; 
And  like  the  murmur  of  a  dream, 
I  heard  her  breathe  my  name. 

Her  bosom  heaved — she  stepped  aside. 
As  conscious  of  my  look  she  stepped — 
Then  suddenly,  with  timorous  eye 
She  fled  to  me  and  wept. 

She  half  enclosed  me  with  her  arms. 
She  pressed  me  with  a  meek  embrace; 
,;     And  bending  back  her  head,  looked  up. 
And  gazed  upon  my  face. 

'Twas  partly  love,  and  partly  fear. 
And  partly  'twas  a  bashful  art, 
That  I  might  rather  feel,  than  see, 
The  swelling  of  her  heart. 

I  calmed  her  fears,  and  she  was  calm, 
And  told  her  love  with  virgin  pride; 
And  so  I  won  my  Genevieve, 

My  bright  and  beauteous  Bride. 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [1772-1834] 


NESTED 

ON    THE    SUSSEX    DOWNS 

"Lured,"  little  one?     Nay,  you've  but  heard 

Love  o'er  3'our  wild  downs  roaming; 
Not  lured,  my  bird,  my  light,  swift  bird. 
But  homing — homing. 


The   Letters  117' 

"Caught,"  does  she  feel?     Nay,  no  net  stirred 

To  catch  the  heart  fore-fated; 
Not  caught,  my  bird,  my  bright,  wild  bird, 
But  mated — mated. 

And  "caged,"  she  fears?    Nay,  never  that  word 

Of  where  your  brown  head  rested; 
Not  caged,  my  bird,  my  shy,  sweet  bird, 
But  nested — nested! 

Habberton  Lulham  fi8     - 


THE  LETTERS 

Still  on  the  tower  stood  the  vane, 

A  black  yew  gloomed  the  stagnant  air; 
I  peered  athwart  the  chancel  pane, 

And  saw  the  altar  cold  and  bare. 
A  clog  of  lead  was  round  my  feet, 

A  band  of  pain  across  my  brow; 
"  Cold  altar,  heaven  and  earth  shall  meet 

Before  you  hear  my  marriage  vow." 

I  turned  and  hummed  a  bitter  song 

That  mocked  the  wholesome  human  heart, 
And  then  we  met  in  wrath  and  wrong, 

We  met,  but  only  meant  to  part. 
Full  cold  my  greeting  was  and  dry; 

She  faintly  smiled,  she  hardly  moved; 
I  saw,  with  half-unconscious  eye. 

She  wore  the  colors  I  approved. 

She  took  the  little  ivory  chest. 

With  half  a  sigh  she  turned  the  key. 
Then  raised  her  head  with  lips  compressed, 

And  gave  my  letters  back  to  me; 
And  gave  the  trinkets  and  the  rings, 

My  gifts,  when  gifts  of  mine  could  please. 
As  looks  a  father  on  the  things 

Of  his  dead  son,  I  looked  on  these. 


iiyS  Poems  of  Love 

She  told  me  all  her  friends  had  said; 

I  raged  against  the  public  liar. 
She  talked  as  if  her  love  were  dead; 

But  in  my  words  were  seeds  of  fire. 
"No  more  of  love,  your  sex  is  known; 

I  never  wlU  be  twice  deceived. 
Henceforth  I  trust  the  man  alone; 

The  woman  cannot  be  believed. 

"Through  slander,  meanest  spawn  of  hell, — 

And  woman's  slander  is  the  worst, — 
And  you,  whom  once  I  loved  so  well. 

Through  you  my  life  will  be  accursed." 
I  spoke  with  heart  and  heat  and  force, 

I  shook  her  breast  with  vague  alarms — 
Like  torrents  from  a  mountain  source 

We  rushed  into  each  other's  arms. 

We  parted;  sweetly  gleamed  the  stars, 

And  sweet  the  vapor-braided  blue; 
Low  breezes  fanned  the  belfry  bars. 

As  homeward  by  the  church  I  drew. 
The  very  graves  appeared  to  smile. 

So  fresh  they  rose  in  shadowed  swells; 
"Dark  porch,"  I  said,  "and  silent  aisle, 

There  comes  a  sound  of  marriage  bells." 

Alfred  Tennyson'[-iiog-ii()2\ 

PROTHALAMION 

Calm  was  the  day,  and  through  the  trembling  air 

Sweet-breathing  Zephyrus  did  softly  play 

A  gentle  spirit,  that  lightly  did  delay 

Hot  Titan's  beams,  which  then  did  glister  fair; 

When  I  (whom  sullen  care. 

Through  discontent  of  my  long  fruitless  stay 

In  Prince's  Court,  and  expectation  vain 

Of  idle  hopes,  which  still  do  fly  away. 

Like  empty  shadows,  did  afflict  my  brain), 

Walked  forth  to  case  my  pain 


Prothalaniion,  ,<-{  1 1 79 

Along  the  shore  of  silver  streaming  Thames; 
Whose  rutty  bank,  the  which  his  river  hems, 
Was  painted  all  with  variable  flowers, 
And  all  the  meads  adorned  with  dainty  gems, 
Fit  to  deck  maidens'  bowers, 
And  crown  their  paramours 
Against  the  bridal  day,  which  is  not  long: 
Sweet  Thames!  run  softly,  till  I  end  my  song. 

There,  in  a  meadow,  by  the  river's  side, 
A  flock  of  nymphs  I  chanced  to  espy, 
All  lovely  daughters  of  the  flood  thereby. 
With  goodly  greenish  locks,  all  loose  untied, 
As  each  had  been  a  bride: 
And  each  one  had  a  little  wicker  basket. 
Made  of  fine  twigs,  entrailed  curiously, 
In  which  they  gathered  flowers  to  fill  their  flasket. 
And,  with  fine  fingers,  cropped  full  feateously 
The  tender  stalks  on  high. 
Of  every  sort,  which  in  that  meadow  grew. 
They  gathered  some;  the  violet,  pallid  blue, 
The  little  daisy,  that  at  evening  closes. 
The  virgin  lily,  and  the  primrose  true. 
With  store  of  vermeil  roses. 
To  deck  their  bridegroom's  posies 
Against  the  bridal  day,  which  was  not  long: 
Sweet  Thames!  run  softly,  till  I  end  my  song. 

With  that  I  saw  two  swans  of  goodly  hue 

Come  softly  swimming  down  along  the  Lee; 

Two  fairer  birds  I  yet  did  never  see; 

The  snow,  which  doth  the  top  of  Pindus  strew, 

Did  never  whiter  shew, 

Nor  Jove  himself,  when  he  a  swan  would  be 

For  love  of  Leda,  whiter  did  appear; 

Yet  Leda  was,  they  say,  as  white  as  he. 

Yet  not  so  white  as  these,  nor  nothing  near; 

So  purely  white  they  were. 

That  even  the  gentle  stream,  the  which  them  bare, 


1 1 8o  Poems  of  Love 

Seemed  foul  to  them,  and  bade  his  billows  spare     '"' 

To  wet  their  silken  feathers,  lest  they  might 

SoU  their  fair  plumes  with  water  not  so  fair, 

And  mar  their  beauties  bright, 

That  shone  as  heaven's  light, 

Against  their  bridal  day,  which  was  not  long: 

Sweet  Thames!  run  softly,  till  I  end  my  song.       -'•"' 

Eftsoons  the  nymphs,  which  now  had  flowers  their  All, 
Ran  all  in  haste  to  see  that  silver  brood. 
As  they  came  floating  on  the  crystal  flood; 
Whom  when  they  saw,  they  stood  amazed  still,  ■'• 

Their  wondering  eyes  to  fill; 
Them  seemed  they  never  saw  a  sight  so  fair 
Of  fowls  so  lovely,  that  they  sure  did  deem 
Them  heavenly  born,  or  to  be  that  same  pair 
Which  through  the  sky  draw  Venus'  silver  team;      " 
For  sure  they  did  not  seem 
To  be  begot  of  any  earthly  seed, 
But  rather  angels,  or  of  angels'  breed; 
Yet  were  they  bred  of  summer's  heat,  they  say, 
In  sweetest  season,  when  each  flower  and  weed 
The  earth  did  fresh  array; 

So  fresh  they  seemed  as  day,  ' ' 

Even  as  their  bridal  day,  which  was  not  long : 
Sweet  Thames!  run  softly,  tfll  I  end  my  song. 

Then  forth  they  all  out  of  their  baskets  drew 
Great  store  of  flowers,  the  honor  of  the  field. 
That  to  the  sense  did  fragrant  odors  yield. 
All  which  upon  those  goodly  birds  they  threw  "^^  ^^"  ^ 

And  all  the  waves  did  strew,  '' 

That  like  old  Peneus'  waters  they  did  seem, 

When  down  along  by  pleasant  Tempe's  shore. 

Scattered  with  flowers,  through  Thessaly  they  stream, 

That  they  appear,  through  lilies'  plenteous  store,    ''  ^ 

Like  a  bride's  chamber  floor: 

Two  of  those  nymphs,  meanwhile,  two  garlands  bound 

Of  freshest  flowers  which  in  that  mead  they  found;'^ ' 


Prothalamion  1 1 8 1 

The  which  presenting  all  in  trim  array, 
Their  snowy  foreheads  therewithal  they  crowned,  "'''• 
Whilst  one  did  sing  this  lay, 
Prepared  against  that  day. 
Against  their  bridal  day,  which  was  not  long: 
Sweet  Thames!  run  softly,  till  I  end  my  song. 

"Ye  gentle  birds!  the  world's  fair  ornament, 
And  heaven's  glory  w'hom  this  happy  hour 
Doth  lead  unto  your  lover's  blissful  bower, 
Joy  may  you  have,  and  gentle  hearts'  content 
Of  your  love's  couplement; 
And  let  fair  Venus,  that  is  queen  of  love, 
With  her  heart-quelling  son  upon  you  smile, 
Whose  smile,  they  say,  hath  virtue  to  remove 
All  love's  dislike,  and  friendship's  faulty  guile 
For  ever  to  assoil; 

Let  endless  peace  your  steadfast  hearts  accord. 
And  blessed  plenty  wait  upon  your  board; 
And  let  your  bed  with  pleasures  chaste  abound. 
That  fruitful  issue  may  to  you  afford, 
Which  may  your  foes  confound, 
And  make  your  joys  redound 
Upon  your  bridal  day,  which  is  not  long": 
Sweet  Thames!  run  softly,  till  I  end  my  song. 

So  ended  she:  and  all  the  rest  around 

To  her  redoubled  that  her  undersong, 

Which  said  their  bridal  day  should  not  be  long:     ^  f 

And  gentle  Echo  from  the  neighbor-ground  ^^ 

Their  accents  did  resound.  ' 

So  forth  those  joyous  birds  did  pass  along, 

Adown  the  Lee,  that  to  them  murmured  low, 

As  he  would  speak,  but  that  he  lacked  a  tongue, 

Yet  did  by  signs  his  glad  affection  show, 

]\Iaking  his  stream  run  slow. 

And  all  the  fowl  which  in  his  flood  did  dwell 

'Gan  flock  about  these  twain,  that  did  excel 

The  rest,  so  far  as  Cynthia  doth  shcnd 

The  lesser  stars.    So  they,  enranged  well, 


1 1 82  Poems  of  Love 

Did  on  those  two  attend, 
And  their  best  service  lend 
Against  their  wedding  day,  which  was  not  long: 
Sweet  Thames!  run  softly,  till  I  end  my  song. 

At  length  they  all  to  merry  London  came, 

To  merry  London,  my  most  kindly  nurse, 

That  to  me  gave  this  life's  first  native  source; 

Though  from  another  place  I  take  my  name. 

An  house  of  ancient  fame: 

There  when  they  came,  whereas  those  bricky  towers 

The  which  on  Thames'  broad,  aged  back  do  ride. 

Where  now  the  studious  lawyers  have  their  bowers. 

There  whilom  wont  the  Templar  Knights  to  bide, 

Till  they  decayed  through  pride: 

Next  whereunto  there  stands  a  stately  place. 

Where  oft  I  gained  gifts  and  goodly  grace 

Of  that  great  lord,  which  therein  wont  to  dwell. 

Whose  want  too  well  now  feels  my  friendless  case; 

But  ah!  here  fits  not  well 

Old  woes,  but  joys,  to  tell 

Against  the  bridal  day,  which  is  not  long: 

Sweet  Thames!  run  softly,  till  I  end  my  song. 

Yet  therein  now  doth  lodge  a  noble  peer, 

Great  England's  glory,  and  the  world's  wide  wonder, 

Whose  dreadful  name  late  through  all  Spain  did  thunder. 

And  Hercules'  two  pillars  standing  near 

Did  make  to  quake  and  fear: 

Fair  branch  of  honor,  flower  of  chivalry! 

That  fiUest  England  with  thy  triumph's  fame, 

Joy  have  thou  of  thy  noble  victory, 

And  endless  happiness  of  thine  own  name, 

That  promise th  the  same; 

That  through  thy  prowess,  and  victorious  arms, 

Thy  country  may  be  freed  from  foreign  harms; 

And  great  Elisa's  glorious  name  may  ring 

Through  all  the  world,  filled  with  thy  wide  alarms, 

Which  some  brave  muse  may  sing 

To  ages  following, 


Epithalamion  1 1 83 

Upon  the  bridal  day,  which  is  not  long: 

Sweet  Thames!  run  softly,  till  I  end  m}-  song. 

From  those  high  towers  this  noble  lord  issuing, 
Like  radiant  Hesper,  when  his  golden  hair 
In  the  ocean  billows  he  hath  bathed  fair, 
Descended  to  the  river's  open  viewing. 
With  a  great  train  ensuing. 
Above  the  rest  were  goodly  to  be  seen 
Two  gentle  knights  of  lovely  face  and  feature 
Beseeming  well  the  bower  of  any  queen. 
With  gifts  of  wit,  and  ornaments  of  nature, 
Fit  for  so  goodly  stature, 

That  like  the  twins  of  Jove  they  seemed  in  sight, 
Which  deck  the  baldrick  of  the  heavens  bright; 
They  two,  forth  pacing  to  the  river's  side, 
Received  those  two  fair  brides,  their  love's  delight; 
Which,  at  the  appointed  tide. 
Each  one  did  make  his  bride 
Against  their  bridal  day,  which  is  not  long: 
Sweet  Thames!  run  softly,  till  I  end  m)^  song. 

Edmund  Spenser  [1552?-!  599] 

EPITHALAMION 

Ye  learned  sisters,  which  have  oftentimes 

Been  to  me  aiding,  others  to  adorn, 

Whom  ye  thought  worthy  of  your  graceful  rhymes, 

That  even  the  greatest  did  not  greatly  scor/i 

To  hear  their  names  sung  in  your  simple  lays. 

But  joyed  in  their  praise; 

And  when  3'e  list  your  own  mishaps  to  mourn. 

Which  death,  or  love,  or  fortune's  wreck  did  raise, 

Your  string  could  soon  to  sadder  tenor  turn. 

And  teach  the  woods  and  waters  to  lament 

Your  doleful  dreariment: 

Now  lay  those  sorrowful  complaints  aside; 

And,  having  all  your  heads  with  garlands  crowned, 

Help  me  mine  own  love's  praises  to  resound; 

Nor  let  the  same  of  any  be  cnvide: 

So  Orpheus  did  for  his  own  bride! 


1 1 84  Poems  of  Love 

So  I  unto  myself  alone  will  sing; 

The  woods  shall  to  me  answer,  and  my  echo  ring. 

Early,  before  the  world's  light-giving  lamp 

His  golden  beam  upon  the  hiUs  doth  spread, 

Having  dispersed  the  night's  uncheerful  damp,j  ,^j(J 

Do  ye  awake;  and,  with  fresh  lusty-hed,  ■.' .'11 

Go  to  the  bower  of  my  beloved  love, 

My  truest  turtle  dove; 

Bid  her  awake;  for  Hymen  is  awake. 

And  long  since  ready  forth  his  mask  to  move, 

With  his  bright  Tead  that  flames  with  many  a  flakCs 

And  many  a  bachelor  to  wait  on  him,  f 

In  their  fresh  garments  trim. 

Bid  her  awake  therefore,  and  soon  her  dight, 

For  lo!  the  wished  day  is  come  at  last. 

That  shall,  for  all  the  pains  and  sorrows  past, 

Pay  to  her  usury  of  long  delight : 

And,  whilst  she  doth  her  dight. 

Do  ye  to  her  of  joy  and  solace  sing, 

That  all  the  woods  may  answer,  and  your  echo  ring. 

Bring  with  you  all  the  Nymphs  that  you  can  hear, , 

Both  of  the  rivers  and  the  forests  green. 

And  of  the  sea  that  neighbors  to  her  near, 

All  with  gay  garlands  goodly  well  beseen. 

And  let  them  also  with  them  bring  in  hand 

Another  gay  garland. 

For  my  fair  love,  of  lilies  and  of  roses, 

Bound  truelove  wise  with  a  blue  silk  riband; 

And  let  them  make  great  store  of  bridal  posies, 

And  let  them  eke  bring  store  of  other  flowers. 

To  deck  the  bridal  bowers. 

And  let  the  ground  whereas  her  foot  shall  treaa^'". , 

For  fear  the  stones  her  tender  foot  should  wrong, 

Be  strewed  with  fragrant  flowers  all  along, 

And  diapered  like  the  discolored  mead; 

Which  done,  do  at  her  chamber  door  await, 

For  she  will  waken  straight; 


Epithalamion  1185 

The  whiles  do  ye  this  song  unto  her  sing, 

The  woods  shall  to  you  answer,  and  your  echo  ring. 

Ye  Nymphs  of  MuUa,  which  with  careful  heed 

The  silver  scaly  trouts  do  tend  full  well, 

And  greedy  pikes  which  use  therein  to  feed 

(Those  trouts  and  pikes  all  others  do  excel) ; 

And  ye  likewise,  which  keep  the  rushy  lake, 

Where  none  do  fishes  take; 

Bind  up  the  locks  the  which  hang  scattered  light, 

And  in  his  waters,  which  your  mirror  make. 

Behold  your  faces  as  the  crystal  bright, 

That  when  you  come  whereas  my  love  doth  lie,      ry 

No  blemish  she  may  spy.  ,  |t 

And  eke,  ye  lightfoot  maids,  which  keep  the  deer,,./, 

That  on  the  hoary  mountain  used  to  tower; 

And  the  wild  wolves,  which  seek  them  to  devour. 

With  your  steel  darts  do  chase  from  coming  near;  jj- 

Be  also  present  here, 

To  help  to  deck  her,  and  to  help  to  sing, 

That  all  the  woods  may  answer,  and  3^our  echo  ring. 

W^ake.  now,  my  love,  awake!  for  it  is  time; 

The  rosy  morn  long  since  left  Tithon's  bed, 

All  ready  to  her  silver  coach  to  climb; 

And  Phoebus  'gins  to  show  his  glorious  head. 

Hark,  how  the  cheerful  birds  do  chant  their  lays 

And  carol  of  love's  praise. 

The  merry  lark  her  matins  sings  aloft; 

The  thrush  replies;  the  mavis  descant  plays; 

The  ouzel  shrills;  the  ruddock  warbles  soft; 

So  goodly  all  agree,  with  sweet  consent, 

To  this  day's  merriment. 

Ah!  my  dear  love,  why  do  ye  sleep  thus  long, 

WTien  meeter  were  that  ye  should  now  awake, 

To  await  the  coming  of  your  joyous  mate, 

And  hearken  to  the  birds'  love-learned  song. 

The  dewy  leaves  among! 

For  they  of  joy  and  pleasance  to  you  sing, 

That  all  the  woods  them  answer,  and  their  echo  ring. 


1 1 86  Poems    of  Love 

My  love  is  now  awake  out  of  her  dreams, 

And  her  fair  eyes,  hke  stars  that  dimmed  were 

With  darksome  cloud,  now  show  their  goodly  beams 

More  bright  than  Hesperus  his  head  doth  rear. 

Come  now,  ye  damsels,  daughters  of  delight, 

Help  quickly  her  to  dight: 

But  first  come,  ye  fair  hours,  which  were  begot 

In  Jove's  sweet  paradise  of  Day  and  Night; 

Which  do  the  seasons  of  the  year  allot. 

And  all  that  ever  in  this  world  is  fair, 

Do  make  and  still  repair: 

And  ye  three  handmaids  of  the  Cyprian  queen, 

The  which  do  still  adorn  her  beauty's  pride. 

Help  to  adorn  my  beautifulest  bride; 

And  as  ye  her  array,  still  throw  between 

Some  graces  to  be  seen. 

And,  as  ye  use  to  Venus,  to  her  sing, 

The  whiles  the  woods  shall  answer,  and  your  echo  ring. 

Now  is  my  love  all  ready  forth  to  come: 

Let  all  the  virgins  therefore  well  await: 

And  ye  fresh  boys,  that  tend  upon  her  groom, 

Prepare  yourselves;  for  he  is  coming  straight; 

Set  all  your  things  in  seemly  good  array, 

Fit  for  so  joyful  day: 

The  joyfulest  day  that  ever  sun  did  see. 

Fair  Sun!  show  forth  thy  favorable  ray, 

And  let  thy  life-full  heat  not  fervent  be. 

For  fear  of  burning  her  sunshiny  face, 

Her  beauty  to  disgrace. 

O  fairest  Phoebus!  father  of  the  Muse! 

If  ever  I  did  honor  thee  aright. 

Or  sing  the  thing  that  might  thy  mind  delight. 

Do  not  thy  servant's  simple  boon  refuse; 

But  let  this  day,  let  this  one  day,  be  mine; 

Let  all  the  rest  be  thine. 

Then  I  thy  sovereign  praises  loud  will  sing, 

That  all  the  woods  shall  answer,  and  their  echo  ring. 

Hark!  how  the  Minstrels  'gin  to  shrill  aloud 
Their  merry  music  that  resounds  from  far, 


Epithalamion  1187 

The  pipe,  the  tabor,  and  the  trembhiig  croud, 

That  well  agree  withouten  breach  or  jar. 

But,  most  of  all,  the  Damsels  do  delight 

When  they  their  timbrels  smite. 

And  thereunto  do  dance  and  carol  sweet, 

That  all  the  senses  they  do  ravish  quite; 

The  whiles  the  boys  run  up  and  down  the  street, 

Crying  aloud  with  strong  confused  noise, 

As  if  it  were  one  voice, 

H3'men,  io  Hymen,  Hymen,  they  do  shout; 

That  even  to  the  heavens  their  shouting  shrill 

Doth  reach,  and  all  the  firmament  doth  fill; 

To  which  the  people  standing  all  about, 

As  in  approvance,  do  thereto  applaud. 

And  loud  advance  her  laud; 

And  evermore  they  Hymen,  Hymen  sing, 

That  all  the  woods  them  answer,  and  their  echo  ring. 

Lo!  where  she  comes  along  with  portly  pace, 

Like  Phoebe,  from  her  chamber  of  the  East, 

Arising  forth  to  run  her  mighty  race, 

Clad  all  in  white,  that  seems  a  virgin  best. 

So  well  it  her  beseems,  that  ye  would  ween 

Some  angel  she  had  been. 

Her  long  loose  yellow  locks  like  golden  wire, 

Sprinkled  with  pearl,  and  pearling  flowers  atween, 

Do  like  a  golden  mantle  her  attire; 

And,  being  crowned  with  a  garland  green, 

Seem  hke  some  maiden  queen. 

Her  modest  eyes,  abashed  to  behold 

So  many  gazers  as  on  her  do  stare. 

Upon  the  lowly  gromid  affixed  are; 

Nor  dare  lift  up  her  countenance  too  bold, 

But  blush  to  hear  her  praises  sung  so  loud, 

So  far  from  being  proud. 

Nathless  do  ye  still  loud  her  praises  sing, 

That  all  the  woods  may  answer,  and  your  echo  ring. 

Tell  me,  ye  merchants'  daughters,  did  ye  see 
So  fair  a  creature  in  your  town  before; 


1 1 88  Poems  of  Love 

So  sweet,  so  lovely,  and  so  mild  as  she,  ,■.  ^ 

Adorned  with  beauty's  grace  and  virtue's  storePri  r 

Her  goodly  eyes  like  sapphires  shining  bright, 

Her  forehead  ivory  white, 

Her  cheeks  like  apples  which  the  sun  hath  ruddied, 

Her  lips  like  cherries  charming  men  to  bite. 

Her  breast  like  to  a  bowl  of  cream  uncrudded, 

Her  paps  like  lilies  budded, 

Her  snowy  neck  like  to  a  marble  tower; 

And  all  her  body  like  a  palace  fair, 

Ascending  up,  with  many  a  stately  stair, 

To  honor's  seat  and  chastity's  sweet  bower. 

Why  stand  ye  still,  ye  virgins,  in  amaze. 

Upon  her  so  to  gaze, 

Whiles  ye  forget  your  former  la}/  to  sing, 

To  which  the  woods  did  answer,  and  your  echo  ring? 

But  if  ye  saw  that  which  no  eyes  can  see, 

The  inward  beauty  of  her  lively  spright, 

Garnished  with  heavenly  gifts  of  high  degree. 

Much  more  then  would  ye  wonder  at  that  sight, 

And  stand  astonished  like  to  those  which  read 

Medusa's  mazeful  head. 

There  dwells  sweet  love,  and  constant  chastity, 

Unspotted  faith,  and  comely  womanhood, 

Regard  of  honor,  and  mild  modesty; 

There  virtue  reigns  as  queen  in  royal  throne. 

And  giveth  laws  alone. 

The  which  the  base  affections  do  obey. 

And  yield  their  services  unto  her  will; 

Nor  thought  of  thing  uncomely  ever  may 

Thereto  approach  to  tempt  her  mind  to  ill. 

Had  ye  once  seen  these  her  celestial  treasures. 

And  unrevealed  pleasures. 

Then  would  ye  wonder,  and  her  praises  sing, 

That  all  the  woods  should  answer,  and  your  echo  ring. 

Open  the  temple  gates  unto  my  love,    "  r  '  I!  ;  ':  '! 
Open  them  wide  that  she  may  enter  in. 
And  all  the  posts  adorn  as  doth  behove. 
And  all  the  pillars  deck  with  garlands  trim. 


Epithalamlon  1189 

For  to  receive  this  Saint  with  honor  due, 

That  cometh  in  to  you. 

With  trembling  steps,  and  humble  reverence, 

She  cometh  in,  before  the  Almight3''s  view; 

Of  her  ye  virgins  learn  obedience, 

When  so  ye  come  into  those  holy  places. 

To  humble  your  proud  faces: 

Bring  her  up  to  the  high  altar,  that  she  may 

The  sacred  ceremonies  there  partake, 

The  which  do  endless  matrimony  make; 

And  let  the  roaring  organs  loudly  play 

The  praises  of  the  Lord  in  lively  notes; 

The  whiles,  with  hollow  throats, 

The  Choristers  the  joyous  Anthems  sing, 

That  all  the  woods  may  answer,  and  their  echo  ring. 

Behold,  whiles  she  before  the  altar  stands, 

Hearing  the  holy  priest  that  to  her  speaks. 

And  blesseth  her  with  his  two  happy  hands, 

How  the  red  roses  flush  up  in  her  cheeks. 

And  the  pure  snow,  with  goodly  vermill  stain 

Like  crimson  dyed  in  grain: 

That  even  the  Angels,  which  continually 

About  the  sacred  altar  do  remain, 

Forget  their  service  and  about  her  fly, 

Oft  peeping  in  her  face,  that  seems  more  fair, 

The  more  they  on  it  stare. 

But  her  sad  eyes,  still  fastened  on  the  ground, 

Are  governed  with  goodly  modesty. 

That  suffers  not  one  look  to  glance  awry, 

Which  may  let  in  a  little  thought  unsound. 

Why  blush  ye,  love,  to  give  to  me  your  hand, 

The  pledge  of  all  our  band? 

Sing,  ye  sweet  Angels,  Alleluja  sing, 

That  all  the  woods  may  answer,  and  your  echo  ring. 

Now  all  is  done:  bring  home  the  bride  again; 
Bring  home  the  triumph  of  our  victory: 
Bring  home  with  you  the  glory  of  her  gain; 
With  joyance  bring  her  and  with  jollity. 


1 190  Poems  of  Love 

Never  had  man  more  joyful  day  than  this, 
Whom  heaven  would  heap  with  bliss. 
Make  feast  therefore  now  all  this  live-long  day; 
This  day  for  ever  to  me  holy  is. 
Pour  out  the  wine  without  restraint  or  stay, 
Pour  not  by  cups,  but  by  the  belly  full. 
Pour  out  to  all  that  will. 

And  sprinkle  all  the  posts  and  walls  with  wine, 
That  they  may  sweat,  and  drunken  be  withal. 
Crown  ye  God  Bacchus  with  a  coronal, 
,  And  Hymen  also  crown  with  wreaths  of  vine; 
And  let  the  Graces  dance  unto  the  rest. 
For  they  can  do  it  best: 
The  whiles  the  maidens  do  their  carol  sing, 
To  which  the  woods  shall  answer,  and  their  echo  ring. 

Ring  ye  the  bells,  ye  young  men  of  the  town. 

And  leave  your  wonted  labors  for  this  day: 

This  day  is  holy;  do  ye  write  it  down. 

That  ye  for  ever  it  remember  may. 

This  day  the  sun  is  in  his  chiefest  height, 

With  Barnaby  the  bright. 

From  whence  declining  daily  by  degrees. 

He  somewhat  loseth  of  his  heat  and  light. 

When  once  the  Crab  behind  his  back  he  sees. 

But  for  this  time  it  ill  ordained  was. 

To  choose  the  longest  day  in  all  the  year. 

And  shortest  night,  when  longest  fitter  were: 

Yet  never  day  so  long,  but  late  would  pass. 

Ring  ye  the  bells,  to  make  it  wear  away. 

And  bonfires  make  all  day; 

And  dance  about  them,  and  abo.ut  them  sing, 

That  all  the  woods  may  answer,  and  your  echo  ring. 

Ah!  when  will  this  long  weary  day  have  end, 
And  lend  me  leave  to  come  unto  my  love? 
How  slowly  do  the  hours  their  numbers  spend? 
How  slowly  does  sad  Time  his  feathers  move? 
Haste  thee,  O  fairest  Planet,  to  thy  home, 
Within  the  Western  foam : 


Epithalamion  1191 

Thy  tired  steeds  long  since  have  need  of  rest. 

Long  though  it  be,  at  last  I  see  it  gloom, 

And  the  bright  evening-star  with  golden  crest 

Appear  out  of  the  East. 

Fair  child  of  beauty!  glorious  lamp  of  love! 

That  all  the  host  of  heaven  in  ranks  dost  lead, 

And  guidest  lovers  through  the  night's  sad  dread, 

How  cheerfully  thou  lookest  from  above, 

And  seems  to  laugh  atween  thy  twinkling  light, 

As  joying  in  the  sight 

Of  these  glad  many,  which  for  joy  do  sing. 

That  all  the  woods  them  answer,  and  their  echo  ring! 

Now,  cease,  ye  damsels,  your  delights  fore-past; 

Enough  is  it  that  all  the  day  was  yours: 

Now  day  is  done,  and  night  is  nighing  fast, 

Now  bring  the  bride  into  the  bridal  bowers. 

The  night  is  come,  now  soon  her  disarray, 

And  in  her  bed  her  lay; 

Lay  her  in  lilies  and  in  violets, 

And  silken  curtains  over  her  display, 

And  odored  sheets,  and  Arras  coverlets. 

Behold  how  goodly  my  fair  love  does  lie, 

In  proud  humility! 

Like  unto  Maia,  when  as  Jove  her  took 

In  Tempe,  lying  on  the  flowery  grass, 

'Twixt  sleep  and  wake,  after  she  weary  was, 

With  bathing  in  the  Acidahan  brook. 

Now  it  is  night,  ye  damsels  may  be  gone. 

And  leave  my  love  alone. 

And  leave  likewise  your  former  lay  to  sing: 

The  woods  no  more  shall  answer,  nor  your  echo  ring. 

Now  welcome,  night!  thou  night  so  long  expected. 
That  long  day's  labor  dost  at  last  defray, 
And  all  ray  cares,  which  cruel  Love  collected, 
Hast  summed  in  one,  and  cancelled  for  aye: 
Spread  thy  broad  wing  over  my  love  and  me, 
That  no  man  may  us  see; 
And  in  thy  sable  mantle  us  enwrap, 
From  fear  of  peril  and  foul  horror  free. 


119^  Poems  of  Love 

Let  no  false  treason  seek  us  to  entrap, 
Nor  any  dread  disquiet  once  annoy 
The  safety  of  our  joy; 
But  let  the  night  be  calm,  and  quietsome, 
Without  tempestuous  storms  or  sad  affray: 
Like  as  when  Jove  with  fair  Alcmena  la}', 
*  When  he  begot  the  great  Tirynthian  groom: 
Or  like  as  when  he  with  thyself  did  lie 
And  begot  Majesty. 

And  let  the  maids  and  young  men  cease  to  sing; 
Nor  let  the  woods  them  answer,  nor  their  echo  ring. 

Let  no  lamenting  cries,  nor  doleful  tears, 

Be  heard  all  night  within,  nor  yet  without: 

Nor  let  false  whispers,  breeding  hidden  fears. 

Break  gentle  sleep  with  misconceived  doubt. 

Let  no  deluding  dreams,  nor  dreadfid  sights, 

Make  sudden  sad  affrights; 

Nor  let  house-fires,  nor  lightning's  helpless  harms, 

Nor  let  the  Puck,  nor  other  evil  sprites, 

Nor  let  mischievous  witches  with  their  charms, 

Nor  let  hobgoblins,  names  whose  sense  we  see  not, 

Fray  us  with  things  that  be  not: 

Let  not  the  screech-owl  nor  the  stork  be  heard, 

Nor  the  night  raven,  that  still  deadly  yells; 

Nor  damned  ghosts,  called  up  with  mighty  spells. 

Nor  grizzly  vultures,  make  us  once  afraid: 

Nor  let  the  unpleasant  choir  of  frogs  still  croaking  .7 

Make  us  to  wish  their  choking.  '^ 

Let  none  of  these  their  dreary  accents  sing; 

Nor  let  the  woods  them  answer,  nor  their  echo  ring. 

But  let  still  Silence  true  night-watches  keep, 

That  sacred  Peace  may  in  assurance  reign, 

And  timely  Sleep,  when  it  is  time  to  sleep. 

May  pour  his  limbs  forth  on  your  pleasant  plain; 

The  whiles  an  hundred  little  winged  loves, 

Like  divers-feathered  doves, 

Shall  fly  and  flutter  round  about  your  bed, 

And  in  the  secret  dark,  that  none  reproves. 

Their  pretty  stealths  shall  work,  and  snares  shall  spread 


^^ 


Epithalamion  ii93 

To  lilch  away  sweet  snatches  of  delight, 

Concealed  through  covert  night. 

Ye  sons  of  Venus,  play  your  sports  at  will.' 

For  greedy  pleasure,  careless  of  your  toys, 

Thinks  more  upon  her  paradise  of  joys. 

Then  what  ye  do,  albeit  good  or  ill. 

All  night  therefore  attend  your  merry  play, 

For  it  will  soon  be  day: 

Now  none  doth  hinder  you,  that  say  or  sing; 

Nor  will  the  woods  now  answer,  nor  your  echo  ring. 

Who  is  the  same,  which  at  my  window  peeps? 

Or  whose  is  that  fair  face  that  shines  so  bright? 

Is  it  not  Cynthia,  she  that  never  sleeps. 

But  walks  about  high  heaven  all  the  night? 

O!  fairest  goddess,  do  thou  not  envy 

My  love  with  me  to  spy: 

For  thou  likewise  didst  love,  though  now  unthought 

And  for  a  ileece  of  wool,  which  privily 

The  Latmian  shepherd  once  unto  thee  brought. 

His  pleasures  with  thee  wrought. 

Therefore  to  us  be  favorable  now; 

And  since  of  women's  labors  thou  hast  charge. 

And  generation  goodly  dost  enlarge. 

Incline  thy  will  to  effect  our  wishful  vow, 

And  the  chaste  womb  inform  with  timely  seed. 

That  may  our  comfort  breed: 

Till  which  we  cease  our  hopeful  hap  to  sing; 

Nor  let  the  woods  us  answer,  nor  our  echo  ring. 

And  thou,  great  Juno!  which  with  awful  might\  T| 

The  laws  of  wedlock  still  dost  patronize, 

And  the  rchgion  of  the  faith  first  plight 

With  sacred  rites  hast  taught  to  solemnize; 

And  eke  for  comfort  often  called  art 

Of  women  in  their  smart ; 

Eternally  bind  thou  this  lovely  l^and, 

And  all  thy  blessings  unto  us  impart. 

And  thou,  glad  Genius!  in  whose  gentle  hand 

The  bridal  bower  and  genial  bed  remain, 

Without  blemish  or  stain; 


1 1 94  Poems  of  Love 

And  the  sweet  pleasures  of  their  love's  delight 
With  secret  aid  dost  succor  and  supply, 
Till  they  bring  forth  the  fruitful  progeny; 
Send  us  the  timely  fruit  of  this  same  night. 
And  thou,  fair  Hebe!  and  thou,  Hymen  free! 
Grant  that  it  may  so  be. 

Till  which  we  cease  your  further  praise  to  sing; 
Nor  any  woods  shall  answer,  nor  your  echo  ring. 

And  ye  high  heavens,  the  temple  of  the  gods. 

In  which  a  thousand  torches  flaming  bright 

Do  burn,  that  to  us  wretched  earthly  clods 

In  dreadful  darkness  lend  desired  light; 

And  all  ye  powers  which  in  the  same  remain, 

More  than  we  men  can  feign. 

Pour  out  your  blessing  on  us  plenteously. 

And  happy  influence  upon  us  rain, 

That  we  may  raise  a  large  posterity. 

Which  from  the  earth,  which  they  may  long  possess 

With  lasting  happiness. 

Up  to  your  haughty  palaces  may  mount; 

And,  for  the  guerdon  of  their  glorious  merit. 

May  heavenly  tabernacles  there  inherit, 

Of  blessed  Saints  for  to  increase  the  count. 

So  let  us  rest,  sweet  love,  in  hope  of  this, 

And  cease  till  then  our  timely  joys  to  sing: 

The  woods  no  more  us  answer,  nor  our  echo  ring! 

Song  !  made  in  lieu  of  many  ornaments, 

With  ivhick  my  love  should  duly  have  been  decked, 

Which  cutting  off  through  hasty  accidents, 

Ye  would  not  stay  your  due  tirnx  to  expect, 

But  promised  both  to  recompense; 

Be  unto  her  a  goodly  ornament, 

And  for  short  time  an  endless  monument. 

Edmund  Spenser  [i5S2?-i599] 

THE  KISS 
Before  you  kissed  me  only  winds  of  heaven 

Had  kissed  me,  and  the  tenderness  of  rain — 
Now  you  have  come,  how  can  I  care  for  kisses 
Like  theirs  again? 


The   Newly-Wedded  1^95 

I  sought  the  sea,  she  sent  her  winds  to  meet  me, 
They  surged  about  me  singing  of  the  south — 
I  turned  my  head  away  to  keep  still  holy 
Your  kiss  upon  my  mouth. 

And  swift  sweet  rains  of  shining  April  weather 

Found  not  my  lips  where  living  kisses  are; 
I  bowed  my  head  lest  they  put  out  my  glory 
As  rain  puts  out  a  star. 

I  am  my  love's  and  he  is  mine  forever, 

Sealed  with  a  seal  and  safe  forevermore— 
Think  you  that  I  could  let  a  beggar  enter 
Where  a  king  stood  before? 

Sara  Tcasdale  [1S84- 

MARRIAGE 

Going  my  way  of  old 
Contented  more  or  less 
I  dreamt  not  life  could  hold 
Such  happiness. 

I  dreamt  not  that  love's  way 
Could  keep  the  golden  height 
Day  after  happy  day, 
Night  after  night. 

Wilfrid  Wilson  Gibson  [1878- 

THE  NEWLY-WEDDED 

Now  the  rite  is  duly  done. 

Now  the  word  is  spoken. 
And  the  spell  has  made  us  one 

Which  may  ne'er  be  broken; 
Rest  we,  dearest,  in  our  home, 

Roam  we  o'er  the  heather: 
We  shall  rest,  and  we  shall  roam^ 

Shall  wc  not?  together. 

P'rom  this  hour  the  summer  rose 

Sweeter  breathes  to  charm  us; 
From  this  hour  the  winter  snows 

Lighter  fall  tc  harm  us: 


11^6  Poems  of  Love 

Fair  or  foul — on  land  or  sea- 
Come  the  wind  or  weather,  ; 

Best  and  worst,  whate'er  they  be,  ■  ' 

We  shall  share  together. 

Death,  who  friend  from  friend  can  part, 

Brother  rend  from  brother, 
Shall  but  link  us,  heart  and  heart, 

Closer  to  each  other: 
We  will  call  his  anger  play. 

Deem  his  dart  a  feather, 
When  we  meet  him  on  our  way 

Hand  in  hand  together. 

Winlhrop  Mackuwth  Pracd  [1802-1830] 


"I   SAW  TWO   CLOUDS  AT  MORNING" 

I  SAW  two  clouds  at  morning, 

Tinged  by  the  rising  sun, 
And  in  the  dawn  they  floated  on. 

And  mingled  into  one; 
I  thought  that  morning  cloud  was  blest. 
It  moved  so  sweetly  to  the  west. 

I  saw  two  summer  currents 

Flow  smoothly  to  their  meeting, 
And  join  their  course,  with  silent  force. 

In  peace  each  other  greeting; 
Calm  was  their  course  through  banks  of  green, 
While  dimpling  eddies  played  between. 

Such  be  your  gentle  motion. 

Till  life's  last  pulse  shall  beat; 
Like  summer's  beam,  and  summer's  stream. 

Float  on,  in  joy,  to  meet 
A  calmer  sea,  where  storms  shall  cease, 
A  purer  sky,  where  all  is  peace. 

John  Gardiner  Calkins  Brainard  [1796-182J 


Holy   Matrimony  ii97 

HOLY   MATRIMONY 

The  voice  that  breathed  o'er  Eden, 

That  earliest  wedding-day, 
The  primal  marriage  blessing, 

It  hath  not  passed  away. 

Still  in  the  pure  espousal 

Of  Christian  man  and  maid, 
The  holy  Three  are  with  us, 

The  threefold  grace  is  said. 

For  dower  of  blessed  children, 

For  love  and  faith's  sweet  sake. 
For  high  mysterious  union, 

Which  naught  on  earth  may  break. 

Be  present,  awful  Father, 

To  give  away  this  bride. 
As  Eve  thou  gav'st  to  Adam 

Out  of  his  own  pierced  side: 

Be  present,  Son  of  Mary, 

To  join  their  loving  hands. 
As  thou  didst  bind  two  natures 

In  thine  eternal  bands: 

Be  present,  Holiest  Spirit, 

To  bless  them  as  they  kneel. 
As  thou  for  Christ,  the  Bridegroom, 

The  heavenly  Spouse  dost  seal. 

Oh,  spread  thy  pure  wing  o'er  them.. 

Let  no  ill  power  find  place. 
When  onward  to  thine  altar 

The  hallowed  path  they  trace. 

To  cast  their  crowns  before  thee 

In  perfect  sacrifice, 
Till  to  the  home  of  gladness 

With  Christ's  own  Bride  they  rise.  Amen. 

John  Keble  [1792-1S66J 


1 198  Poems  of  Love 


THE  BRIDE 

Beat  on  the  Tom-toms,  and  scatter  the  flowers, 

Jasmine,  hibiscus,  vermilion  and  white, 
This  is  the  day,  and  the  Hour  of  Hours, 

Bring  forth  the  Bride  for  her  Lover's  dehght. 
Maidens  no  more  as  a  maiden  shall  claim  her, 

Near,  in  his  Mystery,  draweth  Desire. 
Who,  if  she  waver  a  moment,  shall  blame  her? 

She  is  a  flower,  and  love  is  a  fire. 

Give  her  the  anklets,  the  ring,  and  the  necklace, 

Darken  her  eyelids  with  delicate  art, 
Heighten  the  beauty,  so  youthful  and  fleckless. 

By  the  Gods  favored,  oh,  Bridegroom,  thou  art! 
Twine  in  thy  fingers  her  fingers  so  slender, 

Circle  together  the  Mystical  Fire, 
Bridegroom, — a  whisper, — be  gentle  and  tender, 

Choti  Tinchaurya  knows  not  desire. 

Bring  forth  the  silks  and  the  veil  that  shall  cover 

Beauty,  till  yesterday  careless  and  wild; 
Red  are  her  lips  for  the  kiss  of  a  lover. 

Ripe  are  her  breasts  for  the  lips  of  a  child. 
Center  and  .Shrine  of  JNIysterious  Power, 

Chalice  of  Pleasure  and  Rose  of  Delight, 
Shyly  aware  of  the  swift-coming  hour, 

Waiting  the  shade  and  the  silence  of  night. 

Still  must  the  Bridegroom^  his  longing  dissemble, 

Longing  to  loosen  the  silk-woven  cord, 
Ah,  how  his  fingers  wifl  flutter  and  tremble. 

Fingers  well  skifled  with  the  bridle  and  sword. 
Thine  is  his  valor,  oh  Bride,  and  his  beauty, 

Thine  to  possess  and  re-issue  again. 
Such  is  thy  tender  and  passionate  duty, 

Licit  thy  pleasure  and  honored  thy  pain. 


A   Marriage  Charm  1^99 

Choti  Tinchaurya,  lovely  and  tender, 

Still  all  unbroken  to  sorrow  and  strife, 
Come  to  the  Bridegroom  who,  silk-clad  and  slender, 

Brings  thee  the  Honor  and  Burden  of  Life. 
Bidding  farewell  to  thy  light-hearted  playtime. 

Worship  thy  Lover  with  fear  and  delight; 
Art  thou  not  ever,  though  slave  of  his  daytime, 

Choti  Tinchaurya,  queen  of  his  night? 

Laurence  Hope  [1865-1904] 

A  MARRIAGE   CHARM 

I  SET  a  charm  upon  your  hurrying  breath, 
I  set  a  charm  upon  your  wandering  feet. 
You  shall  not  leave  me — not  for  life,  nor  death, 
Not  even  though  you  cease  to  love  me.  Sweet. 

A  woman's  love  nine  Angels  cannot  bind, 
Nor  any  rune  that  wind  or  water  knows. 
My  heart  were  all  as  well  set  on  the  wind. 
Or  bound,  to  live  or  die,  upon  a  rose. 

I  set  a  charm  upon  you,  foot  and  hand, 

That  you  and  Knowledge,  love,  may  never  meet, 

That  you  may  never  chance  to  understand 

How  strong  you  are,  how  weak  your  lover.  Sweet. 

I  set  my  charm  upon  3'our  kindly  arm, 
I  set  it  as  a  seal  upon  your  breast; 
That  you  may  never  hear  another's  charm. 
Nor  guess  another's  gift  outruns  my  best. 

I  bid  your  wandering  footsteps  me  to  follow, 
Your  thoughts  to  travel  after  in  my  track, 
I  am  the  sky  that  waits  you,  dear  gray  swallow, 
No  wind  of  mine  shall  ever  blow  you  back. 

I  am  your  dream,  Sweet;  so  no  more  of  dreaming, 
Your  lips  to  mine  must  end  this  chanted  charm,      1 
Your  heart  to  mine,  'neath  nut-brown  tresses  streaming, 
I  set  my  love  a  seal  upon  your  arm. 

Nora  Hopper  [  1 87 1  - 


I200  Poems  of  Love 


"LIKE  A  LAVEROCK  IN  THE  LIFT" 

It's  we  two,  it's  we  two,  it's  we  two  for  aye, 
All  the  world,  and  we  two,  and  Heaven  be  our  stay! 
Like  a  laverock  in  the  lift,  sing,  O  bonny  bride! 
All  the  world  was  Adam  once,  with  Eve  by  his  side. 

What's  the  world,  my  lass,  my  love! — what  can  it  do? 
I  am  thine,  and  thou  art  mine;  life  is  sweet  and  new. 
If  the  world  have  missed  the  mark,  let  it  stand  by; 
For  wc  two  have  gotten  leave,  and  once  more  we'll  try. 

Like  a  laverock  in  the  lift,  sing,  O  bonny  bride! 
It's  we  two,  it's  we  two,  happy  side  by  side. 
Take  a  kiss  from  me,  thy  man;  now  the  song  begins: 
"All  is  made  afresh  for  us,  and  the  brave  heart  wins." 

When  the  darker  days  come,  and  no  sun  will  shine,,  j^- 
Thou  shalt  dry  my  tears,  lass,  and  I'll  dry  thine.   , '  q 
It's  we  two,  it's  we  two,  while  the  world's  away, 
Sitting  by  the  golden  sheaves  on  our  wedding-day. 

Jean  Ingeloiv  [1820-1897] 


MY  OWEN 

Proud  of  you,  fond  of  you,  chnging  so  near  to  you, 
Light  is  my  heart  now  I  know  I  am  dear  to  you! 
Glad  is  my  voice  now,  so  free  it  may  sing  for  you 
All  the  wild  love  that  is  burning  within  for  you! 
Tell  me  once  more,  tell  it  over  and  over, 
The  tale  of  that  eve  which  first  saw  you  my  lover. 
Now  I  need  never  blush 
At  my  heart's  hottest  gush — 
The  wife  of  my  Owen  her  heart  may  discover! 

Proud  of  you,  fond  of  you,  having  all  right  in  you, 
Quitting  all  else  through  my  lov^e  and  delight  in  you! 
Glad  is  my  heart  since  'tis  beating  so  nigh  to  you! 
Light  is  my  step  for  it  always  may  fly  to  you! 


Doris:  A   Pastoral  1201 

Clasped  in  your  arms  where  no  sorrow  can  reach  to  me, 
Reading  your  eyes  till  new  love  they  shall  teach  to  me. 

Though  wild  and  weak  till  now, 

By  that  blest  marriage  vow. 
More  than  the  wisest  know  your  heart  shall  preach  to  me. 
EUcn  Mary  Patrick  Downing  [1828-1860] 


DORIS:  A  PASTORAL 

I  SAT  with  Doris,  the  shepherd  maiden; 

Her  crook  was  laden  with  wreathed  flowers. 
I  sat  and  wooed  her  through  sunlight  wheeling, 

And  shadows  stealing  for  hours  and  hours. 

And  she,  my  Doris,  whose  lap  incloses  - 

Wild  summer  roses  of  faint  perfume. 

The  while  I  sued  her,  kept  hushed  and  harkened 
Till  shades  had  darkened  from  gloss  to  gloom. 

She  touched  my  shoulder  with  fearful  finger; 

She  said,  ''We  hnger,  we  must  not  stay; 
My  flock's  in  danger,  my  sheep  will  wander; 

Behold  them  yonder,  how  far  they  stray!" 

I  answered  bolder,  "Nay,  let  me  hear  you. 
And  still  be  near  you,  and  still  adore! 

No  wolf  nor  stranger  will  touch  one  yearling — 
Ah!  stay  my  darling  a  moment  more!" 

She  whispered,  sighing,  "There  will  be  sorrow 
Beyond  to-morrow,  if  I  lose  to-day; 

My  fold  unguarded,  my  flock  unfolded —    , 
I  shall  be  scolded  and  sent  away!" 

Said  I,  denying,  "If  they  do  miss  you, 
They  ought  to  kiss  you  when  you  get  hom.e; 

And  well  rewarded  by  friend  and  neighbor 
Should  be  the  labor  from  which  you  come." 


I202  Poems  of  Love 

"They  might  remember,"  she  answered  meekly, 

"  That  lambs  are  weakly  and  sheep  are  wild;  >${ 

But  if  they  love  me  it's  none  so  fervent— 
I  am  a  servant  and  not  a  child." 


Then  each  hot  ember  glowed  quick  within  me, 

And  love  did  win  me  to  swift  reply: 
"Ah!  do  but  prove  me,  and  none  shall  bind  you, 

Nor  fray  nor  find  you  until  I  die! " 

She  blushed  and  started,  and  stood  awaiting, 

As  if  debating  in  dreams  divine; 
But  I  did  brave  them — I  told  her  plainly, 

She  doubted  vainly,  she  must  be  mine. 

So  we,  twin-hearted,  from  all  the  valley 
Did  rouse  and  rally  her  nibbling  ewes; 

And  homeward  drove  them,  we  two  together. 
Through  blooming  heather  and  gleaming  dews. 

That  simple  duty  such  grace  did  lend  her, 

My  Doris  tender,  my  Doris  true. 
That  I  her  warder  did  always  bless  her, 

And  often  press  her  to  take  her  due. 

And  now  in  beauty  she  fills  my  dwelling 

With  love  excelling,  and  undefiled; 
And  love  doth  guard  her,  both  fast  and  fervent, 

No  more  a  servant,  nor  yet  a  child. 

Arthur  Joseph  Munby  [i 828-1910] 


"HE'D  NOTHING  BUT  HIS  VIOLIN" 

He'd  nothing  but  his  violin, 

I'd  nothing  but  my  song, 

But  we  were  wed  when  skies  were  blue 

And  summer  days  were  long; 

And  when  we  rested  by  the  hedge, 

The  robins  came  and  told 

How  they  had  dared  to  woo  and  win, 

When  early  Spring  was  cold.  ;,. 


oioM 


Love's  Calendar  1203 

We  sometimes  supped  on  dew-berries, 

Or  slept  among  the  hay, 

But  oft  the  farmers'  wives  at  eve 

Came  out  to  hear  us  play; 

The  rare  old  songs,  the  dear  old  tunes, — 

We  could  not  starve  for  long 

While  my  man  had  his  violin. 

And  I  my  sweet  love-song. 

The  world  has  aye  gone  well  with  us 

Old  man  since  we  were  one, — 

Our  homeless  wandering  down  the  lanes 

It  long  ago  was  done. 

But  those  who  wait  for  gold  or  gear, 

For  houses  or  for  kine, 

Till  youth's  sweet  spring  grows  brown  and  sere. 

And  love  and  beauty  tine, 

Will  never  know  the  joy  of  hearts 

That  met  without  a  fear, 

When  you  had  but  your  violin 

And  I  a  song,  my  dear. 

Mary  Kyle  Dallas  [1830-1897] 


LOVE'S   CALENDAR 

That  gusty  spring,  each  afternoon 
By  the  ivied  cot  I  passed,  . 

r  And  noted  at  that  lattice  soon  /. 

Her  fair  face  downward  cast;  / 

Still  in  the  same  place  seated  there,  / 

So  diligent,  so  very  fair. 

Oft-times  I  said  I  knew  her  not. 
Yet  that  wa}'  round  would  go. 

Until,  when  evenings  lengthened  out. 
And  bloomed  the  may-hedge  row, 

I  met  her  by  the  wayside  well. 

Whose  waters,  maybe,  broke  the  spell. 


I204  Poems  of  Love 

For,  leaning  on  her  pail,  she  prayed, 

I'd  lift  it  to  her  head. 
So  did  I;  but  I'm  much  afraid 

Some  wasteful  drops  were  shed,  ,.  :■ 

And  that  we  blushed,  as  face  to  face  -i T 

Needs  must  we  stand  the  shortest  space. 

Then  when  the  sunset  mellowed  through 
The  ears  of  rustling  grain,  ■-■ 

When  lattices  wide  open  flew, 
When  ash-leaves  fell  like  rain, 

As  well  as  I  she  knew  the  hour 

At  morn  or  eve  I  neared  her  bower. 

And  now  that  snow  o'erlays  the  thatch. 

Each  starlit  eve  within 
The  door  she  waits,  I  raise  the  latch, 

And  kiss  her  Hf  ted  chin ; 
Nor  do  I  think  we've  blushed  again, 
For  Love  hath  made  but  one  of  twain. 

William  Bell  Scott  [iSii-i8go] 

HOME 

Two  birds  within  one  nest ; 

Two  hearts  within  one  breast; 

Two  spirits  in  one  fair, 

Firm  league  of  love  and  prayer. 

Together  bound  for  aye,  together  blest. 

An  ear  that  waits  to  catch 
A  hand  upon  the  latch; 
■  A  step  that  hastens  its  sweet  rest  to  win; 

A  world  of  care  without, 
A  world  of  strife  shut  out, 
A  world  of  love  shut  in. 

Dora  Greemvell  [1821-1882] 

TWO  LOVERS 

Two  lovers  by  a  moss-grown  spring: 
They  leaned  soft  cheeks  together  there. 
Mingled  the  dark  and  sunny  hair, 

And  heard  the  wooing  thrushes  sing. 


Two   Lovers  1205 

O  budding  time! 
O  love's  blest  prime! 

Two  wedded  from  the  portal  stept: 
The  bells  made  happy  carolings, 
The  air  was  soft  as  fanning  wings, 
White  petals  on  the  pathway  slept. 

O  pure-eyed  bride !  ''-'■ 

O  tender  pride!  '^ 

Two  faces  o'er  a  cradle  bent: 

Two  hands  above  the  head  were  locked : 
These  pressed  each  other  while  they  rocked, 
Those  watched  a  life  that  love  had  sent. 

O  solemn  hour!  -.Y- 

O  hidden  power! 

Two  parents  by  the  evening  fire: 
The  red  light  fell  about  their  knees 
On  heads  that  rose  by  slow  degrees 
Like  buds  upon  the  lily  spire. 
O  patient  life! 
O  tender  strife! 

The  two  still  sat  together  there, 

The  red  light  shone  about  their  knees; 
But  all  the  heads  by  slow  degrees 
Had  gone  and  left  that  lonely  pair. 
O  voyage  fast! 
O  vanished  past! 

The  red  light  shone  upon  the  floor 

And  made  the  space  between  them  wide; 
They  drew  their  chairs  up  side  by  side, 
Their  pale  cheeks  joined,  and  said,  "Once  more!" 
O  memories! 
O  past  that  is! 

Georg^ Eliot  [  1 8 1 9- 1 8  80] 


i2o6  Poems  of  Love 


■     THE   LAND   OF  HEART'S  DESIRE 

"Somewhere,"  he  mused,  "its  dear  enchantments  wait, 

That  land,  so  heavenly  sweet; 
Yet  all  the  paths  we  follow,  soon  or  late, 

End  in  the  desert's  heat. 

"And  still  it  lures  us  to  the  eager  quest, 

And  calls  us  day  by  day" — 
"But  I,"  she  said,  her  babe  upon  her  breast, 

" But  I  have  foutid  the  way."  r 

"Some  time,"  he  sighed,  "when  youth  and  joy  are  spent, 

Our  feet  the  gates  may  win  " — 
"But  I,"  she  smiled,  with  eyes  of  deep  content^ 

"  But  1  have  entered  in." 

Emily  Huntington  Miller  [1833-1913I 

MY  AIN  WIFE  ,    ^ 

I  WADNA  gi'e  my  ain  wife 

For  ony  wife  I  see;  ,,  ^ 

I  wadna  gi'e  my  ain  wife 

For  ony  wife  I  see; 
A  bonnier  yet  I've  never  seen, 

A  better  canna  be — •  ,,-{"1; 

I  wadna  gi'e  my  ain  wife 

For  ony  wife  I  see! 

0  couthie  is  my  ingle-cheek. 
An'  cheerie  is  my  Jean ; 

1  never  see  her  angry  look. 
Nor  hear  her  word  on  ane. 

She's  gude  wi'  a'  the  neebors  roun*  ' 

An'  aye  gude  wi'  me— 
I  wadna  gi'e  my  ain  wife 

For  ony  wife  I  see. 

An'  O  her  looks  sae  kindlie, 
They  melt  my  heart  outright, 

When  o'er  the  baby  at  her  breast 
She  hangs  wi'  fond  delight; 


T 


The    Irish   Wife 


i07 


She  looks  intill  its  bonnic  face, 

An'  syne  looks  to  me — 
I  wadna  gi'e  my  ain  wife 

For  ony  wife  I  see. 

A  lexander  Laing  [  1 7  8  7- 1 85  7  ] 


THE  IRISH  WIFE 

I  WOULD  not  give  my  Irish  wife 

For  all  the  dames  of  the  Saxon  land; 
I  would  not  give  my  Irish  wife 

For  the  Queen  of  France's  hand; 
For  she  to  me  is  dearer 

Than  castles  strong,  or  lands,  or  life. 
An  outlaw — so  I'm  near  her 

To  love  till  death  my  Irish  wife. 

0  what  would  be  this  home  of  mine, 
A  ruined,  hermit-haunted  place, 

But  for  the  light  that  nightly  shines 
Upon  its  walls  from  Kathleen's  face! 

What  comfort  in  a  mine  of  gold, 
What  pleasure  in  a  royal  life. 

If  the  heart  within  lay  dead  and  cold. 
If  I  could  not  wed  my  Irish  wife? 

1  knew  the  law  forbade  the  banns; 

I  knew  my  king  abhorred  her  race; 
Who  never  bent  before  their  clans 

Must  bow  before  their  ladies'  grace. 
Take  aU  my  forfeited  domain, 

I  cannot  wage  with  kinsmen  strife: 
Take  knightly  gear  and  noble  name, 

And  I  will  keep  my  Irish  wife. 

;My  Irish  wife  has  clear  blue  eyes, 

M)'-  heaven  by  day,  my  stars  by  night; 

And  twin-like  truth  and  fondness  lies 
Within  her  sweUing  bosom  white. 


i2o8  Poems  ot   Love 

My  Irish  wife  has  golden  hair, 

Apollo's  harp  had  once  such  strings, 

Apollo's  self  might  pause  to  hear 
Her  bird-like  carol  when  she  sings. 

I  would  not  give  my  Irish  wife 

For  all  the  dames  of  the  Saxon  land; 
I  would  not  give  my  Irish  wife 

For  the  Queen  of  France's  hand; 
For  she  to  me  is  dearer 

Than  castles  strong,  or  lands,  or  life: 
In  death  I  would  be  near  her. 

And  rise  beside  my  Irish  wife. 

Thomas  D'Arcy  McGec  [1825-186S] 

MY  WIFE'S  A  WINSOME   WEE  THING 

She  is  a  winsome  wee  thing, 
She  is  a  handsome  wee  thing, 
She  is  a  bonnie  wee  thing, 
This  sweet  wee  wife  o'  mine. 

I  never  saw  a  fairer, 
lo-jsii    I  never. lo'ed  a  dearer, 

And  niest  my  heart  I'll  wear  her, 
For  fear  my  jewel  tine. 

She  is  a  winsome  wee  thing, 
She  is  a  handsome  wee  thing. 
She  is  a  bonnie  wee  thing, 
This  sweet  wee  wife  o'  mine.    -  - 

The  warld's  wrack  we  share  o't, 
The  warsle  and  the  care  o't: 
Wi'  her  I'll  blithely  bear  it. 
And  think  my  lot  divine. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 

LETTICE 

I  SAID  to  Lettice,  our  sister  Lettice, 

While  drooped  and  glistened  her  eyelash  brown, 
"Your  man's  a  poor  man,  a  cold  and  dour  man, 

There's  many  a  better  about  our  town." 


"If  Thou   Wert  by    My  Side"      1209 

She  smiled  securely — "He  loves  me  purely: 
A  true  heart's  safe,  both  in  smile  or  frown; 

And  nothing  harms  me  while  his  love  warms  me, 
Whether  the  world  go  up  or  down." 

"He  comes  of  strangers,  and  they  are  rangers, 

And  ill  to  trust,  girl,  when  out  of  sight: 
Fremd  folk  may  blame  ye,  and  e'en  defame  ye, — 

A  gov/n  oft  handled  looks  seldom  white." 
She  raised  serenely  her  eyelids  queenly, — 

"My  innocence  is  my  whitest  gown; 
No  harsh  tongue  grieves  me  while  he  believes  me, 

Whether  the  world  go  up  or  down." 

"Your  man's  a  frail  man,  was  ne'er  a  hale  man. 

And  sickness  knocketh  at  every  door, 
And  death  comes  making  bold  hearts  cower,  breaking — " 

Our  Lettice  trembled; — but  once,  no  more. 
"  If  death  should  enter,  smite  to  the  center 

Our  poor  home  palace,  all  crumbling  down, 
He  cannot  fright  us,  nor  disunite  us, 

Life  bears  Love's  cross,  death  brings  Love's  crown." 
Dhiah  Maria  Mulock  Craik  [1826-1887] 


"IF  THOU  WERT  BY   MY  SIDE,   MY  LOVE" 

If  thou  wert  by  my  side,  my  love, 

How  fast  would  evening  fail 
In  green  Bengala's  palmy  grove, 

Listening  ihe  nightingale! 

If  thou,  my  love,  wert  by  my  side, 

My  babies  at  my  knee, 
How  gayly  would  our  pinnace  glide 

O'er  Gunga's  mimic  sea! 

I  miss  thee  at  the  dawning  gray, 

When,  on  our  deck  reclined,  ■■'•■n  ,hA 

In  careless  ease  my  limbs  I  lay)  Jaawa  gA 
And  woo  the  cooler  wind,    id  A 


I2IO  Poems  of  Love 

I  miss  thee  when  by  Gunga's  stream       oHfa?,  atP. 

My  twilight  steps  I  guide, 
But  most  beneath  the  lamp's  pale  beam 

I  miss  thee  from  my  side. 

I  spread  my  books,  my  pencil  try, 

The  lingering  noon  to  cheer, 
But  miss  thy  kind,  approving  eye, 

Thy  meek,  attentive  ear. 

But  when  at  morn  and  eve  the  star 

Beholds  me  on  my  knee, 
I  feel,  though  thou  art  distant  far, 

Thy  prayers  ascend  for  me. 

,,  Then  on!  then  on!  where  duty  leads, 

My  course  be  onward  still. 
O'er  broad  Hindostan's  sultry  meads. 

O'er  bleak  Almorah's  hill.  , . 

..    ,    That  course  nor  Delhi's  kingly  gates, 
Nor  mild  Malwah  detain; 
For  sweet  the  bHss  us  both  awaits 
By  yonder  western  main. 

"T/n.T  0"TT  IV 

Thy  towers,  Bombay,  gleam  bright,  they  say. 

Across  the  dark  blue  sea ; 
But  ne'er  were  hearts  so  light  and  gay 
As  then  shall  meet  in  thee! 

Reginald  Heber  [1783-1826] 


THE  SHEPHERD'S  WIFE'S   SONG 

From  "The  Mourning  Garment  " 

Ah,  what  is  love?     It  is  a  pretty  thing. 
As  sweet  unto  a  shepherd  as  a  king, 
And  sweeter,  too: 


The  Shepherd's  Wife's  Song       121 1 

For  kings  have  cares  that  wait  upon  a  crown, 
And  cares  can  make  the  sweetest  love  to  frown: 

Ah  then,  ah  then. 
If  country  loves  such  sweet  desires  do  gain, 
What  lady  would  not  love  a  shepherd  swain? 

His  flocks  are  folded;  he  comes  home  at  night 
As  merry  as  a  king  in  his  delight, 

And  merrier,  too: 
For  kings  bethink  them  what  the  state  require. 
Where  shepherds,  careless,  carol  by  the  fire: 

He  kisseth  first,  then  sits  as  blithe  to  eat 
His  cream  and  curds,  as  doth  a  king  his  meat,, 
And  blither,  too:  :,r.-  .; , 

For  kings  have  often  fears  when  they  do  sup. 
Where  shepherds  dread  no  poison  in  their  cup: 

To  bed  he- goes,  as  wanton  then,  I  ween, 
As  is  a  king  in  dalliance  with  a  queen; 

More  wanton,  too: 
For  kings  have  many  griefs,  afTects  to  move. 
Where  shepherds  have  no  greater  grief  than  love: 

/ 
Upon  his  couch  of  straw  he  sleeps  as  sound 
As  doth  the  king  upon  his  bed  of  down;       ■  [ 

More  sounder,  too: 
For  cares  cause  kings  full  oft  their  sleep  to  spill. 
Where  weary  shepherds  lie  and  snort  their  fill: 

Thus,  with  his  wife,  he  spends  the  year  as  blithe 
As  doth  the  king  at  every  tide  or  sithe, 

And  blither,  too: 
For  kings  have  wars  and  broils  to  take  in  hand. 
Where  shepherds  laugh  and  love  upon  the  land: 

Ah  then,  ah  then. 
Since  country  loves  such  sweet  desires  do  gain. 
What  lady  would  not  love  a  shepherd  swain? 

Robert  Greene  [is6o?-i592] 


I  2 12  Poems  of  Love   -?   grfT 

"TRUTH  DOTH  TRUTH  DESERVE" , 

From  the  "Arcadia" 

■  T 

Who  doth  desire  that  chaste  his  wife  should  be, 
First  be  he  true,  for  truth  doth  truth  deserve: 
Then  such  be  he  as  she  his  worth  may  see,     ^^ 
And  one  man  still  credit  with  her  preserve. 
Not  toying  kind,  nor  causelessly  unkind; 
Not  stirring  thoughts,  nor  yet  denying  right; 
Not  spying  faults,  nor  in  plain  errors  blind; 
Never  hard  hand,  nor  ever  reins  too  light. 
As  far  from  want,  as  far  from  vain  expense 
(The  one  doth  force,  the  latter  doth  entice); 
Allow  good  company,  but  keep  from  thence 
All  filthy  mouths  that  glory  in  their  vice. 
This  done,  thou  hast  no  more,  but  leave  the  rest 
To  virtue,  fortune,  time,  and  woman's  breast. 

Philip  Sidney  [1554-15^ 


THE   MARRIED   LOVER 

From  "  The  Angel  in  the  House  " 

Why,  having  won  her,  do  I  woo? 

Because  her  spirit's  vestal  grace 
Provokes  me  always  to  pursue. 

But,  spirit-like,  eludes  embrace; 
Because  her  womanhood  is  such 
'■  hil  That,  as  on  court-days  subjects  kiss 
The  Queen's  hand,  yet  so  near  a  touch 
efftili;  Affirms  no  mean  familiarness;        ''  -rrrlT 
Nay,  rather  marks  more  fair  the  height       / 

Which  can  with  safety  so  neglect 
To  dread,  as  lower  ladies  might,  [jj  -jol! 

That  grace  could  meet  with  disrespect; 
Thus  she  with  happy  favor  feeds 

Allegiance  from  a  love  so  high  .^ 

That  thence  no  false  conceit  proceeds  ' 

-.Qli-'^.OiOl  difference  bridged,  or  state  put  by; 


My   Love     'I  12 13 

Because,  although  in  act  and  word 

As  lowly  as  a  wife  can  be, 
Her  manners,  when  they  call  me  lord, 

Remind  me  'tis  by  courtesy; 
Not  with  her  least  consent  of  will, 

Which  would  my  proud  affection  hurt, 
But  by  the  noble  style  that  still 

Imputes  an  unattained  desert; 
Because  her  gay  and  lofty  brows. 

When  all  is  won  which  hope  can  ask. 
Reflect  a  light  of  hopeless  snows 

That  bright  in  virgin  ether  bask; 
Because,  though  free  of  the  outer  court 

I  am,  this  Temple  keeps  its  shrine 
Sacred  to  heaven;  because,  in  short. 

She's  not  and  never  can  be  mine. 

Coventry  Patniore  [1823-1896] 

MY  LOVE 

Not  as  all  other  women  are 
Is  she  that  to  my  soul  is  dear; 
Her  glorious  fancies  come  from  far. 
Beneath  the  silver  evening-star, 
And  yet  her  heart  is  ever  near. 

Great  feeUngs  hath  she  of  her  own. 
Which  lesser  souls  may  never  know; 
God  giveth  them  to  her  alone, 
And  sweet  they  are  as  any  tone 
Wherewith  the  wind  may  choose  to  blow. 

Yet  in  herself  she  dwelleth  not, 
Although  no  home  were  half  so  fair; 
No  simplest  duty  is  forgot. 
Life  hath  no  dim  and  lowly  spot 
That  doth  not  inhe^sun^ine  shace...,  . , 

She  doeth  little  kindnesses,  , ,  , 

Which  most  leave  undone,  or  despise: 


1 2 14  Poems  of  Love 

For  naught  that  sets  one  heart  at  ease, 

And  giveth  happiness  or  peace, 

Is  low-esteemed  in  her  eyes.  inism  lali 

She  hath  no  scorn  of  common  things. 
And,  though  she  seem  of  other  birth, 
Round  us  her  heart  intwines  and  cHngs, 
And  patiently  she  folds  her  wings 
To  tread  the  humble  paths  of  earth. 

Blessing  she  is:  God  made  her  so. 
And  deeds  of  week-day  holiness 
Fall  from  her  noiseless  as  the  snow, 
Nor  hath  she  ever  chanced  to  know 
That  aught  were  easier  than  to  bless. 

f'^       She  is  most  fair,  and  thereunto 
Her  life  doth  rightly  harmonize; 
Feeling  or  thought  that  was  not  true 
Ne'er  made  less  beautiful  the  blue 
Unclouded  heaven  of  her  eyes. 

She  is  a  woman:  one  in  whom 
The  spring-time  of  her  childish  years 
Hath  never  lost  its  fresh  perfume, 
Though  knowing  well  that  life  hath  room 
For  many  blights  and  many  tears. 

:  '■  i  xbiriW 

I  love  her  with  a  love  as  still 
As  a  broad  river's  peaceful  might, 
Which,  by  high  tower  and  lowly  mill. 
Seems  following  its  own  wayward  will, 
And  yet  doth  ever  flow  aright. 

And,  on  its  full,  deep  breast  serene, 

Like  quiet  isles  my  duties  lie; 

It  flows  around  them  and  between. 

And  makes  them  fresh  and  fair  and  green, 

Sweet  homes  wherein  to  live  and  die. 

James  Russell  Lowell  [1819-1891] 


At  Last  1 2 15 

MARGARET  TO  DOLCINO 

Ask  if  I  love  thee?    Oh,  smiles  cannot  tell 
Plainer  what  tears  are  now  showing  too  well. 
Had  I  not  loved  thee,  my  sky  had  been  clear: 
Had  I  not  loved  thee,  I  had  not  been  here, 
Weeping  by  thee. 

Ask  if  I  love  thee?     How  else  could  I  borrow 
Pride  from  man's  slander,  and  strength  from  my  sorrow? 
Laugh  when  they  sneer  at  the  fanatic's  bride, 
Knowing  no  bliss,  save  to  toil  and  abide 
Weeping  by  thee. 

Charles  Kingsley  [1810-1875], 

■  Jirjt) 

•  --aiJ 


DOLCINO  TO  MARGARET 


The  world  goes  up  and  the  world  goes  down,  '. 

And  the  sunshine  follows  the  rain; 
And  yesterday's  sneer,  and  yesterday's  frown, 

Can  never  come  over  again, 

Sweet  wife:  t  lagniJ 

No,  never  come  over  again.  '  '^      _ 

rfV/ 

For  woman  is  warm,  though  man  be  cold, 

And  the  night  will  hallow  the  day;  .{g  woH 

Till  the  heart  which  at  even  was  weary  and  old 
Can  rise  in  the  morning  gay, 

Sweet  wife; 
To  its  work  in  the  morning  gay. 

Charles  Kingsley  [i8ig-i87s] 

AT  LAST 

When  first  the  bride  and  bridegroom  wed, 
They  love  their  single  selves  the  best; 

A  sword  is  in  the  marriage  bed. 

Their  separate  slumbers  are  not  rest. 

They  quarrel,  and  make  up  again, 

They  give  and  suffer  worlds  of  pain. 


12 16  Poems  of  Love 

Both  right  and  wrong, 
They  struggle  long, 
Till  some  good  day,  when  they  are  old, 
Some  dark  day,  when  the  bells  are  tolled,  '■  "  ^^■^ 
Death  having  taken  their  best  of  life,'' '*"  T^nir.H 
They  lose  themselves,  and  find  each^'otW^f;    '''" 
They  know  that  they  are  husband,  wife,  '■^^^ 

For,  weeping,  they  are  Father,  Mother! 

Richard  Ileiirv  Stoddard  [1825-1903] 
t  ii  dsA 

;1  abiiT 
THE   WIFE  TO  HER  HUSBAND   ,,  jg^^  j 

Linger  not  long.    Home  is  not  home  without  thee:"'*"*^^^ 
Its  dearest  tokens  do  but  make  me  mourn. 

O,  let  its  memory,  like  a  chain  about  thee, 
Gently  compel  and  hasten  thy  return! 

Linger  not  long.    Though  crowds  should  woo  thy  staying. 
Bethink  thee,  can  the  mirth  of  thy  friends,  though  dear, 

Compensate  for  the  grief  thy  long  delaying 

Costs  the  fond  heart  that  sighs  to  have  thee  here? 

Linger  not  long.    How  shall  I  watch  thy  coming, 
As  evening  shadows  stretch  o'er  moor  and  dell; 

When  the  wild  bee  hath  ceased  her  busy  humming,  ' 
And  silence  hangs  on  all  things  like  a  spell! 

How  shall  I  watch  for  thee,  when  fears  grow  stronger, 
As  night  grows  dark  and  darker  on  the  hiUii  :uij  iii  I 

How  shall  I  weep,  when  I  can  watch  no  longer!-:  .w.^i 
Ah!  art  thou  absent,  art  thou  absent  still? 

Yet  I  shall  grieve  not,  though  the  eye  that  seeth  me 
Gazeth  through  tears  that  make  its  splendor  dull; 

For  oh!  I  sometimes  fear  when  thou  art  with  me. 
My  cup  of  happiness  is  all  too  full. 

Haste,  haste  thee  home  unto  thy  mountain  dwelling, 

Haste,  as  a  bird  unto  its  peaceful  nest! 
Haste,  as  a  skiff,  through  tempests  wide  and  swelling, 

Flies  to  its  haven  of  securest  rest! 

Unkno-wn 


The  Sailor's  Wife  1 2 1 7 

A  WIFE'S   SONG 

O  WELL  I  love  the  Spring, '/"'"'   ' 

When  the  sWeet,  sweet  hlawthdrn  blows; 
And  well  I  love  the  Summer, 

And  the  coming  of  the  rose; 
But  dearer  are  the  changing  leaf. 

And  the  j'ear  upon  the  wane. 
For  O,  they  bring  the  blessed  time 

That  brings  him  home  again. 

November  may  be  dreary,  if 

December's  days  may  be 
As  full  of  gloom  to  others 

As  once  they  were  to  me;  if 

But  O,  to  hear  the  tempest 

Beat  loud  against  the  pane! 
For  the  roaring  wind  and  the  blessed  time 

That  brings  him  home  again. 

William  Cox  Bciindt  [1S20-1S95] 
/I 

THE  SAILOR'S  WIFE 

And  are  ye  sure  the  news  is  true? 

And  are  ye  sure  he's  weel? 
Is  this  a  time  to  talk  o'  wark?  1  i 

Ye  jauds,  fling  by  your  wheel! 
Is  this  a  time  to  spin  a  thread,  lA 

W'hen  Colin's  at  the  door? 
Rax  down  my  cloak — I'll  to  the  quay,-'! 
And  see  him  come  ashore. 

For  there's  nae  luck  aboot  the  house,. 

There's  nae  luck  ava', 
There's  little  pleasure  in  the  house, 
When  our  gudeman's  awa'. 

And  gi'c  to  me  my  bigonet, 

My  bishop's  satin  gown; 
For  I  maun  tell  the  baillie's  wife  . 

That  Colin's  in  the  town. 


12 1 8  Poems  of  Love 

My  Turkey  slippers  maun  gae  on, 

My  stockins  pearly  blue; 
It's  a'  to  pleasure  our  gudcman, 

For  he's  baith  leal  and  true. 

Rise,  lass,  and  mak'  a  clean  fireside, 

Put  on  the  muckle  pot; 
Gi'e  little  Kate  her  button  gown. 

And  Jock  his  Sunday  coat. 
And  mak'  their  shoon  as  black  as  slaes, 

Their  hose  as  white  as  snaw; 
It's  a'  to  please  my  own  gudeman, 

He  likes  to  see  them  braw. 

There's  twa  hens  upon  the  bauk, 

Hae  fed  this  month  and  mair; 
Mak'  haste  and  thraw  their  necks  about 

That  Colin  weel  may  fare ! 
And  spread  the  table  neat  and  clean, 

Gar  ilka  thing  look  braw; 
For  wha  can  tell  how  Colin  fared, 

When  he  was  far  awa'?    .  .  ., 

Sae  true  his  heart,  sae  smooth  his  speech, 

His  breath  like  caller  air; 
His  very  foot  has  music  in't 

As  he  comes  up  the  stair. 
And  v/ill  I  see  his  face  again, 

And  will  I  hear  him  speak? 
I'm  downright  dizzy  wi'  the  thought, 

In  troth  I'm  like  to  greet! 

If  Colin's  weel,  and  weel  content, 

I  ha'e  nae  mair  to  crave; 
And  gin  I  live  to  keep  him  sae,/ 

I'm  blest  abune  the  lave. 
And  will  I  see  his  face  again, 

And  will  I  hear  him  speak? 
I'm  downright  dizzy  wi'  the  thought. 

In  troth  I'm  like  to  greetl 


Jerry   an'   Me  12 19 

For  there's  nae  luck  aboot  the  house, 

There's  nae  luck  ava'; 
There's  little  pleasure  in  the  house 
When  our  gudeman's  awa'. 

William  Julius  Micklc  [i 735-1 788] 
{or  Jean  Adam  {?)  [1710-1765]) 

JERRY  AN'  ME 

No  matter  how  the  chances  are, 

Nor  when  the  winds  may  blow, 
My  Jerry  there  has  left  the  sea 

With  all  its  luck  an'  woe: 
For  who  would  try  the  sea  at  all. 

Must  try  it  luck  or  no. 

They  told  him — Lor',  men  take  no  care 
How  words  they  speak  may  fall — 

They  told  him  blunt,  he  was  too  old, 
Too  slow  with  oar  an'  trawl, 

An'  this  is  how  he  left  the  sea 
An'  luck  an'  woe  an'  all. 

Take  any  man  on  sea  or  land 

Out  of  his  beaten  way. 
If  he  is  young  'twill  do,  but  then. 

If  he  is  old  an'  gray, 
A  month  will  be  a  year  to  him. 

Be  all  to  him  you  may. 

He  sits  by  me,  but  most  he  walks 

The  door-yard  for  a  deck, 
An'  scans  the  boat  a-goin'  out 

Till  she  becomes  a  speck. 
Then  turns  away,  his  face  as  wet 

As  if  she  were  a  wreck. 

I  cannot  bring  him  back  again, 

The  days  when  we  were  wed. 
But  he  shall  never  know — my  man— 

The  lack  o'  love  or  bread,  i  i" 

While  I  can  cast  a  stitch  or  fill 

A  needleful  o'  thread. 


I220  Poems  of  Love 

God  pity  me,  I'd  most  forgot 

How  many  yet  there  be, 
Whose  goodmen  full  as  old  as  mine 

Are  somewhere  on  the  sea, 
Who  hear  the  breakin'  bar  an'  think 

O' Jerry  home  an' — me. 

Hiram  Rich  [  ? 


'DON'T  BE  SORROWFUL,   DARLING" 

O  don't  be  sorrowful,  dariing! 

And  don't  be  sorrowful,  pray; 
Taking  the  year  together,  my  dear,  ■  ^ 

There  isn't  more  night  than  day. 

'Tis  rainy  weather,  my  darling; 

Time's  waves  they  heavily  run; 
But  taking  the  year  together,  my  dear, 

There  isn't  more  cloud  than  sun. 

We  are  old  folks  now,  my  darling. 

Our  heads  are  growing  gray; 
But  taking  the  year  all  round,  my  dear, 

You  will  always  find  the  May. 

We  have  had  our  May,  my  dariing. 

And  our  roses  long  ago; 
And  the  time  of  the  year  is  coming,  my  dear, 

For  the  silent  night  and  the  snow. 

But  God  is  God,  my  darling. 

Of  the  night  as  well  as  the  day; 
And  we  feel  and  know  that  we  can  go 

Wherever  He  leads  the  way. 

maso  I 
A  God  of  the  night,  my  darling,  ^ 

Of  the  night  of  death  so  grim;      '^T 
The  gate  that  leads  out  of  hfe,  good  wife, 

Is  the  gate  that  leads  to  Him. 

Rembrandt  Peale  [17 78-1 860] 


Winifreda  1221 


WINIFREDA 

Away!  let  naught  to  love  displeasing, 

My  Winifreda,  move  your  care; 
Let  naught  delay  the  heavenly  blessing, 

Nor  squeamish  pride,  nor  gloomy  fear. 

What  though  no  grants  of  royal  donors 
With  pompous  titles  grace  our  blood, 

We'll  shine  in  more  substantial  honors, 
And,  to  be  noble,  we'll  be  good. 

Our  name,  while  virtue  thus  we  tender, 
Will  sweetly  sound  where'er  'tis  spoke; 

And  all  the  great  ones,  they  shall  wonder 
How  they  respect  such  little  folk. 

What  though,  from  fortune's  lavish  bounty, 

No  mighty  treasures  we  possess; 
We'll  find,  within  our  pittance,  plenty, 

And  be  content  without  e.xcess. 

Still  shall  each  kind  returning  season 

Sufficient  for  our  wishes  give ; 
For  we  will  live  a  life  of  reason, 

And  that's  the  only  life  to  live. 

Through  youth  and  age,  in  love  excelling, 

We'll  hand  in  hand  together  tread; 
Sweet-smiling  peace  shall  crown  our  dwelling,  / 

And  babes,  sweet-smiling  babes,  our  bed. 

How  should  I  love  the  pretty  creatures. 
While  round  my  knees  they  fondly  clung! 

To  see  them  look  their  mother's  features. 
To  hear  them  lisp  their  mother's  tongue! 

And  when  with  envy  time  transported 

Shall  think  to  rob  us  of  our  joys,  "^  •  '""fV/ 

You'll  in  your  girls  again  be  courted, 
And  I'll  go  wooing  in  my  boys. 

Unknown 


1222  Poems  of  Love 


AN  OLD   MAN'S  IDYL 

By  the  waters  of  Life  we  sat  together, 

Hand  in  hand,  in  the  golden  days 
Of  the  beautiful  early  summer  weather, 

When  skies  were  purple  and  breath  was  praise, 
When  the  heart  kept  tune  to  the  carol  of  birds, 

And  the  birds  kept  tune  to  the  songs  which  ran 
Through  shimmer  of  flowers  on  grassy  swards, 

And  trees  with  voices  aeolian. 

By  the  rivers  of  Life  we  walked  together, 

I  and  my  darling,  unafraid; 
And  lighter  than  any  linnet's,  feather 

The  burdens  of  being  on  us  weighed ; 
And  Love's  sweet  miracles  o'er  us  threw 

Mantles  of  joy  outlasting  Time, 
And  up  from  the  rosy  morrows  grew 

A  sound  that  seemed  like  a  marriage  chime. 

In  the  gardens  of  Life  we  strayed  together. 

And  the  luscious  apples  were  ripe  and  red. 
And  the  languid  lilac,  and  honeyed  heather 

Swooned  with  the  fragrance  which  they  shed; 
And  under  the  trees  the  angels  walked, 

And  up  in  the  air  a  sense  of  wings 
Awed  us  tenderly  while  we  talked 

Softly  in  sacred  communings. 

In  the  meadows  of  Life  we  strayed  together, 

Watching  the  waving  harvests  grow. 
And  under  the  benison  of  the  Father 

Our  hearts,  like  the  lambs,  skipped  to  and  fro; 
And  the  cowslip,  hearing  our  low  replies, 

Broidered  fairer  the  emerald  banks. 
And  glad  tears  shone  in  the  daisy's  eyes, 

And  the  timid  violet  glistened  thanks. 

Who  was  with  us,  and  what  was  round  us, 
Neither  myself  nor  my  darling  guessed; 

Only  we  knew  that  something  crowned  us 
Out  from  the  heavens  with  crowns  of  rest: 


The  Poet's   Song  to   His  Wife     1223 

Onl}^  we  knew  that  something  bright       T 

Lingered  lovingly  where  we  stood, 
Clothed  with  the  incandescent  light 
,  Of  something  higher  than  humanhood. 

Oh,  the  riches  Love  doth  inherit! 

Oh,  the  alchemy  which  doth  change 
Dross  of  body  and  dregs  of  spirit 

Into  sanctities  rare  and  strange! 
My  flesh  is  feeble,  and  dry,  and  old, 

My  darling's  beautiful  hair  is  gray; 
But  our  elixir  and  precious  gold 

Laugh  at  the  footsteps  of  decay. 

Harms  of  the  world  have  come  unto  us, 

Cups  of  sorrow  we  yet  shall  drain; 
But  we  have  a  secret  which  doth  show  us 

Wonderful  rainbows  in  the  rain. 
And  we  hear  the  tread  of  the  years  move  by, 

And  the  sun  is  setting  behind  the  hills; 
But  my  darling  does  not  fear  to  die, 

And  I  am  happy  in  what  God  wills. 

So  we  sit  by  our  household  fires  together, 

Dreaming  the  dreams  of  long  ago; 
Then  it  was  balmy,  sunny  weather, 

And  now  the  valleys  are  laid  in  snow; 
Icicles  hang  from  the  slippery  eaves. 

The  wind  blows  cold, — 'tis  growing  late; 
Well,  well!  we  have  garnered  all  our  sheaves, 

I  and  my  darling,  and  we  wait. 

Richard  Realf  [ 1 83 4- 1 8 7 8] 


THE  POET'S  SONG  TO  HIS  WIFE 

How  many  summers,  love. 

Have  I  been  thine? 
How  many  days,  thou  dove, 

Hast  thou  been  mine? 


1224  Poems  of  Love      |    -,rlT 

Time,  like  the  winged  wind 

When  it  bends  the  flowers, 
Hath  left  no  mark  behind. 

To  count  the  hours. 

Some  weight  of  thought,  though  loth, 

On  thee  he  leaves; 
Some  lines  of  care  round  both 

Perhaps  he  weaves; 
Some  fears,— a  soft  regret 

For  joys  scarce  known; 
Sweet  looks  we  half  forget;— 

All  else  is  flown! 

Ah!— With  what  thankless  heart  ^ 

I  mourn  and  sing! 
Look,  where  our  children  start. 

Like  sudden  Spring! 
With  tongues  all  sweet  and  low, 

Like  a  pleasant  rhyme. 
They  tell  how  much  I  owe 

To  thee  and  Time! 

Bryan  Waller  Procter  [1787-1874I 


JOHN  ANDERSON 

John  Anderson  my  jo,  John, 

When  we  were  first  acquent 

Your  locks  were  like  the  raven,        jj^y/ 

Your  bonnie  brow  was  brent; 

But  now  your  brow  is  bald,  John, 

Your  locks  are  like  the  snow; 

But  blessings  on  your  frosty  pow, 

John  Anderson  my  jo. 

John  Anderson  my  jo,  John,.-] 
We  clamb  the  hill  thegither, 
And  mony  a  canty  day,  John, 
We've  had  wi'  ane  anither: 


To   Mary  1J225 

Now  we  maun  totter  down,  John, 
But  hand  in  hand  we'll  go, 
And  sleep  thcgither  at  the  foot, 
John  Anderson  my  jo. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 

TO  IMARY 

"Thee,  Mary,  with  this  ring  I  wed, 
So,  fourteen  years  ago,  I  said— 
Behold  another  ring! — "For  what? 
To  wed  thee  o'er  again — ^why  not?  " 

With  that  first  ring  I  married  Youth, 
Grace,  Beauty,  Innocence,  and  Truth; 
Taste  long  admired,  sense  long  revered. 
And  all  my  IMoUy  then  appeared. 
If  she,  by  merit  since  disclosed, 
Prove  twice  the  woman  I  supposed, 
I  plead  that  double  merit  now. 
To  justify  a  double  vow. 

Here  then,  to-day,  (with  faith  a-s  sure, 
With  ardor  as  intense  and  pure. 
As  when,  amidst  the  rites  divine, 
I  took  thy  troth,  and  plighted  mine), 
To  thee,  sweet  girl,  my  second  ring 
A  token,  and  a  pledge,  I  bring; 
With  this  I  wed,  till  death  us  part. 
Thy  riper  virtues  to  my  heart; 
Those  virtues,  which,  before  untried, 
The  wife  has  added  to  the  bride; 
Those  virtues,  whose  progressive  claim. 
Endearing  wedlock's  very  name, 
]\Iy  soul  enjoys,  my  song  approves. 
For  Conscience'  sake,  as  well  as  Love's. 

For  why? — They  show  me  every  hour. 
Honor's  high  thought.  Affection's  power. 
Discretion's  deed,  sound  Judgment's  sentence, 
And  teach  me  all  things — but  Repentance. 

Samuel  Bishop  [1731-1795] 


1226  Poems  of  Love 


THE   GOLDEN  WEDDING 

O  Love,  whose  patient  pilgrim  feet 

Life's  longest  path  have  trod; 
Whose  ministry  hath  symboUed  sweet 

The  dearer  love  of  God; 
The  sacred  myrtle  wreathes  again 

Thine  altar,  as  of  old; 
And  what  was  green  with  summer  then, 

Is  mellowed  now  to  gold. 

Not  now,  as  then,  the  future's  face 

Is  iiushed  with  fancy's  light; 
But  memory,  with  a  milder  grace. 

Shall  rule  the  feast  to-night. 
Blest  was  the  sun  of  joy  that  shone, 

Nor  less  the  blinding  shower; 
The  bud  of  fifty  years  agone 

Is  love's  perfected  flower. 

O  memory,  ope  thy  mystic  door; 

O  dream  of  youth,  return; 
And  let  the  light  that  gleamed  of  yore 

Beside  this  altar  burn. 
The  past  is  plain;  'twas  love  designed 

E'en  sorrow's  iron  chain; 
And  mercy's  shining,  thread  has  twined 

With  the  dark  warp  of  pain. 

So  be  it  still.    O  Thou  who  hast 

That  younger  bridal  blest, 
Till  the  May-morn  of  love  has  passed 

To  evening's  golden  west; 
Come  to  this  later  Cana,  Lord, 

And,  at  thy  touch  divine. 
The  water  of  that  earlier  board 

To-night  shall  turn  to  wine. 

David  Gray  [1837-1S 


Moggy   and   Me  1227 


MOGGY  AND   ME 

Oh  wha  are  sae  happy  as  me  an'  my  Moggy? 

Oh  wha  are  sae  happy  as  JVIoggy  an'  me? 
We're  baith  turnin'  auld,  an'  our  walth  is  soon  tauld, 

But  contentment  bides  aye  in  our  cottage  sae  wee. 
She  toils  a'  the  day  when  I'm  out  wi'  the  hi'rsel, 

An'  chants  to  the  bairns  while  I  sing  on  the  brae; 
An'  aye  her  bhthe  smile  welcomes  me  frae  my  toil, 

When  down  the  glen  I  come  weary  an'  wae. 

Aboon  our  auld  heads  we've  a  nice  little  biggin, 

That  keeps  out  the  cauld  when  the  simmer's  awa; 
We've  twa  webs  o'  linen  o'  Moggy's  ain  spinnin', 

As  thick  as  silk  velvet  and  white  as  the  snaw; 
We've  kye  in  the  byre,  an'  yauds  in  the  stable, 

A  grumphie  sae  fat  that  she  hardly  can  stand; 
An'  something,  I  guess,  in  yon  auld  painted  press 

To  cheer  up  the  speerits  an'  steady  the  hand. 

'Tis  true  we  hae  had  mony  sorrows  an'  crosses. 

Our  pouches  oft  toom,  an'  our  hearts  fu'  o'  care; 
But  wi'  a'  our  crosses,  our  sorrows  an'  losses, 

Contentment,  thank  heaven!  has  aye  been  our  share. 
I've  an  auld  roostit  sword  that  was  left  by  my  father, 

Whilk  aye  has  been  drawn  when  my  king  had  a  fae; 
We  hae  friends  ane  or  twa  that  aft  gie  us  a  ca'. 

To  laugh  when  we're  happy  or  grieve  when  we're  wae. 

Our  duke  may  hae  gowd  mair  than  schoolmen  can  reckon, 

An'  flunkies  to  watch  ilka  glance  o'  his  e'e, 
His  lady  aye  braw  sittin'  prim  in  her  ha'; 

But  are  they  sae  happy  as  Moggy  an'  me? 
A'  ye  wha  ne'er  fand  the  straight  road  to  be  happy, 

Wha  are  nae  content  wi'  the  lot  that  ye  dree, 
Come  down  to  the  dwellin'  o'  whilk  I've  been  tellin'/i 

You'U  learn  it  by  lookin'  at  Moggy  an'  me.  ■ 

James  Hogg  [1770-1835] 


1228  Poems  of  Love 


'O,  LAY  THY  HAND  IN  MINE,  DEAR!"    • 

O,  LAY  thy  hand  in  mine,  dear! 

We're  growing  old; 
But  Time  hath  brought  no  sign,  dear, 

That  hearts  grow  cold.  '  ^i  '^^^ 

'Tis  long,  long  since  our  new  love         '    '-^ 

Made  life  divine;  ' 

But  age  enricheth  true  love, 

Like  noble  wine.  '  ^"- 

And  lay  thy  cheek  to  mine,  dear. 

And  take  thy  rest ; 
Mine  arms  around  thee  twine,  dear. 

And  make  thy  nest. 
A  many  cares  are  pressing 

On  this  dear  head; 
But  Sorrow's  hands  in  blessing 

Are  surely  laid. 

O,  lean  thy  life  on  mine,  dear! 

'Twill  shelter  thee.  ' 

Thou  wert  a  winsome  vine,  dear, 

On  my  young  tree: 
And  so,  till  boughs  are  leafless, 

And  songbirds  flown, 
We'll  twine,  then  lay  us,  griefless. 

Together  down. 

Gerald  Masscy  [1S28-1907] 


iw  Ju3 


(t/b  TUO 


THE  EXEQUY 


Accept,  thou  shrine  of  my  dead  saint. 

Instead  of  dirges  this  complaint; 

And  for  sweet  flowers  to  crown  thy  hearse, 

Receive  a  strew  of  weeping  verse 

From  thy  grieved  friend,  whom  thou  might'st  see 

Quite  melted  into  tears  for  thee. 


The   Exequy  1229 

Dear  loss!  since  thy  untimely  fate,  ,rA 
My  task  hath  been  to  meditate  >/i 

On  thee,  on  thee:  thou  art  the  book, — 
The  library  whereon  I  look. 
Though  almost  blind.    For  thee  (loved  clay) 
I  languish  out,  not  live,  the  day. 
Using  no  other  exercise 
But  which  I  practise  with  mine  eyes: 
By  which  wet  glasses  I  find  out 
How  lazily  time  creeps  about 
To  one  that  mourns:  this,  only  this. 
My  exercise  and  business  is: 
So  I  compute  the  weary  hours 
With  sighs  dissolved  into  showers.        ■ ,' 

Nor  wonder  if  my  time  go  thus 
Backward  and  most  preposterous; 
Thou  hast  benighted  me;  thy  set 
This  eve  of  blackness  did  beget, 
Who  wast  my  day  (though  overcast 
Before  thou  hadst  thy  noontide  passed): 
And  I  remember  must  in  tears  .': 

Thou  scarce  hadst  seen  so  many  years  ni. 
As  day  tells  hours.  By  thy  clear  sun  7/ 
My  love  and  fortune  first  did  run;  ■  1 
But  thou  wilt  never  more  appear  -' 

Folded  within  my  hemisphere. 
Since  both  thy  light  and  motion, 
Like  a  fled  star,  is  fallen  and  gone, 
And  'twixt  me  and  rny  soul's  dear  wish 
The  earth  now  interposed  is, 
Which  such  a  strange  eclipse  doth  make 
As  ne'er  was  read  in  almanac. 

I  could  allow  thee  for  a  time 
To  darken  me  and  my  sad  clime; 
Were  it  a  month,  a  year,  or  ten, 
I  would  thy  exile  live  till  then, 
And  all  that  space  my  mirth  adjourn, 
So  thou  wouldst  promise  to  return, 


1230  Poems  of  Love 

And  putting  off  thy  ashy  shroud 

At  length  disperse  this  sorrow's  cloud. 

But  woe  is  me!  the  longest  date 

Too  narrow  is  to  calculate 

These  empty  hopes:  never  shall  I 

Be  so  much  blest  as  to  descry 

A  glimpse  of  thee,  till  that  day  come ■^'^  i 

Which  shall  the  earth  to  cinders  doom," 

And  a  fierce  fever  must  calcine 

The  body  of  this  world — like  thine, 

(My  little  world!)    That  fit  of  fire 

Once  off,  our  bodies  shall  aspire 

To  our  souls'  bliss:  then  we  shall  rise  ' 

And  view  ourselves  with  clearer  eyes  '  '■  f^ 

In  that  calm  region  where  no  night 

Can  hide  us  from  each  other's  sight. 

n  -  •  •! 

Meantime  thou  hast  her,  earth:  much  good 
May  my  harm  do  thee!    Since  it  stood 
With  Heaven's  will  I  might  not  call 
Her  longer  mine,  I  give  thee  all 
My  short-lived  right  and  interest 
In  her  whom  living  I  loved  best : 
With  a  most  free  and  bounteous  grieif    ' 
I  give  thee  what  I  could  not  keep.       fi  '- 
Be  kind  to  her,  and  prithee  look         'i^i 
Thou  write  into  thy  Doomsday  book'^-'  ! 
Each  parcel  of  this  rarity 
Which  in  thy  casket  shrined  doth  lie, 
See  that  thou  make  thy  reckoning  straight, 
And  yield  her  back  again  by  weight ; 
For  thou  must  audit  on  thy  trust 
Each  grain  and  atom  of  this  dust. 
As  thou  wilt  answer  Him  that  lent — 
Not  gave — thee  my  dear  monument. 
So  close  the  ground,  and  'bout  her  shade 
Black  curtains  draw:  my  bride  is  laid. 

Sleep  on,  my  Love,  in  thy  cold  bed.""' 
Never  to  be  disquieted!      ■'luoY/  uoAi  o2 


The   Exequy  1231 

My  last  good-night !    Thou  wilt  not  wake 

Till  I  thy  fate  shall  overtake: 

Till  age,  or  grief,  or  sickness  must 

Marry  my  body  to  that  dust 

It  so  much  loves;  and  fill  the  room 

My  heart  keeps  empty  in  thy  tomb. 

Stay  for  me  there:  I  will  not  fail 

To  meet  thee  in  that  hollow  vale. 

And  think  not  much  of  my  delay: 

I  am  already  on  the  way. 

And  follow  thee  with  all  the  speed 

Desire  can  make,  or  sorrows  breed. 

Each  minute  is  a  short  degree 

And  every  hour  a  step  towards  thee. 

At  night  when  I  betake  to  rest. 

Next  morn  I  rise  nearer  my  west 

Of  life,  almost  by  eight  hours'  sail, 

Than  when  sleep  breathed  his  drowsy  gale. 

Thus  from  the  Sun  my  bottom  steers, 
And  my  day's  compass  downward  bears: 
Nor  labor  I  to  stem  the  tide 
Through  which  to  thee  I  swiftly  glide. 
'Tis  true,  with  shame  and  grief  I  yield, 
Thou,  like  the  van,  first  took'st  the  field; 
And  gotten  hast  the  victory 
In  thus  adventuring  to  die 
Before  me,  whose  more  years  might  crave 
A  just  precedence  in  the  grave. 
But  hark!  my  pulse,  like  a  soft  drum. 
Beats  my  approach,  tells  thee  I  come- 
And  slow  howc'er  my  marches  be 
I  shall  at  last  sit  down  by  thee. 

The  thought  of  this  bids  me  go  on 
And  wait  my  dissolution 
With  hope  and  comfort.    Dear  (forgive 
The  crime),  I  am  content  to  live 
Divided,  with  but  half  a  heart. 
Till  we  shall  meet  and  never  part. 

Henry  King  [1502-1660] 


-f^now   Jgejf    /TA 


LOVE  SONNETS 

SONNETS 

From  "  Araoretti  " 
III 

The  sovereign  beauty  which  I  do  admire, 
Witness  the  world  how  worthy  to  be  praised! 
The  light  whereof  hath  kindled  heavenly  fire 
In  my  frail  spirit,  by  her  from  baseness  raised; 
That  being  now  with  her  huge  brightness  dazed, 
Base  thing  I  can  no  more  endure  to  view: 
But,  looking  still  on  her,  I  stand  amazed 
At  wondrous  sight  of  so  celestial  hue. 
So  when  my  tongue  would  speak  her  praises  due, 
It  stopped  is  with  thought's  astonishment; 
And  when  my  pen  would  write  her  titles  true, 
It  ravished  is  with  fancy's  wonderment: 

Yet  in  my  heart  I  then  both  speak  and  write 
The  wonder  that  my  wit  cannot  indite. 

vni 
More  than  most  fair,  full  of  the  living  fire 
Kindled  above  unto  the  Maker  near; 
No  eyes  but  joys,  in  which  all  powers  conspire 
That  to  the  world  naught  else  be  counted  dear; 
Through  your  bright  beams  doth  not  the  bhnded  guest 
Shoot  out  his  darts  to  base  affections  wound; 
But  angels  come  to  lead  frail  minds  to  rest 
In  chaste  desires,  on  heavenly  beauty  bound. 
You  frame  my  thoughts,  and  fashion  me  within; 
You  stop  my  tongue,  and  teach  my  heart  to  speak; 
You  calm  the  storm  that  passion  did  begin, 
Strong  through  your  cause,  but  by  your  virtue  weak. 

Dark  is  the  world,  where  your  light  shined  never; 
[yo  Well  is  he  born  that  may  behold  you  ever. 
1232 


Sonnets  i^JJ 

XXIV 

When  I  behold  that  beauty's  wonderment, 
And  rare  perfection  of  each  goodly  part, 
Of  Nature's  still  the  only  complement, 
I  honor  and  admire  the  Maker's  art. 
But  when  I  feel  the  bitter  baleful  smart 
Which  her  fair  eyes  un'wares  do  work  in  me, 
That  death  out  of  their  shiny  beams  do  dart, 
I  think  that  I  a  new  Pandora  see, 
Whom  all  the  gods  in  councU  did  agree 
Into  this  sinful  world  from  heaven  to  send,  '^'^ 

That  she  to  wicked  men  a  scourge  should  be, 
For  all  their  faults  with  which  they  did  offend. 
But  since  ye  are  my  scourge,  I  wiU  entreat 
That  for  my  faults  ye  will  me  gently  beat. 

■"''''  "  '""   '■  '  XXXIV 

Like  as  a  ship,  that  through  the  ocean  wide. 
By  conduct  of  some  star  doth  make  her  way, 
Whenas  a  storm  hath  dimmed  her  trusty  guide, 
Out  of  her  course  doth  wander  far  astray; 
So  I,  whose  star,  that  wont  with  her  bright  ray 
Me  to  direct,  with  clouds  is  overcast, 
Do  wander  now,  in  darkness  and  dismay. 
Through  hidden  perils  round  about  me  placed; 
Yet  hope  I  well  that,  when  this  storm  is  past, 
My  Helice,  the  lodestar  of  my  life. 
Will  shine  again,  and  look  on  me  at  last. 
With  lovely  light  to  clear  my  cloudy  grief: 

Till  then  I  wander  care-full,  comfortless, 

In  secret  sorrow,  and  sad  pensiveness. 


So  oft  as  I  her  beauty  do  behold. 

And  therewith  do  her  cruelty  compare, 

I  marvel  of  what  substance  was  the  mould,  • 

The  which  her  made  at  once  so  cruel  fair; 

Not  earth,  for  her  high  thoughts  more  heavenly  are; 

Not  water,  for  her  love  doth  burn  like  fire; 


1234  Poems  of  Love 

Not  air,  for  she  is  not  so  light  or  rare; 

Not  fire,  for  slie  doth  freeze  with  faint  desire. 

Then  needs  another  element  inquire 

Whereof  she  might  be  made — that  is,  the  sky; 

For  to  the  heaven  her  haughty  looks  aspire. 

And  eke  her  mind  is  pure  immortal  high. 

Then,  since  to  heaven  ye  likened  are  the  best, 
Be  like  in  mercy  as  in  all  the  rest. 

LXVIII 

Most  glorious  Lord  of  Life!  that  on  this  day 
Didst  make  thy  triumph  over  death  and  sin, 
And,  having  harrowed  hell,  didst  bring  away 
Captivity  thence  captive,  us  to  win. 
This  joyous  day,  dear  Lord,  with  joy  begin; 
And  grant  that  we,  for  whom  thou  diddest  die, 
Being  with  thy  dear  blood  clean  washed  from  sin, 
May  live  forever  in  felicity; 
And  that  thy  love  we  weighing  worthily, 
May  likewise  love  thee  for  the  same  again, 
And  for  thy  sake,  that  all  'like  dear  didst  buy, 
With  love  may  one  another  entertain! 

So  let  us  love,  dear  Love,  like  as  we  ought: 
Love  is  the  lesson  which  the  Lord  us  taught. 


Fresh  Spring,  the  herald  of  love's  mighty  king, 
In  whose  coat-armor  richly  are  displayed 
All  sorts  of  flowers  the  which  on  earth  do  spring 
In  goodly  colors  gloriously  arrayed; 
Go  to  my  love,  where  she  is  careless  laid. 
Yet  in  her  winter's  bower  not  well  awake; 
Tell  her  the  joyous  time  will  not  be  stayed. 
Unless  she  do  him  by  the  forelock  take; 
Bid  her  therefore  herself  soon  ready  make 
To  wait  on  Love  amongst  his  lovely  crew; 
Wherfe  everyone  that  misseth  then  her  mate 
Shall  be  by  him  amerced  with  penance  due. 

Make  haste,  therefore,  sweet  love,  whilst  it  is  prime; 

For  none  can  call  again  the  passed  time. 


Sonnets    -^}  ^'^35 

LXXV 

One  day  I  wTote  her  name  upon  the  strand, 
But  came  the  waves  and  washed  it  away: 
Again  I  wrote  it  with  a  second  hand, 
But  came  the  tide  and  made  my  pains  his  prey. 
"Vain  man,"  said  she,  "that  dost  in  vain  essay 
A  mortal  thing  so  to  immortalize; 
For  I  myself  shall  like  to  this  decay, 
And  eke  my  name  be  wiped  out  likewise." 
"Not  so,"  quoth  I;  "let  baser  things  devise 
To  die  in  dust,  but  you  shall  hve  by  fame; 
My  verse  your  virtues  rare  shall  eternize. 
And  in  the  heavens  write  your  glorious  name: 
Where,  whenas  Death  shall  all  the  world  subdue, 
Our  love  shall  live,  and  later  Ufe  renew."  '  ^^ 

LXXIX 

Men  call  you  fair,  and  you  do  credit  it,  ^^  ,  . 

For  that  yourself  ye  daily  such  do  see:  .  j 

But  the  true  fair,  that  is  the  gentle  wit  .  q. 

And  virtuous  mind,  is  much  more  praised  of  me: 
For  all  the  rest,  however  fair  it  be. 
Shall  turn  to  naught  and  lose  that  glorious  hue; 
But  only  that  is  permanent  and  free 
From  frail  corruption  that  doth  flesh  ensue. 
That  is  true  beauty;  that  doth  argue  you 
To  be  divine,  and  born  of  heavenly  seed; 
Derived  from  that  fair  Spirit  from  whom  all  true 
And  perfect  beauty  did  at  first  proceed: 

He  only  fair,  and  what  he  fair  hath  made; 

All  other  fair,  like  flowers,  untimely  fade. 

Edmund  Spenser  [iss2?-iS99] 

SONNETS 

From  "Astrophel  and  Stella" 
I 

Loving  in  truth,  and  fain  in  verse  my  love  to  show. 
That  She,  dear  She!  might  take  some  pleasure  of  my  pain; 
Pleasure  might  cause  her  read,  reading  might  make  her  know, 
Knowledge  might  pity  win,  and  pity  grace  obtain: 


1236  Poems  of  Love 

I  sought  fit  words  to  paint  the  blackest  face  of  woe, 
Studying  inventions  line,  her  wits  to  entertain;  "*  '■ 

Oft  turning  others'  leaves,  to  see  if  thence  would  flow 
Some  fresh  and  fruitful  showers  upon  my  sunburnt  brain: 
But  words  came  halting  forth,  wanting  Invention's  stay. 
Invention,  Nature's  child,  fled  step-dame  Study's  blows; 
And  others'  feet  still  seemed  but  strangers  in  my  way. 
Thus,  great  with  child  to  speak,  and  helpless  in  my  throes, 
Biting  my  truant  pen,  beating  myself  for  spite: 
"  Fool!"  said  my  Muse  to  me,  "look  in  thy  heart,  and  write !" 

XXXI 

With  how  sad  steps,  O  Moon,  thou  climb'st  the  skies! 

How  silently,  and  with  how  wan  a  face! 

What!  may  it  be  that  even  in  heavenly  place 

That  busy  archer  his  sharp  arrows  tries? 

Sure,  if  that  long-with-love-acquainted  eyes 

Can  judge  of  love,  thou  feel'st  a  lover's  case; 

I  read  it  in  thy  looks.    Thy  languished  grace 

To  me,  that  feel  the  like,  thy  state  descries.  ;  ^    " 

Then,  even  of  fellowship,  O  Moon,  tell  me, 

Is  constant  love  deemed  there  but  want  of  wit? 

Are  beauties  there  as  proud  as  here  they  be? 

Do  they  above  love  to  be  loved,  and  yet 

Those  lovers  scorn  whom  that  love  dOth  possess? *'"*  ^ 

Do  they  call  virtue  there,  ungratefulness? 

XXXIX 

Come  Sleep!    O  Sleep,  the  certain  knot  of  peace, 
The  baiting-place  of  wit,  the  balm  of  woe, 
The  poor  man's  wealth,  the  prisoner's  release. 
The  indiiferent  judge  between  the  high  and  low! 
With  shield  of  proof,  shield  me  from  out  the  press 
Of  those  fierce  darts  Despair  at  me  doth  throw: 

0  make  in  me  those  civil  wars  to  cease! 

1  will  good  tribute  pay  if  thou  do  so. 

Take  thou  of  me,  smooth  pillows,  sweetest  bed,       f  i^rrivo  T 

A  chamber  deaf  to  noise  and  bUnd  to  light, 

A  rosy  garland,  and  a  weary  head: 

And  if  these  things,  as  being  thine  in  right, 


Sonnets  1237 

Move  not  thy  heavy  grace,  thou  shalt  in  me, 
Livelier  than  elsewhere,  Stella's  image  see. 

Lxn 

Late  tired  with  woe,  even  ready  for  to  pine 

With  rage  of  love,  I  called  my  Love  unkind; 

She  in  whose  eyes  love,  though  unfelt,  doth  shine, 

Sweet  said  that  I  true  love  in  her  should  find. 

I  joyed;  but  straight  thus  watered  was  my  wine. 

That  love  she  did,  but  loved  a  love  not  blind; 

Which  would  not  let  me,  whom  she  loved,  decline 

From  nobler  cause,  fit  for  my  birth  and  mind: 

And  therefore,  by  her  love's  authority. 

Willed  me  these  tempests  of  vain  love  to  fly. 

And  anchor  fast  myself  on  Virtue's  shore. 

Alas,  if  this  the  only  metal  be 

Of  love  new-coined  to  help  my  beggary. 

Dear!  love  me  not,  that  ye  may  love  me  more! 

LXIV 

No  more,  my  Dear,  no  more  these  counsels  try; 

0  give  my  passions  leave  to  run  their  race! 
Let  Fortune  lay  on  me  her  worst  disgrace; 

Let  folk  o'ercharged  with  brain,  against  me  cry; 
Let  clouds  bedim  my  face,  break  in  mine  eye; 
Let  me  no  steps  but  of  lost  labor  trace; 
Let  all  the  earth  with  scorn  recount  my  case; 
But  do  not  wiU  me  from  my  love  to  fly ! 

1  do  not  envy  Aristotle's  wit; 

Nor  do  aspire  to  Caesar's  bleeding  fame; 

Nor  aught  do  care,  though  some  above  me  sit; 

Nor  hope,  nor  wish  another  course  to  frame. 
But  that  which  once  may  win  thy  cruel  heart: 
Thou  art  my  Wit,  and  thou  my  Virtue  art. 

LXXIII 

Love  still  a  boy  and  oft  a  wanton  is, 
Schooled  only  by  his  mother's  tender  eye; 
What  wonder,  then,  if  he  his  lesson  miss. 
When  for  so  soft  a  rod  dear  play  he  try? 


1238  Poems  of  Love 

And  yet  my  Star,  because  a  sugared  kiss 

In  sport  I  sucked  while  she  asleep  did  lie, 

Doth  lower,  nay  chide,  nay  threat,  for  only  this. — ■ 

Sweet,  it  v/as  saucy  Love,  not  humble  I! 

But  no  'souse  serves;  she  makes  her  wrath  appear 

In  Beauty's  throne;  see  now,  who  dares  come  near 

Those  scarlet  judges,  threatening  bloody  pain! 

O  heavenly  fool,  thy  most  kiss-worthy  face 

Anger  invests  with  such  a  lovely  grace. 

That  Anger's  self  I  needs  must  kiss  again. 

cm 

0  happy  Thames  that  didst  my  Stella  bear! 

1  saw  thee  with  full  many  a  smiling  line 
Upon  thy  cheerful  face,  Joy's  livery  wear. 

While  those  fair  planets  on  thy  streams  did  shine. 
The  boat  for  joy  could  not  to  dance  forbear; 
While  wanton  winds,  with  beauties  so  divine, 
Ravished,  stayed  not,  till  in  her  golden  hair 
They  did  themselves,  (O  sweetest  prison!)  twine. 
And  fain  those  ^ol's  youths  there  would  their  stay 
Have  made,  but  forced  by  Nature  still  to  fly. 
First  did  with  puffing  kiss  those  locks  display. 
She  so  dishevelled,  blushed.    From  window,  I, 

With  sight  thereof,  cried  out,  "O  fair  disgrace! 

Let  Honor's  self  to  thee  grant  highest  place!" 

cvii 

Stella!  since  thou  so  right  a  Princess  art 
Of  all  the  powers  which  life  bestows  on  me. 
That  ere  by  them  aught  undertaken  be. 
They  first  resort  unto  that  sovereign  part; 
Sweet!  for  a  while  give  respite  to  my  heart, 
Which  pants  as  though  it  still  should  leap  to  thee; 
And  on  my  thoughts  give  thy  lieutenancy 
To  this  great  cause,  which  needs  both  use  and  art. 
And  as  a  Queen,  who  from  her  presence  sends 
Whom  she  employs,  dismiss  from  thee  my  wit,:: Oo 
Till  it  have  wrought  what  thy  own  will  attends: 
On  servants'  shame  oft  master's  blame  doth  sit. 


Sonnets  1239 

O,  let  not  fools  in  me  thy  works  reprove, 
And  scorning,  say,  "See  what  it  is  to  love!"  • 

Philip  Sidney  [1554-1586] 


SONNETS 

From  "To  Delia" 
VI 

Fair  is  my  Love,  and  cruel  as  she's  fair: 

Her  brow  shades  frowns,  although  her  eyes  are  sunny; 

Her  smiles  are  hghtning,  though  her  pride  despair, 

And  her  disdains  are  gaU,  her  favors  honey. 

A  modest  maid,  decked  with  a  blush  of  honor. 

Whose  feet  do  tread  green  paths  of  youth  and  love; 

The  wonder  of  all  eyes  that  look  upon  her, 

Sacred  on  earth,  designed  a  Saint  above. 

Chastity  and  Beauty,  which  were  deadly  foes, 

Live  reconciled  friends  within  her  brow; 

And  had  she  Pity  to  conjoin  with  those, 

Then  who  had  heard  the  plaints  I  utter  now? 
O  had  she  not  been  fair,  and  thus  unkind. 
My  Muse  had  slept,  and  none  had  known  my  mind. 

xn 

My  sp>otless  love  hovers,  with  purest  wings. 

About  the  temple  of  the  proudest  frame. 

Where  blaze  those  lights,  fairest  of  earthly  things. 

Which  clear  our  clouded  world  with  brightest  flame. 

My  ambitious  thoughts,  confined  in  her  face. 

Affect  no  honor  but  what  she  can  give; 

My  hopes  do  rest  in  limits  of  her  grace; 

I  weigh  no  comfort,  unless  she  relieve. 

For  she,  that  can  my  heart  imparadise, 

Holds  in  her  fairest  hand  what  dearest  is. 

My  Fortune's  Wheel's  the  Circle  of  her  Eyes, 

Whose  rolling  grace  deign  once  a  turn  of  bliss! 

Ail  my  life's  sweet  consists  in  her  alone; 

So  much  I  love  the  most  unloving  one. 


1240  Poems  of  Love 

XXX 

And  yet  I  cannot  reprehend  the  flight 

Or  blame  the  attempt,  presuming  so  to  soar; 

The  mounting  venture,  for  a  high  delight, 

Did  make  the  honor  of  the  fall  the  more. 

For  who  gets  wealth,  that  puts  not  from  the  shore? 

Danger  hath  honor;  great  designs,  their  fame; 

Glory  doth  follow,  courage  goes  before; 

And  though  the  event  oft  answers  not  the  same, 

Suffice  that  high  attempts  have  never  shame.  '/l 

The  Mean-observer  (whom  base  safety  keeps)  j  ,H 

Lives  without  honor,  dies  without  a  name,  A\ 

And  in  eternal  darkness  ever  sleeps.  ;/. 

And  therefore,  DeHa!  'tis  to  me  no  blot  i.uui  /. 

To  have  attempted,  though  attained  thee  not.: orf'// 

XXXVI  :':r;;,y 

When  men  shall  find  thy  flower,  thy  glory  pass/f'^fidrj 
And  thou,  with  careful  brow,  sitting  alone,  f  J 

Received  hast  this  message  from  thy  glass, 
That  tells  the  truth,  and  says  that  All  is  gone; 
Fresh  shalt  thou  see  in  me  the  wounds  thou  madest, 
Though  spent  thy  flame,  in  me  the  heat  remaining: 
I  that  have  loved  thee  thus  before  thou  fadest. 
My  faith  shall  wax,  when  thou  art  in  thy  waning! 
The  world  shall  find  this  miracle  in  me,  -^ 

That  fire  can  burn  when  all  the  matter's  spent:         ,  f^ 
Then  what  my  faith  hath  been,  thyself  shalt  see,        //■ 
And  that  thou  wast  unkind,  thou  may'st  repent!       ^z 
Thou  may'st  repent  that  thou  hast  scorned  my  tears, 
When  Winter  snows  upon  thy  golden  hairs. 

XXXIX 

Look,  Delia,  how  we  esteem  the  half-blown  rose 

The  image  of  thy  blush,  and  Summer's  honor!  : : 

Whilst  yet  her  tender  bud  doth  undisclose 

That  full  of  beauty  Time  bestows  upon  her. 

No  sooner  spreads  her  glory  in  the  air 

But  straight  her  wide-blown  pomp  comes  to  decline; 


Sonnets  1241 

She  then  is  scorned  that  late  adorned  the  fair; 

So  fade  the  roses  of  those  cheeks  of  thine. 

No  April  can  revive  thy  v/ithered  flowers 

Whose  springing  grace  adorns  thy  glory  now; 

Swift,  speedy  Time,  feathered  with  flying  hours, 

Dissolves  the  beauty  of  the  fairest  brow. 

Then  do  not  thou  such  treasure  waste  in  vain, 
But  love  now,  whilst  thou  may'st  be  loved  again. 

XLV 

Beauty,  sweet  Love,  is  like  the  morning  dew, 
Whose  short  refresh  upon  the  tender  green 
Cheers  for  a  time,  but  till  the  sun  doth  show: 
And  straight  'lis  gone,  as  it  had  never  been. 
Soon  doth  it  fade,  that  makes  the  fairest  flourish; 
Short  is  the  glory  of  the  blushing  rose: 
The  hue  which  thou  so  carefully  dost  nourish. 
Yet  which,  at  length,  thou  must  be  forced  to  lose. 
When  thou,  surcharged  with  burthen  of  thy  years, 
Shalt  bend  thy  wrinkles  homeward  to  the  earth; 
When  Time  hath  made  a  passport  for  thy  fears. 
Dated  in  Age,  the  Calends  of  our  Death: 

But  ah,  no  more!    This  hath  been  often  told; 

And  women  grieve  to  think  they  must  be  old. 

XLVI 

I  must  not  grieve  my  Love,  whose  eyes  would  read 
Lines  of  delight,  whereon  her  youth  might  smile! 
Flowers  have  a  time,  before  they  come  to  seed; 
And  she  is  young,  and  now  must  sport  the  while. 
And  sport,  Sweet  Maid,  in  season  of  these  years, 
And  learn  to  gather  flowers  before  they  wither! 
And  where  the  sweetest  blossom  first  appears, 
Let  Love  and  Youth  conduct  thy  pleasures  thither! 
Lighten  forth  smiles  to  clear  the  clouded  air. 
And  calm  the  tempest  which  my  sighs  do  raise! 
Pity  and  smiles  do  best  become  the  fair; 
Pity  and  smiles  shall  yield  thee  lasting  praise. 
I  hope  to  say,  when  all  my  griefs  are  gone, 
"Happy  the  heart  that  sighed  for  such  a  one!" 


1242  Poems  of  Love 

L 

Let  others  sing  of  Knights  and  Paladines 
In  aged  accents  and  untimely  words, 
Paint  shadows  in  imaginary  Hnes, 
Which  well  the  reach  of  their  high  wit  records: 
But  I  must  sing  of  Thee,  and  those  fair  eyes! 
Authentic  shall  my  verse  in  time  to  come, 
When  the  yet  unborn  shall  say,  Lo,  where  she  lies  I 
Whose  beauty  made  him  speak,  that  else  was  dumb/ 
These  are  the  arks,  the  trophies  I  erect, 
That  fortify  thy  name  against  old  age; 
And  these  thy  sacred  virtues  must  protect 
Against  the  Dark,  and  Time's  consuming  rage. 
Though  the  error  of  my  youth  in  them  appear. 
Suffice,  they  showed  I  lived,  and  loved  thee  dear. 

LI 

Care-charmer  Sleep,  son  of  the  sable  Night, 
Brother  to  Death,  in  silent  darkness  born: 
Relieve  my  languish,  and  restore  the  light; 
With  dark  forgetting  of  my  care,  return! 
And  let  the  day  be  time  enough  to  mourn 
The  shipwreck  of  my  ill-adventured  youth: 
Let  waking  eyes  suffice  to  wail  their  scorn, 
Without  the  torment  of  the  night's  untruth. 
Cease,  dreams,  the  images  of  day-desires, 
To  model  forth  the  passions  of  the  morrow; 
Never  let  rising  sun  approve  you  liars. 
To  add  more  grief  to  aggravate  my  sorrow. 

Still  let  me  sleep,  embracing  clouds  in  vain; 

And  never  wake  to  feel  the  day's  disdain. 

Samuel  Daniel  [i 562-1 61 9] 

SONNETS 

From  "  Idea  " 
TO  THE  READER  OF  THESE  SONNETS 

Into  these  Loves,  who  but  for  Passion  looks,,  jj 
At  this  first  sight,  here  let  him  lay  them  by. 
And  seek  elsewhere  in  turning  other  books, 
Which  better  may  his  labor  satisfy. 


.,     Sonnets  i  o^o 

No  far-fetched  sigh  shall  ever  wound  my  breast; 

Love  from  mine  eye  a  tear  shall  never  wring; 

Nor  in  "Ah  ma's!"  my  whining  sonnets  dressed! 

A  libertine,  fantasticly  I  sing! 

My  verse  is  the  true  image  of  my  mind, 

Ever  in  motion,  still  desiring  change; 

And  as  thus,  to  variety  inclined. 

So  in  all  humors  sportively  I  range! 

My  Muse  is  rightly  of  the  English  strain, 
That  cannot  long  one  fashion  entertain. 

IV 

Bright  Star  of  Beauty!  on  whose  eyelids  sit 

A  thousand  nymph-like  and  enamored  Graces, 

The  Goddesses  of  Memory  and  Wit, 

Which  there  in  order  take  their  several  places; 

In  whose  dear  bosom,  sweet  delicious  Love 

Lays  down  his  quiver,  which  he  once  did  bear, 

Since  he  that  blessed  paradise  did  prove; 

And  leaves  his  mother's  lap,  to  sport  him  there. 

Let  others  strive  to  entertain  with  words! 

My  soul  is  of  a  braver  mettle  made : 

I  hold  that  vile,  which  vulgar  wit  affords. 

In  me's  that  faith  which  Time  cannot  invade! 

Let  what  I  praise  be  still  made  good  by  j'ou! 

Be  you  most  worthy,  whilst  I  am  most  true! 

XX 

An  evil  Spirit  (your  Beauty)  haunts  me  still, 
Wlierewith,  alas,  I  have  been  long  possessed; 
Which  ceaseth  not  to  attempt  me  to  each  ill. 
Nor  give  me  once,  but  one  poor  minute's  rest. 
In  me  it  speaks,  whether  I  sleep  or  wake; 
And  when  by  means  to  drive  it  out  I  try. 
With  greater  torments  then  it  me  doth  take, 
And  tortures  me  in  most  extremity. 
Before  my  face,  it  lays  down  my  despairs, 
And  hastes  me  on  unto  a  sudden  death; 
Now  tempting  me,  to  drown  myself  in  tears, 
And  then  in  sighing  to  give  up  my  breath. 


1244  Poems  of  Love 

Thus  am  I  still  provoked  to  every  evil, 

By  this  good-wicked  Spirit,  sweet  Angel-Devil. 


.  Dear!  why  should  you  command  me  to  my  rest, 

When  now  the  night  doth  summon  aU  to  sleep? 

Methinks  this  time  becometh  lovers  best! 

Night  was  ordained  together  friends  to  keep. 

How  happy  are  all  other  living  things. 

Which,  through  the  day,  disjoined  by  several  flight, 

The  quiet  evening  yet  together  brings, 

And  each  returns  unto  his  Love  at  night! 

O  thou  that  art  so  courteous  else  to  all. 

Why  shouldst  thou,  Night,  abuse  me  only  thus! 

That  every  creature  to  his  kind  doth  call, 

And  yet  'tis  thou  dost  only  sever  us? 
Well  could  I  wish  it  would  be  ever  day, 
If,  when  night  comes,  you  bid  me  go  away! 

XL 

My  heart  the  Anvil  where  my  thoughts  do  beat; 
My  words  the  Hammers  fashioning  my  Desire; 
My  breast  the  Forge  including  all  the  heat. 
Love  is  the  Fuel  which  maintains  the  fire. 
My  sighs  the  Bellows  which  the  flame  increaseth, 
Filling  mine  ears  with  noise  and  nightly  groaning. 
Toiling  with  pain,  my  labor  never  ceaseth; 
In  grievous  Passions,  my  woes  still  bemoaning. 
My  eyes  with  tears  against  the  fire  striving. 
Whose  scorching  glede  my  heart  to  cinders  turneth: 
But  with  those  drops,  the  flame  again  reviving 
Still  more  and  more  it  to  my  torment  burneth. 
With  Sisyphus  thus  do  I  roll  the  stone. 
And  turn  the  wheel  with  damned  Ixion. 

XLII 

How  many  paltry,  foolish,  painted  things. 
That  now  in  coaches  trouble  every  street, 
Shall  be  forgotten,  whom  no  poet  sings, 
Ere  they  be  well  wrapped  in  their  winding-sheet? 


Sonnets 


1245 


Where  I  to  thee  eternity  shall  give, 

When  nothing  else  remaineth  of  these  days, 

And  queens  hereafter  shall  be  glad  to  live 

Upon  the  alms  of  thy  superfluous  praise; 

Virgins  and  matrons  reading  these  my  rhymes, 

Shall  be  so  much  delighted  with  thy  story, 

That  they  shall  grieve  they  lived  not  in  these  times, 

To  have  seen  thee,  their  sex's  only  glory: 

So  shalt  thou  fly  above  the  vulgar  throng, 

Still  to  survive  in  my  immortal  song. 

LXI 

Since  there's  no  help,  come,  let  us  kiss  and  part! 

Nay,  I  have  done.     You  get  no  more  of  me! 

And  I  am  glad,  yea,  glad  with  all  my  heart, 

That  thus  so  cleanly  I  myself  can  free. 

Shake  hands  for  ever!     Cancel  all  our  vows! 

And  when  we  meet  at  any  time  again. 

Be  it  not  seen  in  either  of  our  brows 

That  we  one  jot  of  former  love  retain. 

Now  at  the  last  gasp  of  Love's  latest  breath, 

When,  his  pulse  failing,  Passion  speechless  lies, 

When  Faith  is  kneeling  by  his  bed  of  death. 

And  Innocence  is  closing  up  his  eyes: 

Now,  if  thou  wouldst,  when  all  have  given  him  over, 
From  death  to  life  thou  might'st  him  j^et  recover! 
Michael  Drayioti  [1563-1631] 

SONNETS 

From  "  Diana  " 
IX 

My  Lady's  presence  makes  the  Roses  red, 
Because  to  see  her  lips  they  blush  for  shame. 
The  Lily's  leaves,  for  envy,  pale  became; 
And  her  white  hands  in  them  this  envy  bred. 
The  Marigold  the  leaves  abroad  doth  spread, 
Because  the  sun's  and  her  power  is  the  same. 
The  Violet  of  purple  color  came, 
Dyed  in  the  blood  she  made  my  heart  to  shed. 


1246  Poems  of  Love 

In  brief,  all  flowers  from  her  their  virtue  take;  T  -^    "U 
From  her  sweet  breath,  their  sweet  smells  do  proceed; 
The  living  heat  which  her  eyebeams  doth  make 
Warmeth  the  ground,  and  quickeneth  the  seed. 
The  rain,  wherewith  she  watereth  the  flowers. 
Falls  from  mine  eyes,  which  she  dissolves  in  showers. 

LXII 

To  live  in  hell,  and  heaven  to  behold; 

To  welcome  life,  and  die  a  living  death; 

To  sweat  with  heat,  and  yet  be  freezing  cold; 

To  grasp  at  stars,  and  lie  the  earth  beneath; 

To  tread  a  maze  that  never  shall  have  end; 

To  burn  in  sighs,  and  starve  in  daily  tears; 

To  climb  a  hill,  and  never  to  descend; 

Giants  to  kiU,  and  quake  at  childish  fears; 

To  pine  for  food,  and  watch  the  Hesperian  tree; 

To  thirst  for  drink,  and  nectar  stiU  to  draw; 

To  live  accurst,  whom  men  hold  blest  to  be; 

And  weep  those  wrongs  which  never  creature  saw; 
If  this  be  love,  if  love  in  these  be  founded. 
My  heart  is  love,  for  these  in  it  are  grounded. 

Henry  Constable  (?)  [1562-1613] 


SONNETS 

xvin 
Shall  I  compare  thee  to  a  Summer's  day? 
Thou  art  more  lovely  and  more  temperate: 
Rough  winds  do  shake  the  darling  buds  of  May, 
And  Summer's  lease  hath  all  too  short  a  date: 
Sometime  too  hot  the  eye  of  heaven  shines, 
And  often  is  his  gold  complexion  dimmed ; 
And  every  fair  from  fair  sometime  declines, 
By  chance  or  nature's  changing  course  untrimmed: 
But  thy  eternal  Summer  shall  not  fade 
Nor  lose  possession  of  that  fair  thou  owest; 
Nor  shall  Death  brag  thou  wanderest  in  his  shade, 
When  in  eternal  lines  to  time  thou  growesl: 


Sonnets  1 247 

So  long  as  men  can  breathe,  or  eyes  can  see, 
So  long  lives  this,  and  this  gives  life  to  thee. 


As  an  unperfect  actor  on  the  stage, 
Who  with  his  fear  is  put  besides  his  part, 
Or  some  fierce  thing  replete  with  too  much  rage, 
Whose  strength's  abundance  weakens  his  own  heart; 
So  I,  for  fear  of  trust,  forget  to  say 
The  perfect  ceremony  of  love's  rite, 
And  in  mine  own  love's  strength  seem  to  decay, 
O'ercharged  with  burden  of  mine  own  love's  might. 
O,  let  my  books  be  then  the  eloquence 
And  dumb  presagers  of  my  speaking  breast; 
Who  plead  for  love,  and  look  for  recompense, 
More  than  that  tongue  that  more  hath  more  expressed. 
O,  learn  to  read  what  silent  love  hath  writ: 
To  hear  with  eyes  belongs  to  love's  fine  wit. 


When,  in  disgrace  with  fortune  and  men's  eyes, 
I  all  alone  beweep  my  outcast  state, 
And  trouble  deaf  heaven  with  my  bootless  cries, 
And  look  upon  myself,  and  curse  my  fate. 
Wishing  me  like  to  one  more  rich  in  hope. 
Featured  like  him,  like  him  with  friends  possessed. 
Desiring  this  man's  art  and  that  man's  scope, 
With  what  I  most  enjoy  contented  least; 
Yet  in  these  thoughts  myself  almost  despising, 
Haply  I'think  on  thee:  and  then  my  state, 
Like  to  the  lark  at  break  of  day  arising 
From  sullen  earth,  sings  hymns  at  heaven's  gate: 
For  thy  sweet  love  remembered  such  wealth  brings 
That  then  I  scorn  to  change  my  state  with  kings. 

XXX 

WTien  to  the  sessions  of  sweet  silent  thought 

I  summon  up  remembrance  of  things  past, 

I  sigh  the  lack  of  many  a  thing  I  sought, 

And  with  old  woes  new  wail  my  dear  time's  waste: 


1248  Poems  of  Love 

Then  can  I  drown  an  eye,  unused  to  flow, 
For  precious  friends  hid  in  death's  dateless  night. 
And  weep  afresh  love's  long-since  cancelled  woe. 
And  moan  the  expense  of  many  a  vanished  sight: 
Then  can  I  grieve  at  grievances  foregone, 
And  heavily  from  woe  to  woe  tell  o'er 
The  sad  account  of  fore -bemoaned  moan. 
Which  I  new  pay  as  if  not  paid  before: 

But  if  the  while  I  think  on  thee,  dear  friend. 
All  losses  are  restored,  and  sorrows  end. 


If  thou  survive  my  well-contented  day 

When  that  churl  Death  my  bones  with  dust  shall  cover 

And  shalt  by  fortune  once  more  re-survey 

These  poor  rude  lines  of  thy  deceased  lover. 

Compare  them  with  the  bettering  of  the  time. 

And  though  they  be  outstripped  by  every  pen. 

Reserve  them  for  my  love,  not  for  their  rhyme. 

Exceeded  by  the  height  of  happier  men. 

O,  then  vouchsafe  me  but  this  loving  thought: 

"Had  my  friend's  Muse  grown  with  this  growing  age, 

A  dearer  birth  than  this  his  love  had  brought. 

To  march  in  ranks  of  better  equipage: 

But  since  he  died,  and  poets  better  prove, 
Theirs  for  their  style  I'll  read,  his  for  his  love." 


Full  many  a  glorious  morning  have  I  seen 

Flatter  the  mountain-tops  with  sovereign  eye,    - 

Kissing  with  golden  face  the  meadows  green. 

Gilding  pale  streams  with  heavenly  alchemy. 

Anon  permit  the  basest  clouds  to  ride 

With  ugly  rack  on  his  celestial  face. 

And  from  the  forlorn  world  his  visiige  hide. 

Stealing  unseen  to  west  with  this  disgrace: 

Even  so  my  sun  one  early  morn  did  shine  i'j^TJ 

With  all-triumphant  splendor  on  my  brow; 

But  out,  alack!  he  was  but  one  hour  mine, 

The  region  cloud  hath  masked  him  from  me  now. 


Sonnets 


1249 


Yet  him  for  this  my  love  no  whit  disdaineth ; 

Suns  of  the  world  may  stain  when  heaven's  sun  staineth. 

LX 

Like  as  the  waves  make  towards  the  pebbled  shore, 

So  do  our  minutes  hasten  to  their  end; 

Each  changing  place  with  that  which  goes  before, 

In  sequent  toil  all  forwards  do  contend. 

Nativity,  once  in  the  main  of  light, 

Crawls  to  maturity,  wherewith  being  crowned, 

Crooked  eclipses  'gainst  his  glory  fight, 

And  Time  that  gave,  doth  now^  his  gift  confound. 

Time  doth  transfix  the  flourish  set  on  j^outh. 

And  delves  the  parallels  in  beauty's  brow; 
,  Feeds  on  the  rarities  of  nature's  truth,  ■-; 

And  nothing  stands  but  for  his  scythe  to  mow: 
And  yet,  to  times  in  hope,  my  verse  shall  stand 
Praising  thy  worth,  despite  his  cruel  hand. 

LXXI 

No  longer  mourn  for  me  when  I  am  dead. 
Than  you  shall  hear  the  surly,  sullen  bell 
Give  warning  to  the  world  that  I  am  fled 
From  this  vile  world,  with  vilest  worms  to  dwell: 
Nay,  if  you  read  this  line,  remember  not 
The  hand  that  writ  it;  for  I  love  you  so, 
That  I  in  your  sweet  thoughts  would  be  forgot. 
If  thinking  on  me  then  should  make  you  woe. 
O,  if  (I  say)  you  look  upon  this  verse. 
When  I  perhaps  compounded  am  with  clay, 
Do  not  so  much  as  my  poor  name  rehearse. 
But  let  your  love  even  with  my  life  decay; 

Lest  the  wise  world  should  look  into  your  moan, 

And  mock  you  with  me  after  I  am  gone. 

Lxxin 
That  time  of  year  thou  may'st  in  me  behold 
When  yellow  leaves,  or  none,  or  few,  do  Imng 
Upon  those  boughs  which  shake  against  the  cold. 
Bare  ruined  choirs,  where  late  the  sweet  birds  sang. 


1250  Poems  of  Love 

In  me  thou  see'st  the  twiUght  of  such  day      '■'^'-'  tjY 

As  after  sunset  fadcth  in  the  west, 

Which  by  and  by  black  night  doth  take  away, 

Death's  second  self,  that  seals  up  all  in  rest. 

In  me  thou  see'st  the  glowing  of  such  fire 

That  on  the  ashes  of  his  youth  doth  lie. 

As  the  death-bed  whereon  it  must  expire. 

Consumed  with  that  which  it  was  nourished  by. 

This  thou  perceiv'st,  which  makes  thy  love  more  strong 
To  love  that  well  which  thou  must  leave  ere  long. 

CIV 

To  me,  fair  friend,  you  never  can  be  old; 
For  as  you  were  when  first  your  eye  I  eyed, 
Such  seems  your  beauty  still.     Three  Winters  cold 
Have  from  the  forests  shook  three  Summers'  pride; 
Three  beauteous  Springs  to  yellow  Autumn  turned 
In  process  of  the  seasons  have  I  seen, 
Three  April  perfumes  in  three  hot  Junes  burned, 
Since  first  I  saw  you  fresh,  which  yet  are  green. 
Ah!  yet  doth  beauty,  like  a  dial-hand, 
Steal  from  his  figure,  and  no  pace  perceived; 
So  your  sweet  hue,  which  methinks  still  doth  stand, 
Hath  motion,  and  mine  eye  may  be  deceived: 
For  fear  of  which,  hear  this,  thou  age  unbred: 
Ere  you  were  born  was  beauty's  Summer  dead. 

cvi 
When  in  the  chronicle  of  wasted  time 
I  see  descriptions  of  the  fairest  wights. 
And  beauty  making  beautiful  old  rhyme 
In  praise  of  ladies  dead,  and  lovely  knights; 
Then  in  the  blazon  of  sweet  beauty's  best  j^i 

Of  hand,  of  foot,  of  hp,  of  eye,  of  brow,  7 

I  see  their  antique  pen  would  have  expressed 
Even  such  a  beauty  as  you  master  now. 
So  all  their  praises  are  but  prophecies  ""'*  i&dT 

Of  this  our  time,  all,  you  prefiguring; 
And,  for  they  looked  but  with  divining  eyes, 
They  had  not  skill  enough  your  worth  to  sing: 


Sonnets  125 

For  we,  which  now  behold  these  present  days, 
Have  eyes  to  wonder,  but  lack  tongues  to  praise. 

cix 
O,  never  say  that  I  was  false  of  heart 
Though  absence  seemed  my  flame  to  qualify: 
As  easy  might  I  from  myself  depart 
As  from  my  soul,  which  in  thy  breast  doth  lie; 
That  is  my  home  of  love;  if  I  have  ranged, 
Like  him  that  travels,  I  return  again, 
Just  to  the  time,  not  with  the  time  exchanged, 
So  that  myself  bring  water  for  my  stain. 
Never  believe,  though  in  my  nature  reigned 
All  frailties  that  besiege  all  kinds  of  blood, 
That  it  could  so  preposterously  be  stained 
To  leave  for  nothing  all  thy  sum  of  good! 
For  nothing  this  wide  universe  I  call, 
Save  thou,  my  rose:  in  it  thou  art  my  all. 

cxvi 
Let  me  not  to  the  marriage  of  true  minds 
Admit  impediments.     Love  is  not  love 
Which  alters  when  it  alteration  finds, 
Or  bends  with  the  remover  to  remove: 
O,  no!  it  is  an  ever-fixed  mark 
That  looks  on  tempests,  and  is  never  shaken; 
It  is  the  star  to  every  wandering  bark. 
Whose  worth's  unknown,  although  his  height  be  taken. 
Love's  not  Time's  fool,  though  rosy  lips  and  cheeks 
Within  his  bending  sickle's  compass  come; 
Love  alters  not  with  his  brief  hours  and  weeks, 
But  bears  it  out  even  to  the  edge  of  doom: 

If  this  be  error,  and  upon  me  proved, 

I  never  writ,  nor  no  man  ever  loved. 

cxxx 
My  mistress'  eyes  arc  nothing  like  the  sun; 
Coral  is  far  more  red  than  her  lips'  red ; 
If  snow  be  white,  why  then  her  breasts  are  dun; 
If  hairs  be  wires,  black  wires  grow  on  her  head. 


1252  Poems  of  Love 

I  have  seen  roses  damasked,  red  and  white, 

But  no  such  roses  see  I  in  her  cheeks; 

And  in  some  perfumes  is  there  more  delight 

Than  in  the  breath  that  from  my  mistress  reeks. 

I  love  to  hear  her  speak, — yet  well  I  know 

That  music  hath  a  far  more  pleasing  sound; 

I  grant  I  never  saw  a  goddess  go, — 

My  mistress,  when  she  walks,  treads  on  the  ground: 
And  yet,  by  heaven,  I  think  my  love  as  rare 
As  any  she  belied  with  false  compare. 

CXLVI 

Poor  soul,  the  centre  of  my  sinful  earth, 
Pressed  by  these  rebel  powers  that  thee  array, 
Why  dost  thou  pine  within  and  suffer  dearth, 
Painting  thy  outward  walls  so  costly  gay? 
Why  so  large  cost,  having  so  short  a  lease. 
Dost  thou  upon  thy  fading  mansion  spend? 
Shall  worms,  inheritors  of  this  excess. 
Eat  up  thy  charge?     Is  this  thy  body's  end? 
Then,  soul,  Hve  thou  upon  thy  servant's  loss, 
And  let  that  pine  to  aggravate  thy  store; 
Buy  terms  divine  in  selling  hours  of  dross; 
Within  be  fed,  without  be  rich  no  more: 

So  shalt  thou  feed  on  Death,  that  feeds  on  men; 

And  Death  once  dead,  there's  no  more  dying  then. 
William  Shakespeare  [1564-1616} 


"ALEXIS,    HERE    SHE    STAYED" 

Alexis,  here  she  stayed;  among  these  pines, 

Sweet  hermitress,  she  did  alone  repair; 

Here  did  she  spread  the  treasure  of  her  hair. 

More  rich  than  that  brought  from  the  Colchian  mines. 

She  set  her  by  these  musked  eglantines, 

The  happy  place  the  print  seems  yet  to  bear; 

Her  voice  did  sweeten  here  thy  sugared  lines. 

To  which  winds,  trees,  beasts,  birds,  did  lend  their  ear. 


■:i 


A  Sonnet  of  the   Moon  1253 

Me  here  she  first  perceived,  and  here  a  morn 
Of  bright  carnations  did  o'erspread  her  face; 
Here  did  she  sigh,  here  iirst  my  hopes  were  born, 
And  I  first  got  a  pledge  of  promised  grace: 
But,  ah!  what  served  it  to  be  happy  so, 
Since  passed  pleasures  double  but  new  woe? 

William  Drummond  [1585-1649] 

^'WERE  I  AS  BASE  AS  IS  THE  LOWLY  PLAIN" 

Were  I  as  base  as  is  the  lowly  plain, 
x\nd  you,  my  love,  as  high  as  heaven  above, 
Yet  should  the  thoughts  of  me,  your  humble  swain, 
Ascend  to  heaven  in  honor  of  my  love. 
Were  I  as  high  as  heaven  above  the  plain, 
And  you,  my  love,  as  humble  and  as  low 
As  are  the  deepest  bottoms  of  the  main, 
Wheresoe'er  you  were,  with  you  my  love  should  go. 
Were  you  the  earth,  dear  love,  and  I  the  skies. 
My  love  should  shine  on  you,  like  to  the  sun. 
And  look  upon  you  with  ten  thousand  eyes. 
Till  heaven  waxed  blind  and  till  the  world  were  done. 
Wheresoe'er  I  am, — below,  or  else  above  you, — 
Wheresoe'er  you  are,  my  heart  shall  truly  love  you. 
Joshua  Sylvester  [1563-1618] 

A  SONNET  OF  THE   MOON 

Look  how  the  pale  Queen  of  the  silent  night 
Doth  cause  the  ocean  to  attend  upon  her, 
And  he,  as  long  as  she  is  in  his  sight, 
With  his  full  tide  is  ready  her  to  honor: 
But  when  the  silver  wagon  of  the  Moon 
Is  mounted  up  so  high  he  cannot  follow, 
The  sea  calls  home  his  crystal  waves  to  moan. 
And  with  low  ebb  doth  manifest  his  sorrow. 
So  you  that  are  the  sovereign  of  my  heart. 
Have  all  my  joys  attending  on  your  will. 
My  joys  low-ebbing  when  you  do  depart, 
When  you  return,  their  tide  my  heart  doth  fill. 


1^54  Poems  of  Love 

So  as  you  come,  and  as  you  do  depart, 
Joys  ebb  and  flow  within  my  tender  heart. 

Charles  Best  [fl.  1602] 


TO  MARY   UNWIN 

Mary!  I  want  a  lyre  with  other  strings. 

Such  aid  from  Heaven  as  some  have  feigned  they  drew, 

An  eloquence  scarce  given  to  mortals,  new 

And  undebased  by  praise  of  meaner  things; 

That,  ere  through  age  or  woe  I  shed  my  wings, 

I  may  record  thy  worth  with  honor  due. 

In  verse  as  musical  as  thou  art  true. 

And  that  immortalizes  whom  it  sings: 

But  thou  hast  little  need.     There  is  a  Book 

By  seraphs  writ  with  beams  of  heavenly  light,->"JX  t>"^^- 

On  which  the  eyes  of  God  not  rarely  look,       ''  -   '"'   '-  ' 

A  chronicle  of  actions  just  and  bright: 

There  aU  thy  deeds,  my  faithful  Mary,  shine; 

And,  since  thou  own'st  that  praise,  I  spare  thee  mine, 
William  Cow  per  [  1 7  3 1  - 1 800] 


"WHY  ART  THOU  SILENT" 

Why  art  thou  silent?     Is  thy  love  a  plant 
Of  such  weak  fibre  that  the  treacherous  air 
Of  absence  withers  what  was  once  so  fair? 
Is  there  no  debt  to  pay,  no  boon  to  grant?  ^ 

Yet  have  my  thoughts  for  thee  been  vigilant,         r 
Bound  to  thy  service  with  unceasing  care — 
The  mind's  least  generous  wish  a  mendicant 
For  naught  but  what  thy  happiness  could  spare. 
Speak! — though  this  soft  warm  heart,  once  free  to  hold 
A  thousand  tender  pleasures,  thine  and  mine, 
Be  left  more  desolate,  more  dreary  cold 
Than  a  forsaken  bird's-nest  filled  with  snow 
'Mid  its  own  bush  of  leafless  eglantine — 
Speak,  that  my  torturing  doubts  their  end  may  know! 
William  Wordsworth  [17  70-1 850] 


Sonnets  '^55 


SONNETS 

From  "  The  House  of  Life  " 
IV 
LOVE  SIGHT 

When  do  I  see  thee  most,  beloved  one? 

When  in  the  light  the  spirits  of  mine  eyes 

Before  thy  face,  their  altar,  solemnize 

The  worship  of  that  Love  through  thee  made  known? 

Or  when  in  the  dusk  hours,  (we  two  alone,) 

Close-kissed  and  eloquent  of  still  replies 

Thy  twilight-hidden  glimmering  visage  lies. 

And  my  soul  only  sees  thy  soul  its  own? 

O  love,  my  love!  if  I  no  more  should  see 

Thyself,  nor  on  the  earth  the  shadow  of  thee, 

Nor  image  of  thine  eyes  in  any  spring, — 

How  then  should  sound  upon  Life's  darkening  slope 

The  ground-whirl  of  the  perished  leaves  of  Hope, 

The  wind  of  Death's  imperishable  wing? 

v 
heart's  hope 

By  what  word's  power,  the  key  of  paths  untrod, 

Shall  I  the  difficult  deeps  of  Love  explore, 

Till  parted  waves  of  Song  yield  up  the  shore 

Even  as  that  sea  which  Israel  crossed  dryshod? 

For  lo!  in  some  poor  rhythmic  period, 

Lady,  I  fain  would  tell  how  evermore 

Thy  soul  I  know  not  from  thy  body,  nor 

Thee  from  myself,  neither  our  love  from  God. 

Yea,  in  God's  name,  and  Love's,  and  thine,  would  I 

Draw  from  one  loving  heart  such  evidence 

As  to  all  hearts  all  things  shall  signify; 

Tender  as  dawn's  first  lidl-fire,  and  intense 

As  instantaneous  penetrating  sense, 

In  Spring's  birth-hour,  of  other  Springs  gone  by. 


1256  Poems  of  Love 

XV 
THE   BIRTH-BOND 

Have  you  not  noted,  in  some  family 

Where  two  were  born  of  a  first  marriage-bed, 

How  still  they  own  their  gracious  bond,  though  fed 

And  nursed  on  the  forgotten  breast  and  knee? — 

How  to  their  father's  children  they  shall  be 

In  act  and  thought  of  one  goodwill;  but  each 

Shall  for  the  other  have,  in  silence  speech, 

And  in  a  word  complete  community? 

Even  so,  when  first  I  saw  you,  seemed  it,  love, 

That  among  souls  allied  to  mine  was  yet 

One  nearer  kindred  than  life  hinted  of. 

O  born  with  me  somewhere  that  men  forget. 

And  though  in  years  of  sight  and  sound  unmet, 

Known  for  my  soul's  birth-partner  well  enough! 

XIX 

SILENT   NOON 

Your  hands  he  open  in  the  long  fresh  grass, — 

The  finger-points  look  through  like  rosy  blooms: 

Your  eyes  smile  peace.     The  pasture  gleams  and  glooms 

'Neath  billowing  skies  that  scatter  and  amass. 

All  round  our  nest,  far  as  the  eye  can  pass. 

Are  golden  kingcup-fields  with  silver  edge 

Where  the  cow-parsley  skirts  the  hawthorn-hedge. 

'Tis  visible  silence,  still  as  the  hour-glass. 

Deep  in  the  sun-searched  growths  the  dragon-fly 

Hangs  like  a  blue  thread  loosened  from  the  sky: — 

So  this  winged  hour  is  dropped  to  us  from  above. 

Oh!  clasp  we  to  our  hearts,  for  deathless  dower. 

This  close-companioned  inarticulate  hour 

When  twofold  silence  was  the  song  of  love. 

XXVI 
MID-RAPTURE 

Thou  lovely  and  beloved,  thou  my  love; 

Whose  kiss  seems  still  the  first ;  whose  summoning  eyes, 

Even  now,  as  for  our  love-world's  new  sunrise, 

Shed  very  dawn;  whose  voice,  attuned  above  'in™l8  al 


Sonnets  i-57 

All  modulation  of  the  deep-bowered  dove, 
Is  like  a  hand  laid  softly  on  the  soul; 
Whose  hand  is  like  a  sweet  voice  to  control 
Those  worn  tired  brows  it  hath  the  keeping  of: — 
What  word  can  answer  to  thy  word,— what  gaze 
To  thine,  which  now  absorbs  within  its  sphere 
M}'  worshipping  face,  till  I  am  mirrored  there 
Light-circled  in  a  heaven  of  deep-drawn  rays? 

What  clasp,  what  kiss  mine  inmost  heart  can  prove, 

0  lovely  and  beloved,  O  my  love? 

XXXI 
HER    GIFTS 

High  grace,  the  dower  of  queens;  and  therewithal 
Some  wood-born  wonder's  sweet  simplicity; 
A  glance  like  water  brimming  with  the  sky 
Or  hyacinth-light  where  forest-shadows  fall; 
Such  thrilling  pallor  of  cheek  as  doth  enthrall 
The  heart;  a  mouth  whose  passionate  forms  imply 
All  music  and  all  silence  held  thereby; 
Deep  golden  locks,  her  sovereign  coronal;  aT 

A  round  reared  neck,  meet  column  of  Love's  shrine 
To  cling  to  when  the  heart  takes  sanctuary; 
Hands  which  for  ever  at  Love's  bidding  be. 
And  soft-stirred  feet  still  answering  to  his  sign: — 

These  are  her  gifts,  as  tongue  may  tell  them  o'er. 

Breathe  low  her  name,  my  soul;  for  that  means  more. 

xxxiv 

-.THE   DARK   GLASS 

Not  I  myself  know  all  my  love  for  thee: 
How  should  I  reach  so  far.  who  cannot  weigh 
To-morrow's  dower  by  gage  of  jx'sterday? 
Shall  birth  and  death,  and  all  dark  names  that  be 
As  doors  and  windows  bared  to  some  loud  sea. 
Lash  deaf  mine  ears  and  blind  my  face  with  spray; 
And  shall  my  sense  pierce  love, — the  last  relay 
And  ultimate  outpost  of  eternity  ? 


1258  Poems  of  Love 

Lo!  what  am  I  to  Love,  the  lord  of  all? 

One  murmuring  shell  he  gathers  from  the  sand, — 

One  little  heart-flame  sheltered  in  his  hand. 

Yet  through  thine  eyes  he  grants  me  clearest  call 

And  veriest  touch  of  powers  primordial 

That  any  hour-girt  life  may  understand. 

XLIX 
WILLOWWOOD 

I  SAT  with  Love  upon  a  woodsidc  well, 

Leaning  across  the  water,  I  and  he; 

Nor  ever  did  he  speak  nor  looked  at  me, 

But  touched  his  lute  wherein  was  audible 

The  certain  secret  thing  he  had  to  tell: 

Only  our  mirrored  eyes  met  silently 

Li  the  low  wave;  and  that  sound  came  to  be 

The  passionate  voice  I  knew;  and  my  tears  fell. 

And  at  their  fall,  his  eyes  beneath  grew  hers; 

And  with  his  foot  and  with  his  wing-feathers 

He  swept  the  spring  that  watered  my  heart's  drouth, 

Then  the  dark  ripples  spread  to  waving  hair. 

And  as  I  stooped,  her  own  lips  rising  there 

Bubbled  with  brimming  kisses  at  my  mouth. 


LXXVIII 

body's  beauty 


Or  Adam's  first  wife,  Lilith,  it  is  told 

(The  witch  he  loved  before  the  gift  of  Eve,) 

That,  ere  the  snake's,  her  sweet  tongue  could  deceive, 

And  her  enchanted  hair  was  the'lirst  gold. 

And  still  she  sits,  young  while  the  earth  is  old, 

And,  subtly  of  herself  contemplative. 

Draws  men  to  watch  the  bright  web  she  can  weave, 

Till  heart  and  body  and  life  are  in  its  hold. 

The  rose  and  poppy  are  her  flowers :  for  where 

Is  he  not  found,  O  Lihth!  whom  shed  scent 

And  soft-shed  kisses  and  soft  sleep  shaU  snare? 

Lo!  as  that  youth's  eyes  burned  at  thine,  so  went 


Sonnets  1259 


Thy  spell  through  him,  and  left  his  straight  neck  bent, 
And  round  his  heart  one  strangling  golden  hair. 

Danlc  Gabriel  Rossdti  [1828-18^2] 


SONNETS 

MEETING 

They  made  the  chamber  sweet  with  flowers  and  leaves, 

And  the  bed  sweet  with  flowers  on  which  I  lay; 

While  my  soul,  love-bound,  loitered  on  its  way. 

I  did  not  hear  the  birds  about  the  eaves. 

Nor  hear  the  reapers  talk  among  the  sheaves: 

Only  my  soul  kept  watch  from  day  to  day. 

My  thirsty  soul  kept  watch  for  one  away: — 

Perhaps  he  loves,  I  thought,  remembers,  grieves. 

At  length  there  came  the  step  upon  the  stair. 

Upon  the  lock  the  old  familiar  hand: 

Then  first  my  spirit  seemed  to  scent  the  air 

Of  Paradise;  then  first  the  tardy  sand 

Of  time  ran  golden;  and  I  felt  my  hair 

Put  on  a  glory,  and  my  soul  expand. 

THE    FIRST    DAY 

I  WISH  I  could  remember  the  first  day, 

First  hour,  first  moment  of  your  meeting  me, 

If  bright  or  dim  the  season,  it  might  be 

Summer  or  Winter  for  aught  I  can  say; 

So  unrecorded  did  it  slip  away, 

So  blind  was  I  to  see  and  to  foresee. 

So  dull  to  mark  the  budding  of  my  tree 

That  would  not  blossom  yet  for  many  a  May. 

If  only  I  could  recollect  it,  such 

A  day  of  days!     I  let  it  come  and  go 

As  traceless  as  a  thaw  of  bygone  snow; 

It  seemed  to  mean  so  little,  meant  so  much; 

If  only  now  I  could  recall  that  touch, 

First  touch  of  hand  in  hand — Did  one  but  know! 


i26o  Poems   of  Love 

REMEMBER 

Remember  me  when  I  am  gone  away, 
Gone  far  away  into  the  silent  land; 
When  you  can  no  more  hold  me  by  the  hand, 
Nor  I  half  turn  to  go,  yet  turning  stay. 
Remember  me  when  no  more,  day  by  day, 
You  tell  me  of  our  future  that  you  planned: 
Only  remember  me;  you  understand 
It  will  be  late  to  counsel  then  or  pray. 
Yet  if  you  should  forget  me  for  a  while 
And  afterwards  remember,  do  not  grieve: 
For  if  the  darkness  and  corruption  leave 
A  vestige  of  the  thoughts  that  once  I  had, 
Better  by  far  you  should  forget  and  smile 
Than  that  you  should  remember  and  be  sad. 

REST 

O  EARTH,  lie  heavily  upon  her  eyes;  .-/i  -  - 

Seal  her  sweet  eyes  weary  of  watching.  Earth;  '  , 
Lie  close  around  her;  leave  no  room  for  mirth 
With  its  harsh  laughter,  nor  for  sound  of  sighs. 
She  hath  no  questions,  she  hath  no  replies. 
Hushed  in  and  curtained  with  a  blessed  dearth 
Of  all  that  irked  her  from  the  hour  of  birth; 
With  stillness  that  is  almost  Paradise. 
Darkness  more  clear  than  noonday  holdeth  her, 
Silence  more  musical  than  any  song; 
Even  her  very  heart  has  ceased  to  stir:  , 

Until  the  morning  of  Eternity  ^  . 

Her  rest  shall  not  begin  nor  end,  but  be; 
And  when  she  wakes  she  will  not  think  it  long. 

Christina  Georgina  Rossetti  [183  0-1894] 


HOW  MY  SONGS  OF  HER  BEGAN 

God  made  my  lady  lovely  to  behold ; — 
Above  the  painter's  dream  he  set  her  face. 
And  wrought  her  body  in  divinest  grace; 
He  touched  the  brown  hair  with  a  sense  of  gold, 


I'o   One   Who    Makes   Confession      126 1 

And  in  the  perfect  form  He  did  enfold 
What  was  alone  as  perfect,  the  sweet  heart; 
Knowledge  most  rare  to  her  He  did  impart, 
And  filled  with  love  and  worship  all  her  days. 
And  then  God  thought  Him  how  it  would  be  well 
To  give  her  music,  and  to  Love  He  said, 
"Bring  thou  some  minstrel  now  that  he  may  tell 
How  fair  and  sweet  a  thing  My  hands  have  made." 
Then  at  Love's  call  I  came,  bowed  down  my  head, 
And  at  His  will  my  lyre  grew  audible. 

Philip  Bourkc  Marston  [1850-1887] 

AT  THE  LAST 

Because  the  shadows  deepened  verily, — 

Because  the  end  of  all  seemed  near,  forsooth, —  1 

Her  gracious  spirit,  ever  quick  to  ruth, 

Had  pity  on  her  bond-slave,  even  on  me. 

She  came  in  with  the  twilight  noiselessly, 

Fair  as  a  rose,  immaculate  as  Truth; 

She  leaned  above  my  wrecked  and  wasted  youth; 

I  felt  her  presence,  which  I  could  not  see. 

"God  keep  you,  my  poor  friend,"  I  heard  her  say; 

And  then  she  kissed  my  dry,  hot  lips  and  eyes. 

Kiss  thoti  the  next  kiss,  quiet  Death,  I  pray; 

Be  instant  on  this  hour,  and  so  surprise 

My  spirit  while  the  vision  seems  to  stay; 

Take  thou  the  heart  with  the  heart's  Paradise. 

Philip  Bourkc  Marston  [i  850-1 887] 

TO  ONE  WHO  WOULD  MAKE  A  CONFESSION 

Oh!  leave  the  past  to  bury  its  own  dead. 

The  past  is  naught  to  us,  the  present  all. 

What  need  of  last  year's  leaves  to  strew  Love's  bed? 

What  need  of  ghosts  to  grace  a  festival? 

I  would  not,  if  I  could,  those  days  recall, 

Those  days  not  ours.    For  us  the  feast  is  spread, 

The  lamps  are  lit,  and  music  plays  withal. 

Then  let  us  love  and  leave  the  rest  unsaid. 


1262  Poems  of  Love 

This  island  is  our  home.     Around  it  roar 
Great  gulfs  and  oceans,  channels,  straits  and  seas. 
What  matter  in  what  wreck  we  reached  the  shore, 
So  we  both  reached  it?    We  can  mock  at  these. 
Oh!  leave  the  past,  if  past  indeed  there  be; 
I  would  not  know  it ;  I  would  know  but  thee. 
Wilfrid  Scawen  Blunt  [184C)- 
,  iij;l  v/oH 

THE  PLEASURES  OF  LOVE 

I  DO  not  care  for  kisses.    'Tis  a  debt 
We  paid  for  the  first  privilege  of  love. 
These  are  the  rains  of  April  which  have  wet 
Our  fallow  hearts  and  forced  their  germs  to  move. 
Now  the  green  corn  has  sprouted.    Each  new  day 
Brings  better  pleasures,  a  more  dear  surprise. 
The  blade,  the  ear,  the  harvest — and  our  way 
Leads  through  a  region  wealthy  grown  and  wise. 
We  now  compare  our  fortunes.    Each  his  store 
Displays  to  kindred  eyes  of  garnered  grain, 
Two  happy  farmers,  learned  in  love's  lore, 
Who  weigh  and  touch  and  argue  and  complain — ■ 
Dear  endless  argument!    Yet  sometimes  we  ' / 
Even  as  we  argue  kiss.    There!  Let  it  be.      '  -^ 
Wilfrid  Scawen  Blunl  [1840- 


"WERE  BUT  MY  SPIRIT  LOOSED  UPON  THE  AIR'' 

Were  but  my  spirit  loosed  upon  the  air, — 

By  some  High  Power  who  could  Life's  chains  unbind, 

Set  free  to  seek  what  most  it  longs  to  find, — 

To  no  proud  Court  of  Kings  would  I  repair:    ^  i 

I  would  but  climb,  once  more,  a  narrow  stair,,-)'// 

When  day  was  wearing  late,  and  dusk  was  kind;' 

And  one  should  greet  me  to  my  failings  blind, 

Content  so  I  but  shared  his  twilight  there. 

Nay!  well  I  know  he  waits  not  as  of  old, — 

I  could  not  find  him  in  the  old-time  place, — 


"My   Love  tor  Thee"  i'263 

I  must  pursue  him,  made  by  sorrow  bold, 
Through  worlds  unknown,  in  strange  celestial  race, 
Whose  mystic  round  no  traveller  has  told. 
From  star  to  star,  until  I  see  his  face. 

Louise  Chandler  Moidton  [1835-1908] 

RENOUNCEMENT 

I  MUST  not  think  of  thee;  and,  tired  yet  strong, 

I  shun  the  thought  that  lurks  in  all  delight — 

The  thought  of  thee — and  in  the  blue  heaven's  height, 

And  in  the  dearest  passage  of  a  song. 

Oh,  just  beyond  the  fairest  thoughts  that  throng 

This  breast,  the  thought  of  thee  waits,  hidden  yet  bright; 

But  it  must  never,  never  come  in  sight; 

I  must  stop  short  of  thee  the  whole  day  long. 

But  when  sleep  comes  to  close  each  difficult  day, 

When  night  gives  pause  to  the  long  watch  I  keep, 

And  all  my  bonds  I  needs  must  loose  apart. 

Must  doff  my  will  as  raiment  laid  away, — 

With  the  first  dream  that  comes  with  the  first  sleep 

I  run,  I  run,  I  am  gathered  to  thy  heart. 

Alice  Meynelh[iSS3~  - 
"in'.rft  'jn.r'.  ][  gA 

"MY  LOVE   FOR  THEE" 

My  love  for  thee  doth  march  like  armed  men, 

Against  a  queenly  city  they  would  take. 

Along  the  army's  front  its  banners  shake;  ,  ,,       ,     , 

Across  the  mountam  and  the  sun-smit  plain 

It  steadfast  sweeps  as  sweeps  the  steadfast  rain; 

And  now  the  trumpet  makes  the  sliU  air  quake. 

And  now  the  thundering  cannon  doth  awake 

Echo  on  echo,  echoing  loud  again. 

But,  lo!  the  conquest  higher  than  bard  e'er  sung: 

Instead  of  answering  cannon,  proud  surrender! 

Joyful  the  iron  gates  are  open  flung 

And,  for  the  conqueror,  welcome  gay  and  tender! 
O,  bright  the  invader's  path  with  tribute  flowers, 
While  comrade  flags  flame  forth  on  wall  and  towers! 
Richard  Walson  Gilder  [1844-1909] 


1264  Poems  of  Love 

SONNETS 

AFTER   THE   ITALMN 

I  KNOW  not  if  I  love  her  overmuch; 

But  this  I  know,  that  when  unto  her  face 

She  Hfts  her  hand,  which  rests  there,  still,  a  space, 

Then  slowly  falls — 'tis  I  who  feel  that  touch. 

And  when  she  sudden  shakes  her  head,  with  such 

A  look,  I  soon  her  secret  meaning  trace.  '  ''^ 

So  when  she  runs  I  think  'tis  I  who  race. 

Like  a  poor  cripple  who  has  lost  his  crutch 

I  am  if  she  is  gone;  and  when  she  goes, 

I  know  not  why,  for  that  is  a  strange  art — 

As  if  myself  should  from  myself  depart. 

I  know  not  if  I  love  her  more  than  those 

Who  long  her  light  have  known ;  but  for  the  rose 

She  covers  in  her  hair,  I'd  give  my  heart. 

I  like  her  gentle  hand  that  sometimes  strays. 

To  find  the  place,  through  the  same  book  with  mine; 

I  hke  her  feet;  and  O,  those  eyes  divine! 

And  when  we  say  farewell,  perhaps  she  stays 

Love-lingering — then  hurries  on  her  ways. 

As  if  she  thought,  "To  end  my  pain  and  thine." 

I  like  her  voice  better  than  new-made  wine; 

I  hke  the  mandohn  whereon  she  plays. 

And  I  hke,  too,  the  cloak  I  saw  her  wear, 

And  the  red  scarf  that  her  white  neck  doth  cover. 

And  well  I  like  the  door  that  she  comes  through; 

I  Hke  the  ribbon  that  doth  bind  her  hair — 

But  then,  in  truth,  I  am  that  lady's  lover, 

And  every  new  day  there  is  something  new. 

Richard  Watson  Gilder  [1844-1909] 

STANZAS 

From  "Modern  Love"  fjj 

I  ;oi. 

By  this  he  knew  she  wept  with  waking  eyes: 
That,  at  his  hand's  light  quiver  by  her  head, 
The  strange  low  sobs  that  shook  their  common  bed 
'    Were  called  into  her  with  a  sharp  surprise, 


'^iv  Stanzas  1265 

And  strangled  mute,  like  little  gaping  snakes,     >J;Tj  IIA 
Dreadfully  venomous  to  him.     She  lay  :•-: 

Stone-still,  and  the  long  darkness  flowed  away 
With  muifled  pulses.     Then  as  midnight  makes 
Her  giant  heart  of  Memory  and  Tears 
Drink  the  pale  drug  of  silence,  and  so  beat 
Sleep's  heavy  measure,  they  from  head  to  feet 
Were  moveless,  looking  through  their  dead  black  years. 
By  vain  regret  scrawled  over  the  blank  wall. 
Like  sculptured  efiigies  they  might  be  seen 
Upon  their  marriage-tomb,  the  sword  between; 
Each  wishing  for  the  sword  that  severs  all. 


It  ended,  and  the  morrow  brought  the  task. 

Her  eyes  were  guilty  gates,  that  let  him  in 

By  shutting  all  too  zealous  for  their  sin: 

Each  sucked  a  secret,  and  each  wore  a  mask. 

But,  oh,  the  bitter  taste  her  beauty  had! 

He  sickened  as  at  breath  of  poison-flowers: 

A  languid  humor  stole  among  the  hours. 

And  if  their  smiles  encountered,  he  went  mad. 

And  raged  deep  inward,  tiU  the  light  was  brown 

Before  his  vision,  and  the  world  forgot. 

Looked  wicked  as  some  old  dull  murder-spot. 

A  star  with  lurid  beams,  she  seemed  to  crown 

The  pit  of  infamy:  and  then  again 

He  fainted  on  his  vengefulness,  and  strove 

To  ape  the  magnanimity  of  love. 

And  smote  himself,  a  shuddering  heap  of  pain.  '  fJ 

III 

This  was  the  woman;  what  now  of  the  man? 

But  pass  him.     If  he  comes  beneath  a  heel, 

He  shall  be  crushed  until  he  cannot  feel, 

Or,  being  callous,  haply  till  he  can.  11 

But  he  is  nothing: — nothing?     Only  mark 

The  rich  light  striking  out  from  her  on  him! 

Ha!  what  a  sense  it  is  when  her  eyes  swim 

Across  the  man  she  singles,  leaving  dark 


1266  Poems  of  Love 

All  else!    Lord  God,  who  mad 'st  the  thing  so  fair, 

See  that  I  am  drawn  to  her,  even  now! 

It  cannot  be  such  harm  on  her  cool  brow 

To  plant  a  kiss?     Yet  if  I  meet  him  there! 

But  she  is  mine!     Ah,  no!  I  know  too  well 

I  claim  a  star  whose  light  is  overcast: 

I  claim  a  phantom-woman  in  the  Past.  ^ jl-'. 

The  hour  has  struck,  though  I  heard  not  the  bell! 

XIV 

What  soul  would  bargain  for  a  cure  that  brings 

Contempt  the  nobler  agony  to  kill? 

Rather  let  me  bear  on  the  bitter  ill, 

And  strike  this  rusty  bosom  with  new  stings! 

It  seems  there  is  another  veering  fit, 

Since  on  a  gold-haired  lady's  eyeballs  pure, 

I  looked  with  little  prospect  of  a  cure, 

The  while  her  mouth's  red  bow  loosed  shafts  of  wit.'u.i 

Just  heaven !  can  it  be  true  that  jealousy  ' :  -  T 

Has  decked  the  woman  thus?  and  does  her  head 

Swim  somewhat  for  possessions  forfeited? 

Madam,  you  teach  me  many  things  that  be. 

I  open  an  old  book,  and  there  I  find. 

That  "Women  still  may  love  whom  they  deceive.".. ... 

Such  love  I  prize  not,  madam:  by  your  leave,  /  bsjIooJ 

The  game  you  play  at  is  not  to  my  mind. 

XVI 

In  our  old  shipwrecked  days  there  was  an  hour 

When  in  the  firelight  steadily  aglow. 

Joined  slackly,  we  beheld  the  red  chasm  grow 

Among  the  clicking  coals.     Our  library-bower 

That  eve  was  left  to  us:  and  hushed  we  sat 

As  lovers  to  whom  Time  is  whispering. 

From  sudden-opened  doors  we  heard  them  sing: 

The  nodding  elders  mixed  good  wine  with  chat.:.-j  .lO 

Well  knew  we  that  Life's  greatest  treasure  lay  -  ^r^  *uf^ 

With  us,  and  of  it  was  our  talk.     "Ah,  yes! 

Love  dies!"  I  said:  I  never  thought  it  less. 

She  yearned  to  me  that  sentence  to  unsay. 


Stanzas  1267 

Then  when  the  fire  domed  blackening,  I  found 
Her  cheek  was  salt  against  my  kiss,  and  swift      .  -  ,-• 
Up  the  sharp  scale  of  sobs  her  breast  did  hft:^ 
Now  am  I  haunted  by  that  taste!  that  sound! 


XXVI 

Love  ere  he  bleeds,  an  eagle  in  high  skies, 
Has  earth  beneath  his  wings:  from  reddened  eve 
He  views  the  rosy  dawn.     In  vain  they  weave    . 
The  fatal  web  below  while  far  he  flies. 
But  when  the  arrow  strikes  him,  there's  a  change, 
He  moves  but  in  the  track  of  his  spent  pain, 
Whose  red  drops  are  the  hnks  of  a  harsh  chain, 
Binding  him  to  the  ground,  with  narrow  range. 
A  subtle  serpent  then  has  Love  become. 
I  had  the  eagle  in  my  bosom  erst : 
Henceforward  with  the  serpent  I  am  cursed. 
I  can  interpret  where  the  mouth  is  dumb. 
Speak,  and  I  see  the  side-He  of  a  truth. 
Perchance  my  heart  may  pardon  you  this  deed: 
But  be  no  coward: — you  that  made  Love  bleed, 
You  must  bear  all  the  venom  of  his  tooth! 


XLI 

How  many  a  thing  which  we  cast  to  the  ground, 

When  others  pick  it  up  becomes  a  gem! 

We  grasp  at  all  the  wealth  it  is  to  them; 

And  by  reflected  light  its  worth  is  found. 

Yet  for  us  still  'tis  nothing!  and  that  zeal 

Of  false  appreciation  quickly  fades. 

This  truth  is  little  known  to  human  shades, 

How  rare  from  their  own  instinct  'tis  to  feel! 

They  waste  the  soul  with  spurious  desire, 

That  is  not  the  ripe  flame  upon  the  bough. 

We  two  have  taken  uj)  a  lifeless  vow 

To  rob  a  hving  passion:  dust  for  fire! 

Madam  is  grave,  and  eyes  the  clock  that  tells 

Approaching  midnight.     We  have  struck  despair 

Into  two  hearts.     O,  look  we  Hke  a  pair  -'^ 

Who  for  fresh  nuptials  joyfully  yield  all  else?        '^ 


^68  Poems  of  Love 

XLIII         ,r"      .'; 

Mark  where  the  pressing  wind  shoots  javehn-Hke, 

Its  skeleton  shadow  on  the  broad-backed  wave! 

Here  is  a  fitting  spot  to  dig  Love's  grave; 

Here  where  the  ponderous  breakers  plunge  and  strike, 

And  dart  their  hissing  tongues  high  up  the  sand: 

In  hearing  of  the  ocean,  and  in  sight 

Of  those  ribbed  wind-streaks  running  into  white. 

If  I  the  death  of  Love  had  deeply  planned, 

I  never  could  have  made  it  half  so  sure, 

As  by  the  unblest  kisses  which  upbraid 

The  full-waked  sense;  or  failing  that,  degrade! 

'Tis  morning:  but  no  morning  can  restore 

What  we  have  forfeited.    I  see  no  sin: 

The  wrong  is  mixed.    In  tragic  life,  God  wot, 

No  villain  need  be!    Passions  spin  the  plot: 

We  are  betrayed  by  what  is  false  within. 

XLIX 

He  found  her  by  the  ocean's  moaning  verge, 

Nor  any  wicked  change  in  her  discerned; 

And  she  beheved  his  old  love  had  returned, 

Which  was  her  exultation,  and  her  scourge. 

She  took  his  hand,  and  walked  with  him,  and  seemed 

The  wife  he  sought,  though  shadow-like  and  dry. 

She  had  one  terror,  lest  her  heart  should  sigh, 

And  tell  her  loudly  she  no  longer  dreamed. 

She  dared  not  say,  "This  is  my  breast:  look  in." 

But  there's  a  strength  to  help  the  desperate  weak. 

That  night  he  learned  how  silence  best  can  speak 

The  awful  things  when  Pity  pleads  for  Sin. 

About  the  middle  of  the  night  her  call 

Was  heard,  and  he  came  wondering  to  the  bed. 

"Now  kiss  me,  dear!  it  may  be,  now!"  she  said. 

Lethe  had  passed  those  lips,  and  he  knew  all. 


Thus  piteously  Love  closed  what  he  begat: 
The  union  of  this  ever-diverse  pair! 


"Oh!   Death   Will   Find   Mc"      1269 

These  two  were  rapid  falcons  in  a  snare,    tc'/  hni\ 
Condemned  to  do  the  flitting  of  the  bat. 
Lovers  beneath  the  singing  sky  of  May, 
They  wandered  once;  clear  as  the  dew  on  flowers: 
But  they  fed  not  on  the  advancing  hours: 
Their  hearts  held  cravings  for  the  buried  day. 
Then  each  applied  to  each  that  fatal  knife, 
Deep  questioning,  which  probes  to  endless  dole. 
Ah,  what  a  dusty  answer  gets  the  soul 
When  hot  for  certainties  in  this  our  life!— 
In  tragic  hints  here  see  what  evermore 
Moves  dark  as  yonder  midnight  ocean's  force. 
Thumping  like  ramping  hosts  of  warrior  horse. 
To  throw  that  faint  thin  line  upon  the  shore! 

George  Meredith  [i 828-1 909] 

LOVE  IN  THE  WINDS 

When  I  am  standing  on  a  mountain  crest, 
Or  hold  the  tiller  in  the  dashing  spray. 
My  love  of  you  leaps  foaming  in  my  breast, 
Shouts  with  the  winds  and  sweeps  to  their  foray; 
My  heart  bounds  v.ith  the  horses  of  the  sea. 
And  plunges  in  the  wild  ride  of  the  night. 
Flaunts  in  the  teeth  of  tempest  the  large  glee 
That  rides  out  Fate  and  welcomes  gods  to  fight.     • 
Ho,  love,  I  laugh  aloud  for  love  of  you, 
Glad  that  our  love  is  fellow  to  rough  weather, — 
No  fretful  orchid  hothoused  from  the  dew. 
But  hale  and  hardy  as  the  highland  heather. 
Rejoicing  in  the  wind  that  stings  and  thrills. 
Comrade  of  ocean,  playmate  of  the  hills. 

Richard  Hovey  [1864- 1900] 

"OH!  DEATH  WILL  FIND  ME" 

Oh!  Death  will  find  me,  long  before  I  tire 

Of  watching  you;  and  swing  me  suddenly 

Into  the  shade  and  loneliness  and  mire  ' 

Of  the  last  land!    There,  waiting  patiently, 

One  day,  I  think,  I'll  feel  a  cool  wind  blowing, 

See  a  slow  light  across  the  Stygian  tide, 

And  hear  the  Dead  about  me  stir,  unknowing. 

And  tremble.    And  I  shall  know  that  you  have  died. 


1270  Poems  of  Love 

And  watch  you,  a  broad-browed  and  smiling  dream, 
Pass,  light  as  ever,  through  the  lightless  host, 
Quietly  ponder,  start,  and  sway,  and  gleam — 
Most  individual  and  bewildering  ghost! — 
And  turn,  and  toss  your  brown  delightful  head 
Amusedly,  among  the  ancient  Dead. 

Rupert  Brooke  [1887-1915] 

THE  BUSY  HEART 

Now  that  we've  done  our  best  and  worst,  and  parted, 

I  would  fill  my  mind  with  thoughts  that  will  not  rend. 

(O  heart,  I  do  not  dare  go  empty-hearted) 

I'll  think  of  Love  in  books,  Love  without  end; 

Women  with  child,  content;  and  old  men  sleeping; 

And  wet  strong  ploughlands,  scarred  for  certain  grain; 

And  babes  that  weep,  and  so  forget  their  weeping; 

And  the  young  heavens,  forgetful  after  rain; 

And  evening  hush,  broken  by  homing  wings; 

And  Song's  nobility  and  Wisdom  holy, 

That  live,  we  dead.     I  would  think  of  a  thousand  things, 

Lovely  and  durable,  and  taste  them  slowly, 

One  after  one,  like  tasting  a  sweet  food. 

I  have  need  to  busy  my  heart  with  quietude. 

Rupert  Brooke  [1887-1915] 

THE  HILL 

Breathless,  we  flung  us  on  the  windy  hill, 

Laughed  in  the  sun,  and  kissed  the  lovely  grass. 

You  said,  "Through  glory  and  ecstasy  we  pass; 

Wind,  sun,  and  earth  remain,  the  birds  sing  still, 

When  we  are  old,  are  old.  ..."    "And  when  we  die 

All's  over  that  is  ours;  and  life  burns  on 

Through  other  lovers,  other  lips,"  said  I, 

— "Heart  of  my  heart,  our  heaven  is  now,  is  won!"  .,  ^ 

"We  are  Earth's  best,  that  learnt  her  lesson  here. ,   ^.. 

Life  is  our  cry.    We  have  kept  the  faith!"  we  said: ^  y 

"We  shall  go  down  with  unreluctant  treadf  ^,  ^,r     >_.  ^q 

Rose-crowned  into  the  darkness!"  .  .  .     Proud  we  were, 

And  laughed,  that  had  such  brave  true  things  to  say. 

^And  then  you  suddenly  cried,  and  turned  away. 

Rupert  Brooke  [1887-1915] 


Sonnets  1271 

SONNETS 

From  "  Sonnets  to  Miranda  " 
I 

Daughter  of  her  whose  face,  and  lofty  name 
Prenuptial,  of  old  States  and  Cities  speak, 
Where  lands  of  wine  look  north  to  peak  on  peak 
Of  the  overwatching  Alps:  through  her,  you  claim 
Kinship  with  vanished  Power,  un vanished  Fame; 
And  midst  a  world  grown  colorless  and  bleak 
I  see  the  blood  of  Doges  in  your  cheek, 
And  in  your  hair  the  Titian  tints  of  flame. 
Daughter  of  England  too,  you  first  drew  breath 
Where  our  coy  Springs  to  our  coy  Summers  yield; 
And  you  descend  from  one  whose  lance  and  shield 
Were  with  the  grandsire  of  Elizabeth, 
When  the  Plantagenet  saw  the  avenger  Death 
Toward  him  spurring  over  Bosworth  field. 

n 

If  you  had  lived  in  that  more  stately  time 

When  men  remembered  the  great  Tudor  queen, 

To  noblest  verse  your  name  had  wedded  been, 

And  you  for  ever  crowned  with  golden  rhyme. 

If,  mid  Lorenzo's  Florence,  made  subUme 

By  Art's  Re-Birth,  you  had  moved,  a  Muse  serene, 

The  mightiest  limners  had  revealed  your  mien 

To  all  the  ages  and  each  wondering  clime. 

Fled  are  the  singers  that  from  language  drew 

Its  virgin  secrets;  and  in  narrow  space 

The  mightiest  limners  sleep:  and  only  He, 

The  Eternal  Artist,  still  creates  anew 

That  which  is  fairer  than  all  song — the  grace 

That  takes  the  world  into  captivity. 

Ill 
I  dare  but  sing  of  you  in  such  a  strain 
As  may  beseem  the  wandering  harper's  tongue, 
Who  of  the  glory  of  his  Queen  hath  sung. 
Outside  her  castle  gates  in  wind  and  rain. 


1272  Poems  of  Love 

She,  seated  mid  the  noblest  of  her  train, 

In  her  great  halls  with  pictured  arras  hung, 

Hardly  can  know  what  melody  hath  rung 

Through  the  forgetting  night,  and  rung  in  vain. 

He,  with  one  word  from  her  to  whom  he  brings  ;  t/1 

The  loyal  heart  that  she  alone  can  sway, 

Would  be  made  rich  for  ever;  but  he  sings 

Of  queenhood  too  aloof,  too  great,  to  say 

"Sing  on,  sing  on,  O  minstrel" — though  he  flings 

His  soul  to  the  winds  that  whirl  his  songs  away. 


1  cast  these  lyric  offerings  at  your  feet, 

And  ask  you  but  to  fling  them  not  away: 

There  suffer  them  to  rest,  till  even  they. 

By  happy  nearness  to  yourself,  grow  sweet. 

He  that  hath  shaped  and  ^yrought  them  holds  it  meet 

That  you  be  sung,  not  in  some  artless  way, 

But  with  such  pcmp  and  ritual  as  when  May 

Sends  her  full  choir,  the  throned  Morn  to  greet. 

With  something  caught  from  your  own  lofty  air. 

With  something  learned  from  your  own  highborn  grace, 

Song  must  approach  your  presence;  must  forbear 

All  light  and  easy  accost;  and  yet  abase  ;  '. 

Its  own  proud  spirit  in  awe  and  reverence  there,'    il 

Before  the  Wonder  of  your  form  and  face. 


I  move  amid  your  throng,  I  watch  you  hold 
Converse  with  many  who  are  noble  and  fair^ 
Yourself  the  noblest  and  the  fairest  there,  ;;  i 

Reigning  supreme,  crowned  with  that  living  gold*,'!  ! 
I  talk  with  men  whose  names  have  been  enrolled  ri'i 
In  England's  book  of  honor;  and  I  share  ! 

With  these  one  honor — your  regard;  and  wear 
Your  friendship  as  a  jewel  of  worth  untold. 
And  then  I  go  from  out  your  sphered  light 
Into  a  world  which  still  seems  full  of  You. 
I  know  the  stars  are  yonder,  that  possess 
Their  ancient  seats,  heedless  what  mortals  do; 


Sonnets  1^73 

But  I  behold  in  all  the  range  of  Night 
Only  the  splendor  of  your  loveliness. 

vm 

If  I  had  never  known  your  face  at  all, 

Had  only  heard  you  speak,  beyond  thick  screen 

Of  leaves,  in  an  old  garden,  when  the  sheen 

Of  morning  dwelt  on  dial  and  ivied  wall, 

I  think  your  voice  had  been  enough  to  call 

Yourself  before  me,  in  living  vision  seen, 

So  pregnant  with  your  Essence  had  it  been, 

So  charged  with  You,  in  each  soft  rise  and  fall. 

At  least  I  know,  that  when  upon  the  night 

With  chanted  word  your  voice  lets  loose  your  soul, 

I  am  pierced,  I  am  pierced  and  cloven,  with  Delight 

That  hath  all  Pain  within  it,  and  the  whole 

World's  tears,  all  ecstasy  of  inward  sight, 

And  the  bhnd  cry  of  all  the  seas  that  roll. 

William  Watson  [1S5S-     . 


SONNETS 

From  "Thysia  " 
II 

Twin  songs  there  are,  of  joyance,  or  of  pain; 
One  of  the  morning  lark  in  midmost  sk}^, 
When  falls  to  earth  a  mist,  a  silver  rain, 
A  glittering  cascade  of  melody; 
And  mead  and  wold  and  the  wide  heaven  rejoice. 
And  praise  the  Maker;  but  alone  I  kneel 
In  sorrowing  prayer.     Then  wanes  the  day;  a  voice 
Trembles  along  the  dusk,  till  peal  on  peal 
It  pierces  every  living  heart  that  hears, 
Pierces  and  burns  and  purifies  like  fire; 
Again  I  kneel  under  the  starry  spheres, 
And  all  my  soul  seems  healed,  and  lifted  higher, 
Nor  could  that  jubilant  song  of  day  prevail 
Like  thine  of  tender  grief,  O  nightingale. 


1274  Poems  of  Love 

III 

Bow  down,  my  song,  before  her  presence  high, 
In  that  far  world  where  you  must  seek  her  now; 
Say  that  you  bring  to  her  no  sonnetry, 
But  plain-set  anguish  of  the  breast  or  brow; 
Say  that  on  earth  I  sang  to  her  alone, 
But  now,  while  in  her  heaven  she  sits  divine, 
Turning,  I  tell  the  world  my  bitter  moan. 
Bidding  it  share  its  hopes  and  griefs  with  mine, 
Versing  not  what  I  would,  but  what  I  must, 
Wail  of  the  wind,  or  sobbing  of  the  wave; 
Ah!  say  you  raised  my  bowed  head  from  the  dust, 
And  held  me  backward  from  a  willful  grave; 
Say  this,  and  her  sweet  pity  will  approve, 
And  bind  yet  closer  her  dead  bond  of  love. 


I  watch  beside  you  in  your  silent  room; 
Without,  the  chill  rain  falls,  life  dies  away. 
The  dead  leaves  drip,  and  the  fast-gathering  gloom 
Closes  around  this  brief  November  day, 
First  day  of  holy  death,  of  sacred  rest; 
I  kiss  your  brow,  calm,  beautiful  and  cold, 
I  lay  my  yearning  arms  across  your  breast, 
I  claim  our  darling  rapture  as  of  old ; 
Dear  heart,  I  linger  but  a  little  space, 
Sweet  wife,  I  come  to  your  new  world  ere  long; 
This  lily — keep  it  till  our  next  embrace, 
While  the  mute  Angel  makes  our  love  more  strong, 
While  here  I  cling,  in  life's  short  agony, 
To  God,  and  to  your  deathless  memory. 

XVI 

Comes  the  New  Year;  wailing  the  north  winds  blow; 
In  her  cold,  lonely  grave  my  dead  love  lies; 
Dead  lies  the  stiffened  earth  beneath  the  snow. 
And  blinding  sleet  blots  out  the  desolate  skies; 
I  stand  between  the  living  and  the  dead; 
Hateful  to  me  is  life,  hateful  is  death; 


Sonnets  1^75 

Her  life  was  sad,  and  on  that  narrow  bed 
She  will  not  turn,  nor  wake  with  human  breath. 
I  kneel  between  the  evil  and  the  good; 
The  struggle  o'er,  this  one  sweet  faith  have  I — 
Though  life  and  death  be  dimly  understood, 
She  loved  me;  I  loved  her;  love  cannot  die; 
Go  then  thy  way  with  thine  accustomed  cheer, 
Nor  heed  my  churlish  greeting,  O  New  Year. 

XXIII 

Like  some  lone  miser,  dear,  behold  me  stand, 
To  count  my  treasures,  and  their  worth  extol:— 
A  last  word  penciled  by  that  poor  left  hand; 
Two  kindred  names  on  the  same  gentle  scroll, 
(I  found  it  near  your  pillow,)  traced  below; 
This  little  scarf  you  made,  our  latest  pride; 
The  violet  I  digged  so  long  ago. 
That  nestled  in  your  bosom  till  you  died; 
But  dearest  to  my  heart,  whereon  it  lies, 
Is  one  warm  tress  of  your  luxuriant  hair, 
Still  present  to  my  touch,  my  lips,  my  eyes, 
Forever  changeless,  and  forever  fair. 

And  even  in  your  grave,  beauteous  and  free 

From  the  cold  grasp  of  mutability. 

xxxvi 

So  sang  I  in  the  springtime  of  my  years — 
"There's  nothing  we  can  call  our  own  but  love;" 
So  let  me  murmur  now  that  winter  nears, 
And  even  in  death  the  deathless  truth  approve. 
Oft  have  I  seen  the  slow,  the  broadening  river 
Roll  its  glad  waters  to  the  parent  sea; 
Death  is  the  call  of  love  to  love;  the  giver 
Claims  his  own  gift  for  some  new  mystery. 
In  boundless  love  divine  the  heavens  are  spread, 
In  wedded  love  is  earth's  divinest  store, 
And  he  that  liveth  to  himself  is  dead. 
And  he  that  lives  for  love  lives  evermore; 

Only  in  love  can  life's  true  path  be  trod; 

Love  is  self-giving;  therefore  love  is  God. 


1276  Poems  of  Love 


Hear,  O  Self-Giver,  infinite  as  good; 

This  faith,  at  least,  my  wavering  heart  should  hold, 

Nor  find  in  dark  regret  its  daily  food. 

But  catch  the  gleam  of  glories  yet  untold. 

Yea,  even  on  earth,  beloved,  as  love  well  knew, 

Brief  absence  brought  our  fond  returning  kiss, 

So  let  my  soul  to  God's  great  world  and  you 

Look  onward  with  sweet  pain  of  secret  bliss; — 

O  sunset  sky  and  lonely  gleaming  star. 

Your  beauty  thrills  me  from  the  bound  of  space, 

0  Love,  thy  loveliness  shows  best  afar, 

And  only  Heaven  shall  give  thee  perfect  grace; 
Grant  then,  dear  Lord,  that  all  who  love  may  be 
Heirs  of  Thy  glorious  Immortality. 

XLV 

How  shall  I  tell  the  measure  of  my  love? 
'Tis  vain  that  I  have  given  thee  vows  and  tears, 
Or  striven  in  verse  my  tenderness  to  prove, 
Or  held  thy  hand  in  journeyings  through  the  years; 
Vain  that  I  follow  now  with  hastening  feet. 
And  sing  thy  death,  still  murmuring  in  my  song, 
"Only  for  thee  I  would  the  strain  were  sweet. 
Only  for  thee  I  would  the  words  were  strong;" 
Vain  even  that  I  closed  with  death,  and  fought 
To  hold  thee  longer  in  a  world  so  dear, 
Vain  that  I  count  a  weary  world  as  naught. 
That  I  would  die  to  bring  thee  back;  I  hear 
God  answer  me  from  heaven,  O  angel  wife — 
"To  prove  thy  love,  live  thou  a  nobler  life." 

Morton  Luce  [1849- 

SONNETS 

From   "  Sonnets  from  the  Portuguese  " 
I 

1  THOUGHT  once  how  Theocritus  had  sung 

Of  the  sweet  years,  the  dear  and  wished-for  years. 
Who  each  one  in  a  gracious  hand  appears 
To  bear  a  gift  for  mortals,  old  or  young: 


Sonnets     ,</!  1277 


And,  as  I  mused  it  in  his  antique  tongue, 

I  saw,  in  gradual  vision  through  my  tears,  t. 

The  sweet,  sad  years,  the  melancholy  years. 

Those  of  my  own  life,  who  by  turns  had  flung 

A  shadow  across  me.     Straightway  I  was  'ware, 

So  weeping,  how  a  mystic  Shaj^e  did  move 

Behind  me,  and  drew  me  backward  by  the  hair; 

And  a  voice  said  in  mastery,  while  I  strove, — 

"  Guess  now  who  holds  thee?  " — "Death,"  I  said.    But,  there 

The  silver  answer  rang, — "Not  Death,  but  Love." 

m 

Unlike  are  we,  unlike,  O  princely  Heart! 

Unlike  our  uses  and  our  destinies. 

Our  ministering  two  angels  look  surprise 

On  one  another,  as  they  strike  athwart 

Their  wings  in  passing.     Thou,  bethink  thee,  art 

A  guest  for  queens  to  social  pageantries. 

With  gages  from  a  hundred  brighter  eyes 

Than  tears  even  can  make  mine,  to  play  thy  part 

Of  chief  musician.     What  hast  thou  to  do 

With  looking  from  the  lattice-lights  at  me, 

A  poor,  tired,  wandering  singer,  singing  through 

The  dark,  and  leaning  up  a  cypress  tree? 

The  chrism  is  on  thine  head, — on  mine,  the  dew, — 

And  Death  must  dig  the  level  where  these  agree. 

VI 

i 
Go  from  me.     Yet  I  feel  that  I  shall  stand 

Henceforward  in  thy  shadow.     Nevermore 

Alone  upon  the  threshold  of  my  door 

Of  individual  life,  I  shall  command 

The  uses  of  my  soul,  nor  lift  my  hand 

Serenely  in  the  sunshine  as  before. 

Without  the  sense  of  that  which  I  forbore, — 

Thy  touch  upon  the  palm.     The  widest  land 

Doom  takes  to  part  us,  leaves  thy  heart  in  mine 

With  pulses  that  beat  double.     What  I  do 

And  what  I  dream  include  thee,  as  the  wine 

Must  taste  of  its  own  grapes.     And  when  I  sue 


127B  Poems  of   Love 

God  for  myself,  He  hears  that  name  of  thine,         '  "'•  •f'>fiA 
And  sees  within  my  eyes  the  tears  of  two.  f^^  i 

•  rfT 
VII  y-'^  {' 

The  face  of  all  the  world  is  changed,  I  think, 

Since  first  I  heard  the  footsteps  of  thy  soul 

Move  still,  oh,  stUl,  beside  me,  as  they  stole 

Betwixt  me  and  the  dreadful  outer  brink 

Of  obvious  death,  where  I,  who  thought  to  sink, 

Was  caught  up  into  love,  and  taught  the  whole     '"^^^^  ^^^ 

Of  life  in  a  new  rhythm.     The  cup  of  dole 

God  gave  for  baptism,  I  am  fain  to  drink. 

And  praise  its  sweetness,  Sweet,  with  thee  anear.  '"'  -• 

The  name  of  country,  heaven,  are  changed  away  ^  -* 

For  where  thou  art  or  shalt  be,  there  or  here;  ''  ' 

And  this  .  .  .  this  lute  and  song  .  .  .  loved  yesterday,"' ' 

(The  singing  angels  know)  are  only  dear  ''  ' 

Because  thy  name  moves  right  in  what  they  say. 

VIII 

What  can  I  give  thee  back,  O  liberal  '  ' 

And  princely  giver,  who  hast  brought  the  gold  ^'  •'"^ 

And  purple  of  thine  heart,  unstained,  untold. 

And  laid  them  on  the  outside  of  the  wall 

For  such  as  I  to  take  or  leave  withal, 

In  unexpected  largess?     Am  I  cold. 

Ungrateful,  that  for  these  most  manifold 

High  gifts,  I  render  nothing  back  at  all? 

Not  so;  not  cold, — but  very  poor  instead.  ■'    "'  ^'^ 

Ask  God  who  knows.     For  frequent  tears  have  run         ''' 

The  colors  from  my  life,  and  left  so  dead 

And  pale  a  stuff,  it  were  not  fitly  done 

To  give  the  same  as  pillow  to  thy  head. 

Go  farther!  let  it  serve  to  trample  on. 

IX 

Can  it  be  right  to  give  what  I  can  give? 

To  let  thee  sit  beneath  the  fall  of  tears  '^ 

As  salt  as  mine,  and  hear  the  sighing  years 

Re-sighing  on  my  lips  renunciative 


Sonnets  1^79 

Through  those  infrequent  smiles  which  fail  to  live   ^1 
For  all  thy  adjurations?     O  my  fears,       <>  39rfJ  hA  8-1 
That  this  can  scarce  be  right!     We  are  not  peers 
So  to  be  lovers;  and  I  own,  and  grieve. 
That  givers  of  such  gifts  as  mine  are,  must  ii 

Be  counted  with  the  ungenerous.     Out,  alas!  ' 

I  will  not  soil  thy  purple  with  my  dust, 
Nor  breathe  my  poison  on  thy  Venice-glass, 
Nor  give  thee  any  love — which  were  unjust. 
Beloved,  I  only  love  thee!  let  it  pass. 


Yet,  love,  mere  love,  is  beautiful  indeed 

And  worthy  of  acceptation.     Fire  is  bright,  i 

Let  temple  burn,  or  flax;  an  equal  light  /-. 

Leaps  in  the  flame  from  cedar-plank  or  weed :  :  1.' 

And  love  is  fire.     And  when  I  say  at  need  c\ 

I  love  thee  .  .  .  mark!  .  .  .  I  love  thee — in  thy  sight 

I  stand  transfigured,  glorified  aright. 

With  conscience  of  the  new  rays  that  proceed 

Out  of  my  face  toward  thine.     There's  nothing  low 

In  love,  when  love  the  lowest:  meanest  creatures 

Who  love  God,  God  accepts  while  loving  so. 

And  what  I  feel,  across  the  inferior  features 

Of  what  I  am,  doth  flash  itself,  and  show 

How  that  great  work  of  Love  enhances  Nature's. 


Indeed  this  very  love  which  is  my  boast. 

And  which,  when  rising  up  from  breast  to  brow. 

Doth  crown  me  with  a  ruby  large  enow 

To  draw  men's  eyes  and  prove  the  inner  cost, — 

This  Icve  even,  all  my  worth,  to  the  uttermost, 

I  should  not  love  withal,  unless  that  thou 

Hadst  set  me  an  example,  shown  me  how, 

When  first  thine  earnest  eyes  with  mine  were  crossed, 

And  love  caUed  love.     And  thus,  I  cannot  speak 

Of  love  even,  as  a  good  thing  of  my  own: 

Thy  soul  hath  snatched  up  mine  all  faint  and  weak, 

And  placed  it  by  thee  on  a  golden  throne, —  I 


i28o  Poems  of  Love 

And  that  I  love  (O  soul,  we  must  be  meekO,   iguoirIT 
Is  by  thee  only,  whom  I  love  alone.  p.  yrfJ  Ilij  loT 


If  thou  must  love  me,  let  it  be  for  naught 

Except  for  love's  sake  only.     Do  not  say 

"I  love  her  for  her  smile — her  look — her  way 

Of  speaking  gently, — for  a  trick  of  thought 

That  falls  in  well  with  mine,  and  certes  brought 

A  sense  of  pleasant  ease  on  such  a  day" — 

For  these  things  in  themselves,  Beloved,  may 

Be  changed,  or  change  for  thee, — and  love,  so  wrought, 

May  be  unwrought  so.     Neither  love  me  for 

Thine  own  dear  pity's  wiping  my  cheeks  dry, — 

A  creature  might  forget  to  weep,  who  bore 

Thy  comfort  long,  and  lose  thy  love  thereby! 

But  love  me  for  love's  sake,  that  evermore 

Thou  may'st  love  on,  through  love's  eternity. 


My  poet,  thou  canst  touch  on  all  the  notes 

God  set  between  His  After  and  Before, 

And  strike  up  and  strike  off  the  general  roar 

Of  the  rushing  worlds  a  melody  that  floats 

In  a  serene  air  purely.     Antidotes 

Of  medicated  music,  answering  for 

Mankind's  forlornest  uses,  thou  canst  pour 

From  thence  into  their  ears.     God's  will  devotes 

Thine  to  such  ends,  and  mine  to  wait  on  thine. 

How,  Dearest,  wilt  thou  have  me  for  most  use? 

A  hope,  to  sing  by  gladly?  or  a  fine 

Sad  memory,  with  thy  songs  to  interfuse? 

A  shade,  in  which  to  sing — of  palm  or  pine? 

A  grave,  on  which  to  rest  from  singing?     Choose. 


I  never  gave  a  lock  of  hair  away 
To  a  man,  Dearest,  except  this  to  thee. 
Which  now  upon  my  fingers  thoughtfully 
I  ring  out  to  the  full  brown  length  and  say 


Sonnets 


1281 


"Take  it."     My  day  of  youth  went  yesterday; 
]My  hair  no  longer  bounds  to  my  foot's  glee, 
Nor  plant  1  it  from  rose  or  myrtle-tree, 
As  girls  do,  any  more:  it  only  may 
Now  shade  on  two  pale  cheeks  the  mark  of  tears, 
Taught  drooping  from  the  head  that  hangs  aside 
Through  sorrow's  trick.     I  thought  the  funeral-shears 
Would  take  this  first,  but  Love  is  justified, — 
Take  it  thou, — finding  pure,  from  all  those  years, 
The  kiss  my  mother  left  here  when  she  died. 

XXI 

Say  over  again,  and  yet  once  over  again, 

That  thou  dost  love  me.     Though  the  word  repeated 

Should  seem  "a  cuckoo-song,"  as  thou  dost  treat  it. 

Remember,  never  to  the  hill  or  plain, 

\'alley  and  wood,  without  her  cuckoo-strain, 

Comes  the  fresh  Spring  in  all  her  green  completed. 

Beloved,  I,  amid  the  darkness  greeted 

By  a  doubtful  spirit-voice,  in  that  doubt's  pain 

Cry:  "Speak  once  more — thou  lovest!"     Who  can  fear 

Too  many  stars,  though  each  in  heaven  shall  roll. 

Too  many  llowers,  though  each  shall  crown  the  year? 

Say  thou  dost  love  me,  love  me,  love  me, — toll 

The  silver  iterance! — only  minding,  Dear, 

To  love  me  also  in  silence  with  thy  soul. 

xxu 
When  our  two  souls  stand  up  erect  and  strong. 
Face  to  face,  silent,  drawing  nigh  and  nigher. 
Until  the  lengthening  wings  break  into  fire 
At  either  curved  point, — what  bitter  wrong 
Can  the  earth  do  us,  that  we  should  not  long 
Be  here  contented?     Think.     In  mounting  higher^ 
The  angels  would  press  on  us  and  aspire 
To  drop  some  golden  orb  of  perfect  song 
Into  our  deep,  dear  silence.     Let  us  stay 
Rather  on  earth,  Beloved, — where  the  unfit 
Contrarious  moods  of  men  recoil  away 
And  isolate  pure  spirits,  and  permit 


12  82  Poems  of  Love 

A  place  to  stand  and  love  in  for  a  day, 

With  darkness  and  the  death-hour  rounding  it. 

XXVIII 

My  letters!  all  dead  paper,  mute  and  white! 

And  yet  they  seem  alive  and  quivering 

Against  my  tremulous  hands  which  loose  the  string 

And  let  them  drop  down  on  my  knee  to-night. 

This  said, — -he  wished  to  have  me  in  his  sight 

Once,  as  a  friend:  this  fixed  a  day  in  spring 

To  come  and  touch  my  hand  ...  a  simple  thing. 

Yet  I  wept  for  it! — this,  .  .  .  the  paper's  light  .  .  . 

Said,  Dear,  I  love  thee;  and  I  sank  and  quailed, 

As  if  God's  future  thundered  on  my  past. 

This  said,  /  am  thine, — and  so  its  ink  has  paled 

With  lying  at  my  heart  that  beat  too  fast. 

And  this  .  .  .  O  Love,  thy  words  have  ill  availed. 

If,  what  this  said,  I  dared  repeat  at  last! 

XXXVIII 

First  time  he  kissed  me,  he  but  only  kissed 
The  fingers  of  this  hand  wherewith  I  write; 
And  ever  since,  it  grew  more  clean  and  white, 
Slow  to  world-greetings,  quick  with  its  "Oh,  list," 
When  the  angels  speak.     A  ring  of  amethyst 
I  could  not  wear  here,  plainer  to  my  sight. 
Than  that  first  kiss.     The  second  passed  in  height 
The  first,  and  sought  the  forehead,  and  half  missed. 
Half  falling  on  the  hair.     O  beyond  meed! 
That  was  the  chrism  of  love,  which  love's  own  crown. 
With  sanctifying  sweetness,  did  precede. 
The  third  upon  my  lips  was  folded  down 
In  perfect,  purple  state;  since  when,  indeed, 
I  have  been  proud,  and  said,  "My  love,  my  own!" 

o  ^gJiq  blaow  sbg.; 

XLIII 

How  do  I  love  thee?    Let  me  count  the  ways. 

I  love  thee  to  the  depth  and  breadth  and  height         i 

My  soul  can  reach,  when  feeling  out  of  sight J 

For  the  ends  of  Being  and  ideal  Grace.       ..  mioai  bnA 


Sonnets  1283 

I  love  thee  to  the  level  of  cveryday's 

Most  quiet  need,  by  sun  and  candle-light. 

I  love  thee  freely,  as  men  strive  for  Right; 

I  love  thee  purely,  as  they  turn  from  Praise. 

I  love  thee  with  the  passion  put  to  use 

In  my  old  griefs,  and  with  my  childhood's  faith. 

I  love  thee  with  a  love  I  seemed  to  lose 

With  my  lost  saints, — I  love  thee  with  the  breath, 

Smiles,  tears,  of  all  my  life! — and,  if  God  choose, 

I  shall  but  love  thee  better  after  death. 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [i  806-1 861] 


1<,    rv/'i!    -,rf  ■    r,  I    .v.,(!   <,-r.[    T 


ONE  WORD   MORE 

TO   E.    B.    B. 
I 

There  they  are,  my  fifty  men  and  women 
Naming  me  the  fifty  poems  finished! 
Take  them,  Love,  the  book  and  me  together;     ' 
Where  the  heart  lies,  let  the  brain  He  also. 

II 
Rafael  made  a  century  of  sonnets, 
Made  and  wrote  them  in  a  certain  volume 
Dinted  with  the  silver-pointed  pencil 
Else  he  only  used  to  draw  Madonnas: 
These,  the  world  might  view — but  one,  the  volume. 
Who  that  one,  you  ask?     Your  heart  instructs  you. 
Did  she  live  and  love  it  all  her  lifetime? 
Did  she  drop,  his  lady  of  the  sonnets, 
Die,  and  let  it  drop  beside  her  pillow 
Where  it  lay  in  place  of  Rafael's  glory, 
Rafael's  cheek  so  duteous  and  so  loving — 
Cheek,  the  world  was  wont  to  hail  a  painter's, 
Rafael's  cheek,  her  love  had  turned  a  poet's? 

Ill 

You  and  I  would  rather  read  that  volume, 
(Taken  to  his  beating  bosom  by  it) 
Lean  and  list  the  bosom-beats  of  Rafael, 
Would  we  not?  than  wonder  at  Madonnas^ 
Her,  San  Sisto  names,  and  Her,  Foligno, 
Her,  that  visits  Florence  in  a  vision, 
Her,  that's  left  with  lilies  in  the  Louvre — 
Seen  by  us  and  all  the  world  in  circle. 

IV 

You  and  I  will  never  read  that  volume. 
Guido  Reni,  hke  his  own  eye's  apple 
ia84 


One  Word   More  1285 

Guarded  long  llw  Ireasure-book  and  loved  it. 
Guide  Reni  dying,  all  Bologna  ) 

Cried,  and  the  world  cried  too,  "Ours,  the  treasure! "7 
Suddenly,  as  rare  things  will,  it  vafnished.  r 


Dante  once  prepared  to  paint  an  angel: 
Whom  to  please?     You  whisper  "Beatrice." 
While  he  mused  and  traced  it  and  retraced  it, 
(Peradventure  with  a  pen  corroded 
Still  by  drops  of  that  hot  ink  he  dipped  for, 
When,  his  left  hand  i'  the  hair  o'  the  wicked, 
Back  he  held  the  brow  and  pricked  its  stigma, 
Bit  into  the  live  man's  flesh  for  parchment. 
Loosed  him,  laughed  to  see  the  writing  rankle, 
Let  the  wretch  go  festering  through  Florence)— 
Dante,  who  loved  well  because  he  hated, 
Hated  wickedness  that  hinders  loving, 
Dante  standing,  studying  his  angel, — 
In  there  broke  the  folk  of  his  Inferno. 
Says  he — "Certain  people  of  importance" 
(Such  he  gave  his  daily  dreadful  line  to) 
"Entered  and  would  seize,  forsooth,  the  poet." 
Says  the  poet — "Then  I  stopped  my  painting." 

VI 

You  and  I  would  rather  see  that  angel. 
Painted  by  the  tenderness  of  Dante, 
Would  we  not? — than  read  a  fresh  Inferno. 

vn 
You  and  I  will  never  see  that  picture. 
While  he  mused  on  love  and  Beatrice, 
While  he  softened  o'er  his  outlined  angel. 
In  they  broke,  those  "people  of  importance": 
We  and  Bice  bear  the  loss  forever. 

\'iii 
What  of  Rafael's  sonnets,  Dante's  picture? 
This:  no  artist  lives  and  loves,  that  longs  not 


12  86  Poems  of  Love 

Once,  and  only  once,  and  for  one  only,      'i ''  '■  > 

(Ah,  the  prize!)  to  find  his  love  a  language 

Fit  and  fair  and  simple  and  sufficient — 

Using  nature  that's- an  art  to  others. 

Not,  this  one  time,  art  that's  turned  his  nature. 

Ay,  of  all  the  artists  living,  loving. 

None  but  would  forego  his  proper  dowry, — 

Does  he  paint?  he  fain  would  write  a  poem, — 

Does,  he  write?  he  fain  would  paint  a  picture. 

Put  to  proof  art  alien  to  the  artist's. 

Once,  and  only  once,  and  for  one  only, 

So  to  be  the  man  and  leave  the  artist. 

Gain  the  man's  joy,  miss  the  artist's  sorrow. 


IX  ^i'J   JJvi 

Wherefore?     Heaven's  gift  takes  earth's  abatement! 

He  who  smites  the  rock  and  spreads  the  water. 

Bidding  drink  and  live  a  crowd  beneath  him, 

Even  he,  the  minute  makes  immortal. 

Proves,  perchance,  but  mortal  in  the  minute, 

Desecrates,  belike,  the  deed  in  doing. 

While  he  smites,  how  can  he  but  remember, 

So  he  smote  before,  in  such  a  peril. 

When  they  stood  and  mocked — "Shall  smiting  help  us? " 

When  they  drank  and  sneered — "A  stroke  is  easy!" 

When  they  wiped  their  mouths  and  went  their  journey, 

Throwing  him  for  thanks — "But  drought  was  pleasant." 

Thus  old  memories  mar  the  actual  triumph; 

Thus  the  doing  savors  of  disrelish; 

Thus  achievement  lacks  a  gracious  somewhat;nR  uoY 

O'er-importuned  brows  becloud  the  mandate,  '/ 

Carelessness  or  consciousness — the  gesture. 

For  he  bears  an  ancient  wrong  about  him. 

Sees  and  knows  again  those  phalanxed  faces. 

Hears,  yet  one  time  more,  the  'customed  prelude — 

"How  shouldst  thou  of  all  men,  smite,  and  save  us?" 

Guesses  what  is  like  to  prove  the  sequel — 

"Egypt's  flesh-pots — nay,  the  drought  was  better."  ' 


One  Word   More  1287 

X 

Oh,  the  crowd  must  have  emphatic  warrant!  ? 

Theirs,  the  Sinai-forehead's  cloven  brilliance, 
Right-arm's  rod-sweep,  tongue's  imperial  fiat. 
Never  dares  the  man  put  off  the  prophet. 

XI 

Did  he  love  one  face  from  out  the  thousands, 

(Were  she  Jethro's  daughter,  white  and  wifely, 

Were  she  but  the  ^Ethiopian  bondslave,) 

He  would  envy  yon  dumb  patient  camel, 

Keeping  a,  reserve  of  scanty  water 

Meant  to  save  his  own  life  in  the  desert; 

Ready  in  the  desert  to  deliver 

(Kneeling  down  to  let  his  breast  be  opened)  -'' 

Hoard  and  life  together  for  his  mistress. 

XII 

I  shall  never,  in  the  years  remaining, 

Paint  you  pictures,  no,  nor  carve  you  statues, 

Make  you  music  that  should  all-express  me; 

So  it  seems:  I  stand  on  my  attainment. 

This  of  verse  alone,  one  life  allows  me; 

V'erse  and  nothing  else  have  I  to  give  you. 

Other  heights  in  other  lives,  God  willing: 

All  the  gifts  from  all  the  heights,  your  own.  Love! 

xin 

Yet  a  semblance  of  resource  avails  us — 

Shade  so  finely  touched,  love's  sense  must  seize  it. 

Take  these  lines,  look  lovingly  and  nearly. 

Lines  I  write  the  first  time  and  the  last  time. 

He  who  works  in  fresco,  steals  a  hair-brush. 

Curbs  the  liberal  hand,  subservient  proudly, 

Cramps  his  spirit,  crowds  its  all  in  little, 

Makes  a  strange  art  of  an  art  familiar. 

Fills  his  lady's  missal-marge  with  flowerets. 

He  who  blows  through  bronze,  may  breathe  through  silver, 

Fitly  serenade  a  slumbrous  princess. 

He  who  writes,  may  write  for  once  as  I  do. 


1288  Poems  of  Love 

XIV 

Love,  you  saw  me  gather  men  and  women, 

Live  or  dead  or  fashioned  by  my  fancy, 

Enter  each  and  all,  and  use  their  service. 

Speak  from  every  mouth,— the  speech,  a  poem^ 

Hardly  shall  I  tell  my  joys  and  sorrows, 

Hopes  and  fears,  belief  and  disbelieving: 

I  am  mine  and  yours — the  rest  be  all  men's, 

Karshish,  Cleon,  Norbert,  and  the  fifty. 

Let  me  speak  this  once  in  my  true  person. 

Not  as  Lippo,  Roland,  or  Andrea, 

Though  the  fruit  of  speech  be  just  this  sentence: 

Pray  you,  look  on  these  my  men  and  women,,^  oj  Jncai/ 

Take  and  keep  my  fifty  poems  finished; 

Where  my  heart  lies,  let  my  brain  lie  also! 

Poor  the  speech;  be  how  I  speak,  for  all  things. 

XV 

Not  but  that  you  know  me!     Lo,  the  moon's  self ! 
Here  in  London,  yonder  late  in  Florence, 

,.T,,J/; 

Still  we  find  her  face,  the  thrice-transfigured.  ->^^A'i- 

Curving  on  a  sky  imbrued  with  color,  ''  '   ' 

Drifted  over  Fiesole  by  twilight. 

Came  she,  our  new  crescent  of  a  hair's-breadth. 

Full  she  flared  it,  lamping  Samminiato, 

Rounder  'twixt  the  cypresses  and  rounder. 

Perfect  till  the  nightingales  applauded. 

Now,  a  piece  of  her  old  self,  impoverished, 

Hard  to  greet,  she  traverses  the  house-roofs, 

Hurries  with  unhandsome  thrift  of  silver. 

Goes  dispiritedly,  glad  to  finish. 

XVI  , 

What,  there's  nothing  in  the  moon  noteworthy?  i 
Nay:  for  if  that  moon  could  love  a  mortal. 

Use,  to  charm  him  (so  to  fit  a  fancy),  ■ 
,i«j,All  her  magic  ('tis  the  old  sweet  mythos),               [fi  ^y 
She  would  turn  a  new  side  to  her  mortal,                    '  •  ■ 
Side  unseen  of  herdsman,  huntsman,  steersman-= 


One   Word    More  1289 

Blank  to  Zoroaster  on  his  terrace, 

Blind  to  Galileo  on  his  turret,         .  -;r,|4)    ^1  < 

Dumb  to  Homer,  dumb  to  Kcals— him,  even! 

Think,  the  wonder  of  the  moonstruck  mortal — ■ 

When  she  turns  round,  comes  again  in  heaven, 

Opens  out  anew  for  worse  or  better! 

Proves  she  Uke  some  portent  of  an  iceberg 

Swimming  fuU  upon  the  ship  it  founders, 

Hungry  with  huge  teeth  of  spHntered  crystals? 

Proves  she  as  the  paved  work  of  a  sapphire 

Seen  by  Moses  when  he  climbed  the  mountain? 

Moses,  Aaron,  Nadab  and  Abihu 

Climbed  and  saw  the  very  God,  the  Highest, 

Stand  upon  the  paved  work  of  a  sapphire. 

Like  the  bodied  heaven  in  his  clearness 

Shone  the  stone,  the  sapphire  of  that  paved  work, 

When  they  ate  and  drank  and  saw  God  also! 

XVII 

What  were  seen?    None  knows,  none  ever  shall  know.    . 

Only  this  is  sure — the  sight  were  other, 

Not  the  moon's  same  side,  born  late  in  Florence, 

Dying  now  impoverished  here  in  London. 

God  be  thanked,  the  meanest  of  his  creatures 

Boasts  two  soul-sides,  one  to  face  the  world  with, 

One  to  show  a  woman  when  he  loves  her! 

XVIII 

This  I  say  of  me,  but  think  of  you,  Love! 

This  to  you — yourself  my  moon  of  poets! 

Ah,  but  that's  the  world's  side,  there's  the  wonder. 

Thus  they  see  you,  praise  you,  think  they  know  you! 

There,  in  turn  I  stand  with  them  and  praise  you^ 

Out  of  my  own  self,  I  dare  to  phrase  it. 

But  the  best  is  when  I  glide  from  out  them. 

Cross  a  step  or  two  of  dubious  twihght. 

Come  out  on  the  other  side,  the  novel 

Silent  silver  lights  and  darks  undreamed  of. 

Where  I  hush  and  bless  myself  with  silence. 


1290  Poems  of  Love 

Oh,  their  Rafael  of  the  dear  Madonnas, 
Oh,  their  Dante  of  the  dread  Inferno, 
Wrote  one  song — and  in  my  brain  I  sing  it, 
Drew  one  angel — borne,  see,  on  my  bosom! 

Robert  Browning  [i8i2-r{ 


PART  III 
POEMS  OF  NATURE 


1 291 


The  world  is  too  much  with  us;  late  and  soon, 
Getting  and  spending,  we  lay  waste  our  powers: 
Little  we  see  in  Nature  that  is  ours; 
We  have  given  our  hearts  away,  a  sordid  boon! 
This  sea  that  bares  her  bosom  to  the  moon, 
The  winds  that  will  be  howling  at  all  hours. 
And  are  up-gathered  now  like  sleeping  flowers; 
For  this,  for  everything,  we  are  out  of  tune; 
It  moves  us  not. — Great  God!  I'd  rather  be 
A  Pagan  suckled  in  a  creed  outworn; 
So  might  I,  standing  on  this  pleasant  lea, 
Have  glimpses  that  would  make  me  less  forlorn; 
Have  sight  of  Proteus  rising  from  the  sea; 
Or  hear  old  Triton  blow  his  wreathed  horn. 

William  Wordsworth  [i 770-1 850] 


MOTHER  NATURE 

THE  BOOK  OF  THE  WORLD 

Of  this  fair  volume  which  we  World  do  name, 
If  we  the  sheets  and  leaves  could  turn  with  care, 
Of  him  who  it  corrects,  and  did  it  frame. 
We  clear  might  read  the  art  and  wisdom  rare; 
Find  out  his  power  which  wildest  powers  doth  tame. 
His  providence  extending  everywhere. 
His  justice  which  proud  rebels  doth  not  spare. 
In  every  page,  no,  period  of  the  same. 
But  silly  we,  like  foolish  children,  rest 
Well  pleased  with  colored  vellum,  leaves  of  gold, 
Fair  dangling  ribbons,  leaving  what  is  best, 
On  the  great  Writer's  sense  ne'er  taking  hold; 
Or,  if  by  chance  we  stay  our  minds  on  aught. 
It  is  some  picture  on  the  margin  wrought. 

WilliajH  Dritmmoiid  [15S5-1640] 
• 

NATURE 

The  bubbling  brook  doth  leap  when  I  come  by. 
Because  my  feet  find  measure  with  its  call; 
The  birds  know  when  the  friend  they  love  is  nigh, 
For  I  am  known  to  them,  both  great  and  small. 
The  flower  that  on  the  lonely  hillside  grows 
Expects  me  there  when  spring  its  bloom  has  given; 
And  many  a  tree  and  bush  my  wanderings  knows, 
And  e'en  the  clouds  and  silent  stars  of  heaven; 
For  he  who  with  his  Maker  walks  aright, 
Shall  be  their  lord  as  Adam  was  before; 
His  ear  shall  catch  each  sound  with  new  delight, 
Each  object  wear  the  dress  that  then  it  wore; 
And  he,  as  when  erect  in  sovd  he  stood, 
Hear  from  his  Father's  lips  that  all  is  good. 

Jones  Very  [1813-1880J 
1293 


1294  Poems  of  Nature 


COMPENSATION 

In  that  new  world  toward  which  our  feet  are  set, 
Shall  we  find  aught  to  make  our  hearts  forget 
Earth's  homely  joys  and  her  bright  hours  of  bliss? 
Has  heaven  a  spell  divine  enough  for  this? 
For  who  the  pleasure  of  the  spring  shall  tell 
When  on  the  leafless  stalk  the  brown  buds  swell, 
When  the  grass  brightens  and  the  days  grow  long, 
And  little  birds  break  out  in  rippling  song? 

O  sweet  the  dropping  eve,  the  blush  of  morn. 
The  starlit  sky,  the  rustling  fields  of  corn, 
The  soft  airs  blowing  from  the  freshening  seas, 
The  sunflecked  shadow  of  the  stately  trees. 
The  mellow  thunder  and  the  lulling  rain, 
The  warm,  delicious,  happy  summer  rain. 
When  the  grass  brightens  and  the  days  grow  long, 
And  little  birds  break  out  in  rippling  song! 

O  beauty  manifold,  from  morn  till  night. 

Dawn's  flush,  noon's  blaze  and  sunset's  tender  light! 

O  fair,  familiar  features,  changes  sweet 

Of  her  revolving  seasons,  storm  and  sleet 

And  golden  calm,  as  slow  she  wheels  through  space, 

From  snow  to  roses, — and  how  dear  her  face. 

When  the  grass  brightens,  when  the  days  grow  long, 

And  little  birds  break  out  in  rippling  song! 

I/.  ■■■I 
O  happy  earth !     O  home  so  well  beloved ! 
What  recompense  have  we,  from  thee  removed? 
One  hope  we  have  that  overtops  the  whole, — 
The  hope  of  finding  every  vanished  soul. 
We  love  and  long  for  daily,  and  for  this 
Gladly  we  turn  from  thee,  and  all  thy  bliss,  ■,,,■-, 

Even  at  thy  loveliest,  when  the  days  are  long,     ' 
And  little  birds  break  out  in  rippling  song. 


/ 


Nature  1295 


THE  LAST  HOUR 

O  JOYS  of  love  and  joys  of  fame, 

It  is  not  you  I  shall  regret; 

I  sadden  lest  I  should  forget 
The  beauty  woven  in  earth's  name: 

The  shout  and  battle  of  the  gale, 
The  stillness  of  the  sun-rising, 
The  sound  of  some  deep  hidden  spring, 

The  glad  sob  of  the  filling  sail. 

The  first  green  ripple  of  the  wheat, 
The  rain-song  of  the  lifted  leaves, 
The  waking  birds  beneath  the  eaves. 

The  voices  of  the  summer  heat. 

Ethel  Clijford  [i8    •= 

NATURE  ^ 

O  nature!  I  do  not  aspire 

To  be  the  highest  in  thy  choir, — 

To  be  a  meteor  in  thy  sky, 

Or  comet  that  may  range  on  high; 

Only  a  zephyr  that  may  blow 

Among  the  reeds  by  the  river  low; 

Give  me  thy  most  privy  place 

Where  to  run  my  airy  race. 

In  some  withdrawn,  unpublic  meady 
Let  me  sigh  upon  a  reed. 
Or  in  the  woods,  with  leafy  din,,.  „   ^ 
Whisper  the  still  evening  in:    :  joi  10 
Some  still  work  give  me  to  do, — 
Only — be  it  near  to  you ! 

For  I'd  rather  be  thy  child 
And  pupil,  in  the  forest  wild,  /. 

Than  be  the  king  of  men  elsewhere, . 
And  most  sovereign  slave  of  care;     i 


1296  Poems  of  Nature 


To  have  one  moment  of  thy  dawn, 
Than  share  the  city's  year  forlorn. 

Henry  David  Thoreau  [1817-1862] 


SONG  OF  NATURE 

Mine  are  the  night  and  morning, 
The  pits  of  air,  the  gulf  of  space. 
The  sportive  sun,  the  gibbous  moon, 
The  innumerable  days. 

I  hide  in  the  solar  glory, 
I  am  dumb  in  the  peahng  song, 
I  rest  on  the  pitch  of  the  torrent. 
In  slumber  I  am  strong. 

No  numbers  have  counted  my  tallies, 
No  tribes  my  house  can  fill, 
I  sit  by  the  shining  Fount  of  Life 
And  pour  the  deluge  still; 

And  ever  by  delicate  powers 
Gathering  along  the  centuries 
From  race  on  race  the  rarest  flowcrS; 
My  wreath  shall  nothing  miss. 

And  many  a  thousand  summers 
My  gardens  ripened  well. 
And  light  from  meliorating  stars 
With  firmer  glory  fell. 

I  wrote  the  past  in  characters 
Of  rock  and  fire  the  scroll, 
The  building  in  the  coral  sea. 
The  planting  of  the  coal. 

And  thefts  from  satellites  and  rings 
And  broken  stars  I  drew. 
And  out  of  spent  and  aged  things 
I  formed  the  world  anew; 


Song  of  Nature  1^97 

What  time  the  gods  kept  carnival, 
Tricked  out  in  star  and  flower, 
And  in  cramp  elf  and  saurian  forms 
They  swathed  their  too  much  power. 

Time  and  Thought  were  my  surveyors, 
They  laid  their  courses  well, 
They  boiled  the  sea,  and  piled  the  layers 
Of  granite,  marl  and  shell. 

But  he,  the  man-child  glorious, — 
Where  tarries  he  the  while? 
The  rainbow  shines  his  harbinger, 
The  sunset  gleams  his  smile. 

My  boreal  lights  leap  upward. 
Forthright  my  planets  roll. 
And  still  the  man-child  is  not  born, 
The  summit  of  the  whole. 

Must  time  and  tide  forever  run? 
Will  never  my  winds  go  sleep  in  the  west? 
Will  never  my  .wheels  which  whirl  the  sun 
And  satellites  have  rest? 

Too  much  of  donning  and  doffing, 
Too  slow  the  rainbow  fades, 
I  weary  of  my  robe  of  snow, 
Mj'  leaves  and  my  cascades; 

I  tire  of  globes  and  races. 
Too  long  the  game  is  played; 
What  without  him  is  summer's  pomp, 
Or  winter's  frozen  shade? 

I  travail   in  pain  for  him, 
]\Iy  creatures  travail  and  wait; 
His  couriers  come  by  squadrons, 
He  comes  not  to  the  gate. 


1298  Poems   of  Nature 

Twice  I  have  moulded  an  image, 
And  thrice  outstretched  my  hand, 
Made  one  of  day  and  one  of  night 
And  one  of  the  salt  sea-sand. 

One  in  a  Juda?an  manger. 

And  one  by  Avon  stream, 

One  over  against  the  mouths  of  Nile, 

And  one  in  the  Academe. 

I  moulded  kings  and  saviors, 
And  bards  o'er  kings  to  rule; — 
But  fell  the  starry  influence  short, 
'fhe  cup  was  never  full. 

Yet  whirl  the  glowing  wheels  once  more, 
And  mix  the  bowl  again; 
Seethe,  Fate!  the  ancient  elements. 
Heat,  cold,  wet,  dry,  and  peace,  and  pain. 


Let  war  and  trade  and  creeds  and  song 
Blend,  ripen  race  on  race, 
The  sunburnt  world  a  man  shall  breed 
Of  all  the  zones  and  countless  days. 


ir 


No  ray  is  dimmed,  no  atom  worn. 
My  oldest  force  is  good  as  new, 
And  the  fresh  rose  on  yonder  thorn 
Gives  back  the  bending  heavens  in  dew. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [i  803-1 88 2] 


"GREAT  NATURE  IS  AN  ARMY  GAY" 

Great  nature  is  an  army  gay, 
Resistless  marching  on  its  way; 
I  hear  the  bugles  clear  and  sweet, 
I  hear  the  tread  of  million  feet. 
Across  the  plain  I  see  it  pour; 
It  tramples  down  the  waving  grass; 
Within  the  echoing  mountain-pass 
I  hear  a  thousand  cannon  roar. 


To   Mother  Nature  1299 

It  swarms  within  my  garden  gate; 
My  deepest  well  it  drinketh  dry. 
It  doth  not  rest;  it  doth  not  wait; 
By  night  and  day  it  sweepeth  by; 
Ceaseless  it  marcheth  by  my  door; 
It  heeds  me  not,  though  I  implore. 
I  know  not  whence  it  comes,  nor  where 
It  goes.     For  me  it  doth  not  care — 
Whether  I  starve,  or  eat,  or  sleep, 
Or  live,  or  die,  or  sing,  or  weep. 
And  now  the  banners  all  are  bright, 
Now  torn  and  blackened  by  the  fight. 
Sometimes  its  laughter  shakes  the  sky, 
Sometimes  the  groans  of  those  who  die. 
Still  through  the  night  and  through  the  livelong  day 
The  infinite  army  marches  on  its  remorseless  way. 

Richard  Watson  Gilder  [1844-1909] 


TO  MOTHER  NATURE 

Nature,  in  thy  largess,  grant 
I  may  be  thy  confidant! 
Taste  who  wiU  life's  roadside  cheer 
(Though  my  heart  doth  hold  it  dear — 
Song  and  wine  and  trees  and  grass, 
All  the  joys  that  flash  and  pass), 
I  must  put  within  my  prayer 
Gifts  more  intimate  and  rare. 
Show  me  how  dry  branches  throw 
Such  blue  shadows  on  the  snow, — 
Tell  me  how  the  wind  can  fare 
On  his  unseen  feet  of  air, — 
Show  me  how  the  spider's  loom 
Weaves  the  fabric  from  her  womb, — 
Lead  me*to  those  brooks  of  morn 
Where  a  woman's  laugh  is  born, — 
Let  me  taste  the  sap  that  flows 
Through  the  blushes  of  a  rose, 


ijoo  Poems  of  Nature 

Yea,  and  drain  the  blood  which  runs 
From  the  heart  of  dying  suns, — 
Teach  me  how  the  butterfly 
Guessed  at  immortahly, — 
Let  me  follow  up  the  track  •  '  ^ 

Of  Love's  deathless  Zodiac 
Where  Joy  chmbs  among  the  spheres 
Circled  by  her  moon  of  tears, — 
Tell  me  how,  when  I  forget 
All  the  schools  have  taught  me,  yet 
I  recall  each  trivial  thing 
In  a  golden,  far-off  Spring, — 
Give  me  whispered  hints  how  I 
May  instruct  my  heart  to  fly 
Where  the  baffling  Vision  gleams  ''■' 

Till  I  overtake  my  dreams, 
yy-'-v        And  the  impossible  be  done 

When  the  Wish  and  Deed  grow  one! 

Frederic  Lawrence  Knowlcs  [1869-1905] 


QUIET  WORK 

One  lesson,  Nature,  let  me  learn  of  thee, 
One  lesson  which  in  every  wind  is  blown, 
One  lesson  of  two  duties  kept  at  one 
Though  the  loud  world  proclaim  their  enmity— 
Of  toil  unsevered  from  tranquillity; 
Of  labor,  that  in  lasting  fruit  outgrows 
Far  noisier  schemes,  accomplished  in  repose, 
Too  great  for  haste,  too  high  for  rivalry. 

Yes,  while  on  earth  a  thousand  discords  ring, 
Man's  fitful  uproar  mingling  with  his  toil, 
StiU  do  thy  sleepless  ministers  mqve  on. 
Their  glorious  tasks  in  silence  perfecting; 
Still  working,  blaming  still  our  vain  turmoil; 
Laborers  that  shall  not  fail,  when  man  is  gone. 

Matllmv  Arnold  [1822-1888] 


Good   Company  ^301 

NATURE 

As  a  fond  mother,  when  the  day  is  o'er, 

Leads  by  the  hand  her  httle  child  to  tjed,, 

Half  wilUng,  half  reluctant  to  be  led, 
And  leave  his  broken  playthings  on  the  floor, 
Still  gazing  at  them  through  the  open  door,  !1^T" 

Nor  wholly  reassured  and  comforted 

By  promises  of  others  in  their  stead. 
Which,  though  more  splendid,  may  not  please  him  more; 
So  Nature  deals  with  us,  and  takes  away 

Our  playthings  one  by  one,  and  by  the  hand 
Leads  us  to  rest  so  gently,  that  we  go  n^AW 

Scarce  knowing  if  we  wish  to  go  or  stay,  ■  ■  •  - 

Being  too  full  of  sleep  to  understand 

How  far  the  unknown  transcends  the  what  we  know. 
Ilcnry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  [1807-1S82] 

"AS  AN  OLD  MERCER" 

As  an  old  mercer  in  some  sleepy  town 

Swings  wide  his  windows  new  day  after  day. 

Sets  all  his  wares  around  in  arch  array 

To  please  the  taste  of  passers  up  and  down, — ■ 

His  hoard  of  handy  things  of  trite  renown. 
Of  sweets  and  spices  and  of  faint  perfumes. 
Of  silks  and  prints, — and  at  the  last  illumes 
His  tiny  panes  to  foil  the  evening's  frown; 

So  Nature  spreads  her  proffered  treasures:  such 
As  daily  dazzle  at  the  morning's  rise, — ■ 
Fair  show  of  isle  and  ocean  merchandise, 

And  airy  offerings  filmy  to  the  touch ; 

Then,  lest  we  like  not  these,  in  Dark's  bazaars 
She  nightly  tempts  us  with  her  store  of  stars. 
Mahlon  Leonard  F  is  fur  [1874- 

GOOD  COMPANY 

To-day  I  have  grown  taller  from  walking  with  the  trees. 
The  seven  sister-poplars  who  go  softly  in  a  line; 
And  I  think  my  heart  is  whiter  for  its  parley  with  a  star 
That  trembled  out  at  nightfall  and  hung  above  the  pine. 


1302  Poems  of  Nature 

The  call-note  of  a  redbird  from  the  cedars  in  the  dusk 
Woke  his  happy  mate  within  me  to  an  answer  free  and  fine; 
And  a  sudden  angel  beckoned  from  a  column  of  blue  smoke — 
Lord,  who  am  I  that  they  should  stoop — these  holy  folk  of 
thine?  Karle  Wilson  Baker  [1878- 

"HERE    IS    THE    PLACE    WHERE    LOVELINESS 
KEEPS  HOUSE"  <.iiodvv  lo/x 

Here  is  the  place  where  Loveliness  keeps' hdiisfe','   ''^ 

Between  the  river  and  the  wooded  hills, 

Within  a  valley  where  the  Springtime  spills 

Her  firstling  wind-flowers  under  blossoming  boughs: 

Where  Summer  sits  braiding  her  warm,  white  brows 

With  bramble-roses;  and  where  Autumn  fills 

Her  lap  with  asters;  and  old  Winter  frills 

With  crimson  haw  and  hip  his  snowy  blouse. 

Here  you  may  meet  with  Beauty.     Here  she  sits 

Gazing  upon  the  moon,  or  all  the  day 

Tuning  a  wood-thrush  flute,  remote,  unseen; 

Or  when  the  storm  is  out,  'tis  she  who  flits 

From  rock  to  rock,  a  form  of  flying  spray, 

Shouting,  beneath  the  leaves'  tumultuous  green. 

Madison  Cawein  [1865-1914] 

GOD'S  WORLD 

O  WORLD,  I  cannot  hold  thee  close  enough t.;^ 
Thy  winds,  thy  wide  gray  skies!  ly 

Thy  mists,  that  roll  and  rise! 
Thy  woods,  this  autumn  day,  that  ache  and  sag 
And  all  but  cry  with  color!     That  gaunt  crag 
To  crush!     To  lift  the  lean  of  that  black  bluff! 
World,  world,  I  cannot  get  thee  close  enough! 

Long  have  I  known  a  glory  in  it  all     ^^  ^^2 

But  never  knew  I  this. 

Here  such  a  passion  is 

As  stretcheth  me  apart.    Lord,  I  do  fear 

Thou'st  made  the  world  too  beautiful  this  year. 

My  soul  is  all  but  out  of  me — let  fall 

No  burning  leaf;  prithee,  let  no  bird  call. 

Edna  St.  Vincent  Millay  [1892- 


Patmos  \3P3 


SIC  VITA 

Heart  free,  hand  free, 

Blue  above,  brown  under, 
All  the  world  to  me 

Is  a  place  of  wonder. 
Sun  shine,  moon  shine. 

Stars,  and  winds  a-blowing, 
All  into  this  heart  of  mine 

Flowing,  flowing,  flowing! 

Mind  free,  step  free, 

Days  to  follow  after, 
Joys  of  life  sold  to  me 

For  the  price  of  laughter. 
Girl's  love,  man's  love. 

Love  of  work  and  duty, 
Just  a  will  of  God's  to  prove 

Beauty,  beauty,  beauty! 

William  Stanley  Braithwaite  [1878- 


PATMOS 

All  around  him  Patmos  Hes, 
Who  hath  spirit-gifted  eyes, 
Who  his  happy  sight  can  suit 
To  the  great  and  the  minute. 
Doubt  not  but  he  holds  in  view 
A  new  earth  and  heaven  new; 
Doubt  not  but  his  ear  doth  catch 
Strain  nor  voice  nor  reed  can  match: 
Many  a  silver,  sphery  note 
Shall  within  his  hearing  float. 

All  around  him  Patmos  lies. 
Who  unto  God's  priestess  flies: 
Thou,  O  Nature,  bid  him  see. 
Through  all  guises  worn  by  thee, 
A  divine  apocalypse. 
Manifold  his  fellowships: 


1304  Poems  of  Nature 

Now  the  rocks  their  archives  ope; 
Voiceless  creatures  tell  their  hope 
In  a  language  symbol-wrought ; 
Groves  to  him  sigh  out  their  thought; 
Musings  of  the  flower  and  grass 
Through  his  quiet  spirit  pass. 
'Twixt  new  earth  and  heaven  new 
He  hath  traced  and  holds  the  clue, 
Number  his  delights  ye  may  not; 
Fleets  the  year  but  these  decay  not. 
Now  the  freshets  of  the  rain, 
Bounding  on  from  hill  to  plain, 
Show  him  earthly  streams  have  rise 
In  the  bosom  of  the  skies. 
Now  he  feels  the  morning  thrill. 
As  upmounts,  unseen  and  still, 
Dew  the  wing  of  evening  drops. 
Now  the  frost,  that  meets  and  stops 
Summer's  feet  in  tender  sward. 
Greets  him,  breathing  heavenward. 
Hieroglyphics  writes  the  snow, 
Through  the  silence  falling  slow; 
Types  of  star  and  petaled  bloom 
A  white  missal-page  illume. 
By  these  floating  symbols  fine, 
Heaven-truth  shall  be  divine. 

All  around  him  Patmos  lies. 
Who  hath  spirit-gifted  eyes; 
He  need  not  afar  remove. 
He  need  not  the  times  reprove, 
Who  would  hold  perpetual  lease 
Of  an  isle  in  seas  of  peace. 

Edith  M.  Thomas  [1854- 


J      DAWN  AND  DARK 

SONG 

Phcebus,  arise, 

And  paint  the  sable  skies 

With  azure,  white,  and  red: 

Rouse  Memnon's  mother  from  her  Tithon's  bed, 

That  she  thy  career  may  with  roses  spread : 

The  nightingales  thy  coming  each  where  sing, 

Make  an  eternal  Spring! 

Give  life  to  this  dark  world  which  lieth  dead ; 

Spread  forth  thy  golden  hair 

In  larger  locks  than  thou  wast  wont  before, 

And,  emperor-like,  decore 

With  diadem  of  pearl  thy  temples  fair: 

Chase  hence  the  ugly  night. 

Which  serves  but  to  make  dear  thy  glorious  light. 

This  is  that  happy  morn. 
That  day,  long-wished  day, 
Of  all  my  life  so  dark, 
(If  cruel  stars  have  not  my  ruin  sworn. 
And  fates  not  hope  betray,) 
Which,  only  white,  deserves 
A  diamond  for  ever  should  it  mark. 
This  is  the  morn  should  bring  unto  this  grove 
My  Love,  to  hear  and  recompense  my  love. 
Fair  king,  who  all  preserves, 
But  show  thy  blushing  beams, 
And  thou  two  sweeter  eyes 
Shalt  sec,  than  those  which  by  Peneus'  streams 
Did  once  thy  heart  surprise. 
Nay,  suns,  which  shine  as  clear 
As  thou,  when  two  thou  didst  to  Rome  appear. 
Now,  Flora,  deck  thyself  in  fairest  guise: 
If  that  ye,  winds,  would  hear 
1305 


1306  Poems  of  Nature 

A  voice  surpassing  far  Amphion's  lyre, 

Your  stormy  chiding  stay; 

Let  Zephyr  only  breathe, 

And  with  her  tresses  play, 

Kissing  sometimes  these  purple  ports  of  death. 

— The  winds  all  silent  are, 

And  Phoebus  in  his  chair 

Ensaffroning  sea  and  air,  laJDnT 

Makes  vanish  every  star:  r.t^  ]u^/- 

Night  like  a  drunkard  reels 

Beyond  the  hills,  to  shun  his  flaming  wheels;        L 

The  fields  with  flowers  are  decked  in  every  hue, !" 

The  clouds  bespangle  with  bright  gold  their  blue:  ' 

Here  is  the  pleasant  place, 

And  everything  save  her,  who  all  should  grace. 

William  Drummond  [i 585-1 649] 


HYMN  OF  APOLLO 

The  sleepless  Hours  who  watch  me  as  I  lie, 
Curtained  with  star-inwoven  tapestries, 

From  the  broad  moonlight  of  the  sky. 

Fanning  the  busy  dreams  from  my  dim  eyes, — 

Waken  me  when  their  Mother,  the  gray  Dawn, 

Tells  them  that  dreams  and  that  the  moon  is  gone. 

Then  I  arise,  and  climbing  Heaven's  blue  dome,    7 
I  walk  over  the  mountains  and  the  waves. 

Leaving  my  robe  upon  the  ocean  foam; 

My  footsteps  pave  the  clouds  with  fire;  the  caves 

Are  filled  with  my  bright  presence,  and  the  air 

Leaves  the  green  Earth  to  my  embraces  bare. 

The  sunbeams  are  my  shafts,  with  which  I  kill 
Deceit,  that  loves  the  night  and  fears  the  day; 

All  men  who  do  or  even  imagine  ill 
Fly  me,  and  from  the  glory  of  my  ray 

Good  minds  and  open  actions  take  new  might, 

Until  diminished  by  the  reign  of  Night. 


Prelude  ijo? 

I  feed  the  clouds,  the  rainbows,  and  the  flowers, 
With  their  ethereal  colors;  the  Moon's  globe,ii 

And  the  pure  stars  in  their  eternal  bowers. 
Are  cinctured  with  my  power  as  with  a  robe; 

Whatever  lamps  on  Earth  or  Heaven  may  shine, 

Are  portions  of  one  power,  which  is  mine. 

I  stand  at  noon  upon  the  peak  of  Heaven; 

Then  with  unwilling  steps  I  wander  down        ' 
Into  the  clouds  of  the  Atlantic  even; 

For  grief  that  I  depart  they  weep  and  frown : 
What  look  is  m.ore  delightful  than  the  smile 
With  which  I  soothe  them  from  the  western  isle? 

I  am  the  eye  with  which  the  Universe 
Beholds  itself,  and  knows  it  is  divine; 

All  harmony  of  instrument  or  verse. 
All  prophecy,  all  medicine,  is  mine, 

All  light  of  art  or  nature; — to  my  song 

Victory  and  praise  in  its  own  right  belong. 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [1792-1822] 


PRELUDE 

From  "  The  New  Day  " 

The  night  was  dark,  though  sometimes  a  faint  star 
A  little  while  a  little  space  made  bright. 
The  night  was  dark  and  still  the  dawn  seemed  far. 
When,  o'er  the  muttering  and  invisible  sea. 
Slowly,  within  the  East,  there  grew  a  light 
Which  half  was  starlight,  and  half  seemed  to  be 
The  herald  of  a  greater.     The  pale  white 
Turned  slowly  to  pale  rose,  and  up  the  height 
Of  heaven  slowly  climbed.     The  gray  sea  grew 
Rose-colored  like  the  sky.     A  white  gull  flew 
Straight  toward  the  utmost  boundary  of  the  East 
Where  slowly  the  rose  gathered  and  increased. 
There  was  light  now,  where  all  was  black  before: 
It  was  as  on  the  opening  of  a  door 


1308  Poems  of  Nature 

By  one  who  in  his  hand  a  lamp  doth  hold 

(Its  flame  being  hidden  by  the  garment's  fold),— 

The  still  air  moves,  the  wide  room  is  less  dim. 

More  bright  the  East  became,  the  ocean  turned 
Dark  and  more  dark  against  the  brightening  sky- 
Sharper  against  the  sky  the  long  sea  line. 
The  hollows  of  the  breakers  on  the  shore 
Were  green  like  leaves  whereon  no  sun  doth  shine, 
Though  sunlight  make  the  outer  branches  hoar. 
From  rose  to  red  the  level  heaven  burned; 
Then  sudden,  as  if  a  sword  fell  from  on  high, 
A  blade  of  gold  flashed  on  the  ocean's  rim. 

Richard  Watson  Gilder  [i  844-1  gog] 

DAWN  ON  THE  HEADLAND 

Dawn — and  a  magical  stillness:  on  earth,  quiescence  pro- 
found ; 
On  the  waters  a  vast  Content,  as  of  hunger  appeased  and 
stayed; 
In  the  heavens  a  silence  that  seems  not  mere  privation  of 
sound. 
But  a  thing  with  form  and  body,  a  thing  to  be  touched 
and  weighed! 

Yet  I  know  that  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  the  roar  of  the 
cosmic  wheel. 
In  the  hot  collision  of  Forces,  and  clangor  of  boundless 
Strife, 
Mid  the  sound  of  the  speed  of  the  worlds,  the  rushing 
worlds,  and  the  peal 
Of  the  thunder  of  Life. 

William  Watson  [1858- 

THE  MIRACLE  OF  THE  DAWN 

What  woifld  it  mean  for  you  and  me 

If  dawn  should  come  no  more ! 
Think  of  its  gold  along  the  sea. 

Its  rose  above  the  shore! 
That  rose  of  awful  mystery. 

Our  souls  bow  down  before. 


Dawn-Angels  1309 

What  wonder  that  the  Inca  kneeled, 

The  Aztec  prayed  and  pled 
And  sacrificed  to  it,  and  sealed, — 

With  rites  that  long  are  dead, — 
The  marvels  that  it  once  revealed 

To  them  it  comforted. 

What  wonder,  yea!  what  awe,  behold! 

What  rapture  and  what  tears 
Were  ours,  if  wild  its  rivered  gold, — 

That  now  each  day  appears, — 
Burst  on  the  world,  in  darkness  rolled. 

Once  every  thousand  years! 

Think  what  it  means  to  me  and  you 
To  see  it  even  as  God  ■:  i 

Evolved  it  when  the  world  was  new! 
When  Light  rose,  earthquake-shod. 

And  slow  its  gradual  splendor  grew 
O'er  deeps  the  whirlwind  trod. 

What  shoutings  then  and  cymballings 

Arose  from  depth  and  height ! 
What  worship-solemn  trumpetings, 

And  thunders,  burning-white. 
Of  winds  and  waves,  and  anthemings 

Of  Earth  received  the  Light. 

Think  what  it  meant  to  see  the  dawn! 

The  dawn,  that  comes  each  day! — 
What  if  the  East  should  ne'er  grow  wan, 

Should  nevermore  grow  gray! 
That  line  of  rose  no  more  be  drawn 

Above  the  ocean's  spray! 

Madison  Cawein  [1865-1914] 

DAWN-ANGELS 

All  night  I  watched  awake  for  morning, 

At  last  the  East  grew  all  a  flame, 
The  birds  for  welcome  sang,  or  warning, 

And  with  their  singing  morning  came. 


13 lO  Poems  of  Nature 

Along  the  gold-green  heavens  drifted 

Pale  wandering  souls  that  shun  the  light, 

Whose  cloudy  pinions,  torn  and  rifted. 
Had  beat  the  bars  of  Heaven  all  night. 

These  clustered  round  the  moon,  but  higher 
A  troop  of  shining  spirits  went. 

Who  were  not  made  of  wind  or  fire. 
But  some  divine  dream-element. 

Some  held  the  Light,  while  those  remaining 
Shook  out  their  harvest-colored  wings, 

A  faint  unusual  music  raining, 

(Whose  sound  was  Light)  on  earthly  things. 

They  sang,  and  as  a  mighty  river 
Their  voices  washed  the  night  away. 

From  East  to  West  ran  one  white  shiver, 
And  waxen  strong  their  song  was  Day. 

A.  Mary  F.  Robinson  [1857- 


MUSIC  OF  THE   DAWN 

AT   SEA,  OCTOBER  23,  I907 

In  far  forests'  leafy  twilight,  now  is  stealing  gray  dawn's 
shy  hght. 
And  the  misty  air  is  tremulous  with  songs  of  many  a  bird; 
While  from  mountain  steeps  descending,  every  streamlet's 
voice  is  blending 
With  the  anthems  of  great  pine  trees,  by  the  breath  of 
daylight  stirred. 

But  I  turn  from  Fancy's  dreaming  of  the  green  earth,  to  the 
gleaming 
Of  the  fluttering  wings  of  morning  rushing  o'er  the  jewelled 
deep; 
And  the  ocean's  rhythmic  pounding,  with  each  lucent  wave 
resounding. 
Seems  the  music  made  when  God's  own  hands  His  mighty 
harpstrings  sweep. 

Virginia  Bioren  Harrison  [18     - 


Sunrise  en    Mansfield   Mountain      13  ii 

SUNRISE  ON  MANSFIELD  MOUNTAIN 

O  SWIFT  forerunners,  rosy  with  the  racel 
Spirits  of  dawn,  divinely  manifest 
Behind  your  blushing  banners  in  the  sky, 
Daring  invaders  of  Night's  tcnting-ground, — 
How  do  ye  strain  on  forward-bending  foot, 
Each  to  be  first  in  heralding  of  joy! 
With  silence  sandalled,  so  they  weave  their  way, 
And  so  they  stand,  with  silence  panoplied. 
Chanting,  through  mystic  symbollings  of  flame, 
Their  solemn  invocation  to  the  light. 

O  changeless  guardians!     O  ye  wizard  firs! 
What  strenuous  philter  feeds  your  potency. 
That  thus  ye  rest,  in  sweet  wood-hardiness. 
Ready  to  learn  of  all  and  utter  naught? 
What  breath  may  move  ye,  or  what  breeze  invite 
To  odorous  hot  lendings  of  the  heart? 
What  wind — but  all  the  winds  are  yet  afar, 
And  e'en  the  little  tricksy  zephyr  sprites, 
That  fleet  before  them,  like  their  elfin  locks. 
Have  lagged  in  sleep,  nor  stir  nor  waken  yet 
To  pluck  the  robe  of  patient  majesty. 

Too  still  for  dreaming,  too  divine  for  sleep, 
So  range  the  firs,  the  constant,  fearless  ones. 
Warders  of  mountain  secrets,  there  they  wait, 
Each  with  his  cloak  about  him,  breathless,  calm. 
And  yet  expectant,  as  who  knows  the  dawn. 
And  all  night  thrills  with  memory  and  desire, 
Searching  in  what  has  been  foi  what  shall  be: 
The  marvel  of  the  ne'er  familiar  day. 
Sacred  investiture  of  life  renewed. 
The  chrism  of  dew,  the  coronal  of  flame. 

Low  in  the  valley  lies  the  conquered  rout 
Of  man's  poor  trivial  turmoil,  lost  and  drowned 
Under  the  mist,  in  gleaming  rivers  rolled. 
Where  oozy  marsh  contends  with  frothing  main. 


13 1 2  Poems  of  Nature 

And  rounding  all,  springs  one  full,  ambient  arch, 
One  great  good  limpid  world — so  still,  so  still! 
For  no  sound  echoes  from  its  crystal  curve 
Save  four  clear  notes,  the  song  of  that  lone  bird^^''^^  ^ 
Who,  brave  but  trembling,  tries  his  morning  hymri>'''T  ' 
And  has  no  heart  to  finish,  for  the  awe  '^ 

And  wonder  of  this  pearling  globe  of  dawn.       '  ^i^^i-EQ 

■  ''■  ■/voTI 

Light,  light  eternal!  veiling-place  of  stars! 

Light,  the  revealer  of  dread  beauty's  face! 

Weaving  whereof  the  hills  are  lambent  clad! 

Mighty  libation  to  the  Unknown  God! 

Cup  whereat  pine-trees  slake  their  giant  thirst 

And  little  leaves  drink  sweet  dehrium! 

Being  and  breath  and  potion!    Living  soul 

And  all-informing  heart  of  all  that  Hves! 

How  can  we  magnify  thine  awful  name 

Save  by  its  chanting:  Light!  and  light!  and  light! 

An  exhalation  from  far  sky  retreats. 

It  grows  in  silence,  as  'twere  self-create, 

Suffusing  all  the  dusky  web  of  night. 

But  one  lone  corner  it  invades  not  yet, 

Where  low  above  a  black  and  rimy  crag 

Hangs  the  old  moon,  thin  as  a  battered  shield, 

The  holy,  useless  shield  of  long-past  wars. 

Dinted  and  frosty,  on  the  crystal  dark. 

But  lo!  the  east, — let  none  forget  the  east, 

Pathway  ordained  of  old  where  He  should  tread. 

Through  some  sweet  magic  common  in  the  skies 

The  rosy  banners  are  with  saffron  tinct : 

The  saffron  grows  to  gold,  the  gold  is  lire, 

And  led  by  silence  more  majestical 

Than  clash  of  conquering  arms.  He  comes!    He  comes! 

He  holds  his  spear  benignant,  sceptrewise, 

And  strikes  out  flame  from  the  adoring  hills. 

Alice  Brown  [1857- 


Ode  to   Evening  ^3^3 

.nif.-i  \j':r/i-')   p'i    ,-:'!f;^/'  -''.ire. I-   iTii  'I"!!}" 

ODE  TO  EVENING 

If  aught  of  oaten  stop,  or  pastoral  song, 

May  hope,  chaste  Eve,  to  soothe  thy  modest  ear, 

Like  thy  own  solemn  springs, 

Thy  springs  and  dying  gales; 

O  Nymph  reserved,  while  now  the  bright-haired  sun 
Sits  in  yon  western  tent,  whose  cloudy  skirts. 

With  brede  ethereal  wove, 

O'erhang  his  wavy  bed : 

Now  air  is  hushed,  save  where  the  weak-eyed  bat 
With  short  shrill  shriek  flits  by  on  leathern  wing. 

Or  where  the  beetle  winds 

His  small  but  sullen  horn, 

As  oft  he  rises,  'midst  the  twilight  path 
Against  the  pilgrim  borne  in  heedless  hum: 

Now  teach  me,  maid  composed. 

To  breathe  some  softened  strain. 

Whose  numbers,  stealing  through  thy  darkening  vale. 
May  not  unseemly  with  its  stillness  suit. 

As,  musing  slow%  I  hail 

Thy  genial  loved  return! 

For  when  thy  folding-star  arising  shows 
His  paly  circlet,  at  his  warning  lamp 

The  fragrant  Hours,  and  Elves 

Who  slept  in  buds  the  day, 

And  many  a  Nymph  who  wreathes  her  brows  with  sedge. 
And  sheds  the  freshening  dew,  and,  lovelier  still, 

The  pensive  Pleasures  sweet. 

Prepare  thy  shadowy  car: 

Then  lead,  calm  votaress,  where  some  sheety  lake 
Cheers  the  lone  heath,  or  some  time-hallowed  pile. 

Or  upland  fallows  gray 

Reflect  its  last  cool  gleam. 


13 14  Poems  of  Nature 

Or,  if  chill  blustering  winds,  or  driving  rain, 
Prevent  my  willing  feet,  be  mine  the  hut 

That,  from  the  mountain's  side. 

Views  wilds  and  swelling  floods,  '{^ub  il 

And  hamlets  brown,  and  dim-discovered  spires, 
And  hears  their  simple  bell,  and  marks  o'er  all 

Thy  dewy  fingers  draw 

The  gradual  dusky  veil. 

While  Spring  shall  pour  his  showers,  as  of  the  wont, 
And  bathe  thy  breathing  tresses,  meekest  Eve! 

While  Summer  loves  to  sport  7 

Beneath  thy  lingering  light; 

While  sallow  Autumn  fills  thy  lap  with  leaves. 
Or  Winter,  yelling  through  the  troublous  air. 

Affrights  thy  shrinking  train, 

And  rudely  rends  thy  robes: 

So  long,  regardful  of  thy  quiet  rule. 

Shall  Fancy,  Friendship,  Science,  smUing  Peace, 

Thy  gentlest  influence  own. 

And  hymn  thy  favorite  name! 

William  Collins  [1721-1759] 


'IT  IS  A  BEAUTEOUS  EVENING,  CALM  AND  FREE" 

It  is  a  beauteous  evening,  calm  and  free;       '  " 

The  holy  time  is  quiet  as  a  Nun  ^ 

Breathless  with  adoration;  the  broad  sun 

Is  sinking  down  in  his  tranquility; 

The  gentleness  of  heaven  broods  o'er  the  Sea; 

Listen!  the  mighty  Being  is  awake, 

And  doth  with  his  eternal  motion  make 

A  sound  like  thunder — everlastingly. 

Dear  Child!  dear  Girl!  that  walkest  with  me  here. 

If  thou  appear  untouched  by  solemn  thought,j£ 


Evening   Melody  '^3^5 

Thy  nature  is  not  therefore  less  divine; 
Thou  liest  in  Abraham's  bosom  all  the  year, 
And  worship'st  at  the  Temple's  inner  shrine, 
God  being  with  thee  when  we  know  it  not. 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 


GLOAMING 

Skies  to  the  West  are  stained  with  madder; 
Amber  light  on  the  rare  blue  hills; 
The  sough  of  the  pines  is  growing  sadder; 
From  the  meadow-lands  sound  the  whippoorwills. 

Air  is  sweet  with  the  breath  of  clover;'-' 

Dusk  is  on,  and  the  day  is  over. 

Skies  to  the  East  are  streaked  with  golden; 
Tremulous  light  on  the  darkening  pond; 
Glow-worms  pale,  to  the  dark  beholden; 
Twitterings  hush  in  the  hedge  beyond. 

Air  is  sweet  with  the  breath  of  clover; 

Silver  the  hills  where  the  moon  climbs  overi"' 
Robert  Adgcr  Bowen  [1868- 


EVENING  MELODY  1  d 

O  THAT  the  pines  which  crown  yon  steep        i .     q- 

Their  lires  might  ne'er  surrender! 
O  that  yon  fervid  knoll  might  keep,  ,.7 

While  lasts  the  world,  its  splendor! 


Pale  poplars  on  the  breeze  that  lean, 

And  in  the  sunset  shiver, 
O  that  your  golden  stems  might  screen 

For  aye  yon  glassy  river! 

That  yon  white  bird  on  homeward  wing 
Soft-sliding  without  motion. 

And  now  in  blue  air  vanishing 
Like  snow-flake  lost  in  ocean. 


13 1 6  Poems  of  Nature 

Beyond  our  sight  might  never  flee,  '^'^  '•'"T^ 

Yet  forward  stifl  be  flying; 
And  ah  the  dying  day  might  be 

Immortal  in  its  dying! 

Pellucid  thus  in  saintly  trance, 

Thus  mute  in  expectation, 
What  waits  the  earth?    Deliverance? 

Ah  no !    Transfiguration !  .  ^;  ■ 

.  /' 
She  dreams  of  that  "New  Earth"  divine,  ■ 

Conceived  of  seed  immortal; 
She  sings  "Not  mine  the  holier  shrine, 

Yet  mine  the  steps  and  portal!" 

Aubrey  Thomas  de  Vcre  [1814-1902] 


"IN  THE  COOL  OF  THE  EVENING" 

In  the  cool  of  the  evening,  when  the  low  sweet  whispers 
waken, 
When  the  laborers  turn  them  homeward,  and  the  weary 
have  their  will, 
When  the  censers  of  the  roses  o'er  the  forest  aisles  are 
shaken, 
Is  it  but  the  wind  that  cometh  o'er  the  far  green  hill? 

For  they  say  'tis  but  the  sunset  winds  that  wander  through 
the  heather, 
Rustle  all  the  meadow-grass  and  bend  the  dewy  fern; 
They  say  'tis  but  the  winds  that  bow  the  reeds  in  prayer 
together, 
And  fill  the  shaken  pools  with  fire  along  the  shadowy 
burn. 

In  the  beauty  of  the  twilight,  in  the  Garden  that  He  loveth, 
They  have  veiled  His  lovely  vesture  with  the  darkness  of 
a  name! 
Through  His  Garden,  through  His  Garden,  it  is  but  the  wind 
that  moveth, 
No  more!    But  O  the  miracle,  the  miracle  is  the  Same. 


At   Perivale  131 7 

In  the  cool  of  the  evening,  when  the  sky  is  an  old  story, 
Slowly  dying,  but  remembered,  ay,  and  loved  with  pas- 
sion still  .  .  . 
Hush!  .  .  .  the  fringes  of  His  garment,  in  the  fading  golden 
glory 
Softly  rustling  as  He  cometh  o'er  the  far  green  hill. 

Alfred  Noyes  [1880- 

TWILIGHT 

Spirit  of  Twilight,  through  your  folded  wings 

I  catch  a  glimpse  of  your  averted  face, 
And  rapturous  on  a  sudden,  my  soul  sings 

"Is  not  this  common  earth  a  holy  place?" 

Spirit  of  Twilight,  you  are  like  a  song 
That  sleeps,  and  waits  a  singer, — like  a  hymn 

That  God  finds  lovely  and  keeps  near  Him  long, 
Till  it  is  choired  by  aureoled  cherubim. 

Spirit  of  Twilight,  in  the  golden  gloom 

Of  dreamland  dim  I  sought  you,  and  I  found 

A  woman  sitting  in  a  silent  room 

Full  of  white  flowers  that  moved  and  made  no  sound. 

These  white  flowers  were  the  thoughts  you  bring  to  alL 
And  the  room's  name  is  Mystery  where  you  sit. 

Woman  whom  we  call  Twilight,  when  night's  pall 
You  lift  across  our  Earth  to  cover  it. 

Olive  Custancc  [1874- 

TWILIGHT  AT  SEA 

The  twilight  hours,  like  birds,  flew  by, 

As  lightly  and  as  free, 
Ten  thousand  stars  were  in  the  sky, 

Ten  thousand  on  the  sea; 
For  every  wave,  with  dimpled  face. 

That  leaped  upon  the  air. 
Had  caught  a  star  in  its  embrace, 

And  held  it  trembling  there. 

Amelia  C.  Welby  [1819-1852] 


13 1 8  Poems  of  Nature 


"THIS  IS  MY  HOUR" 
I 

The  ferries  ply  like  shuttles  in  a  loom, 
And  many  barques  come  in  across  the  bay 

To  lights  and  bells  that  signal  through  the  gloom 
Of  twilight  gray; 

And  like  the  brown  soft  flutter  of  the  snow 

The  wide-winged  sea-birds  droop  from  closing  skies, 

And  hover  near  the  water,  circling  low. 
As  the  day  dies. 

The  city  like  a  shadowed  castle  stands, 

Its  turrets  indistinctly  touching  night; 
Like  earth-born  stars  far  fetched  from  faerie  lands, 

Its  lamps  are  bright. 

This  is  my  hour, — when  wonder  springs  anew 
To  see  the  towers  ascending,  pale  and  high, 

And  the  long  seaward  distances  of  blue, 
And  the  dim  sky?        ''■>"^<i>m' 


This  is  my  hour,  between  the  day  and  night; 
The  sun  has  set  and  all  the  world  is  still. 
The  afterglow  upon  the  distant  hill 

Is  as  a  holy  light. 

This  is  my  hour,  between  the  sun  and  moon; 
The  little  stars  are  gathering  in  the  sky, 
There  is  no  sound  but  one  bird's  startled  cry, 

One  note  that  ceases  soon. 

The  gardens  and,  far  off,  the  meadow-land. 
Are  like  the  fading  depths  beneath  a  sea, 
While  over  waves  of  misty  shadows  we 

Drift  onward,  hand  in  hand. 


Song  to   the   Evening  Star  13 19 

This  is  my  hour,  that  you  have  called  your  own; 
Its  hushed  beauty  silently  we  share, — 
Touched  by  the  wistful  wonder  in  the  air 

That  leaves  us  so  alone. 


Ill 

In  rain  and  twilight  mist  the  city  street, 
Hushed  and  half-hidden,  might  this  instant  be 
A  dark  canal  beneath  our  balcony, 

Like  one  in  Venice,  Sweet. 

The  street-lights  blossom,  star-wise,  one  by  one; 
A  lofty  tower  the  shadows  have  not  hid 
Stands  out — part  column  and  part  pyramid — 

Holy  to  look  upon. 

The  dusk  grows  deeper,  and  on  silver  wings 
The  twilight  flutters  like  a  weary  gull 
Toward  some  sea-island,  lost  and  beautiful, 

Where  a  sea-syren  sings. 

"This  is  my  hour,"  you  breathe  with  quiet  lips; 
And  filled  with  beauty,  dreaming  and  devout, 
We  sit  in  silence,  while  our  thoughts  go  out  — 

Like  treasure -seeking  ships. 

Zoe  A  kins  ir886- 


SONG  TO  THE  EVENING  STAR 

Star  that  bringest  home  the  bee, 
And  sett'st  the  weary  laborer  free! 
If  any  star  shed  peace,  'tis  thou 

That  send'st  it  from  above. 
Appearing  when  Heaven's  breath  and  brow 

Are  sweet  as  hers  we  love. 

Come  to  the  luxuriant  skies, 
Whilst  the  landscape's  odors  rise, 


1320  Poems  of  Nature  ;nrro? 

Whilst  far-off  lowing  herds  are  heard 

And  songs  when  toil  is  done, 
From  cottages  whose  smoke  unstirred 

Curls  yellow  in  the  sun. 

Star  of  love's  soft  interviews. 

Parted  lovers  on  thee  muse; 

Their  remembrancer  in  Heaven  ■ '  '  ■  ^ 

Of  thrilling  vows  thou  art,  •jrfauH 

Too  delicious  to  be  riven 

By  absence  from  the  heart. 

Thomas  Campbell  [1777-1844] 

THE  EVENING   CLOUD 

A  CLOUD  lay  cradled  near  the  setting  sun, 

A  gleam  of  crimson  tinged  its  braided  snow; 
Long  had  I  watched  the  glory  moving  on     ■ 

O'er  the  still  radiance  of  the  lake  below:^  ^"T 
Tranquil  its  spirit  seemed,  and  floated  slow! 

Even  in  its  very  motion  there  was  rest; 
While  every  breath  of  eve  that  chanced  to  blow 

Wafted  the  traveller  to  the  beauteous  west. 
Emblem,  methought,  of  the  departed  soul! 

To  whose  white  robe  the  gleam  of  bliss  is  given. 
And  by  the  breath  of  mercy  made  to  roll 

Right  onwards  to  the  golden  gates  of  heaven. 
Where  to  the  eye  of  faith  it  peaceful  lies. 
And  tells  to  man  his  glorious  destinies. 

John  Wilson  [1785-1854] 

SONG:  TO  CYNTHIA 

From  "  Cynthia's  Revels  " 

Queen  and  huntress,  chaste  and  fair. 
Now  the  sun  is  laid  to  sleep, 
Seated  in  thy  silver  chair. 
State  in  wonted  manner  keep: 

Hesperus  entreats  thy  light, 

Goddess  excellently  bright. 


Night  132 1 

Earth,  let  not  thy  envious  shade 
Dare  itself  to  interpose; 
Cynthia's  shining  orb  was  made 
Heaven  to  clear,  when  day  did  close: 

Bless  us  then  with  wished  sight, 

Goddess  excellently  bright. 

Lay  thy  bow  of  pearl  apart, 
And  thy  crystal-shining  quiver; 
Give  unto  the  flying  hart 
Space  to  breathe,  how  short  soever: 

Thou  that  mak'st  a  day  of  night, 

Goddess  excellently  bright. 

Ben  Jonson  [i573?-i637] 


MY  STAR 

All  that  I  know 

Of  a  certain  star 
Is,  it  can  throw 

(Like  the  angled  spar) 
Now  a  dart  of  red. 

Now  a  dart  of  blue. 
Till  my  friends  have  said 
They  would  fain  see,  too, 
My  star  that  dartles  the  red  and  the  blue! 
Then  it  stops  like  a  bird;  like  a  flower,  hangs  furled: 

They  must  solace  themselves  with  the  Saturn  above  it. 
What  matter  to  me  if  their  star  is  a  world? 

Mine  has  opened  its  soul  to  me;  therefore  I  love  it. 
Robert  Broii)ii)ig  [181 2-1889] 


NIGHT 

The  sun  descending  in  the  West, 
The  evening  star  does  shine; 
The  birds  are  silent  in  their  nest, 
And  I  must  seek  for  mine. 


1322  .  Poems  of  Nature 

The  moon,  like  a  flower 
In  heaven's  high  bower, 
With  silent  delight 
Sits  and  smiles  on  the  night. 

Farewell,  green  fields  and  happy  grove, 

Where  flocks  have  ta'en  delight ; 

Where  lambs  have  nibbled,  silent  move 

The  feet  of  angels  bright: 
Unseen,  they  pour  blessing, 
And  joy  without  ceasing. 
On  each  bud  and  blossom, 
On  each  sleeping  bosom. 

They  look  in  every  thoughtless  nest, 
Where  birds  are  covered  warm, 
They  visit  caves  of  every  beast, 
To  keep  them  aU  from  harm. 
If  they  see  any  weeping 
That  should  have  been  sleeping,^ 
They  pour  sleep  on  their  head,        ; 
And  sit  down  by  their  bed. 

When  wolves  and  tigers  howl  for  prey 
They  pitying  stand  and  weep. 
Seeking  to  drive  their  thirst  away, 
And  keep  them  from  the  sheep. 

But,  if  they  rush  dreadful, 

The  angels,  most  heedful. 

Receive  each  mild  spirit 

New  worlds  to  inherit. 

And  there  the  lion's  ruddy  eyes 
ShaU  flow  with  tears  of  gold: 
And  pitying  the  tender  cries. 
And  walking  round  the  fold, 

Saying:  "Wrath  by  His  meekness, 
And  by  His  health,  sickness, 
Are  driven  away 
From  our  immortal  day. 


To   Night  1323 

"And  now  beside  ihee,  bleating  Iamb, 
I  can  lie  down  and  sleep. 
Or  think  on  Him  who  bore  Ihy  name, 
Graze  after  thee,  and  weep. 

For,  washed  in  life's  river, 

My  bright  mane  for  ever 

Shall  shine  like  the  gold. 

As  I  guard  o'er  the  fold." 

William  Blake  [1757-1S27] 

TO  NIGHT 

Swiftly  walk  o'er  the  western  wave. 

Spirit  of  Night ! 
Out  of  the  misty  eastern  cave 
Where,  all  the  long  and  lone  daylight. 
Thou  wovest  dreams  of  joy  and  fear, 
Which  make  thee  terrible  and  dear, 

Swift  be  thy  flight! 

Wrap  thy  form  in  a  mantle  gray. 

Star-inwrought! 
Blind  with  thine  hair  the  eyes  of  Day; 
Kiss  her  until  she  be  wearied  out, 
Then  wander  o'er  city,  and  sea,  and  land, 
Touching  all  with  thine  opiate  wand — 

Come,  long-sought! 

When  I  arose  and  saw  the  dawn, 

I  sighed  for  thee; 
When  light  rode  high,  and  the  dew  was  gonC; 
And  noon  lay  heavy  on  flower  and  tree. 
And  the  weary  Day  turned  to  his  rest. 
Lingering  like  an  unloved  guest, 

I  sighed  for  thee. 

Thy  brother  Death  came,  and  cried, 

"Would'st  thou  me?" 
Thy  sweet  child  Sleep,  the  filmy-eyed, 
Murmured  like  a  noontide  bee,  '^ 


1324  Poems  of  Nature 

"Shall  I  nestle  near  thy  side? 
Would 'st  thou  me?" — And  I  replied, 
"No,  not  thee." 

Death  will  come  when  thou  art  dead, 

Soon,  too  soon — 
Sleep  will  come  when  thou  art  fled; 
Of  neither  would  I  ask  the  boon 
I  ask  of  thee,  beloved  Night — 
Swift  be  thine  approaching  flight. 

Come  soon,  soon! 

Percy  Bysshc  Shelley  [1792-1822] 

TO  NIGHT 

Mysterious  Night !  when  our  first  parent  knew 
Thee  from  report  divine,  and  heard  thy  name. 
Did  he  not  tremble  for  this  lovely  frame. 
This  glorious  canopy  of  light  and  blue? 
Yet  'neath  the  curtain  of  translucent  dew, 
Bathed  in  the  rays  of  the  great  setting  flame, 
Hesperus  with  the  host  of  heaven  came. 
And  lo!  creation  widened  on  man's  view. 
Who  could  have  thought  such  darkness  lay  concealed 
Within  thy  beams,  O  Sun!  or  who  could  find. 
While  fly,  and  leaf,  and  insect  stood  revealed, 
That  to  such  countless  orbs  thou  mad'st  us  blind! 
Why  do  we,  then,  shun  Death  with  anxious  strife? — 
If  Light  can  thus  deceive,  wherefore  not  Life? 

Joseph  Blanco  White  [17 75-1 841] 

NIGHT 

Mysterious  night!    Spread  wide  thy  silvery  plume! 
Soft  as  swan's  down,  brood  o'er  the  sapphirine 
Breadth  of  stiU  shadowy  waters  dark  as  wine; 
Smooth  out  the  liquid  heavens  that  stars  illume! 
Come  with  fresh  airs  breathing  the  faint  perfume 
Of  deep-walled  gardens,  groves  of  whispering  pine; 
Scatter  soft  dews,  waft  pure  sea-scent  of  brine; 
In  sweet  repose  man's  pain,  man's  love  resume! 


Night  1325 

Deep-bosomed  night !    Not  here  where  down  the  marge 

Marble  with  palaces  those  lamps  of  earth 

Tremble  on  trembhng  blackness;  nay,  far  hence, 

There  on  the  lake  where  space  is  lone  and  large, 

And  man's  life  lost  in  broad  indifference, 

Lift  thou  the  soul  to  spheres  that  gave  her  birth! 

John  Addinglon  Symonds  [1840-1893] 

NIGHT 

Night  is  the  time  for  rest; 

How  sweet,  when  labors  close, 
To  gather  round  an  aching  breast 

The  curtain  of  repose. 
Stretch  the  tired  limbs,  and  lay  the  head 
Down  on  our  own  delightful  bed! 

Night  is  the  time  for  dreams; 

The  gay  romance  of  life, 
When  truth  that  is,  and  truth  that  seems, 

Blend  in  fantastic  strife; 
Ah!  visions,  less  beguiling  far 
Than  waking  dreams  by  daylight  are! 

Night  is  the  time  for  toil; 

To  plough  the  classic  field, 
Intent  to  find  the  buried  spoil 

Its  wealthy  furrows  yield; 
Till  all  is  ours  that  sages  taught. 
That  poets  sang,  or  heroes  wrought. 

Night  is  the  time  to  weep; 

To  wet  with  unseen  tears 
Those  graves  of  Memory,  where  sleep 

The  joys  of  other  years; 
Hopes,  that  were  Angels  at  their  birth, 
But  perished  young,  like  things  of  earth. 

Night  is  the  time  to  watch; 

O'er  ocean's  dark  expanse. 
To  hail  the  Pleiades,  or  catch 

The  full  moon's  earliest  glance, 


132.6  Poems  of  Nature 

That  brings  into  the  homesick  mind 
All  we  have  loved  and  left  behind. 

Night  is  the  time  for  care; 

Brooding  on  hours  misspent, 
To  see  the  spectre  of  Despair  ■■'"• 

Come  to  our  lonely  tent ;  •' 

Like  Brutus,  'midst  his  slumbering  host, 
Summoned  to  die  by  Caesar's  ghost. 

Night  is  the  time  to  think; 

When,  from  the  eye,  the  soul 
Takes  flight;  and,  on  the  utmost  brink, 

Of  yonder  starry  pole 
Descries  beyond  the  abyss  of  night 
The  dawn  of  uncreated  hght. 

Night  is  the  time  to  pray; 

Our  Saviour  oft  withdrew 
To  desert  mountains  far  away; 

So  will  his  followers  do, — 
Steal  from  the  throng  to  haunts  untrod, 
And  hold  communion  there  with  God. 

Night  is  the  time  for  Death; 

When  all  around  is  peace. 
Calmly  to  yield  the  weary  breath. 

From  sin  and  suffering  cease, 
Think  of  heaven's  bliss,  and  give  the  sign 
To  parting  friends; — such  death  be  mine! 

James  Montgomery  [1771-1854] 

HE  MADE  THE   NIGHT 

Vast  Chaos,  of  eld,  was  God's  dominion; 
'Twas  His  beloved  child,  His  own  first-born; 
And  He  was  aged  ere  the  thought  of  morn 
Shook  the  sheer  steeps  of  dim  Obhvion. 
Then  all  the  works  of  darkness  being  done 
Through  countless  sons  hopelessly  forlorn, 
1  Out  to  the  very  utmost  verge  and  bourne, 

God  at  the  last,  reluctant,  made  the  sun. 


Hymn   to  the   Night  1327 

He  loved  His  darkness  still,  for  it  was  old; 

He  grieved  to  see  His  eldest  child  take  flight ; 

And  when  His  Fiai  Lux  the  death-knell  tolled, 

As  the  doomed  Darkness  backward  by  Him  rolled. 
He  snatched  a  remnant  flying  into  light 
And  strewed  it  with  the  stars,  and  called  it  Night. 
Lloyd  Mifflin  [1846- 

HYMN  TO  THE  NIGHT 

I  HEARD  the  trailing  garments  of  the  Night 

Sweep  through  her  marl^le  halls! 
I  saw  her  sable  skirts  all  fringed  with  light 

From  the  celestial  walls! 

I  felt  her  presence,  by  its  spell  of  might, 

Stoop  o'er  me  from  above; 
The  calm,  majestic  presence  of  the  Night, 

As  of  the  one  I  love. 

I  heard  the  sounds  of  sorrow  and  delight, 

The  manifold,  soft  chimes, 
That  fill  the  haunted  chambers  of  the  Night, 

Like  some  old  poet's  rhymes. 

From  the  cool  cisterns  of  the  midnight  air 

My  spirit  drank  repose; 
The  fountain  of  perpetual  peace  flows  there, — - 

From  those  deep  cisterns  flows. 

O  holy  Night!  from  thee  I  learn  to  bear 

What  man  has  borne  before! 
Thou  layest  thy  finger  on  the  lips  of  Care, 

And  they  complain  no  more. 

Peace!  Peace!  Orestes-like  I  breathe  this  prayer! 

Descend  with  broad-winged  flight, 
The  welcome,  the  thrice-prayed  for,  the  most  fair, 

The  best-beloved  Night ! 

Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  [180 7- 188 2] 


1328  -i,- Poems  of  Nature 


NIGHT'S  MARDI  GRAS 

Night  is  the  true  democracy.    When  day 
Like  some  great  monarch  with  his  train  has  passed, 
In  regal  pomp  and  splendor  to  the  last, 
The  stars  troop  forth  along  the  Milky  Way, 
A  jostling  crowd,  in  radiant  disarray. 
On  heaven's  broad  boulevard  in  pageants  vast. 
And  things  of  earth,  the  hunted  and  outcast, 
Come  from  their  haunts  and  hiding-places;  yea. 
Even  from  the  nooks  and  crannies  of  the  mind 
Visions  uncouth  and  vagrant  fancies  start. 
And  specters  of  dead  joy,  that  shun  the  light, 
And  impotent  regrets  and  terrors  blind. 

Each  one,  in  form  grotesque,  playing  its  part 
In  the  fantastic  Mardi  Gras  of  Night. 

Edward  J.  Wheeler  [1859- 

DAWN  AND  DARK 

God  with  His  million  cares 
Went  to  the  left  or  right. 
Leaving  our  world;  and  the  day 
Grew  night. 

Back  from  a  sphere  He  came 

Over  a  starry  lawn. 
Looked  at  our  world;  and  the  dark 
Grew  dawn. 

Norman  Gale  [1862- 

DAWN 

His  radiant  fingers  so  adorning 
Earth  that  in  silent  joy  she  thrills. 

The  ancient  day  stands  every  morning 
Above  the  flowing  eastern  hills. 

This  day  the  new-born  world  hath  taken 
Within  his  mantHng  arms  of  white, 


A  Wood  Song  1329 

And  sent  her  forth  by  fear  unshaken 
To  walk  among  the  stars  in  light. 

Risen  with  laughter  unto  leaping, 
His  feet  untired,  undimmed  his  eyes, 

The  old,  old  day  comes  up  from  sleeping, 
Fresh  as  a  flower,  for  new  emprise. 

The  curtain  of  the  night  is  parted 

That  once  again  the  dawn  may  tread. 

In  spotless  garments,  ways  uncharted 
And  death  a  million  times  is  dead. 

Slow  speechless  music  robed  in  splendor 

The  deep  sky  sings  eternally. 
With  childlike  wonderment  to  render 

Its  own  unwearied  symphony. 

Reborn  between  the  great  suns  spinning 
Forever  where  men's  prayers  ascend, 

God's  day  in  love  hath  its  beginning, 
And  the  beginning  hath  no  end. 

George  B.  Logan,  Jr.  [i8 


A  WOOD  SONG 

Now  one  and  all,  you  Roses, 
Wake  up,  you  lie  too  long! 

This  very  morning  closes 
The  Nightingale  his  song; 

Each  from  its  olive  chamber 

His  babies  every  one 
This  very  morning  clamber 

Into  the  shining  sun. 

You  Slug-a-beds  and  Simples, 

Why  will  you  so  delay! 
Dears,  dofif  your  olive  wimples. 

And  listen  while  you  may. 

Ralph  Hodgson  [i8 


THE  CHANGING  YEAR 

A  SONG  FOR  THE   SEASONS 

When  the  merry  lark  doth  gild 

With  his  song  the  summer  hours, 
And  their  nests  the  swallows  build 

In  the  roofs  and  tops  of  towers, 
And  the  golden  broom-flower  burns 

All  about  the  waste, 
And  the  maiden  May  returns 

With  a  pretty  haste, — 

Then,  how  merry  are  the  times! 

The  Spring  times!  the  Summer  times! 

Now,  from  off  the  ashy  stone 

The  chilly  midnight  cricket  crieth, 
And  all  merry  birds  are  flown. 

And  our  dream  of  pleasure  dieth; 
Now  the  once  blue,  laughing  sky 

Saddens  into  gray. 
And  the  frozen  rivers  sigh. 

Pining  all  away! 
Now,  how  solemn  are  the  times! 
The  Winter  times!  the  Night  times! 

Yet,  be  merry;  all  around 

Is  through  one  vast  change  revolving; 
Even  Night,  who  lately  frowned, 

Is  in  paler  dawn  dissolving; 
Earth  will  burst  her  fetters  strange, 

And  in  Spring  grow  free; 
All  things  in  the  world  will  change, 
Save — my  love  for  thee! 
Sing  thett,  hopeful  are  all  times! 
Winter,  Spring,  Summer  times! 

Bryan  Waller  Procter  [1787 -1874] 
1330 


A  Song  of  the  Seasons  ^33^ 


A  SONG  OF  THE  SEASONS 

Sing  a  song  of  Spring-time, 

The  world  is  going  round, 
Blown  by  the  south  wind: 

Listen  to  its  sound. 
"Gurgle"  goes  the  mill-wheel, 

"Cluck"  clucks  the  hen; 
And  it's  O  for  a  pretty  girl 

To  kiss  in  the  glen. 

Sing  a  song  of  Summer, 

The  world  is  nearly  still, 
The  mill-pond  has  gone  to  sleep, 

And  so  has  the  mill. 
Shall  we  go  a-sailing, 
'       Or  shall  we  take  a  ride. 
Or  dream  the  afternoon  away 

Here,  side  by  side? 

Sing  a  song  of  Autumn, 

The  world  is  going  back; 
They  glean  in  the  corn-field, 

And  stamp  on  the  stack. 
Our  boy,  Charlie, 

Tall,  strong,  and  light: 
He  shoots  all  the  day 

And  dances  all  the  night. 

Sing  a  song  of  Winter, 

The  world  stops  dead; 
Under  snowy  coverlid 

Flowers  lie  abed. 
There'll  hunting  for  the  young  ones 

And  wine  for  the  old, 
And  a  sexton  in  the  churchyard 

Digging  in  the  cold. 

Cosmo  Monkhoiise  [i  840-1 901] 


1332  Poems  of  Nature 


TURN  O'  THE  YEAR 

This  is  the  time  when  bit  by  bit 
The  days  begin  to  lengthen  sweet 
And  every  minute  gained  is  joy — 
And  love  stirs  in  the  heart  of  a  boy. 

This  is  the  time  the  sun,  of  late 
Content  to  lie  abed  tUl  eight, 
Lifts  up  betimes  his  sleepy  head — 
And  love  stirs  in  the  heart  of  a  maid. 

This  is  the  time  we  dock  the  night 

Of  a  whole  hour  of  candlelight; 

When  song  of  linnet  and  thrush  is  heard— = 

And  love  stirs  in  the  heart  of  a  bird. 

This  is  the  time  when  sword-blades  green. 
With  gold  and  purple  damascene, 
Pierce  the  brown  crocus-bed  a-row — 
And  love  stirs  in  a  heart  I  know. 

Katharine  Tvnan  [1861- 


THE   WAKING   YEAR 

A  LADY  red  upon  the  hill 
Her  annual  secret  keeps; 

A  lady  white  within  the  field 
In  placid  lily  sleeps! 

Tlie  tidy  breezes  with  their  brooms 
Sweep  vale,  and  hill,  and  tree! 

Prithee,  my  pretty  housewives! 
Who  may  expected  be? 

The  neighbors  do  not  yet  suspect! 

The  woods  exchange  a  smile, — 
Orchard,  and  buttercup,  and  bird, 

In  such  a  little  while! 


Early   Spring  1333 

And  yet  how  still  the  landscape  stands, 

How  nonchalant  the  wood, 
As  if  the  resurrection 

Were  nothing  very  odd! 

Emily  Dickinson  [1830-18S6] 

SONG 

From  "Pippa  Passes" 

The  year's  at  the  spring, 
And  day's  at  the  morn; 
Morning's  at  seven; 
The  hill-side's  dew-pearled; 
The  lark's  on  the  wing; 
The  snail's  on  the  thorn; 
God's  in  His  Heaven — 
All's  right  with  the  world! 

Robert  Browning  [ 1 8 1 2-1 889] 

EARLY  SPRING 

Once  more  the  Heavenly  Power 

Makes  all  things  new, 
And  domes  the  red-plowed  hills 

With  loving  blue; 
The  blackbirds  have  their  wills, 

The  throstles  too. 

Opens  a  door  in  Heaven; 

From  skies  of  glass 
A  Jacob's  ladder  falls 

On  greening  grass, 
And  o'er  the  mountain-walls 

Young  angels  pass. 

Before  them  fleets  the  shower, 

And  burst  the  buds. 
And  shine  the  level  lands. 

And  flash  the  floods; 
The  stars  are  from  their  hands 

Flung  through  the  woods, 


1334  Poems  of  Nature 

The  woods  with  living  airs 

How  softly  fanned, 
Light  airs  from  where  the  deep,    :/. 

All  down  the  sand,  ' 

Is  breathing  in  his  sleep. 

Heard  by  the  land. 

O,  follow,  leaping  blood. 

The  season's  lure! 
O  heart,  look  down  and  up, 

Serene,  secure. 
Warm  as  the  crocus  cup, 

Like  snow-drops,  pure! 

Past,  Future  glimpse  and  fade 
Through  some  slight  spell, 

A  gleam  from  j^onder  vale, 
Some  far  blue  fell, 
^  '  And  sympathies,  how  frail, 

In  sound  and  smell! 

Till  at  thy  chuckled  note, 

Thou  twinkling  bird, 
The  fairy  fancies  range. 

And,  hghtly  stirred. 
Ring  little  bells  of  change 

From  word  to  word. 

For  now  the  Heavenly  Power 

Makes  all  things  new, 
And  thaws  the  cold,  and  fills 

The  flower  with  dew; 
The  blackbirds  have  their  wills, 

The  poets  too. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [i8og-i 

LINES  WRITTEN  IN  EARLY  SPRING 

I  HEARD  a  thousand  blended  notes, 
While  in  a  grove  I  sat  reclined, 
In  that  sweet  mood  when  pleasant  thoughts 
Bring  sad  thoughts  to  the  mind. 


In  Early   Spring  1335 

To  her  fair  works  did  Nature  link 
The  human  soul  that  through  me  ran; 
And  much  it  grieved  my  heart  to  think 
What  Man  has  made  of  Man. 

Through  primrose  tufts,  in  that  sweet  bower, 
The  periwinkle  trailed  its  wreaths; 
And  'tisjny  faith  that  every  flower 
Enjoys  the  air  it  breathes. 

The  birds  around  me  hopped  and  played, 
Their  thoughts  I  cannot  measure, — 
But  the  least  motion  which  they  made 
It  seemed  a  thrill  of  pleasure. 

The  budding  twigs  spread  out  their  fan 
To  catch  the  breezy  air; 
And  I  must  think,  do  all  I  can, 
That  there  was  pleasure  there. 

If  this  belief  from  heaven  be  sent. 
If  such  be  Nature's  holy  plan, 
Have  I  not  reason  to  lament 
What  Man  has  made  of  Man? 

WilMam  Wordsworth  [i 770-1850] 


IN  EARLY  SPRING 

0  SPRING,  I  know  thee!    Seek  for  sweet  surprise 
In  the  young  children's  eyes. 

But  I  have  learnt  the  years,  and  know  the  yet 

Leaf-folded  violet. 
Mine  ear,  awake  to  silence,  can  foretell 

The  cuckoo's  fitful  bell. 

1  wander  in  a  gray  time  that  encloses 
June  and  the  wild  hedge-roses. 

A  year's  procession  of  the  flowers  doth  pass 

My  feet,  along  the  grass. 
And  all  you  sweet  birds  silent  yet,  I  know 

The  notes  that  stir  you  so, 


1336  Poems  of  Nature 

Your  songs  yet  half  devised  in  the  dim  dear 

Beginnings  of  the  year. 
In  these  young  days  you  meditate  your  part; 

I  have  it  all  by  heart. 
I  know  the  secrets  of  the  seeds  of  flowers 

Hidden  and  warm  with  showers, 
And  how,  in  kindling  Spring,  the  cuckoo  shall 

Alter  his  interval. 
But  not  a  flower  or  song  I  ponder  is 

My  own,  but  memory's. 
I  shall  be  silent  in  those  days  desired 

Before  a  world  inspired. 
O  dear  brown  birds,  compose  your  old  song-phrases, 

Earth,  thy  familiar  daisies. 

The  poet  mused  upon  the  dusky  height, 

Between  two  stars  towards  night. 
His  purpose  in  his  heart.    I  watched,  a  space, 

The  meaning  of  his  face: 
There  was  the  secret,  fled  from  earth  and  skies, 

Hid  in  his  gray  young  eyes. 
My  heart  and  all  the  Summer  wait  his  choice, 

And  wonder  for  his  voice. 
Who  shall  foretell  his  songs,  and  who  aspire 
I  ...  .  But  to  divine  his  lyre? 

Sweet  earth,  we  know  thy  dimmest  mysteries. 

But  he  is  lord  of  his. 

Alice  Meyncll  [1853- 

SPRING 

From  "  Summer's  Last  Will  and  Testament  " 

Spring,  the  sweet  Spring,  is  the  year's  pleasant  king; 
Then  blooms  each  thing,  then  maids  dance  in  a  ring. 
Cold  doth  not  sting,  the  pretty  birds  do  sing — 
Cuckoo,  jug-jug,  pu-we,  to-witta-woo! 

The  palm  and  may  make  country  houses  gay, 
Lambs  frisk  and  play,  the  shepherds  pipe  all  day, 
And  we  hear  aye  birds  tune  this  merry  lay —      ; , 
Cuckoo,  jug-jug,  pu-we,  to-witta-woo!  ; 


"When   Daffodils   Begin  to   Peer"     1337 

The  fields  breathe  sweet,  the  daisies  kiss  our  feet, 
Young  lovers  meet,  old  wives  a-sunning  sit, 
In  every  street  these  tunes  our  ears  do  greet — 
Cuckoo,  jug-jug,  pu-we,  to-witta-too! 
Spring,  the  sweet  Spring! 

Thomas  Nashe  [15 67-1 601] 


A  STARLING'S  SPRING  RONDEL 

I  CLINK  my  Castanet 

And  beat  my  httle  drum ; 

For  spring  at  last  has  come, 
And  on  my  parapet 
Of  chestnut,  gummy-wet. 

Where  bees  begin  to  hum, 
I  clink  my  castanet. 

And  beat  my  Httle  drum. 

"Spring  goes,"  you  say,  "suns  set." 

So  be  it!    Why  be  glum? 

Enough,  the  spring  has  come; 
And  without  fear  or  fret 
I  clink  my  castanet, 

And  beat  my  Httle  drum, 

James  Cousins  [1873- 


'WHEN  DAFFODILS   BEGIN  TO  PEER" 

(  From  "The  Winter's  Tale" 

When  daffodils  begin  to  peer, 

With  heigh!  the  doxy,  over  the  dale. 

Why,  then  comes  in  the  sweet  o'  the  year; 
For  the  red  blood  reigns  in  the  winter's  pale. 

The  white  sheet  bleaching  on  the  hedge, 

With  heigh!  the  sweet  birds,  O,  how  they  sing! 

Doth  set  my  pugging  tooth  on  edge; 
For  a  quart  of  ale  is  a  dish  for  a  king. 


1338  Poems  of  Nature 

The  lark,  that  tirra-hrra  chants, 

With  heigh!  with  heigh!  the  thrush  and  the  jay, 
Are  summer  songs  for  me  and  my  aunts, 

While  we  lie  tumbling  in  the  hay. 

William  Shakes psare  [1564-16 16] 


SPRING 

From  "  In  Memoriam  " 
LXXXIII 

Dip  down  upon  the  northern  shore, 
O  sweet  new-year,  delaying  long; 
Thou  doest  expectant  Nature  wrong. 

Delaying  long,  delay  no  more. 

What  stays  thee  from  the  clouded  noons, 
Thy  sweetness  from  its  proper  place? 
Can  trouble  live  with  April  days, 

Or  sadness  in  the  summer  moons? 

Bring  orchis,  bring  the  fox-glove  spire, 
The  little  speedwell's  darhng  blue. 
Deep  tulips  dashed  with  fiery  dew, 

Laburnums,  dropping-wells  of  fire. 

O  thou,  new-year,  delaying  long, 
Delayest  the  sorrow  in  my  blood, 
That  longs  to  burst  a  frozen  bud. 

And  flood  a  fresher  throat  with  song. 

cxv 

Now  fades  the  last  long  streak  of  snow. 
Now  burgeons  every  maze  of  quick 
About  the  flowering  squares,  and  thick 
•t,':By  ashen  roots  the  violets  blow. 

Now  rings  the  woodland  loud  and  long. 
The  distance  takes  a  lovelier  hue. 
And  drowned  in  yonder  living  blue 

The  lark  becomes  a  sightless  song. 


"When  the   Hounds  of  Spring"     1339 

Now  dance  the  lights  on  lawn  and  lea, 
The  flocks  are  whiter  down  the  vale, 
And  milkier  every  milky  sail, 

On  winding  stream  or  distant  sea; 

Where  now  the  seamew  pipes,  or  dives 
In  yonder  greening  gleam,  and  fly 
The  happy  birds,  that  change  their  sky 

To  build  and  brood,  that  live  their  lives 

From  land  to  land;  and  in  my  breast 
Spring  wakens  too:  and  my  regret 
Become  an  April  violet, 

And  buds  and  blossoms  like  the  rest. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1800-1892] 

"THE  SPRING  RETURNS" 

The  Spring  returns!    What  matters  then  that  War 

On  the  horizon  like  a  beacon  burns. 

That  Death  ascends,  man's  most  desired  star, 

That  Darkness  is  his  hope?     The  Spring  returns! 

Triumphant  through  the  wider-arched  cope 

She  comes,  she  comes,  unto  her  tyranny, 

And  at  her  coronation  are  set  ope 

The  prisons  of  the  mind,  and  man  is  free! 

The  beggar-garbed  or  over-bent  with  snows, 

Each  mortal,  long  defeated,  disallowed, 

Feeling  her  touch,  grows  stronger  limbed,  and  knows 

The  purple  on  his  shoulders  and  is  proud. 

The  Spring  returns!     O  madness  beyond  sense,  ;^. 

Breed  in  our  bones  thine  own  omnipotence! 

Charles  Leonard  Moore  [1854- 


'WHEN  THE  HOXJNDS  OF  SPRING" 

Chorus  from  "  Atalanta  in  Calvdon  " 


When  the  hounds  of  spring  are  on  winter's  traces,-. 
The  mother  of  months  in  meadow  or  plain  A 

Fills  the  shadows  and  windy  places  ■ '.. 

With  lisp  of  leaves  and  ripple  of  rain; 


1340  Poems  of  Nature 

And  the  brown  bright  nightingale  amorous 
Is  half  assuaged  for  Itylus, 
For  the  Thracian  ships  and  the  foreign  faces, 
The  tongueless  vigil,  and  all  the  pain. 

Come  with  bows  bent  and  with  emptying  of  quivers, 

Maiden  most  perfect,  lady  of  light. 
With  a  noise  of  winds  and  many  rivers, 

With  a  clamor  of  waters,  and  with  might; 
Bind  on  thy  sandals,  O  thou  most  fleet, 
Over  the  splendor  and  speed  of  thy  feet; 
For  the  faint  east  quickens,  the  wan  west  shivers, 

Round  the  feet  of  the  day  and  the  feet  of  the  night. 

Where  shall  we  find  her,  how  shall  we  sing  to  her. 
Fold  our  hands  round  her  knees,  and  cling? 

O  that  man's  heart  were  as  fire  and  could  spring  to  her, 
Fire,  or  the  strength  of  the  streams  that  spring! 

For  the  stars  and  the  winds  are  unto  her 

As  raiment,  as  songs  of  the  harp-player; 

For  the  risen  stars  and  the  fallen  cling  to  her, 
And  the  southwest-wind  and  the  west-wind  sing. 

For  winter's  rains  and  ruins  are  over. 

And  all  the  season  of  snows  and  sins; 
The  days  dividing  lover  and  lover, 

The  light  that  loses,  the  night  that  wins; 
And  time  remembered  is  grief  forgotten, 
And  frosts  are  slain  and  flowers  begotten, 
And  in  green  underwood  and  cover 

Blossom  by  blossom  the  spring  begins. 

The  full  streams  feed  on  flower  of  rushes. 

Ripe  grasses  trammel  a  travelling  foot. 
The  faint  fresh  flame  of  the  young  year  flushes 

From  leaf  to  flower  and  flower  to  fruit ; 
And  fruit  and  leaf  are  as  gold  and  fire, 
And  the  oat  is  heard  above  the  lyre. 
And  the  hoofed  heel  of  a  satyr  crushes 

The  chestnut-husk  at  the  chestnut-root.         ... 


Song  1341 

And  Pan  by  noon  and  Bacchus  by  night, 
Fleeter  of  foot  than  the  fleet-foot  kid, 

Follows  with  dancing  and  lills  with  delight 
The  Maenad  and  the  Bassarid; 

And  soft  as  lips  that  laugh  and  hide 

The  laughing  leaves  of  the  trees  divide, 

And  screen  from  seeing  and  leave  in  sight 
The  god  pursuing,  the  maiden  hid. 

The  ivy  falls  with  the  Bacchanal's  hair 

Over  her  eyebrows  hiding  her  eyes; 
The  wild  vine  slipping  down  leaves  bare 

Her  bright  breast  shortening  into  sighs; 
The  wild  vine  slips  with  the  weight  of  its  leaves, 
But  the  berried  ivy  catches  and  cleaves 
To  the  limbs  that  glitter,  the  feet  that  scare 

The  wolf  that  follows,  the  fawn  that  flies. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [i837-i9og] 


SONG 

Again  rejoicing  Nature  sees 
'■'■    Her  robe  assume  its  vernal  hues; 
Her  leafy  locks  wave  in  the  breeze, 
All  freshly  steeped  in  morning  dews. 

In  vain  to  me  the  cowslips  blaw, 
In  vain  to  me  the  violets  spring; 

In  vain  to  me  in  glen  or  shaw, 
The  mavis  and  the  lintwhite  sing. 

The  merry  ploughboy  cheers  his  team, 
Wi'  joy  the  tentie  seedsman  stalks, 

But  life  to  me's  a  weary  dream, 
A  dream  of  ane  that  never  wauks. 

The  wanton  coot  the  water  skims, 
Amang  the  reeds  the  ducklings  cry, 

The  stately  swan  majestic  swims. 
And  everything  is  blest  but  I. 


134^  Poems  of  Nature 

The  shepherd  steeks  his  faulding  slap, 
And  owre  the  moorland  whistles  shrill; 

Wi'  wild,  unequal,  wand 'ring  step 
I  meet  him  on  the  dewy  hill. 

And  when  the  lark,  'tween  light  and  dark, 
Blithe  waukens  by  the  daisy's  side, 

And  mounts  and  sings  on  flittering  wings, 
A  woe-worn  ghaist  I  hameward  glide. 

Come,  Winter,  with  thine  angry  howl, 

And  raging  bend  the  naked  tree; 
Thy  gloom  will  soothe  my  cheerless  soul. 

When  Nature  all  is  sad  like  me! 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


TO  SPRING 

O  Thou  with  dewy  locks,  who  lookest  down 
Through  the  clear  windows  of  the  morning,  turn 
Thine  angel  eyes  upon  our  western  isle. 
Which  in  full  choir  hails  thy  approach,  0  Spring! 

The  hills  tell  one  another,  and  the  listening 
Valleys  hear;  all  our  longing  eyes  are  turned 
Up  to  thy  bright  pavilions:  issue  forth 
And  let  thy  holy  feet  visit  our  clime! 

Come  o'er  the  eastern  hills,  and  let  our  winds 
Kiss  thy  perfumed  garments;  let  us  taste 
Thy  morn  and  evening  breath;  scatter  thy  pearls 
Upon  our  lovesick  land  that  mourns  for  thee. 

O  deck  her  forth  with  thy  fair  fingers;  pour 
Thy  soft  kisses  on  her  bosom ;  and  put 
Thy  golden  crown  upon  her  languished  head, 
Whose  modest  tresses  are  bound  up  for  thee! 

William  Blake  [1757-1827] 


An   Ode  on  the  Spring  ^343 

AN  ODE  ON  THE  SPRING 

Lo!  where  the  rosy-bosomed  Hours, 

Fair  Venus'  train,  appear, 
Disclose  the  long-expecting  flowers. 

And  wake  the  purple  year! 
The  Attic  warbler  pours  her  throat 
Responsive  to  the  cuckoo's  note, 

The  untaught  harmony  of  spring: 
While,  whispering  pleasure  as  they  fly. 
Cool  Zephyrs  through  the  clear  blue  sky 

Their  gathered  fragrance  fling. 

Where'er  the  oak's  thick  branches  stretch 

A  broader  browner  shade, 
Where'er  the  rude  and  moss-grown  beech 

O'er-canopies  the  glade. 
Beside  some  water's  rushy  brink 
With  me  the  Muse  shall  sit,  and  think 

(At  ease  rechned  in  rustic  state) 
How  vain  the  ardor  of  the  crowd, 
How  low,  how  Httle  are  the  proud. 

How  indigent  the  great! 

StiU  is  the  toihng  hand  of  Care: 

The  panting  herds  repose: 
Yet,  hark,  how  through  the  peopled  air 

The  busy  murmur  glows! 
The  insect-youth  are  on  the  wing, 
Eager  to  taste  the  honied  spring 

And  float  amid  the  liquid  noon ; 
Some  lightly  o'er  the  current  skim, 
Some  show  their  gaily-gilded  trim 

Quick-glancing  to  the  sun. 

To  Contemplation's  sober  eye 

Such  is  the  race  of  Man: 
And  they  that  creep,  and  they  that  fly, 

Shall  end  where  they  began. 


1344  Poems  of  Nature 

Alike  the  Busy  and  the  Gay 

But  flutter  through  life's  little  day, 

In  Fortune's  varying  colors  dressed: 
Brushed  by  the  hand  of  rough  Mischance, 
Or  chilled  by  Age,  their  airy  dance 

They  leave,  in  dust  to  rest. 

Methinks  T  hear,  in  accents  low. 

The  sportive  kind  reply: 
Poor  moralist!  and  what  art  thou? 

A  solitary  fly! 
Thy  joys  no  glittering  female  meets, 
No  hive  hast  thou  of  hoarded  sweets, 

No  painted  plumage  to  display; 
On  hasty  wings  thy  youth  is  flown; 
Thy  sun  is  set,  thy  spring  is  gone — 

We  frolic,  while  'tis  May. 

Thomas  Gray  [1716-1771] 

SPRING 

Spring,  with  that  nameless  pathos  in  the  air 
Which  dwells  with  all  things  fair, 
Spring,  with  her  golden  suns  and  silver  rain. 
Is  with  us  once  again. 

Out  in  the  lonely  woods  the  jasmine  burns 
Its  fragrant  lamps,  and  turns 
Into  a  royal  court  with  green  festoons 
The  banks  of  dark  lagoons. 

In  the  deep  heart  of  every  forest  tree 
The  blood  is  all  aglee, 

And  there's  a  look  about  the  leafless  bowers 
As  if  they  dreamed  of  flowers. 

Yet  still  on  every  side  we  trace  the  hand 
Of  Winter  in  the  land. 
Save  where  the  maple  reddens  on  the  lawn, 
Flushed  by  the  season's  dawn; 


Spring  1345 

Or  where,  like  those  strange  semblances  we  tind 
That  age  to  childhood  bind, 
The  elm  puts  on,  as  if  in  Nature's  scorn, 
The  brown  of  Autumn  corn. 

As  yet  the  turf  is  dark,  although  you  know 
That,  not  a  span  below, 

A  thousand  germs  are  groping  through  the  gloom. 
And  soon  will  burst  their  tomb. 

Already,  here  and  there,  on  frailest  stems 
Appear  some  azure  gems. 
Small  as  might  deck,  upon  a  gala  day 
The  forehead  of  a  fay. 

In  gardens  you  may  note  amid  the  dearth. 
The  crocus  breaking  earth; 

And  near  the  snowdrop's  tender  white  and  green, 
The  violet  in  its  screen. 

But  many  gleams  and  shadows  needs  must  pass 
Along  the  budding  grass. 
And  weeks  go  by,  before  the  enamored  South 
Shall  kiss  the  rose's  mouth. 

Still  there's  a  sense  of  blossoms  yet  unborn 
In  the  sweet  airs  of  morn; 
One  almost  looks  to  see  the  very  street 
Grow  purple  at  his  feet. 

At  times  a  fragrant  breeze  comes  floating  by. 
And  brings,  you  know  not  why, 
A  feeling  as  when  eager  crowds  await 
Before  a  palace  gate 

Some  wondrous  pageant;  and  you  scarce  would  start. 
If  from  a  beech's  heart 

A  blue-eyed  Dryad,  stepping  forth,  should  say, 
"Behold  me!  I  am  May!" 

Henry  Timrod  [1829-1867' 


1346  Poems  of  Nature 

THE  MEADOWS   IN  SPRING 

'Tis  a  dull  sight 
To  see  the  year  dying, 

When  winter  winds 

Set  the  yellow  wood  sfghing: 
Sighing,  oh!  sighing. 

When  such  a  time  cometh, 

I  do  retire 
Into  an  old  room 

Beside  a  bright  fire: 

Oh,  pile  a  bright  fire! 

And  there  I  sit 

Reading  old  things, 
Of  knights  and  lorn  damsels, 

While  the  wind  sings — 
Oh,  drearily  sings! 

I  never  look  out 

Nor  attend  to  the  blast; 

For  all  to  be  seen 

Is  the  leaves  falling  fast: 
Falling,  falling! 

But  close  at  the  hearth, 
Like  a  cricket,  sit  I, 

Reading  of  summer 
And  chivalry — 

Gallant  chivalry! 

Then  with  an  old  friend 
I  talk  of  our  youth! 

How  'twas  gladsome,  but  often 
Foolish,  forsooth: 

But  gladsome,  gladsome! 

Or  to  get  merry 

We  sing  some  old  rhyme. 
That  made  the  wood  ring  again 

In  summer  time — 

Sweet  summer  time! 


The  Spring  1347 

Then  go  we  to  smoking, 

Silent  and  snug: 
Naught  passes  between  us, 

Save  a  brown  jug — 
Sometimes ! 

And  sometimes  a  tear 

Will  rise  in  each  ej^e, 
Seeing  the  two  old  friends 

So  merrily —  ^^ 

So  merrily! 

And  ere  to  bed 

Go  we,  go  we, 
Down  on  the  ashes 

We  kneel  on  the  knee, 
Praying  together! 

Thus,  then,  live  I, 

Till,  'mid  all  the  gloom. 
By  heaven !  the  bold  sun 

Is  with  me  in  the  room 
Shining,  shining! 

Then  the  clouds  part. 

Swallows  soaring  between; 
The  spring  is  alive. 

And  the  meadows  are  green! 

I  jump  up,  like  mad. 

Break  the  old  pipe  in  twain, 
And  away  to  the  meadows. 

The  meadows  again! 

Ediivrd  Fitzgerald  [1809-18S3] 

THE  SPRING 

When  wintry  weather's  all  a-done. 
An'  brooks  do  sparkle  in  the  zun, 
An'  naisy-builden  rooks  do  vlee 
Wi'  sticks  toward  their  elem  tree; 
When  birds  do  zing,  an'  we  can  zee 


1348  Poems  of  Nature 

Upon  the  boughs  the  buds  o'  spring, — 
Then  I'm  as  happy  as  a  king, 
A-vield  wi'  health  an'  zunsh6en. 

Vor  then  the  cowslip's  hangen  flower 
A-wetted  in  the  zunny  shower, 
Do  grow  wi'  vi'lets,  sweet  o'  smell, 
Bezide  the  wood-screened  graegle's  bell; 
«  Where  drushes'  aggs,  wi'  sky-blue  shell. 

Do  lie  in  mossy  nest  among 
The  t^iorns,  while  they  do  zing  their  zong 
At  evenen  in  the  zunsheen. 

An'  God  do  meake  his  win'  to  blow 

An'  rain  to  vail  vor  high  an'  low. 

An'  bid  his  mornen  zun  to  rise 

Vor  all  alike,  an'  groun'  an'  skies 

Ha'  colors  vor  the  poor  man's  eyes: 
An' in  our  trials  He  is  near. 
To  hear  our  mwoan  an'  zee  our  tear, 
An'  turn  our  clouds  to  zunsheen. 

An'  many  times  when  I  do  vind 
Things  all  goo  w'rong,  an'  v'ok  unkind, 
To  zee  the  happy  veeden  herds, 
An'  hear  the  zingen  o'  the  birds. 
Do  soothe  my  sorrow  mwore  than  words; 
V'or  I  do  zee  that  'tis  our  sin 
Do  meake  woone's  soul  so  dark  'ithin. 
When  God  would  gi'e  woone  zunsheen. 

William  Barnes  [1801-1S86] 

"WHEN   SPRING    COMES   BACK   TO   ENGLAND' 

When  Spring  comes  back  to  England 

And  crowns  her  brows  with  May, 
Round  the  merry  moonlit  world 

She  goes  the  greenwood  way: 
She  throws  a  rose  to  Italy, 

A  fleur-de-lys  to  France; 
But  round  her  regal  morris-ring 

The  seas  of  England  dance. 


"Over  the  Wintry   Threshold"      1349 

When  Spring  comes  back  to  England 

And  dons  her  robe  of  green, 
There's  many  a  nation  garlanded 

But  England  is  the  Queen; 
She's  Queen,  she's  Queen  of  all  the  world 

Beneath  the  laughing  sky, 
For  the  nations  go  a-Maying 

When  they  hear  the  New  Year  cry — 

"Come  over  the  water  to  England, 

My  old  love,  my  new  love. 
Come  over  the  water  to  England, 

In  showers  of  flowery  rain; 
Come  over  the  water  to  England, 

April,  my  true  love; 
And  tell  the  heart  of  England 

The  Spring  is  here  again!" 

Alfred  Noycs  [1880- 

NEW  LIFE 
Spring  comes  laughing  down  the  valley 
All  in  white,  from  the  snow 
Where  the  winter's  armies  rally 

Loth  to  go. 
Beauty  white  her  garments  shower 
On  the  world  where  they  pass, — 
Hawthorn  hedges,  trees  in  flower, 
Daisies  in  the  grass. 
Tremulous  with  longings  dim. 
Thickets  by  the  river's  rim 
Have  begun  to  dream  of  green. 
Every  tree  is  loud  with  birds. 
Bourgeon,  heart, — do  thy  part! 
Raise  a  slender  stalk  of  words 
From  a  root  unseen. 

Amelia  Josephine  Burr  [1878- 

"OVER  THE  WINTRY  THRESHOLD" 
Over  the  wintry  threshold 

Who  comes  with  joy  today, 
So  frail,  yet  so  enduring, 

To  trium.ph  o'er  dismay? 


1350  Poems  of  Nature 

Ah,  quick  her  tears  are  springing, 
And  quickly  they  are  dried, 

For  sorrow  walks  before  her. 
But  gladness  walks  beside. 

She  comes  with  gusts  of  laughter, — 

The  music  as  of  rills; 
With  tenderness  and  sweetness, 

The  wisdom  of  the  hills. 

Her  hands  are  strong  to  comfort. 
Her  heart  is  quick  to  heed; 

She  knows  the  signs  of  sadness, 
She  knows  the  voice  of  need ; 

There  is  no  living  creature, 

However  poor  or  small, 
But  she  will  know  its  trouble. 

And  hearken  to  its  call. 

Oh,  well  they  fare  forever. 
By  mighty  dreams  possessed, 

Whose  hearts  have  lain  a  moment 
On  that  eternal  breast. 

Bliss  Carman  [1861- 

MARCH 

Slayer  of  winter,  art  thou  here  again? 
O  welcome,  thou  that  bring'st  the  summer  nigh! 
The  bitter  wind  makes  not  thy  victory  vain. 
Nor  will  we  mock  thee  for  thy  faint  blue  sky. 
Welcome,  O  March!  whose  kindly  days  and  dry 
Make  April  ready  for  the  throstle's  song. 
Thou  first  redresser  of  the  winter's  wrong! 

Yea,  welcome,  March !  and  though  I  die  ere  June, 
Yet  for  the  hope  of  life  I  give  thee  praise, 
Striving  to  swell  the  burden  of  the  tune 
That  even  now  I  hear  thy  brown  birds  raise, 
Unmindful  of  the  past  or  coming  days; 
Who  sing,  "O  joy!  a  new  year  is  begun! 
What  happiness  to  look  upon  the  sun!" 


March  135 1 

O,  what  begetteth  all  this  storm  of  bliss, 

But  Death  himself,  who,  crying  solemnly, 

Even  from  the  heart  of  sweet  P'orget fulness, 

Bids  us,  "Rejoice!  lest  pleasureless  ye  die. 

Within  a  little  time  must  ye  go  by. 

Stretch  forth  your  open  hands,  and,  while  ye  live. 

Take  all  the  gifts  that  Death  and  Life  may  give." 

William  Morris  [1834- 1896] 

SONG  IN  MARCH 

Now  are  the  winds  about  us  in  their  glee, 

Tossing  the  slender  tree; 

Whirling  the  sands  about  his  furious  car, 

March  cometh  from  afar; 

Breaks  the  sealed  magic  of  old  Winter's  dreams, 

And  rends  his  glassy  streams; 

Chafmg  with  potent  airs,  he  fiercely  takes 

Their  fetters  from  the  lakes. 

And,  with  a  power  by  queenly  Spring  supplied. 

Wakens  the  slumbering  tide. 

With  a  wild  love  he  seeks  young  Summer's  charms 

And  clasps  her  to  his  arms; 

Lifting  his  shield  between,  he  drives  away 

Old  Winter  from  his  prey; — 

The  ancient  tyrant  whom  he  boldly  braves, 

Goes  howling  to  his  caves; 

And,  to  his  northern  realm  compelled  to  fly, 

Yields  up  the  victory; 

Melted  are  all  his  bands,  o'erthrown  his  towers. 

And  March  comes  bringing  flowers. 

William  Gilmore  Simms  [1806-1870] 

MARCH 

Blossom  on  the  plum, 

Wild  wind  and  merry; 

Leaves  upon  the  cherry, 
And  one  swallow  come. 


1352  Poems  of  Nature 

Red  windy  dawn, 

Swift  rain  and  sunny; 
Wild  bees  seeking  honey, 

Crocus  on  the  lawn; 
Blossom  on  the  plum. 

Grass  begins  to  grow, 

Dandehons  come; 
Snowdrops  haste  to  go 
After  last  month's  snow; 
Rough  winds  beat  and  blow, 

Blossom  on  the  plum. 

Nora  Hopper  [1871- 


WRITTEN  IN  MARCH 

The  Cock  is  crowing, 

The  stream  is  flowing, 

The  small  birds  twitter, 

The  lake  doth  glitter, 
The  green  field  sleeps  in  the  sun; 

The  oldest  and  youngest 

Are  at  work  with  the  strongest; 

The  cattle  are  grazing, 

Their  heads  never  raising; 
There  are  forty  feeding  like  one! 

Like  an  army  defeated 

The  snow  hath  retreated, 

And  now  doth  fare  ill 

On  the  top  of  the  bare  hill; 
The  ploughboy  is  whooping — anon — anon 

There's  joy  in  the  mountains; 

There's  life  in  the  fountains; 

Small  clouds  are  sailing. 

Blue  sky  prevailing; 
The  rain  is  over  and  gone! 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 


Home  Thoughts,   From  Abroad     1353 


THE   PASSING  OF  MARCH 

Thk  braggart  March  stood  in  the  season's  door 

With  his  broad  shoulders  blocking  up  the  way, 
Shaking  the  snow-flakes  from  the  cloak  he  wore, 

And  from  the  fringes  of  his  kirtle  gray. 
Near  by  him  April  stood  with  tearful  face, 

With  violets  in  her  hands,  and  in  her  hair 
Pale,  wild  anemones;  the  fragrant  lace 

Half-parted  from  her  breast,  which  seemed  like  fair, 
Dawn-tinted  mountain  snow,  smooth-drifted  there. 

She  on  the  blusterer's  arm  laid  one  white  hand, 

But  he  would  none  of  her  soft  blandishment. 
Yet  did  she  plead  with  tears  none  might  withstand, 

For  even  the  fiercest  hearts  at  last  relent. 
And  he,  at  last,  in  ruffian  tenderness, 

With  one  swift,  crushing  kiss  her  lips  did  greet. 
Ah,  poor  starved  heart! — for  that  one  rude  caress. 

She  cast  her  violets  underneath  his  feet. 

Robert  Burns  Wilson  [1850- 


HOME  THOUGHTS,   FROM   ABROAD 

Oh,  to  be  in  England 

Now  that  April's  there. 

And  whoever  wakes  in  England 

Sees,  some  morning,  unaware, 

That  the  lowest  boughs  and  the  brushwood  sheaf 

Round  the  elm-tree  bole  are  in  tiny  leaf. 

While  the  chaffmch  sings  on  the  orchard  bough 

In  England — now! 

And  after  April,  when  May  follows 
And  the  white-throat  l)uilds,  and  all  the  swallows! 
Hark,  where  my  blossomed  pear-tree  in  the  hedge 
Leans  to  the  field  and  scatters  on  the  clover 
Blossoms  and  dewdrops — at  the  bent  .spray's  edge — 
That's  the  wise  thrush:  he  sings  each  song  twice  over, 


'^, 


1354  Poems  of  Nature 

Lest  you  should  think  he  never  could  recapture 

The  first  fine  careless  rapture! 

And  though  the  fields  look  rough  with  hoary  dew, 

All  will  be  gay  when  noontide  wakes  anew 

The  buttercups,  the  little  children's  dower  ..j 

— Far  brighter  than  this  gaudy  melon-flower! 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1889] 

SONG 

April,  April, 

Laugh  thy  girlish  laughter; 
Then,  the  moment  after, 
Weep  thy  girlish  tears! 
April,  that  mine  ears 
Like  a  lover  greetest, 
If  I  tell  thee,  sweetest, 
All  my  hopes  and  fears, 
April,  April, 

Laugh  thy  golden  laughter, 
But,  the  moment  after, 
Weep  thy  golden  tears! 

William  Watson  [1858- 

AN  APRIL  ADORATION 

Sang  the  sunrise  on  an  amber  morn — 
"Earth,  be  glad!    An  April  day  is  born. 

"Winter's  done,  and  April's  in  the  skies, 
Earth,  look  up  with  laughter  in  your  eyes!  " 

Putting  off  her  dumb  dismay  of  snow. 
Earth  bade  all  her  unseen  children  grow. 

Then  the  sound  of  growing  in  the  air 
Rose  to  God  a  liturgy  of  prayer; 

And  the  thronged  succession  of  the  days 
Uttered  up  to  God  a  psalm  of  praise. 


Sweet  Wild  April  '^355 

Laughed  the  running  sap  in  every  vein, 
Laughed  the  running  llurries  of  warm  rain, 

Laughed  the  life  in  every  wandering  root, 
Laughed  the  tinghng  cells  of  bud  and  shoot, 

God  in  all  the  concord  of  their  mirth 
Heard  the  adoration-song  of  Earth. 

Charles  G.  D.  Roberts  [1860- 


SWEET  WILD   APRIL 

O  SWEET  wild  April 

Came  over  the  hills. 
He  skipped  with  the  winds 

And  he  tripped  with  the  rills; 
His  raiment  was  all 
Of  the  daflfodils. 
Sing  hi, 
Sing  hey, 
Sing  ho! 

O  sweet  wild  April 

Came  down  the  lea, 
Dancing  along 

With  his  sisters  three: 

Carnation,  and  Rose, 

And  tall  Lily. 

Sing  hi, 

Sing  hey. 

Sing  ho! 

O  sweet  wild  April, 
On  pastoral  quill 
Came  piping  in  moonlight 

By  hollow  and  hill. 

In  starlight  at  midnight, 

By  dingle  and  rill. 

Sing  hi, 

Sing  hey, 

Sing  hoi 


1356  Poems  of  Nature 


Where  sweet  wild  April 

His  melody  played, 
Trooped  cowslip,  and  primrose, 

iVnd  iris,  the  maid, 
And  silver  narcissus, 
A  star  in  the  shade. 
Sing  hi, 
Sing  hey, 
Sing  hoi 

When  sweet  wild  April 

Dipped  down  the  dale, 
Pale  cuckoopint  brightened. 

And  windflower  frail, 
And  white-thorn,  the  wood-bridCj 
In  virginal  veil. 
Sing  hi. 
Sing  hey, 
Sing  ho! 

When  sweet  wild  April 

Through  deep  woods  pressed, 
Sang  cuckoo  above  him, 
And  lark  on  his  crest, 
And  Philomel  fluttered 
Close  under  his  breast. 
Sing  hi. 
Sing  hey, 
Sing  ho! 

O  sweet  wild  April, 

Wherever  you  went 
The  bondage  of  winter 

Was  broken  and  rent, 
Sank  elfin  ice-city 

And  frost-goblin's  tento 
Sing  hi. 
Sing  hey, 
Sing  ho! 


Spinning  in  April  ^357 

Yet  sweet  wild  April, 

The  blithe,  the  brave,  -xt. 

Fell  asleep  in  the  lields 
By  a  windless  wave 
And  Jack-in-the-Pulpit 
Preached  over  his  grave. 
Sing  hi, 
Sing  hey, 
Sing  ho! 

O  sweet  wild  April, 
Farewell  to  thee! 
And  a  deep  sweet  sleep 

To  thy  sisters  three, — 
Carnation,  and  Rose, 
And  tall  Lily. 
Sing  hi, 
*  Sing  hey, 

Sing  ho! 

William  Furce  Stead  fiS     - 


SPINNING  IN   APRIL 

Moon  in  heaven's  garden,  among  the  clouds  that  wander. 
Crescent  moon  so  young  to  see,  above  the  April  ways. 
Whiten,  bloom  not  yet,  not  yet,  within  the  twilight  yonder; 
All  my  spinning  is  not  done,  for  all  the  loitering  days. 

Oh,  my  heart  has  two  wild  wings  that  ever  would  be  flying! 
Oh,  my  heart's  a  meadow-lark  that  ever  would  be  free! 
Well  it  is  that  I  must  spin  until  the  light  be  dying; 
Well  it  is  the  little  wheel  must  turn  all  day  for  me! 

All  the  hill-tops  beckon,  and  beyond  the  western  meadows 
Something  calls  me  ever,  calls  me  ever,  low  and  clear: 
A  little  tree  as  young  as  I,  the  coming  summer  shadows, — 
The  voice  of  running  waters  that  I  ever  thirst  to  hear. 

Oftcntime  the  plea  of  it  has  set  my  wings  a-beating; 
Oftentime  it  coaxes,  as  I  sit  weary-wise, 


135^  Poems  of  Nature 

Till  the  wild  life  hastens  out  to  wild  things  all  entreating, 
And  leaves  me  at  the  spinning-wheel,  with  dark,  unseeing 
eyes. 

Josephme  Preston  Peabody  [1874- 

SONG:  ON  MAY  MORNING 

Now  the  bright  morning-star,  day's  harbinger. 
Comes  dancing  from  the  east,  and  leads  with  her 
The  flowery  May,  who  from  her  green  lap  throws 
The  yellow  cowslip  and  the  pale  primrose. 
Hail,  bounteous  May,  that  dost  inspire 
Mirth  and  youth  and  warm  desire! 
Woods  and  groves  are  of  thy  dressing, 
Hill  and  dale  doth  boast  thy  blessing. 
Thus  we  salute  thee  with  our  early  song, 
And  welcome  thee,  and  wish  thee  long. 

John  Milton  [i  608-1 674] 

A   MAY  BURDEN 

Through  meadow-ways  as  I  did  tread, 
The  corn  grew  in  great  lustihead, 
And  hey!  the  beeches  burgeoned. 

By  Goddes  fay,  by  Goddes  fay! 
It  is  the  month,  the  jolly  month, 
It  is  the  jolly  month  of  May. 


r|(t 


God  ripe  the  wines  and  corn,  I  say, 
And  wenches  for  the  marriage-day, 
And  boys  to  teach  love's  comely  play. 

By  Goddes  fay,  by  Goddes  fay! 
It  is  the  month,  the  jolly  month. 
It  is  the  jolly  month  of  May. 

As  I  went  down  by  lane  and  lea. 
The  daisies  reddened  so,  pardie! 
"Blushets!"  I  said,  "  I  well  do  see, 
By  Goddes  fay,  by  Goddes  fay! 

The  thing  ye  think  of  in  this  month,         m  '"^ ' 

Heigho!  this  jolly  month  of  May."     ■  ti  arait/iaJlO 


Corinna's  Going  A-Maying        1359 

As  down  I  went  by  rye  and  oats, 
The  blossoms  smelt  of  kisses;  throats 
Of  birds  turned  kisses  into  notes; 

By  Goddes  fay,  by  Goddes  fay! 
The  kiss  it  is  a  growing  flower, 
I  trow,  this  jolly  month  of  JNIay. 

God  send  a  mouth  to  every  kiss, 
Seeing  the  blossom  of  this  bliss 
By  gathering  doth  grow,  certes! 

By  Goddes  fay,  by  Goddes  fay! 
Thy  brow-garland  pushed  all  aslant 
Tells — but  I  tell  not,  wanton  May! 

Francis  Thompson  [iSsgP-igo?] 


CORINNA'S   GOING  A-MAYING 

Get  up,  get  up  for  shame,  the  blooming  morn 
Upon  her  wings  presents  the  god  unshorn. 
See  how  Aurora  throws  her  fair 
Fresh-quilted  colors  through  the  air: 
Get  up,  sweet  slug-a-bed,  and  see 
The  dew  bespangling  herb  and  tree. 
Each  flower  has  wept,  and  bowed  toward  the  east, 
Above  an  hour  since:  yet  you  not  dressed; 
Nay!  not  so  much  as  out  of  bed; 
When  all  the  birds  have  matins  said 
And  sung  their  thankful  hymns:  'tis  sin, 
Nay,  profanation,  to  keep  in, 
Whereas  a  thousand  virgins  on  this  day 
Spring,  sooner  than  the  lark,  to  fetch  in  May. 

Rise  and  put  on  your  foliage,  and  be  seen 

To  come  forth,  like  the  spring-time,  fresh  and  green, 

And  sweet  as  Flora.    Take  no  care 

For  jewels  for  your  gown  or  hair: 

Fear  not;  the  leaves  will  strew 

Gems  in  abundance  upon  you: 
Besides,  the  childhood  of  the  day  has  kept, 
Against  you  come,  some  orient  pearls  unwept; 


1360  Poems  of  Nature 

Come,  and  receive  them  while  the  Hght 

Hangs  on  the  dew-locks  of  the  night, 

And  Titan  on  the  eastern  hill 

Retires  himself^  or  else  stands  still 
Till  you  come  forth.    Wash,  dress,  be  brief  in  praying: 
Few  beads  are  best,  when  once  we  go  a-Maying. 

Come,  my  Corinna,  come;  and,  coming,  mark 
How  each  field  turns  a  street,  each  street  a  park 

Made  green  and  trimmed  with  trees;  see  how 

Devotion  gives  each  house  a  bough 

Or  branch:  each  porch,  each  door,  ere  this, 

An  ark,  a  tabernacle  is, 
Made  up  of  white-thorn,  neatly  interwove; 
As  if  here  were  those  cooler  shades  of  love. 

Can  such  dehghts  be  in  the  street 

And  open  fields,  and  we  not  see't? 

Come,  we'll  abroad;  and  let's  obey 

The  proclamation  made  for  May: 
And  sin  no  more,  as  we  have  done,  by  staying; 
But,  my  Corinna,  come,  let's  go  a-Maying. 

There's  not  a  budding  boy  or  girl,  this  day, 
But  is  got  up,  and  gone  to  bring  in  May. 

A  deal  of  youth,  ere  this,  is  come 

Back,  and  with  white-thorn  laden  home. 

Some  have  despatched  their  cakes  and  cream 

Before  that  we  have  left  to  dream: 
And  some  have  wept,  and  wooed  and  plighted  troth, 
And  chose  their  priest,  ere  we  can  cast  oCf  sloth: 

Many  a  green  gown  has  been  given; 

Many  a  kiss,  both  odd  and  even : 

Many  a  glance,  too,  has  been  sent 

From  out  the  eye,  love's  firmament;  . ; 

Many  a  jest  told  of  the  keys  betraying 
This  night,  and  locks  picked,  yet  we're  not  a-Maying. 

Come,  let  us  go,  while  we  are  in  our  prime, 
And  take  the  harmless  folly  of  the  time. 

We  shall  grow  old  apace,  and  die 

Before  we  know  our  liberty. 


May  1361 

Our  life  is  short,  and  our  days  run 

As  fast  away  as  does  the  sun; 
And,  as  a  vapor  or  a  drop  of  rain, 
Once  lost,  can  ne'er  be  found  again: 

So  when  or  you  or  I  are  made 

A  fable,  song,  or  fleeting  shade, 

All  love,  all  liking,  all  delight 

Lies  drowned  with  us  in  endless  night. 
Then  while  time  serves,  and  we  are  but  decaying, 
Come,  my  Corinna,  come,  let's  go  a-Maying. 

Robert  Ilcrrick  [1501-1674] 


"SISTER,  AWAKE!" 

Sister,  awake!  close  not  your  eyes! 

The  day  her  light  discloses, 
And  the  bright  morning  doth  arise 

Out  of  her  bed  of  roses. 

See  the  clear  sun,  the  world's  bright  eye, 

In  at  our  window  peeping: 
Lo,  how  he  blusheth  to  espy 

Us  idle  wenches  sleeping! 

Therefore  awake!  make  haste,  I  say. 

And  let  us,  without  stayhig, 
All  in  our  gowns  of  green  so  gay 

Into  the  Park  a-maying! 


Unknown 


MAY 

T,f,;-,       May!  queen  of  blossoms. 
And  fulfilling  flowers, 

With  what  pretty  music 
Shall  we  charm  the  hours? 

Wilt  thou  have  pipe  and  reed, 

Blown  in  the  open  mead? 

Or  to  the  lute  give  heed 
In  the  green  bowers? 


1362  Poems  of  Nature 

Thou  hast  no  need  of  us, 

Or  pipe  or  wire; 
Thou  hast  the  golden  bee 

Ripened  with  fire; 
And  many  thousand  more 
Songsters,  that  thee  adore, 
Filling  earth's  grassy  floor 

With  new  desire. 

Thou  hast  thy  mighty  herds. 

Tame  and  free-livers; 
Doubt  not,  thy  music  too 

In  the  deep  rivers; 
And  the  whole  plumy  flight 
Warbhng  the  day  and  night — 
Up  at  the  gates  of  light, 

See,  the  lark  quivers ! 

Edward  Hovell-Thiirlow  [1781-  1829] 


MAY 

Come  w^lk  with  me  along  this  willowed  lane. 
Where,  like  lost  coinage  from  some  miser's  store, 
The  golden  dandelions  more  and  more 

Glow,  as  the  warm  sun  kisses  them  again! 

For  this  is  May!  who  with  a  daisy  chain 
Leads  on  the  laughing  Hours;  for  now  is  o'er 
Long  winter's  trance.     No  longer  rise  and  roar 

His  forest -wrenching  blasts.     The  hopeful  swain, 

Along  the  furrow,  sings  behind  his  team; 

Loud  pipes  the  redbreast — troubadour  of  spring. 
And  vocal  all  the  morning  copses  ring; 

More  blue  the  skies  in  lucent  lakelets  gleam; 

And  the  glad  earth,  caressed  by  murmuring  showers. 
Wakes  like  a  bride,  to  deck  herself  with  flowers! 

Henry  Sylvester  Cornwell  [i  831- 1886] 


Summer  Longings  136^ 


A   SPRING  LILT 

Through  the  silver  mist 

Of  the  blossom-spray 
Trill  the  orioles:  list 
To  their  joyous  lay! 
"What  in  all  the  world,  in  all  the  world,"  they  say, 
"Is  half  so  sweet,  so  sweet,  is  half  so  sweet  as  May?'' 

"June!  June!  June!" 

Low  croon 
The  brown  bees  in  the  clover. 

"Sweet!  sweet!  sweet!" 
Repeat 
The  robins,  nested  over. 


Unknown 


SUMMER  LONGINGS 

Ah!  my  heart  is  weary  waiting, 
Waiting  for  the  May, — 
Waiting  for  the  pleasant  rambles 
Where  the  fragrant  hawthorn-brambles, 
With  the  woodbine  alternating, 

Scent  the  dewy  way. 
Ah !  my  heart  is  weary  waiting. 
Waiting  for  the  May. 

Ah!  my  heart  is  sick  with  longing, 
Longing  for  the  May, — 
Longing  to  escape  from  study 
To  the  young  face  fair  and  ruddy. 
And  the  thousand  charms  belonging 

To  the  summer's  day. 
Ah!  my  heart  is  sick  with  longing. 
Longing  for  the  May. 

Ah !  my  heart  is  sore  with  sighing. 
Sighing  for  the  May, — 
Sighing  for  their  sure  returning. 
When  the  summer  beams  are  burning, 


1364  Poems  of  Nature 

Hopes  and  flowers  that,  dead  or  dying, 

All  the  winter  lay. 
Ah!  my  heart  is  sore  with  sighing, 

Sighing  for  the  May. 

Ah !  my  heart  is  pained  with  throbbing, 
Throbbing  for  the  May,— 
Throbbing  for  the  seaside  billows. 
Or  the  water- wooing  willows; 

Where,  in  laughing  and  in  sobbing. 

Glide  the  streams  away. 
Ah!  my  heart,  my  heart  is  throbbing, 
Throbbing  for  the  May. 

Waiting  sad,  dejected,  weary, 
Waiting  for  the  May: 
Spring  goes  by  with  wasted  warnings, — 
Moonlit  evenings,  sunbright  mornings, — 
Summer  comes,  yet  dark  and  dreary 

Life  still  ebbs  away; 
Man  is  ever  weary,  weary, 
Waiting  for  the  May! 

Denis  Florence  MacCarlhy  [181 7-1? 


MIDSUMMER 

Around  this  lovely  valley  rise 
The  purple  hills  of  Paradise. 

O,  softly  on  yon  banks  of  haze, 
Her  rosy  face  the  Summer  lays! 

Becalmed  along  the  azure  sky. 
The  argosies  of  cloudland  lie, 
Whose  shores,  with  many  a  shining  rift, 
Far  off  their  pearl-white  peaks  uphft. 

Through  all  the  long  midsummer-day 
The  meadow-sides  are  sweet  with  hay. 
I  seek  the  coolest  sheltered  seat, 
Just  where  the  field  and  forest  meet,— 


Midsummer  ^3^S 

Where  grow  the  pine-trees  tall  and  bland, 
The  ancient  oaks  austere  and  grand, 
And  fringy  roots  and  pebbles  fret 
The  ripples  of  the  rivulet. 

I  watch  the  mowers,  as  they  go 
Through  the  tall  grass,  a  white-sleeved  row. 
With  even  stroke  their  scythes  they  swing, 
In  tune  their  merry  whetstones  ring. 
Behind  the  nimble  youngsters  run, 
And  toss  the  thick  swaths  in  the  sun. 
The  cattle  graze,  while,  warm  and  still, 
Slopes  the  broad  pasture,  basks  the  hill, 
And  bright,  where  summer  breezes  break, 
The  green  wheat  crinkles  like  a  lake. 

The  butterfly  and  bumblebee 

Come  to  the  pleasant  woods  with  me; 

Quickly  before  me  runs  the  quail. 

Her  chickens  skulk  behind  the  rail; 

High  up  the  lone  wood-pigeon  sits, 

And  the  woodpecker  pecks  and  flits. 

Sweet  woodland  music  sinks  and  swells, 

The  brooklet  rings  its  tinkling  bells, 

The  swarming  insects  drone  and  hum, 

The  partridge  beats  its  throbbing  drum. 

The  squirrel  leaps  among  the  boughs,  ' 

And  chatters  in  his  leafy  house. 

The  oriole  flashes  by;  and,  look! 

Into  the  mirror  of  the  brook, 

Where  the  vain  bluebird  trims  his  coat, 

Two  tiny  feathers  fall  and  float. 

As  silently,  as  tenderly. 

The  down  of  peace  descends  on  me.  :  7/ 

O,  this  is  peace!  I  have  nc  need 

Of  friend  to  talk,  of  book  to  read: 

A  dear  Companion  here  abides; 

Close  to  my  thrilling  heart  He  hides; 


1366  Poems  of  Nature 


The  holy  silence  is  His  Voice: 
I  lie  and  listen,  and  rejoice. 

John  Townsend  Trowbridge  [1827-1916] 

A  MIDSUMMER   SONG 

0,  father's  gone  to  market-town,  he  was  up  before  the 

day, 
And  Jamie's  after  robins,  and  the  man  is  making  hay, 
And  whistling  down  the  hollow  goes  the  boy  that  minds  the 

mill. 
While  mother  from  the  kitchen-door  is  calling  with  a  will: 
"Polly! — Polly! — The  cows  are  in  the  corn! 
O,  Where's  Polly?"  ^^^ 

From  all  the  misty  morning  air  there  comes  a  summer 

sound — 
A  murmur  as  of  waters  from  skies  and  trees  and  ground. 
The  birds  they  sing  upon  the  wing,  the  pigeons  bill  and  coo, 
And  over  hill  and  hollow  rings  again  the  loud  halloo : 
"Polly! — Polly! — The  cows  are  in  the  corn! 
O,  Where's  Polly?" 

Above  the  trees  the  honey-bees  swarm  by  with  buzz  and 

boom,  iJ-id,  ,-!i' 

And  in  the  field  and  garden  a  thousand  blossoms  bloom. 
Within  the  farmer's  meadow  a  brown-eyed  daisy  blows. 
And  down  at  the  edge  of  the  hollow  a  red  and  thorny  rose. 
But  Polly! — Polly! — The  cows  are, in,  th^. corn! 
O,  where's  Polly?  ,;.,,-,  ,^ryv 

How  strange  at  such  a  time  of  day  the  mill  should  stop  its 

clatter! 
The  farmer's  wife  is  listening  now  and  wonders  what's  the 

matter. 
O,  wild  the  birds  are  singing  in  the  wood  and  on  the  hill. 
While  whistling  up  the  hollow  goes  the  boy  that  minds  the 
mill. 

But  Polly! — Polly!— The  cows  are  in  the  corn.! 
O,  where's  Polly? 

Richard  Watson  Gilder  [1844-1909] 


June  1367 

JUNE 

From  the  Prelude  to  "The  Vision  of  Sir  Laiinfa^^'  ^ 

Over  his  keys  the  musing  organist, 

Beginning  doubtfully  and  far  away, 
First  lets  his  fingers  wander  as  they  list, 

And  builds  a  bridge  from  Dreamland  for  his  lay: 
Then,  as  the  touch  of  his  loved  instrument 

Gives  hope  and  fervor,  nearer  draws  his  theme, 
First  guessed  by  faint  auroral  flushes  sent 

Along  the  wavering  vista  of  his  dream. 

Not  only  around  our  infancy 

Doth  heaven  with  all  its  splendors  lie; 

Daily,  with  souls  that  cringe  and  plot, 

We  Sinais  climb  and  know  it  not.  ^''  '• 

•  .'■• 

Ov&r  our  manhood  bend  the  skies; 

Against  our  fallen  and  traitor  lives 
The  great  winds  utter  prophecies; 

With  our  faint  hearts  the  mountain  strives; 
Its  arms  outstretched,  the  druid  wood 

Waits  with  its  benedicite; 
And  to  our  age's  drowsy  blood 

Still  shouts  the  inspiring  sea. 

Earth  gets  its  price  for  what  Earth  gives  us; 

The  beggar  is  taxed  for  a  corner  to  die  in, 
The  priest  hath  his  fee  who  comes  and  shrives  us. 

We  bargain  for  the  graves  we  lie  in; 
At  the  devil's  booth  are  all  things  sold, 
Each  ounce  of  dross  costs  its  ounce  of  gold; 

For  a  cap  and  bells  our  lives  we  pay. 
Bubbles  we  buy  with  a  whole  soul's  tasking: 

'Tis  heaven  alone  that  is  given  away, 
'Tis  only  God  may  be  had  for  the  asking; 
No  price  is  set  on  the  lavish  summer; 
June  may  be  had  by  the  poorest  comer.     ■     j ,  1 1 


I/? 6 8  Poems  of  Nature 


And  what  is  so  rare  as  a  day  in  June? 

Then,  if  ever,  come  perfect  days; 
Then  Heaven  tries  earth  if  it  be  in  tune, 

And  over  it  softly  her  warm  ear  lays; 
Whether  we  look,  or  whether  we  listen. 
We  hear  life  murmur,  or  see  it  glisten; 
Every  clod  feels  a  stir  of  might, 

An  instinct  within  it  that  reaches  and  towers, 
And,  groping  blindly  above  it  for  light, 

CUmbs  to  a  soul  in  grass  and  flowers; 
The  flush  of  life  may  well  be  seen 

Thrilling  back  over  hills  and  valle3's; 
The  cowslip  startles  in  meadows  green, 

The  buttercup  catches  the  sun  in  its  chalice, 
And  there's  never  a  leaf  nor  a  blade  too  mean 

To  be  some  happy  creature's  palace; 
The  little  bird  sits  at  his  door  in  the  sun, 

Atilt  like  a  blossom  among  the  leaves, 
And  lets  his  illumined  being  o'errun 

With  the  deluge  of  summer  it  receives; 
His  mate  feels  the  eggs  beneath  her  wings,        * '. 
And  the  heart  in  her  dumb  breast  flutters  and  sings; 
He  sings  to  the  wide  world  and  she  to  her  nest, — 
In  the  nice  ear  of  Nature  which  song  is  the  best? 

Now  is  the  high-tide  of  the  year, 

And  whatever  of  life  hath  ebbed  away 

Comes  flooding  back  with  a  ripply  cheer, 
Into  every  bare  inlet  and  creek  and  bay;  I 

Now  the  heart  is  so  full  that  a  drop  ovcrhlls  it, 

We  are  happy  now  because  God  wills  it ; 

No  matter  how  barren  the  past  may  have  been, 

'Tis  enough  for  us  now  that  the  leaves  are  green; 

We  sit  in  the  warm  shade  and  feel  right  well 

How  the  sap  creeps  up  and  the  blossoms  swell; 

We  may  shut  our  eyes,  but  we  cannot  help  knowing 

That  skies  are  clear  and  grass  is  growing; 

The  breeze  comes  whispering  in  our  ear. 

That  dandelions  are  blossoming  near. 

That  maize  has  sprouted,  that  streams  are  flowing. 


June  1369 

That  the  river  is  bluer  than  the  sky, 
That  the  robin  is  plastering  his  house  hard  by; 
And  if  the  breeze  kept  the  good  news  back, 
For  other  couriers  we  should  not  lack; 

We  could  guess  it  all  by  yon  heifer's  lowing. 
And  hark!  how  clear  bold  chanticleer, 
Warmed  with  the  new  wine  of  the  year. 

Tells  all  in  his  lusty  crowing! 

James  Russell  Lowell  [1819-1891] 


JUNE 

When  the  bubble  moon  is  young, 
Down  the  sources  of  the  breeze, 

Like  a  yellow  lantern  hung 
In  the  tops  of  blackened  trees, 

There  is  promise  she  will  grow 

Into  beauty  unforetold, 

Into  all  unthought-of  gold. 
Heigh  ho! 

When  the  Spring  has  dipped  her  foot, 

Like  a  bather,  in  the  air. 
And  the  ripples  warm  the  root 

Till  the  little  flowers  dare,  * 

There  is  promise  she  will  grow 
Sweeter  than  the  Springs  of  old. 
Fairer  than  was  ever  told. 
Heigh  ho! 

But  the  moon  of  middle  night. 
Risen,  is  the  rounded  moon; 
And  the  Spring  of  budding  light 

Eddies  into  just  a  June. 

Ah,  the  promise — -was  it  so? 

Nay,  the  gift  was  fair}'  gold; 

All  the  new  is  over-old. 

Heigh  ho! 

Harrison  Smith  Morris  [1856- 


1370  Poems  of  Nature 

HARVEST 

Sweet,  sweet,  sweet, 

Is  the  wind's  song, 
Astir  in  the  rippled  wheat 

All  day  long, 
It  hath  the  brook's  wild  gayety, 
The  sorrowful  cry  of  the  sea. 
Oh,  hush  and  hear! 
Sweet,  sweet  and  clear. 
Above  the  locust 's  whirr 
And  hum  of  bee 
Rises  that  soft,  pathetic  harmony. 

In  the  meadow-grass 

The  innocent  white  daisies  blow, 
The  dandelion  plume  doth  pass 
Vaguely  to  and  fro, — 

The  unquiet  spirit  of  a  flower 
That  hath  too  brief  an  hour. 

Now  doth  a  little  cloud  all  white, 
Or  golden  bright. 

Drift  down  the  warm,  blue  sky; 
And  now  on  tlie  horizon  line. 

Where  dusky  woodlands  lie, 
A  sunny  mist  doth  shine. 
Like  to  a  veil  before  a  holy  shrine, 
Concealing,  half-revealing,  things  divine. 

Sweet,  sweet,  sweet, 
Is  the  wind's  song. 

Astir  in  the  rippled  wheat 
All  day  long. 

That  exquisite  music  calls 
The  reaper  everywhere — 
Life  and  death  must  share. 

The  golden  harvest  falls. 


September  13  71 


So  doth  all  end,— 

Honored  Philosophy, 
Science  and  Art, 
The  bloom  of  the  heart; — 
Master,  Consoler,  Friend, 

Make  Thou  the  harvest  of  our  days 
To  fall  within  Thy  ways. 
Ellen  Mackay  Hulchinson  Cortissoz  [i8    - 


SCYTHE  SONG 

Mowers,  weary  and  brown,  and  bhthe, 

What  is  the  word  methinks  ye  know, 
Endless  over-word  that  the  Scythe 

Sings  to  the  blades  of  the  grass  below? 
Scythes  that  swing  in  the  grass  and  clover, 

Something,  still,  they  say  as  they  pass; 
What  is  the  word  that,  over  and  over. 

Sings  the  Scythe  to  the  flowers  and  grass? 

Hush,  ah  hush,  the  Scythes  are  saying, 

Hush,  and  heed  not,  and  fall  asleep; 
Hush,  they  say  to  the  grasses  swaying, 

Hush,  they  sing  to  the  clover  deep! 
Hush — 'tis  the  lullaby  Time  is  singing— 

Hush,  and  heed  not,  for  all  things  pass. 
Hush,  ah  hush!  and  the  Scythes  are  swinging 

Over  the  clover,  over  the  grass! 

Andrew  Lang  [1844-igi: 


SEPTEMBER 

Sweet  is  the  voice  that  calls 

From  babbling  waterfalls 
In  meadows  where  the  downy  seeds  are  flying; 

And  soft  the  breezes  blow, 

And  eddying  come  and  go. 
In  faded  gardens  where  the  rose  is  dying. 


1372  Poems  of  Nature 

Among  the  stubbled  corn 

The  bhthe  quail  pipes  at  morn, 
The  merry  partridge  drums  in  hidden  places, 

And  glittering  insects  gleam 

Above  the  reedy  stream, 
Where  busy  spiders  spin  their  filmy  laces. 

At  eve,  cool  shadows  faU 

Across  the  garden  wall. 
And  on  the  clustered  grapes  to  purple  turning; 

Aiad  pearly  vapors  lie 

Along  the  eastern  sky. 
Where  the  broad  harvest-moon  is  redly  burning. 

Ah,  soon  on  field  and  hill 

The  winds  shall  whistle  chill, 
And  patriarch  swallows  call  their  flocks  together 

To  fly  from  frost  and  snow. 

And  seek  for  lands  where  blow 
The  fairer  blossoms  of  a  balmier  weather. 

The  poUen-dusted  bees 

Search  for  the  honey-lees 
That  linger  in  the  last  flowers  of  September, 

While  plaintive  mourning  doves 

Coo  sadly  to  their  loves 
Of  the  dead  summer  they  so  well  remember. 

The  cricket  chirps  all  day, 

"O  fairest  summer,  stay!" 
The  squirrel  eyes  askance  the  chestnuts  browning; 

The  wild  fowl  fly  afar 

Above  the  foamy  bar. 
And  hasten  southward  ere  the  skies  are  frowning. 

Now  comes  a  fragrant  breeze 

Through  the  dark  cedar-trees. 
And  round  about  my  temples  fondly  lingers. 

In  gentle  playfulness. 

Like  to  the  soft  caress 
Bestowed  in  happier  days  by  loving  fingers. 


Prevision  ^373 

Yet,  though  a  sense  of  grief 

Comes  with  the  faUing  leaf, 
And  memory  makes  the  summer  doubly  pleasant, 

In  all  my  autumn  dreams 

A  future  summer  gleams, 
Passing  the  fairest  glories  of  the  present ! 

George  Arnold  [1834-1865] 


INDIAN  SUMMER 

These  are  the  days  when  birds  come  back, 
A  very  few,  a  bird  or  two, 
To  take  a  backward  look. 

These  are  the  days  when  skies  put  on 
The  old,  old  sophistries  of  June, — 
A  blue  and  gold  mistake. 

Oh,  fraud  that  cannot  cheat  the  bee, 
Almost  thy  plausibility 
Induces  my  belief, 

Till  ranks  of  seeds  their  witness  bear, 
And  softly  through  the  altered  air 
Hurries  a  timid  leaf! 

Oh,  sacrament  of  summer  days. 
Oh,  last  communion  in  the  haze. 
Permit  a  child  to  join, 

Thy  sacred  emblems  to  partake. 
Thy  consecrated  bread  to  break, 
Taste  thine  immortal  wine! 

Emily  Dickinson  [1830- 


PREVISION 

Oh,  days  of  beauty  standing  veiled  apart, 
With  dreamy  skies  and  tender,  tremulous  air. 

In  this  rich  Indian  summer  of  the  heart 
Well  may  the  earth  her  jewelled  halo  wear. 


1374 


Poems  of  Nature 


The  long  brown  fields — no  longer  drear  and  dull — 
Burn  with  the  glow  of  these  deep-hearted  hours. 

Until  the  dry  weeds  seem  more  beautiful, 
More  spiritlike  than  even  summer's  flowers. 

But  yesterday  the  world  was  stricken  bare, 
Left  old  and  dead  in  gray,  enshrouding  gloom ; 

To-day  what  vivid  wonder  of  the  air 

Awakes  the  soul  of  vanished  light  and  bloom? 

Sharp  with  the  clean,  fine  ecstasy  of  death, 

A  mightier  wind  shall  strike  the  shrinking  earth, 

An  exhalation  of  creative  breath 

Wake  the  white  wonder  of  the  winter's  birth. 

In  her  wide  Pantheon — her  temple  place — 

Wrapped  in  strange  beauty  and  new  comforting. 

We  shall  not  miss  the  Summer's  full-blown  grace. 
Nor  hunger  for  the  swift,  exquisite  Spring. 

Ada  Foster  Mjirrav  [i8     - 


A  SONG  OF  EARLY  AUTUMN 

When  late  in  summer  the  streams  run  yellow, 

Burst  the  bridges  and  spread  into  bays; 
When  berries  are  black  and  peaches  are  mellow. 

And  hills  are  hidden  by  rainy  haze; 

When  the  goldenrod  is  golden  still. 

But  the  heart  of  the  sunflower  is  darker  and  sadder; 
When  the  corn  is  in  stacks  on  the  slope  of  the  hill, 

And  slides  o'er  the  path  the  striped  adder; 

When  butterflies  flutter  from  clover  to  thicket. 
Or  wave  their  wings  on  the  drooping  leaf; 

When  the  breeze  comes  shrill  with  the  call  of  the  cricket, 
Grasshopper's  rasp,  and  rustle  of  sheaf; 

When  high  in  the  field  the  fern-leaves  wrinkle, 

And  brown  is  the  grass  where  the  mowers  have  mown; 

When  low  in  the  meadow  the  cow-bells  tinkle, 
And  small  brooks  crinkle  o'er  stock  and  stone; 


To  Autumn  1375 

When  heavy  and  hollow  the  robin's  whistle 
And  shadows  are  deep  in  the  heat  of  noon; 

When  the  air  is  white  with  the  down  o'  the  thistle, 
And  the  sky  is  red  with  the  harvest  moon ; 

O,  then  be  chary,  young  Robert  and  Mary, 
No  time  let  slip,  not  a  moment  wait! 

If  the  fiddle  would  play  it  must  stop  its  tuning; 
And  they  who  would  w'ed  must  be  done  with  their 
mooning; 
So  let  the  churn  rattle,  see  well  to  the  cattle, 
And  fHle  the  wood  by  the  barn-yard  gate ! 

Rkliard  Watson  Gilder  [i 844-1 909] 


TO  AUTUMN 

Season  of  mists  and  mellqw  fruitfulness! 

Close  bosom-friend  of  the  maturing  sun; 

Conspiring  with  him  how  to  load  and  bless 

With  fruit  the  vines  that  round  the  thatch-eaves  run; 

To  bend  with  apples  the  mossed  cottage-trees, 

And  fill  all  fruit  with  ripeness  to  the  core; 

To  swell  the  gourd,  and  plump  the  hazel  shells 

With  a  sweet  kernel;  to  set  budding  more. 

And  still  more,  later  flowers  for  the  bees, 

Until  they  think  warm  days  will  never  cease. 

For  Summer  has  o'erbrimmed  their  clammy  cells. 

Who  hath  not  seen  thee  oft  amid  thy  store? 
Sometimes  whoever  seeks  abroad  may  find 
Thee  sitting  careless  on  a  granary  floor. 
Thy  hair  soft-lifted  by  the  winnowing  wind; 
Or  on  a  half-reaped  furrow  sound  asleep, 
Drowsed  with  the  fume  of  poppies,  while  thy  hook 
Spares  the  next  swath  and  all  its  twined  flowers; 
And  sometimes  like  a  gleaner  thou  dost  keep 
Steady  thy  laden  head  across  a  brook; 
Or  by  a  cider-press,  with  patient  look, 
Thou  watchest  the  last  oozings,  hours  by  hours. 


1376  Poems  of  Nature 

Where  are  the  songs  of  Spring?    Ay,  where  are  they?  T//' 

Think  not  of  them,  thou  hast  thy  music  too, 

While  barred  clouds  bloom  the  soft-dying  day 

And  touch  the  stubble-plains  with  rosy  hue; 

Then  in  a  wailful  choir  the  small  gnats  mourn 

Among  the  river  shallows,  borne  aloft 

Or  sinking  as  the  light  wind  lives  or  dies; 

And  full-grown  lambs  loud  bleat  from  hilly  bourn; 

Hedge-crickets  sing,  and  now  with  treble  soft 

The  redbreast  whistles  from  a  garden-croft, 

And  gathering  swallows  twitter  in  the  skies. 

John  Keats  [1795-1821] 


ODE  TO  AUTUMN 

I  SAW  old  Autumn  in  the  misty  morn 
Stand  shadowless  like  Silence,  listening 
To  silence,  for  no  lonely  bird  would  sing 
Into  his  hollow  ear  from  woods  forlorn, 
Nor  lowly  hedge  nor  solitary  thorn; — 
Shaking  his  languid  locks  all  dewy  bright 
With  tangled  gossamer  that  fell  by  night, 
Pearling  his  coronet  of  golden  corn. 

Where  are  the  songs  of  Summer? — With  the  sun, 

Oping  the  dusky  eyelids  of  the  South, 

Till  shade  and  silence  waken  up  as  one. 

And  Morning  sings  with  a  warm  odorous  mouth. 

Where  are  the  merry  birds? — Away,  away. 

On  panting  wings  through  the  inclement  skies. 

Lest  owls  should  prey  '  ' 

Undazzled  at  noonday. 
And  tear  with  horny  beak  their  lustrous  eyes. 

Where  are  the  blooms  of  Summer? — In  the  West, 
Blushing  their  last  to  the  last  sunny  hours, 
When  the  mild  Eve  by  sudden  Night  is  pressed 
Like  tearful  Prosperine,  snatched  from  her  flowers. 
To  a  most  gloomy  breast. 


Ode  to  Autumn  ^377 

Where  is  the  pride  of  Summer, — the  green  prime, — 
The  many,  many  leaves  all  twinkling? — Three 
On  the  mossed  elm;  three  on  the  naked  lime 
Trembling, — and  one  upon  the  old  oak-tree! 

Where  is  the  Dryad's  immortality? — 
Gone  into  mournful  cypress  and  dark  yew. 
Or  wearing  the  long  gloomy  Winter  through 

In  the  smooth  holly's  green  eternity. 

The  squirrel  gloats  on  his  accomplished  hoard. 

The  ants  have  brimmed  their  garners  with  ripe  grain, 

And  honey  bees  have  stored 
The  sweets  of  Summer  in  their  luscious  cells; 
The  swallows  all  have  winged  across  the  main; 
But  here  the  Autumn  melancholy  dwells, 

And  sighs  her  tearful  spells 
Amongst  the  sunless  shadows  of  the  plain. 
Alone,  alone. 
Upon  a  mossy  stone. 
She  sits  and  reckons  up  the  dead  and  gone, 
With  the  last  leaves  for  a  love-rosary, 
Whilst  all  the  withered  world  looks  drearily. 
Like  a  dim  picture  of  the  drowned  past 
In  the  hushed  mind's  mysterious  far  away, 
Doubtful  what  ghostly  thing  will  steal  the  last 
Into  that  distance,  gray  upon  the  gray. 

O  go  and  sit  with  her,  and  be  o'ershaded 
Under  the  languid  downfall  of  her  hair: 
She  wears  a  coronal  of  flowers  faded 
Upon  her  forehead,  and  a  face  of  care; — 
There  is  enough  of  withered  everywhere 
To  make  her  bower, — and  enough  of  gloom; 
There  is  enough  of  sadness  to  invite, 
If  only  for  the  rose  that  died,  whose  doom 
Is  Beauty's, — she  that  with  the  living  bloom 
Of  conscious  cheeks  most  beautifies  the  light: 
There  is  enough  of  sorrowing,  and  quite 
Enough  of  bitter  fruits  the  earth  doth  bear, — 
Enough  of  chilly  droppings  for  her  bowl; 


1378  Poems  of  Nature 

Enough  of  fear  and  shadowy  despair, 
To  frame  her  cloudy  prison  for  the  soul! 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 


ODE  TO  THE  WEST  WIND 

I 

O  WILD  West  Wind,  thou  breath  of  Autumn's  being. 
Thou  from  whose  unseen  presence  the  leaves  dead 
Are  driven,  like  ghosts  from  an  enchanter  fleeing. 

Yellow,  and  black,  and  pale,  and  hectic  red, 
Pestilence-stricken  multitudes!    O  thou 
Who  chariotest  to  their  dark  wintry  bed 

The  winged  seeds,  where  they  lie  cold  and  low, 

Each  like  a  corpse  within  its  grave,  until 
Thine  azure  sister  of  the  Spring  shall  blow 

Her  clarion  o'er  the  dreaming  earth,  and  fill 
(Driving  sweet  buds  like  flocks  to  feed  in  air)         ,.  ' 
With  living  hues  and  odors  plain  and  hill;      '  , ,     , 

Wild  Spirit,  which  art  moving  everywhere; 
Destroyer  and  preserver;  hear,  O  hear! 


Thou  on  whose  stream,  'mid  the  steep  sky's  commotion, 
Loose  clouds  like  earth's  decaying  leaves  are  shed, 

Shook  from  the  tangled  boughs  of  heaven  and  ocean, 

1.'' 
Angels  of  rain  and  lightning!    there  are  spread 

On  the  blue  surface  of  thine  airy  surge, 
Like  the  bright  hair  uplifted  from  the  head 

Of  some  fierce  Maenad,  even  from  the  dim  verge 

Of  the  horizon  to  the  zenith's  height, 
The  locks  of  the  approaching  storm.     Thou  dirge     -\ 


Ode  to  the  West  Wind  13  79 

Of  the  dying  year,  to  which  this  dosing  night 
Will  be  the  dome  of  a  vast  sepulchre, 
Vaulted  with  all  thy  congregated  might 

Of  vapors,  from  whose  solid  atmosphere 

Black  rain,  and  fire,  and  hail  will  burst:    O  hear! 


Thou  who  didst  waken  from  his  summer  dreams 

The  blue  Mediterranean,  where  he  lay, 
Lulled  by  the  coil  of  his  crystalline  streams, 

Beside  a  pumice  isle  in  Baiaj's  bay. 
And  saw  in  sleep  old  palaces  and  towers 
Quivering  within  the  wave's  intenser  day. 

All  overgrown  with  azure  moss,  and  flowers 

So  sweet,  the  sense  faints  picturing  them!    Thou 
For  whose  path  the  Atlantic's  level  powers 

Cleave  themselves  into  chasms,  while  far  below 
The  sea-blooms  and  the  oozy  woods  which  wear 
The  sapless  foliage  of  the  ocean,  know 

Thy  voice,  and  suddenly  grow  gray  with  fear, 
And  tremble  and  despoil  themselves:    O  hear! 

IV 

If  I  were  a  dead  leaf  thou  mightest  bear; 
If  I  were  a  swift  cloud  to  fly  with  thee; 
A  wave  to  pant  beneath  thy  power,  and  share 

The  impulse  of  thy  strength,  only  less  free 
Than  thou,  O  uncontrollable!    If  even 
I  were  as  in  my  boyhood,  and  could  be 

The  comrade  of  thy  wanderings  over  heaven, 
As  then,  when  to  outstrip  thy  skiey  speed 
Scarce  seemed  a  vision — I  would  ne'er  have  striven 


1380  Poems  of  Nature     '"■ 

As  thus  with  thee  m  prayer  in  my  sore  need. 
0!  Uft  me  as  a  wave,  a  leaf,  a  cloud! 
I  fall  upon  the  thorns  of  life!    I  bleed! 

A  heavy  weight  of  hours  has  chained  and  bowed 
One  too  like  thee — tameless,  and  swift,  and  proud. 


Make  me  thy  lyre,  even  as  the  forest  is: 

What  if  my  leaves  are  falling  like  its  own? 
The  tumult  of  thy  mighty  harmonies 

Will  take  from  both  a  deep,  autumnal  tone. 
Sweet  though  in  sadness.     Be  thou,  Spirit  fierce, 
My  spirit!     Be  thou  me,  impetuous  one! 

Drive  my  dead  thoughts  over  the  universe. 

Like  withered  leaves,  to  quicken  a  new  birth; 
And,  by  the  incantation  of  this  verse, 

Scatter,  as  from  an  unextinguished  hearth 

Ashes  and  sparks,  my  words  among  mankind! 

Be  through  my  lips  to  unawakened  earth 

The  trumpet  of  a  prophecy!     O  Wind, 

If  Winter  comes,  can  Spring  be  far  behind? 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [1792-1822] 


AUTUMN:  A  DIRGE 

The  warm  sun  is  failing;  the  bleak  wind  is  waihng; 

The  bare  boughs  are  sighing;  the  pale  flowers  arc  dying; 

And  the  Year 
On  the  earth,  her  death-bed,  in  a  shroud  of  leaves  dead, 
Is  lying. 

Come,  months,  come  away, 

From  November  to  May; 

In  your  saddest  array 

Follow  the  bier  '^riT 

Of  the  dead,  cold  Year, 
And  like  dim  shadows  watch  by  her  sepulchre. 


"When  the   Frost  is  on  the   Punkin"     1381 

The  cliill  rain  is  falling;  the  nipped  worm  is  crawling; 
The  rivers  are  swelling;  the  thunder  is  knelUng 

For  the  Year; 
The  blithe  swallows  are  flown,  and  the  Hzards  each  gone 
To  his  dwelling; 
Come,  months,  come  away; 
Put  on  white,  black,  and  gray; 
Let  your  light  sisters  play — 
Ye,  follow  the  bier 
=^         Of  the  dead,  cold  Year, 
And  make  her  grave  green  with  tear  on  tear. 

Percy  Bysshc  Shelley  [1702-1822] 


AUTUMN 

The  morns  are  meeker  than  they  were, 

The  nuts-  are  getting  brown ; 

The  berry's  cheek  is  plumper, 

The  rose  is  out  of  town. 

The  maple  wears  a  gayer  scarf, 

The  field  a  scarlet  gown. 

Lest  I  should  be  oldrfashioned, 

I'll  put  a  trinket  on. 

Emily  Dickinson  [1830-18S6] 

"WHEN  THE  FROST  IS  ON  THE  PUNKIN" 

When  the  frost  is  on  the  punkin  and  the  fodder's  in  the 
shock, 

And  you  hear  the  kyouck  and  gobble  of  the  struttin'  turkey- 
cock, 

And  the  clackin'  of  the  guineys,  and  the  cluckin'  of  the  hens, 

And  the  roo.ster's  hallylooyer  as  he  tiptoes  on  the  fence; 

O,  it's  then's  the  times  a  fell'^r  is  a-feelin'  at  his  best. 

With  the  risin'  sun  to  greet  him  from  a  night  of  peaceful 
rest. 

As  he  leaves  the  house,  bareheaded,  and  goes  out  to  feed 
the  stock. 

When  the  frost  is  on  the  punkin  and  the  fodder's  in  the 
shock. 


1382  Poems  of  Nature       Al  nariV/ '' 

They's  something  kindo'  harty-like  about  the  atmusfere 
When  the  heat  of  summer's  over  and  the  coohn'  fall  is  here — ■ 
Of  course  we  miss  the  flowers,  and  the  blossoms  on  the  trees, 
And  the  mumble  of  the  hummin'-birds  and  buzzin'  of  the 

bees; 
But  the  air's  so  appetizin';  and  the  landscape  through  the 

haze 
Of  a  crisp  and  sunny  morning  of  the  airly  autumn  days 
Is  a  pictur'  that  no  painter  has  the  colorin'  to  mock — 
When  the  frost  is  on  the  punkin  and  the  fodder's  in  the 

shock. 

The  husky,  rusty  russel  of  the  tossels  of  the  corn, 
And  the  raspin'  of  the  tangled  leaves,  as  golden  as  the  morn; 
The  stubble  in  the  furries — kindo'  lonesome-like,  but  still 
A-preachin'  sermuns  to  us  of  the  barns  they  growed  to  fill; 
The  strawstack  in  the  medder,  and  the  reaper  in  the  shed; 
The  hosses  in  theyr  stalls  below — the  clover  overhead! — 
O,  it  sets  my  hart  a-clickin'  like  the  tickin'  of  a  clock, 
When  the  frost  is  on  the  punkin  and  the  fodder's  in   the 
shock. 

Then  your  apples  all  is  getherd,  and  the  ones  a  feller  keeps 
Is  poured  around  the  celler-floor  in  red  and  yeller  heaps; 
And  your  cidcr-makin's  over,  and  your  wimmern-folks  is 

through 
With  their  mince  and  apple-butter,  and  theyr  souse  and 

saussage,  too!  ... 
I  don't  know  how  to  tell  it — but  ef  sich  a  thing  could  be 
As  the  Angels  wantin'  boardin',  and  they'd  call  around  on 

me — 
I'd  want  to  'commodate  'em — all  the  whole-indurin'  flock — 
When  the  frost  is  on  the  punkin  and  the  fodder's  in  the  shock. 
James  Whilcomb  Riley  [1852-1016] 

KORE 

Yea,  she  hath  passed  hereby,  and  blessed  the  sheaves,  -^A 
And  the  great  garths,  and  stacks,  and  quiet  farms, 
And  all  the  tawny,  and  the  crimson  leaves. 
Yea,  she  hath  passed  with  poppies  in  her  arms, 


Old   October  1383 

Under  the  star  of  dusk,  through  stealing  mist, 

And  blessed  the  earth,  and  gone,  while  no  man  wist. 

With  slow,  reluctant  feet,  and  weary  eyes, 
And  eye-lids  heavy  with  the  coming  sleep. 
With  small  breasts  lifted  up  in  stress  of  sighs, 
She  passed,  as  shadows  pass,  among  the  sheep; 
While  the  earth  dreamed,  and  only  I  was  ware 
Of  that  faint  fragrance  blown  from  her  soft  hair. 

The  land  lay  steeped  in  peace  of  silent  dreams; 
There  was  no  sound  amid  the  sacred  boughs. 
Nor  any  mournful  music  in  her  streams: 
Only  I  saw  the  shadow  on  her  brows. 
Only  I  knew  her  for  the  yearly  slain. 
And  wept,  and  weep  until  she. come  again. 

Frederic  Manning  [iS 

OLD  OCTOBER 

Hail,  old  October,  bright  and  chill. 
First  freedman  from  the  summer  sun! 
Spice  high  the  bowl,  and  drink  your  fill! 
Thank  heaven,  at  last  the  summer's  done! 

Come,  friend,  my  fire  is  burning  bright, 
A  fire's  no  longer  out  of  place, 
How  clear  it  glows!  (there's  frost  to-night,) 
It  looks  white  winter  in  the  face. 

You've  been  to  "Richard."  Ah!  you've  seen 
A  noble  play:  I'm  glad  you  went; 
But  what  on  earth  does  Shakespeare  mean 
By  "wiiilcr  of  our  discontent?''^ 

Be  mine  the  tree  that  feeds  the  fire! 
Be  mine  the  sun  knows  when  to  set ! 
Be  mine  the  months  when  friends  desire 
To  turn  in  here  from  cold  and  wet! 

The  sentry  sun,  that  glared  so  long 
O'erhead,  deserts  his  summer  post; 
Ay,  you  may  brew  it  hot  and  strong: 
"The  joys  of  winter" — come,  a  toast! 


1384  Poems   of  Nature 

Shine  on  the  kangaroo,  thou  sun! 
Make  far  New  Zealand  faint  with  fear! 
Don't  hurry  back  to  spoil  our  fun, 
Thank  goodness,  old  October's  here! 

Thomas  Constable  [1812-1881] 

NOVEMBER 

When  thistle-blows  do  lightly  f^.oat 

About  the  pasture-height, 

And  shrills  the  hawk  a  parting  note, 

And  creeps  the  frost  at  night. 

Then  hilly  ho!  though  singing  so, 

And  whistle  as  I  may. 

There  comes  again  the  old  heart  pain 

Through  all  the  livelong  day. 

In  high  wind  creaks  the  leafless  tree 

And  nods  the  fading  fern; 

The  knolls  are  dun  as  snow-clouds  be, 

And  cold  the  sun  does  burn. 

Then  ho,  hollo!  though  calling  so, 

I  cannot  keep  it  down; 

The  tears  arise  unto  my  eyes, 

And  thoughts  are  chill  and  brown. 

Far  in  the  cedars'  dusky  stoles, 

Where  the  sere  ground-vine  weaves. 

The  partridge  drums  funereal  rolls 

Above  the  fallen  leaves. 

And  hip,  hip,  ho!  though  cheering  so, 

It  stills  no  whit  the  pain; 

For  drip,  drip,  drip,  from  bare-branch  tip, 

I  hear  the  year's  last  rain. 

So  drive  the  cold  cows  from  the  hill. 
And  call  the  wet  sheep  in; 
And  let  their  stamping  clatter  fill  : 

The  barn  with  warming  din. 
And  ho,  folk,  ho!  though  it  be  so 
That  we  no  more  may  roam, 
We  still  will  find  a  cheerful  mind 
Around  the  fire  at  home! 

C.  L.  Cleavdand  [18    -   ?   ] 


Storm    Fear  ^3^S 


NOVEMBER 

Hark  you  such  sound  as  quivers?     Kings  will  hear, 

As  kings  have  heard,  and  tremble  on  their  thrones; 

The  old  will  feel  the  weight  of  mossy  stones; 

The  young  alone  will  laugh  and  scoff  at  fear. 
It  is  the  tread  of  armies  marching  near, 

From  scarlet  lands  to  lands  forever  pale; 

It  is  a  bugle  dying  down  the  gale; 

It  is  the  sudden  gushing  of  a  tear. 
And  it  is  hands  that  grope  at  ghostly  doors; 

And  romp  of  spirit-children  on  the  pave; 

It  is  the  tender  sighing  of  the  brave 
Who  fell,  ah!  long  ago,  in  futile  wars; 

It  is  such  sound  as  death;  and,  after  all, 
'Tis  but  the  forest  letting  dead  leaves  fall. 

Mahlon  Leonard  Fisher  [1874- 


STORM  FEAR 

When  the  wind  works  against  us  in  the  dark, 

And  pelts  with  snow 

The  lower  chamber  window  on  the  cast, 

And  whispers  with  a  sort  of  stifled  bark, 

The  beast, 

"  Come  out !    Come  out ! " — 

It  costs  no  inward  struggle  not  to  go, 

Ah,  no! 

I  count  our  strength, 

Two  and  a  child, 

Those  of  us  not  asleep  subdued  to  mark 

How  the  cold  creeps  as  the  fire  dies  at  length, - 

How  drifts  are  piled, 

Dooryard  and  road  ungraded. 

Till  even  the  comforting  barn  grows  far  away 

And  my  heart  owns  a  doubt 

Whether  'tis  in  us  to  arise  with  day 

And  save  ourselves  unaided. 

Robert  Frost,  [1875- 


I J  86  Poems  of  Nature 


WINTER:  A  DIRGE 

The  wintry  west  extends  his  blast, 

And  hail  and  rain  does  blaw; 
Or  the  stormy  north  sends  driving  forth 

The  blinding  sleet  and  snaw: 
While,  tumbling  brown,  the  burn  comes  down, 

And  roars  frae  bank  to  brae; 
And  bird  and  beast  in  covert  rest, 

And  pass  the  heartless  day. 

"The  sweeping  blast,  the  sky  o'ercast," 

The  joyless  winter  day. 
Let  others  fear, — to  me  more  dear 

Than  all  the  pride  of  May; 
The  tempest's  howl,  it  soothes  my  soul, 

My  griefs  it  seems  to  join ; 
The  leafless  trees  my  fancy  please, 

Their  fate  resembles  mine! 

Thou  Power  Supreme,  whose  mighty  scheme 

These  woes  of  mine  fulfil, 
Here,  firm,  I  rest, — they  must  be  best, 

Because  they  are  Thy  will. 
Then  all  I  want  (oh,  do  Thou  grant 

This  one  request  of  mine!) 
Since  to  enjoy  Thou  dost  deny, 

Assist  me  to  resign! 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 

OLD   WINTER 

Old  Winter  sad,  in  snow  yclad, 

Is  making  a  doleful  din; 
But  let  him  howl  till  he  crack  his  jowl, 

We  will  not  let  him  in. 

Ay,  let  him  lift  from  the  billowy  drift 

His  hoary,  haggard  form, 
And  scowling  stand,  with  his  wrinkled  hand 

Outstretching  to  the  storm. 


The   Frost  1387 

And  let  his  weird  and  sleety  beard 

Stream  loose  upon  the  blast, 
And,  rustling,  chime  to  the  tinkling  rime 

From  his  bald  head  falling  fast. 

Let  his  baleful  breath  shed  blight  and  death         ' ' 

On  herb  and  flower  and  tree; 
And  brooks  and  ponds  in  crystal  bonds 

Bind  fast,  but  what  care  we? 

Let  him  push  at  the  door, — in  the  chimney  roar, 

And  rattle  the  window-pane; 
Let  him  in  at  us  spy  with  his  icicle  eye, 

But  he  shall  not  entrance  gain. 

'   ::>! 

Let  him  gnaw,  forsooth,  with  his  freezing  tooth, 

On  our  roof-tiles,  till  he  tire; 
But  we  care  not  a  whit,  as  we  jovial  sit 

Before  our  blazing  fire. 

Come,  lads,  let's  sing,  till  the  rafters  ring; 

Come,  push  the  can  about; — 
From  our  snug  fire-side  this  Christmas-tide 

We'll  keep  old  Winter  out. 

Thomas  Nod  [i7gg-i86i] 


THE   FROST 

The  Frost  looked  forth,  one  stiU,  clear  night, 
And  he  said,  "Now  I  shall  be  out  of  sight; 
So  through  the  valley  and  over  the  height 

In  silence  I'll  take  my  way. 
I  will  not  go  like  that  blustering  train, 
The  wind  and  the  snow,  the  hail  and  the  rain, 
Who  make  so  much  bustle  and  noise  in  vain. 

But  I'll  be  as  busy  as  they!" 

Then  he  went  to  the  mountain,  and  powdered  its  crest, 
He  climbed  up  the  trees,  and  their  boughs  he  dressed 
With  diamonds  and  pearls,  and  over  the  breast 
Of  the  quivering  lake  he  spread 


1388  Poems  of  Nature 

A  coat  of  mail,  thai  it  need  not  fear 
The  downward  point  of  many  a  spear 
That  he  hung  on  its  margin,  far  and  near, 
Where  a  rock  could  rear  its  head. 

He  went  to  the  windows  of  those  who  slept, 
And  over  each  pane  like  a  fairy  crept; 
Wherever  he  breathed,  wherever  he  stepped. 

By  the  light  of  the  moon  were  seen 
Most  beautiful  things.    There  were  flowers  and  trees. 
There  were  bevies  of  birds  and  swarms  of  bees, 
There  were  cities,  thrones,  temples,  and  towers,  and  these 

All  pictured  in  silver  sheen! 

But  he  did  one  thing  that  was  hardly  fair, — 
He  peeped  in  the  cupboard,  and,  finding  there 
That  all  had  forgotten  for  him  to  prepare, — 

"Now,  just  to  set  them  a-thinking, 
I'll  bite  this  basket  of  fruit,"  said  he; 
"This  costly  pitcher  I'll  burst  in  three. 
And  the  glass  of  water  they've  left  for  me 

Shall  'tcJiick!'  to  tell  them  I'm  drinking." 

Hannah  Flagg  Gould  [1780-1865] 

THE   FROSTED   PANE 

One  night  came  Winter  noiselessly  and  leaned 

Against  my  window-pane. 
In  the  deep  stillness  of  his  heart  convened 

The  ghosts  of  all  his  slain. 

Leaves,  and  ephemera,  and  stars  of  earth. 

And  fugitives  of  grass, — 
White  spirits  loosed  from  bonds  of  mortal  birth, 

He  drew  them  on  the  glass. 

Charles  G.  D.  Roberts  [1860- 

THE  FROST  SPIRIT 

He  comes, — he  comes, — the  Frost  Spirit  comes!    You  may 

trace  his  footsteps  now 
On  the  naked  woods  and  the  blasted  fields  and  the  brown 

hill's  withered  brow. 


The  Frost  Spirit  1389 

He  has  smitten  the  leaves  of  the  gray  old  trees  where  their 

pleasant  green  came  forth, 
And  the  winds,  which  follow  wherever  he  goes,  have  shaken 

them  down  to  earth. 

He  comes, — he  comes, — the  Frost  Spirit  comes!  from  the 

frozen  Labrador, 
From  the  icy  bridge  of  the  Northern  seas,  which  the  white 

bear  wanders  o'er, 
Where  the  fisherman's  sail  is  stiff  with  ice  and  the  luckless 

forms  below  , 

In  the  sunless  cold  of  the  lingering  night  into  marble  statues 

grow ! 

He  comes, — he  comes, — the  Frost  Spirit  comes!  on  the  rush- 
ing Northern  blast. 

And  the  dark  Norwegian  pines  have  bowed  as  his  fearful 
breath  went  past. 

With  an  unscorched  wing  he  has  hurried  on,  where  the  fires  of 
Hecla  glow 

On  the  darkly  beautiful  sky  above  and  the  ancient  ice  below. 

He  comes, — he  comes, — the  Frost  Spirit  comes!  and  the 

quiet  lake  shall  feel 
The  torpid  touch  of  his  glazing  breath,  and  ring  to  the 

skater's  heel; 
And  the  streams  which  danced  on  the  broken  rocks,  or  sang 

to  the  leaning  grass, 
Shall  bow  again  to  their  winter  chain,  and  in  mournful  silence 

pass. 

He  comes, — he  comes, — the  Frost  Spirit  comes!    Let  us  meet 

him  as  wc  may, 
And  turn  with  the  light  of  the  parlor-fire  his  evil  power 

away; 
And  gather  closer  the  circle  round,  when  that  firelight  dances 

high, 
And  laugh  at  the  shriek  of  the  baffled  Fiend  as  his  sounding 

wing  goes  by! 

John  Grcenleaf  WhiUier  [1807-1892] 


1390  Poems  of  Nature 


SNOW 

ii 
Lo,  what  wonders  the  day  hath  brought, 

Born  of  the  soft  and  slumbrous  snow! 
Gradual,  silent,  slowly  wrought; 
Even  as  an  artist,  thought  by  thought, 

Writes  expression  on  lip  and  brow. 

Hanging  garlands  the  eaves  o'erbrim, 

Deep  drifts  smgther  the  paths  below; 
The  elms  are  shrouded,  trunk  and  Umb, 
And  all  the  air  is  dizzy  and  dim  ,,m 

With  a  whirl  of  dancing,  dazzhng  snow. 

Dimly  out  of  the  baffled  sight 

Houses  and  church-spires  stretch  away; 
The  trees,  all  spectral  and  still  and  white, 
Stand  up  like  ghosts  in  the  failing  light. 
And  fade  and  faint  with  the  blinded  day. 

Down  from  the  roofs  in  gusts  are  hurled 
The  eddying  drifts  to  the  waste  below; 
And  still  is  the  banner  of  storm  unfurled, 
TiU  aU  the  drowned  and  desolate  world 
Lies  dumb  and  white  in  a  trance  of  snow. 

Slowly  the  shadows  gather  and  fall. 
Still  the  whispering  snow-flakes  beat; 

Night  and  darkness  are  over  all: 

Rest,  pale  city,  beneath  their  pall! 

Sleep,  white  world,  in  thy  winding-sheet! 

Clouds  may  thicken,  and  storm -winds  breathe: 
On  my  wall  is  a  glimpse  of  Rome, — 

Land  of  my  longing! — and  underneath 

Swings  and  trembles  my  olive- wreath; 
Peace  and  I  are  at  home,  at  home! 

Elizabeth  Akers  [  1 83  2- 1 9 1 1  ] 


The  Snow-Shower  139 1 


TO  A  SNOW-FLAKE 

What  heart  could  have  thought  you?  — 

Past  our  devisal 

(0  filigree  petal!) 

Fashioned  so  purely, 

Fragilely,  surely, 

From  what  Paradisal 

Imagineless  metal, 

Too  costly  for  cost? 

Who  hammered  you,  wrought  you, 

From  argentine  vapor? — 

"God  was  my  shaper. 

Passing  surmisal. 

He  hammered,  He  wrought  me, 

From  curled  silver  vapor, 

To  lust  of  His  mind: — ■ 

Thou  couldst  not  have  thought  me! 

So  purely,  so  palely, 

Tinily,  surely, 

Mightily,  frailly, 

Insculpcd  and  embossed. 

With  His  hammer  of  wind, 

And  His  graver  of  frost." 

Francis  Thompson  [1850?-! 907] 

THE   SNOW-SHOWER 

Stand  here  by  my  side  and  turn,  I  pray. 

On  the  lake  below  thy  gentle  e3'cs; 
The  clouds  hang  over  it,  heavy  and  gray, 

And  dark  and  silent  the  water  lies; 
And  out  of  that  frozen  mist  the  snow 
In  wavering  flakes  begins  to  flow; 

Flake  after  flake 
They  sink  in  the  dark  and  silent  lake. 

See  how  in  a  living  swarm  they  come 

From  the  chambers  beyond  that  misty  veil; 

Some  hover  in  air  awhile,  and  some 
Rush  prone  from  the  sky  like  summer  hail. 


17Q2  Poems  of  Nature 

All,  dropping  swiftly,  or  settling  slow. 
Meet,  and  are  still  in  the  depths  below; 

Flake  after  flake 
Dissolved  in  the  dark  and  silent  lake. 

Here  delicate  snow-stars,  out  of  the  cloud, 
Come  floating  downward  in  airy  play. 

Like  spangles  dropped  from  the  glistening  crowd 
That  whiten  by  night  the  Milky  Way; 

There  broader  and  burlier  masses  fall; 

The  sullen  water  buries  them  all,^ 
Flake  after  flake, — 

All  drowned  in  the  dark  and  silent  lake. 

And  some,  as  on  tender  wings  they  glide 
From  their  chilly  birth-cloud,  dim  and  gray, 

Are  joined  in  their  fall,  and,  side  by  side. 
Come  clinging  along  their  unsteady  way; 

As  friend  with  friend,  or  husband  with  wife, 

Makes  hand  in  hand  the  passage  of  life; 
Each  mated  flake 

Soon  sinks  in  the  dark  and  silent  lake. 

Lo!  while  we  are  gazing,  in  swifter  haste 
Stream  down  the  snows,  till  the  air  is  white. 

As,  myriads  by  myriads  madly  chased. 

They  fling  themselves  from  their  shadowy  height. 

The  fair,  frail  creatures  of  middle  sky. 

What  speed  they  make,  with  their  grave  so  nigh; 
Flake  after  flake 

To  lie  in  the  dark  and  silent  lake. 

I  see  in  thy  gentle  eyes  a  tear; 

They  turn  to  me  in  sorrowful  thought; 
Thou  thinkest  of  friends,  the  good  and  dear, 

Who  were  for  a  time,  and  now  are  not ; 
Like  these  fair  children  of  cloud  and  frost. 
That  glisten  a  moment  and  then  are  lost, — 

Flake  after  flake, — 
All  lost  in  the  dark  and  silent  lake. 


Midwinter  1393 

Yet  look  again,  for  the  clouds  divide; 

A  gleam  of  blue  on  the  water  lies; 
And  far  away,  on  the  mountain-side, 

A  sunbeam  falls  from  the  opening  skies; 
But  the  hurrying  host  that  flew  between 
The  cloud  and  the  water  no  more  is  seen; 

Flake  after  flake. 
At  rest  in  the  dark  and  silent  lake. 

William  Cullcn  Bryanl  [1704-1878] 

MIDWINTER 

The  speckled  sky  is  dim  with  snow, 
The  light  flakes  falter  and  fall  slow; 
Athwart  the  hill-top,  rapt  and  pale, 
Silently  drops  a  silvery  veil; 
And  all  the  valley  is  shut  in 
By  flickering  curtains  gray  and  thin. 

But  cheerily  the  chickadee 
Singeth  to  me  on  fence  and  tree; 
The  snow  sails  round  him  as  he  sings, 
White  as  the  down  of  angels'  wings. 

I  watch  the  slow  flakes  as  they  fall 
On  bank  and  brier  and  broken  wall; 
Over  the  orchard,  Vv^aste  and  brown, 
All  noiselessly  they  settle  down. 
Tipping  the  apple-boughs,  and  each 
Light  quivering  twig  of  plum  and  peach. 

On  turf  and  curb  and  bower-roof 

The  snow-storm  spreads  its  ivory  woof; 

It  paves  with  pearl  the  garden-walk; 

And  lovingly  round  tattered  stalk 

And  shivering  stem  its  magic  weaves 

A  mantle  fair  as  lily-leaves. 

I ! 
The  hooded  beehive,  small  and  low, 

Stands  like  a  maiden  in  the  snow; 

And  the  old  door-slab  is  half  hid 

Under  an  alabaster  lid. 


1394 


Poems  of  Nature 

All  day  it  snows:  the  sheeted  post 
Gleams  in  the  dimness  like  a  ghost; 
All  day  the  blasted  oak  has  stood 
A  mufifled  wizard  of  the  wood; 
Garland  and  airy  cap  adorn 
The  sumach  and  the  wayside  thorn, 
And  clustering  spangles  lodge  and  shine 
In  the  dark  tresses  of  the  pine. 

The  ragged  bramble,  dwarfed  and  old, 
Shrinks  like  a  beggar  in  the  cold; 
In  surplice  white  the  cedar  stands, 
And  blesses  him  with  priestly  hands. 

Still  cheerily  the  chickadee 

Singeth  to  me  on  fence  and  tree: 

But  in  my  inmost  ear  is  heard 

The  music  of  a  holier  bird; 

And  heavenly  thoughts,  as  soft  and  white 

As  snow-flakes,  on  my  soul  alight. 

Clothing  with  love  my  lonely  heart. 

Healing  with  peace  each  bruised  part, 

Till  all  my  being  seems  to  be 

Transfigured  by  their  purity. 

John  Townsend  Trowbridge  [1827-1916] 

A   GLEE   FOR  WINTER 

Hence,  rude  Winter!  crabbed  old  fellow, 
Never  merry,  never  mellow! 
Well-a-day!  in  rain  and  snow 
What  will  keep  one's  heart  aglow? 
Groups  of  kinsmen,  old  and  young, 
Oldest  they  old  friends  among; 
Groups  of  friends,  so  old  and  true 
That  they  seem  our  kinsmen  too; 
These  all  merry  all  together 
Charm  away  chill  Winter  weather. 

What  will  kill  this  dull  old  fellow? 

Ale  that's  bright,  and  wine  that's  mellow! 


The   Death  of  the  Old  Year       i 


395 


Dear  old  songs  for  ever  new; 
Some  true  love,  and  laughter  too; 
Pleasant  wit,  and  harmless  fun,  l 

And  a  dance  when  day  is  done.  ' 

Music,  friends  so  true  and  tried, 
Whispered  love  by  warm  fireside, 
Mirth  at  all  times  all  together, 
Make  sweet  May  of  Winter  weather. 

Alfred  Domett  [1811-1887] 

THE  DEATH  OF  THE  OLD   YEAR 

Full  knee-deep  lies  the  winter  snow, 
And  the  winter  winds  are  wearily  sighing : 
Toll  ye  the  church-bell  sad  and  slow, 
And  tread  softly  and  speak  low. 
For  the  old  year  lies  a-dying. 

Old  year,  you  must  not  die; 

You  came  to  us  so  readily. 

You  lived  with  us  so  steadily, 

Old  year,  you  shall  not  die. 

He  lieth  still,  he  doth  not  move; 

He  will  not  see  the  dawn  of  day. 

He  hath  no  other  life  above. 

He  gave  me  a  friend,  and  a  true  true-love, 

And  the  New-year  will  take  'em  away. 

Old  year,  you  must  not  go; 

So  long  as  you  have  been  with  us. 

Such  joy  as  you  have  seen  with  us. 

Old  year,  you  shall  not  go. 

He  frothed  his  bumpers  to  the  brim ; 
A  jollier  year  we  shall  not  see. 
But  though  his  eyes  are  waxing  dim, 
And  though  his  foes  speak  ill  of  him. 
He  was  a  friend  to  me. 

Old  year,  you  shall  not  die; 

We  did  so  laugh  and  cry  with  you, 

I've  half  a  mind  to  die  with  you. 

Old  year,  if  you  must  die. 


17^6  Poems  of  Nature 


He  was  full  of  joke  and  jest, 
But  all  his  merry  quips  are  o'er. 
To  see  him  die,  across  the  waste 
His  son  and  heir  doth  ride  post-haste, 
But  he'll  be  dead  before. 

Every  one  for  his  own. 

The  night  is  starry  and  cold,  my  friend. 

And  the  New-year,  bhthe  and  bold,  my  friend, 

Comes  up  to  take  his  own. 

How  hard  he  breathes!  over  the  snow 
I  heard  just  now  the  crowing  cock. 
The  shadows  flicker  to  and  fro: 
The  cricket  chirps;  the  light  burns  low; 
'Tis  nearly  twelve  o'clock. 

Shake  hands  before  you  die. 

Old  year,  we'll  dearly  rue  for  you. 

What  is  it  we  can  do  for  you? 

Speak  out  before  you  die. 

His  face  is  growing  sharp  and  thin. 
Alack!  our  friend  is  gone. 
Close  up  his  eyes;  tie  up  his  chin; 
Step  from  the  corpse,  and  let  him  in 
That  standeth  there  alone, 

And  waiteth  at  the  door. 

There's  a  new  foot  on  the  floor,  my  friend, 

And  a  new  face  at  the  door,  my  friend, 

A  new  face  at  the  door. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1802] 


DIRGE   FOR  THE  YEAR 


Orphan  hours,  the  year  is  dead. 
Come  and  sigh,  come  and  weep 

Merry  hours,  smile  instead. 
For  the  year  is  but  asleep. 

See.  it  smiles  as  it  is  sleeping. 

Mocking  your  untimely  weeping. 


Dirge  for  the   Year  ^397 

As  an  earthquake  rocks  a  corse 

In  its  cotlfin  in  the  cLiy, 
So  white  Winter,  that  rough  nurse, 

Rocks  the  dead-cold  year  to-day; 
Solemn  hours!  wail  aloud 
For  your  mother  in  her  shroud.  1 OO'  TJ 

As  the  wild  air  stirs  and  sways 

The  tree-swung  cradle  of  a  child, 
So  the  breath  of  these  rude  days 

Rocks  the  year: — be  calm  and  mild, 
Trembling  hours;  she  will  arise 
With  new  love  within  her  eyes. 

January  gray  is  here, 

Like  a  sexton  by  her  grave; 
February  bears  the  bier; 

March  with  grief  doth  howl  and  rave. 
And  April  weeps — but,  O,  ye  hours, 
Follow  with  May's  fairest  flowers. 

Percy  Bysshc  Shelley  [  1 7  9  2- 1 8  2  2] 


\^^rj 


WOOD  AND  FIELD  AND  RUNNING 
BROOK 

WALDEINSAMKEIT 

I  DO  not  count  the  hours  I  spend 

In  wandering  by  the  sea; 
The  forest  is  my  loyal  friend, 

Like  God  it  useth  me. 

In  plains  that  room  for  shadows  make 

Of  skirting  hills  to  he, 
Bound  in  by  streams  which  give  and  take 

Their  colors  from  the  sky; 

Or  on  the  mountain-crest  sublime, 

Or  down  the  oaken  glade, 
O  what  have  I  to  do  with  time? 

For  this  the  day  was  made. 

Cities  of  mortals  woe-begone 

Fantastic  care  derides. 
But  in  the  serious  landscape  lone 

Stern  benefit  abides. 

Sheen  will  tarnish,  honey  cloy. 

And  merry  is  only  a  mask  of  sad. 
But,  sober  on  a  fund  of  joy. 

The  woods  at  heart  are  glad. 

There  the  great  Planter  plants 

Of  fruitful  worlds  the  grain, 
And  with  a  million  spells  enchants 

The  souls  that  v/alk  in  pain. 
1398 


"When   in   the  Woods    I    Wander"     1399 

Still  on  the  seeds  of  all  he  made 

The  rose  of  beauty  burns; 
Through  times  that  wear  and  forms  that  fade, 

Immortal  youth  returns. 

The  black  ducks  mounting  from  the  lake, 

The  pigeon  in  the  pines, 
The  bittern's  boom,  a  desert  make 

Which  no  false  art  refines. 

Down  in  yon  watery  nook, 

Where  bearded  mists  divide, 
The  gray  old  gods  whom  Chaos  knew, 

The  sires  of  Nature,  hide. 

Aloft,  in  secret  veins  of  air. 

Blows  the  sweet  breath  of  song, 
O,  few  to  scale  those  uplands  dare. 

Though  they  to  all  belong! 

See  thou  bring  not  to  field  or  stone 

The  fancies  found  in  books; 
Leave  authors'  eyes,  and  fetch  your  own, 

To  brave  the  landscape's  looks. 

Oblivion  here  thy  wisdom  is. 

Thy  thrift,  the  sleep  of  cares; 
For  a  proud  idleness  like  this 

Crowns  all  thy  mean  affairs. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-1882] 

"WHEN  IN  THE  WOODS  I   WANDER  ALL 
ALONE" 

When  in  the  woods  I  wander  all  alone. 
The  woods  that  are  my  solace  and  delight. 
Which  I  more  covet  than  a  prince's  throne, 
My  toil  by  day  and  canopy  by  night; 
(Light  heart,  Hght  foot,  light  food,  and  slumber  light, 
These  lights  shall  light  us  to  old  age's  gate. 
While  monarchs,  whom  rebellious  dreams  affright, 
Heavy  with  fear,  death's  fearful  summons  wait;) 


1400  Poems  of  Nature  ni   nariW  " 

Whilst  here  I  wander,  pleased  to  be  alone, 
Weighing  in  thought  the  world's  no-happiness, 
I  cannot  choose  but  wonder  at  its  moan, 
Since  so  plain  joys  the  woody  Hfe  can  bless: 
Then  live  who  may  where  honied  words  prevail, 
I  with  the  deer,  and  with  the  nightingale! 

Edivard  IIovdl-Thnrlow  [i 781-1829] 

ASPECTS   OF  THE   PINES 

Tall,  somber,  grim,  against  the  morning  sky    i 
They  rise,  scarce  touched  by  melancholy  airs. 

Which  stir  the  fadeless  foliage  dreamfully. 
As  if  from  realms  of  mystical  despairs. 

Tall,  somber,  grim,  they  stand  with  dusky  gleams 
Brightening  to  gold  within  the  woodland's  core. 

Beneath  the  gracious  noontide's  tranquil  beams, — 
But  the  weird  winds  of  morning  sigh  no  more. 

A  stillness,  strange,  divine,  ineffable, 

Broods  round  and  o'er  them  in  the  wind's  surcease. 
And  on  each  tinted  copse  and  shimmering  dell 

Rests  the  mute  rapture  of  deep  hearted  peace. 

Last,  sunset  comes — the  solemn  joy  and  might 
Borne  from  the  West  when  cloudless  day  declines — 

Low,  flute-like  breezes  sweep  the  waves  of  light. 
And,  Hfting  dark  green  tresses  of  the  pines, 

'■'Till  every  lock  is  luminous,  gently  float, 

Fraught  with  hale  odors  up  the  heavens  afar, 
To  faint  when  twilight  on  her  virginal  throat      '■'  " 
Wears  for  a  gem  the  tremulous  vesper  star. 

Paul  Hamilton  Hayne  [183,0^-1886] 

"  THE  WOODS  THAT  BRING  THE  SUNSET 
NEAR  " 

The  wind  from  out  the  west  is  blowing; 
The  homeward-wandering  cows  are  lowing;    d  ! 
Dark  grow  the  pine-woods,  dark  and  drear,— ^',^' 
The  woods  that  bring  the  sunset  near. 


"On  Wenlock  Edge"  1401 

When  o'er  ivide  seas  the  sun  declines, 
Far  off  its  fading  glory  shines, — 
Far  oflf,  sublime,  and  full  of  fear, — 
The  pine-woods  bring  the  sunset  near. 

This  house  that  looks  to  east,  to  west. 
This,  dear  one,  is  our  home,  our  rest; 
Yonder  the  stormy  sea,  and  here  |  [ 

The  woods  that  bring  the  sunset  near. 

Richard  Watson  Gilder  [1844-igog] 


UNDER  THE  LEAVES 

Oft  have  I  walked  these  woodland  paths, 

Without  the  blessed  foreknowing 
That  underneath  the  withered  leaves 

The  fairest  buds  were  growing. 

To-day  the  south-wind  sweeps  away 

The  types  of  autumn's  splendor. 
And  shows  the  sweet  arbutus  flowers, — 

Spring's  children,  pure  and  tender. 

O  prophet-flowers! — with  hps  of  bloom, 

Outvying  in  your  beauty 
The  pearly  tints  .of  ocean  shells,— 

Ye  teach  me  faith  and  duty! 

Walk  life's  dark  ways,  ye  seem  to  say. 

With  love's  divine  foreknowing 
That  where  man  sees  but  withered  leaves, 

God  sees  sweet  flowers  growing. 

Albert  Laighton  [1829-1887] 


"ON  WENLOCK  EDGE" 

On  Wenlock  Edge  the  wood's  in  trouble; 
His  forest  fleece  the  Wrekin  heaves; 
The  gale,  it  plies  the  saplings  double. 
And  thick  on  Severn  snow  the  leaves. 


1402  Poems  of  Nature 

'Twould  blow  like  this  through  holt  and  hanger 
When  Uricon  the  city  stood: 
'Tis  the  old  wind  in  the  old  anger, 
But  then  it  threshed  another  wood. 

Then,  'twas  before  my  time,  the  Roman 
At  yonder  heaving  hill  would  stare: 
The  blood  that  warms  an  English  yeoman. 
The  thoughts  that  hurt  him,  they  were  there. 

There,  like  the  wind  through  woods  in  riot, 
Through  him  the  gale  of  life  blew  high ; 
The  tree  of  man  was  never  quiet: 
Then  'twas  the  Roman,  now  'tis  I. 

The  gale,  it  plies  the  saplings  double, 
It  blows  so  hard,  'twill  soon  be  gone: 
To-day  the  Roman  and  his  trouble 
Are  ashes  under  Uricon. 

Alfred  Edward  Housman  [1859- 


"WHAT  DO   WE   PLANT?" 

What  do  we  plant  when  we  plant  the  tree? 
We  plant  the  ship,  which  will  cross  the  sea. 
We  plant  the  mast  to  carry  the  sails; 
We  plant  the  planks  to  withstand  the  gales — 
The  keel,  the  keelson,  the  beam,  the  knee; 
We  plant  the  ship  when  we  plant  the  tree. 

What  do  we  plant  when  we  plant  the  tree? 
We  plant  the  houses  for  you  and  me. 
We  plant  the  rafters,  the  shingles,  the  floors, 
We  plant  the  studding,  the  lath,  the  doors, 
The  beams  and  siding,  all  parts  that  be; 
We  plant  the  house  when  we  plant  the  tree. 

What  do  we  plant  when  we  plant  the  tree? 
A  thousand  things  that  we  daily  see; 


The   Brave  Old  Oak  1403 

We  plant  the  spire  that  out-towers  the  crag, 
We  plant  the  staff  for  our  country's  flag, 
We  plant  the  shade,  from  the  hot  sun  free; 
We  plant  all  these  when  we  plant  the  tree. 

Henry  Abbey  [1842- 1911] 


THE  TREE 

I  LOVE  thee  when  thy  swelling  buds  appear, 
And  one  by  one  their  tender  leaves  unfold. 
As  if  they  knew  that  warmer  suns  were  near. 
Nor  longer  sought  to  hide  from  winter's  cold; 
And  when  with  darker  growth  thy  leaves  are  seen 
To  veil  from  view  the  early  robin's  nest, 
I  love  to  lie  beneath  thy  waving  screen. 
With  limbs  by  summer's  heat  and  toil  oppressed; 
And  when  the  autumn  winds  have  stripped  thee  bare, 
And  round  thee  lies  the  smooth,  untrodden  snow, 
When  naught  is  thine  that  made  thee  once  so  fair, 
I  love  to  watch  thy  shadowy  form  below. 
And  through  thy  leafless  arms  to  look  above 
On  stars  that  brighter  beam  when  most  we  need  their  love. 

Jones  Very  [i  813- 1880] 


THE  BRAVE  OLD   OAK 

A  SONG  to  the  oak,  the  brave  old  oak, 

Who  hath  ruled  in  the  greenwood  long; 
Here's  health  and  renown  to  his  broad  green  crown, 

And  his  fifty  arms  so  strong. 
There's  fear  in  his  frown  when  the  sun  goes  down, 

And  the  fire  in  the  west  fades  out; 
And  he  showeth  his  might  on  a  wild  midnight, 

When  the  storms  through  his  branches  shout. 

Then  here's  to  the  oak,  the  brave  old  oak, 

Who  stands  in  his  pride  alone; 
And  still  flourish  he,  a  hale  green  tree, 

When  a  hundred  years  are  gone! 


1404  Poems  of  Nature 

In  the  days  of  old,  when  the  spring  with  cold 

Had  brightened  his  branches  gray, 
Through  the  grass  at  his  feet  crept  maidens  sweet, 

To  gather  the  dew  of  May. 
And  on  that  day  to  the  rebeck  gay 

They  frolicked  with  lovesome  swains; 
They  are  gone,  they  are  dead,  in  the  churchyard  laid, 

But  the  tree  it  still  remains. 

He  saw  the  rare  times  when  the  Christmas  chimes 

Were  a  merry  sound  to  hear, 
When  the  squire's  wide  hall  and  the  cottage  small 

Were  filled  with  good  English  cheer.  '  r 

Now  gold  hath  sway  we  all  obey, 

And  a  ruthless  king  is  he;      ,     , 
But  he  never  shall  send  our  ancient  friend 

To  be  tossed  on  the  stormy  sea. 

Henry  Fothcrgill  Chorley  [1808-1872] 


"THE  GIRT  WOAK  TREE  THAT'S  IN  THE 
DELL  " 

The  girt  woak  tree  that's  in  the  dell! 
There's  noo  tree  I  do  love  so  well; 
Vor  times  an'  times  when  I  wer  young, 
I  there've  a-climbed,  an'  there've  a-zwung, 
An'  picked  the  eaicorns  green,  a-shed 
In  wrestlen  storms  vrom  his  broad  head.        /. 
An'  down  below 's  the  cloty  brook 
,nv.     Where  I  did  vish  with  line  an'  hook,  11 

An'  beat,  in  playsome  dips  and  zwims, 
The  foamy  stream,  wi'  white-skinned  lim's^  'T 
An'  there  my  mother  nimbly  shot 
Her  knitten-needles,  as  she  zot 
At  evenen  down  below  the  wide 
Woak's  head,  wi'  father  at  her  zide. 
An'  I've  a-played  wi'  many  a  bwoy, 
That's  now  a  man  an'  gone  awoy; 
Zoo  I  do  like  noo  tree  so  well 
'S  the  girt  woak  tree  that's  in  the  dell. 


'  The  Girt  Woak  Tree  in  the   DeJl  "    1405 

An'  there,  in  leater  years,  I  roved 
Wi'  thik  poor  maid  I  fondly  loved, — 
The  maid  loo  fciiir  to  die  so  soon,— 
When  evenen  twilight,  or  the  moon, 
Cast  light  enough  'ithin  the  pleace 
To  show  the  smiles  upon  her  feace, 
Wi'  eyes  so  dear's  the  glassy  pool. 
An'  hps  an'  chciiks  so  soft  as  wool. 
There  han'  in  han',  wi'  bosoms  warm, 
Wi'  love  that  burned  but  thought  noo  harm, 
Below  the  wide-boughed  tree  we  passed 
The  happy  hours  that  went  too  vast; 
An'  though  she'll  never  be  my  wife. 
She's  still  my  leaden  star  o'  life. 
She's  gone:  an'  she've  a-left  to  me 
Her  mem'ry  in  the  girt"\voak  tree; 
Zoo  I  do  love  noo  tree  so  well 
'S  the  girt  woak  tree  that's  in  the  dell. 

An'  oh!  mid  never  ax  nor  hook 
Be  brought  to  spweil  his  steiitely  look; 
Nor  ever  roun'  his  ribby  zides 
Mid  cattle  rub  ther  heiiiry  hides; 
Nor  pigs  rout  up  his  turf,  but  keep 
His  Iwonesome  sheade  vor  harmless  sheep; 
An'  let  en  grow,  an'  let  en  spread, 
An'  let  en  hve  when  I  be  dead. 
But  oh!  if  men  should  come  an'  veil 
The  girt  woak  tree  that's  in  the  dell, 
An'  build  his  planks  'ithin  the  zide 
O'  zome  girt  ship  to  plough  the  tide 
Then,  life  or  deatli!  I'd  goo  to  sea, 
A  saUen  wi'  the  girt  woak  tree: 
An'  I  upon  his  planks  would  stand, 
An'  die  a-fighten  vor  the  land, — 
The  land  so  dear, — the  land  so  free, — 
The  land  that  bore  the  girt  woak  tree; 
Vor  I  do  love  noo  tree  so  welj 
'S  the  girt  woak  tree  that's  in  the  dell. 

William  Barnes  [iSoi-i8S6] 


1406  Poems  of  Nature 


TO  THE   WILLOW-TREE 

Thou  art  to  all  lost  love  the  best, 

The  only  true  plant  found, 
Wherewith  young  men  and  maids  distressed, 

And  left  of  love,  are  crowned. 

When  once  the  lover's  rose  is  dead, 

Or  laid  aside  forlorn: 
Then  willow-garlands  'bout  the  head 

Bedewed  with  tears  are  worn. 

When  with  neglect,  the  lovers'  bane, 

Poor  maids  rewarded  be 
For  their  love  lost,  their  only  gain 

Is  but  a  wreath  from  thee. 

And  underneath  thy  cooling  shade, 

When  weary  of  the  light, 
The  love-spent  youth  and  love-sick  maid 

Come  to  weep  out  the  night. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


ENCHANTMENT 

The  deep  seclusion  of  this  forest  path, — 

O'er  which  the  green  boughs  weave  a  canopy; 

Along  which  bluet  and  anemone 

Spread  dim  a  carpet;  where  the  Twilight  hath 

Her  cool  abode;  and,  sweet  as  aftermath. 

Wood-fragrance  roams, — has  so  enchanted  me, 

That  yonder  blossoming  bramble  seems  to  be 

A  Sylvan  resting,  rosy  from  her  bath: 

Has  so  enspelled  me  with  tradition's  dreams. 

That  every  foam-white  stream  that,  twinkling,  flows, 

And  every  bird  that  flutters  wings  of  tan, 

Or  warbles  hidden,  to  my  fancy  seems 

A  Naiad  dancing  to  a  Faun  who  blows 

Wild  woodland  music  on  the  pipes  of  Pan. 

Madison  Cawein  riSei^-ioul 


The   Holly-Tree  1407 


TREES 

I  THINK  that  I  shall  never  see 
A  poem  lovely  as  a  tree. 

'"  "  A  tree  whose  hungry  mouth  is  pressed     '"  '■ 
Against  the  earth's  sweet  flowing  breast; 

A  tree  that  looks  at  God  all  day 
And  lifts  her  leafy  arms  to  pray; 

A  tree  that  may  in  summer  wear 
wo  A  nest  of  robins  in  her  hair; 

Upon  whose  bosom  snow  has  lain; 
Who  intimately  lives  with  rain. 

Poems  are  made  by  fools  like  me,  ,^jj  | 

But  only  God  can  make  a  tree. 

Joyce  Kilmer  [i886,-f,/^ 


THE  HOLLY-TREE 


\  ir 


O  reader!  hast  thou  ever  stood  to  see 

The  Holly-tree? 
The  eye  that  contemplates  it  well  perceives 

Its  glossy  leaves 
Ordered  by  an  Intelligence  so  wise 
As  might  confound  the  Atheist's  sophistries. 


Below,  a  circling  fence,  its  leaves  are  seen, 

Wrinkled  and  keen; 
No  grazing  cattle,  through  their  prickly  round, 

Can  reach  to  wound; 
But,  as  they  grow  where  nothing  is  to  fear, 
Smooth  and  unarmed  the  pointless  leaves  appear. 

I  love  to  view  these  things  with  curious  eyes, 
And  moralize; 


1408  Poems  of  Nature 

And  in  this  wisdom  of  the  Holly-tree 

Can  emblem  see 
Wherewith,  perchance,  to  make  a  pleasant  rhyme, -•■• 
One  which  may  profit  in  the  after-time. 

Thus,  though  abroad,  perchance,  I  might  appear 

Harsh  and  austere; 
To  those  who  on  my  leisure  would  intrude, 

Reserved  and  rude; 
Gentle  at  home  amid  my  friends  I'd  be, 
Like  the  high  leaves  upon  the  Holly-tree. 

And  should  my  youth — as  youth  is  apt,  I  know, — 

Some  harshness  show. 
All  vain  asperities  I,  day  by  day, 

Would  wear  away, 
Till  the  smooth  temper  of  my  age  should  be 
Like  the  high  leaves  upon  the  Holly-tree. 

And  as,  when  all  the  summer  trees  are  seen 

So  bright  and  green, 
The  Holly-leaves  their  fadeless  hues  display 

Less  bright  than  they; 
But  when  the  bare  and  wintry  woods  we  see, 
What  then  so  cheerful  as  the  Holly-tree? — 

So,  serious  should  my  youth  appear  among 

The  thoughtless  throng; 
So  would  I  seem,  amid  the  young  and  gay. 

More  grave  than  they; 
That  in  my  age  as  cheerful  I  might  be 
As  the  green  winter  of  the  Holly-tree. 

Robert  Southey  [1774-1843J 

THE   PINE 

The  elm  lets  fall  its  leaves  before  the  frost. 
The  very  oak  grows  shivering  and  sere, 

The  trees  are  barren  when  the  summer's  lost:'     ''-'  ■ 
But  one  tree  keeps  its  goodness  all  the  year. 


"Woodman,  Spare  That  Tree"     1409 

Green  pine,  unchanging  as  tlic  days  go  by, 

Thou  art  thyself  beneath  whatever  sky: 

My  shelter  from  all  winds,  my  own  strong  pine, 
'Tis  spring,  'tis  summer,  still,  while  thou  art  mine. 

Augusta  Webster  [1837-1804] 


'WOODMAN,   SPARE  THAT  TREE' 

Woodman,  spare  that  tree! 

Touch  not  a  single  bough! 
In  youth  it  sheltered  me, 

And  I'll  protect  it  now. 
'Twas  my  forefather's  hand 

That  placed  it  near  his  cot; 
There,  woodman,  let  it  stand, 

Thy  axe  shall  harm  it  not! 

That  old  familiar  tree, 

Whose  glory  and  renown 
Arc  spread  o'er  land  and  sea, — 

And  wouldst  thou  hew  it  down? 
Woodman,  forbear  thy  stroke! 

Cut  not  its  earth-bound  ties; 
O,  spare  that  aged  oak, 

Now  towering  to  the  skies! 

When  but  an  idle  boy 

I  sought  its  grateful  shade; 
In  all  their  gushing  joy 

Here,  too,  my  sisters  played. 
My  mother  kissed  me  here; 

My  father  pressed  my  hand — 
Forgive  this  foolish  tear, 

But  let  that  old  oak  stand! 

My  heart-strings  round  thee  cling 
Close  as  thy  bark,  old  friend! 

Here  shall  the  wild-bird  sing, 
And  still  thy  branches  bend. 


1410  Poems  of  Nature ''^'"W  ^* 


Old  tree!  the  storm  still  brave!     .,,•^  •,.,.:  ■ 
And,  woodman,  leave  the  spot;  ha  uofll 

While  I've  a  hand  to  save, 
Thy  axe  shall  harm  it  not. 

George  Pope  Morris  [1802-1864] 


THE  BEECH  TREE'S   PETITION 

O  LEAVE  this  barren  spot  to  me! 
Spare,  woodman,  spare  the  beechen  tree! 
Though  bush  or  floweret  never  grow 
My  dark  unwarming  shade  below; 
Nor  summer  bud  perfume  the  dew 
Of  rosy  blush,  or  yellow  hue; 
Nor  fruits  of  autumn,  blossom-born, 
My  green  and  glossy  leaves  adorn; 
Nor  murmuring  tribes  from  me  derive 
Th'  ambrosial  amber  of  the  hive; 
Yet  leave  this  barren  spot  to  me: 
Spare,  woodman,  spare  the  beechen  tree! 

Thrice  twenty  summers  I  have  seen 
The  sky  grow  bright,  the  forest  green; 
And  many  a  wintry  wind  have  stood 
In  bloomless,  fruitless  solitude. 
Since  childhood  in  my  pleasant  bower 
First  spent  its  sweet  and  sportive  hour; 
Since  youthful  lovers  in  my  shade 
Their  vows  of  truth  and  rapture  made, 
And  on  my  trunk's  surviving  frame 
Carved  many  a  long-forgotten  name. 
Oh!  by  the  sighs  of  gentle  sound, 
First  breathed  upon  this  sacred  ground; 
By  all  that  Love  has  whispered  here. 
Or  Beauty  heard  with  ravished  ear; 
As  Love's  own  altar  honor  me: 
Spare,  woodman,  spare  the  beechen  tree! 

Thomas  Campbell  [1777-1844] 


The   Planting  of  the  Apple-Tree     i^n 


THE  POPLAR  FIELD 

The  poplars  are  felled;  farewell  to  the  shade; 
And  the  whispering  sound  of  the  cool  colonnade; 
The  winds  play  no  longer  and  sing  in  the  leaves, 
Nor  Ouse  on  his  bosom  their  image  receives. 

Twelve  years  have  elapsed  since  I  first  took  a  view 
Of  my  favorite  field,  and  the  bank  where  they  grew; 
And  now  in  the  grass  behold  they  are  laid. 
And  the  tree  is  my  seat  that  once  lent  me  a  shade. 

The  blackbird  has  fled  to  another  retreat, 
Where  the  hazels  afford  him  a  screen  from  the  heat; 
And  the  scene  where  his  melody  charm_ed  me  before 
Resounds  with  his  sweet-flowing  ditty  no  more. 

My  fugitive  years  are  all  hasting  away. 

And  I  must  ere  long  He  as  lowly  as  they, 

With  a  turf  on  my  breast  and  a  stone  at  my  head, 

Ere  another  such  grove  shall  arise  in  its  stead. 

'Tis  a  sight  to  engage  me,  if  anything  can. 
To  muse  on  the  perishing  pleasures  of  man; 
Though  his  life  be  a  dream,  his  enjoyments,  I  see, 
Have  a  being  less  durable  even  than  he. 

William  Cow  per  [i  731-1800] 


THE   PLANTING  OF  THE   APPLE-TREE 

Come,  let  us  plant  the  apple-tree. 
Cleave  the  tough  greensward  with  the  spade; 
Wide  let  its  hollow  bed  be  made; 
There  gently  lay  the  roots,  and  there 
Sift  the  dark  mould  with  kindly  care, 

And  press  it  o'er  them  tenderly, 
As,  round  the  sleeping  infant's  feet, 
We  softly  fold  the  cradle-sheet; 

So  plant  we  the  apple-tree. 


141 2     ^^"^^      Poems  of  Nature' R**!   sHT 

What  plant  we  in  this  apple  tree? 
Buds,  which  the  breath  of  summer  days 
Shall  lengthen  into  leafy  sprays; 
Boughs  where  the  thrush,  with  crimson  breast. 
Shall  haunt,  and  sing,  and  hide  her  nestir    ■    •    ,.r 

We  plant,  upon  the  sunny  lea, 
A  shadow  for  the  noontide  hour, 
A  shelter  from  the  summer  shower, 

When  we  plant  the  apple-tree. 


What  plant  we  in  this  apple-tree? 
Sweets  for  a  hundred  flowery  springs 
To  load  the  May-wind's  restless  wings, 
When,  from  the  orchard-row,  he  pours 
Its  fragrance  through  our  open  doors; 

A  world  of  blossoms  for  the  bee, 
Flowers  for  the  sick  girl's  silent  room, 
For  the  glad  infant  sprigs  of  bloom, 

We  plant  with  the  apple-tree. 

What  plant  we  in  this  apple-tree? 
P'ruits  that  shall  swell  in  sunny  June, 
And  redden  in  the  August  noon, 
And  drop,  when  gentle  airs  come  by, 
That  fan  the  blue  September  sky, 

While  children  come,  with  cries  of  glee, 
And  seek  them  where  the  fragrant  grass 
Betrays  their  bed  to  those  who  pass. 

At  the  foot  of  the  apple-tree. 

And  when,  above  this  apple-tree. 
The  winter  stars  are  quivering  bright. 
And  winds  go  howling  through  the  night. 
Girls,  whose  young  eyes  o'erflow  v/ith  mirth, 
Shall  peel  its  fruit  by  cottage-hearth, 

And  guests  in  prouder  homes  shall  see. 
Heaped  with  the  grape  of  Cintra's  vine 
And  golden  orange  of  the  line, 

The  fruit  of  the  apple-tree. 


Tlie   Planting  of  the  Apple-Tree     14^3 

The  fruitage  of  this  apple-tree 
Winds  and  our  flag  of  stripe  and  star 
Shall  bear  to  coasts  that  he  afar, 
Where  men  shall  wonder  at  the  view, 
And  ask  in  what  fair  groves  they  grew; 

And  sojourners  beyond  the  sea 
Shall  think  of  childhood's  careless  day, 
And  long,  long  hours  of  summer  play. 

In  the  shade  of  the  apple-tree. 

Each  year  shall  give  this  apple-tree 
A  broader  flush  of  roseate  bloom, 
A  deeper  maze  of  verdurous  gloom. 
And  loosen,  when  the  frost-clouds  lower, 
The  crisp  brown  leaves  in  thicker  shower. 

The  years  shall  come  and  pass,  but  we 
Shall  hear  no  longer,  where  we  lie, 
The  summer's  songs,  the  autumn's  sigh, 

In  the  boughs  of  the  apple-tree. 

And  time  shall  waste  this  apple-tree. 
Oh,  when  its  aged  branches  throw 
Thin  shadows  on  the  ground  below. 
Shall  fraud  and  force  and  iron  will 
Oppress  the  weak  and  helpless  still? 

What  shall  the  tasks  of  mercy  be, 
Amid  the  toils,  the  strifes,  the  tears 
Of  those  who  live  when  length  of  years 

Is  wasting  this  little  apple-tree? 

"Who  planted  this  old  apple-tree?" 
The  children  of  that  distant  day 
Thus  to  some  aged  man  shall  say; 
And,  gazing  on  its  mossy  stem, 
The  gray-haired  man  shall  answer  them: 

"A  poet  of  the  land  was  he. 
Born  in  the  rude  but  good  old  times; 
'Tis  said  he  made  some  quaint  old  rhymes. 

On  planting  the  apple-tree." 

William  Cullen  Bryant  [i 794-1 878] 


1414  Poems  of  Nature 


OF  AN  ORCHARD 

Good  is  an  Orchard,  the  Saint  saith, 
To  meditate  on  life  and  death, 
With  a  cool  well,  a  hive  of  bees, 
A  hermit's  grot  below  the  trees. 

Good  is  an  Orchard:  very  good, 
Though  one  should  wear  no  monkish  hoodo 
Right  good,  when  Spring  awakes  her  flute, 
And  good  in  yellowing  time  of  fruit. 

Very  good  in  the  grass  to  lie 

And  see  the  network  'gainst  the  sky, 

A  living  lace  of  blue  and  green, 

And  boughs  that  let  the  gold  between. 

The  bees  are  types  of  souls  that  dwell 
With  honey  in  a  quiet  cell; 
The  ripe  fruit  figures  goldenly 
The  soul's  perfection  in  God's  eye. 

Prayer  and  praise  in  a  country  home, 
Honey  and  fruit:  a  man  might  come. 
Fed  on  such  meats,  to  walk  abroad, 
And  in  his  Orchard  talk  with  God. 

Katherine  Tynan  [1861- 


AN  ORCHARD   AT  AVIGNON 

The  hills  are  white,  but  not  with  snow: 
They  are  as  pale  in  summer  time. 

For  herb  or  grass  may  never  grow 
Upon  their  slopes  of  lime. 

Within  the  circle  of  the  hills 
A  ring,  all  flowering  in  a  round, 

An  orchard-ring  of  almond  fills 
The  plot  of  stony  ground. 


The  Tide   River  141 5 

More  fair  than  happier  trees,  I  think, 

Grown  in  well-watered  pasture  land 
These  parched  and  stunted  branches,  pink 

Above  the  stones  and  sand. 

O  white,  austere,  ideal  place, 

Where  very  few  will  care  to  come. 
Where  spring  hath  lost  the  waving  grace       ,  j 

She  wears  for  us  at  home! 

Fain  would  I  sit  and  watch  for  hours 

The  holy  whiteness  of  thy  hills, 
Their  wreath  of  pale  auroral  flowers, 

Their  peace  the  silence  fills. 

A  place  of  secret  peace  thou  art, 

Such  peace  as  in  an  hour  of  pain 
One  moment  fills  the  amazed  heart. 

And  never  comes  again. 

A.  Mary  F.  Robinson  [1857- 


THE   TIDE   RIVER 

From  "The  Water  Babies" 

Clear  and  cool,  clear  and  cool, 
By  laughing  shallow  and  dreaming  pool; 

Cool  and  clear,  cool  and  clear, 
By  shining  shingle  and  foaming  weir; 
Under  the  crag  where  the  ouzel  sings, 
And  the  ivied  wall  where  the  church-bell  rings, 
Undefiled,  for  the  undcfilcd; 
Play  by  me,  bathe  in  me,  mother  and  child. 

Dank  and  foul,  dank  and  foul,        • ' 
By  the  smoky  town  in  its  murky  cowl; 

Foul  and  dank,  foul  and  dank, 
By  wharf  and  sewer  and  slimy  bank; 
Darker  and  darker  the  farther  I  go, 
Baser  and  baser  the  richer  I  grow; 

Who  dare  sport  with  the  sin-defiled? 
Shrink  from  me,  turn  from  me,  mother  and  child. 


141 6  Poems  of  Nature 

Strong  and  free,  strong  and  free, 
The  flood-gates  are  open,  away  to  the  sea. 

Free  and  strong,  free  and  strong, 
Cleansing  my  streams  as  I  hurry  along, 
To  the  golden  sands,  and  the  leaping  bar, 
And  the  taintless  tide  that  awaits  me  afar. 
As  I  lose  myself  in  the  infinite  main, 
Like  a  soul  that  has  sinned  and  is  pardoned  again, 
Undefiled,  for  the  undefiled; 
Play  by  me,  bathe  in  me,  mother  and  child. 

Charles  Kingsley  [181 9- 1875] 


THE  BROOK'S   SONG 

From  "  The  Brook  " 

I  COME  from  haunts  of  coot  and  hern, 

I  make  a  sudden  sally, 
And  sparkle  out  among  the  fern, 

To  bicker  down  a  valley. 

By  thirty  hiUs  I  hurry  down, 
Or  slip  between  the  ridges. 

By  twenty  thorps,  a  little  town. 
And  half  a  hundred  bridges. 

TiU  last  by  Philip's  farm  I  flow 
To  join  the  brimming  river. 

For  men  may  come  and  men  may  go, 
But  I  go  on  for  ever. 

I  chatter  over  stony  ways. 
In  httle  sharps  and  trebles, 

I  bubble  into  eddying  bays, 
I  babble  on  the  pebbles. 

With  many  a  curve  my  banks  I  fret 
By  many  a  field  and  fallow. 

And  many  a  fairy  foreland  set 
With  willow-weed  and  mallow. 


The   Brook's  Song  1417 

I  chatter,  chatter,  as  I  flow 

To  join  the  brimming  river, 
For  men  may  come  and  men  may  go, 

But  I  go  on  for  ever. 

I  wind  about,  and  in  and  out. 

With  here  a  blossom  sailing. 
And  here  and  there  a  lusty  trout, 

And  here  and  there  a  grayling. 

And  here  and  there  a  foamy  flake 

Upon  me,  as  I  travel 
With  many  a  silvery  water-break 

Above  the  golden  gravel, 

And  draw  them  all  along,  and  flow 

To  join  the  brimming  river, 
For  men  may  come  and  men  may  go, 

But  I  go  on  for  ever. 

I  steal  by  lawns  and  grassy  plots, 

I  slide  by  hazel  covers; 
I  move  the  sweet  forget-me-nots 

That  grow  for  happy  lovers. 

I  slip,  I  slide,  I  gloom,  I  glance, 

Among  my  skimming  swallows; 
I  make  the  netted  sunbeam  dance 

Against  my  sandy  shallows. 

I  murmur  under  moon  and  stars 

In  brarnbly  wildernesses; 
I  linger  by  my  shingly  bars; 

I  loiter  round  my  cresses; 

And  out  again  I  curve  and  flow 

To  join  the  brimming  river, 
For  men  may  come  and  men  may  go. 

But  I  go  on  for  ever 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


1418  Poems  of  Nature 


ARETHUSA 

Arethusa  arose 

From  her  couch  of  snows 
In  the  Acroceraunian  mountains,— = 

From  cloud  and  from  crag, 

With  many  a  jag, 
Shepherding  her  bright  fountains. 

She  leapt  down  the  rocks 

With  her  rainbow  locks 
Streaming  among  the  streams; 

Her  steps  paved  with  green 

The  downward  ravine 
Which  slopes  to  the  western  gleams: 

And  gliding  and  springing, 

She  went,  ever  singing, 
In  murmurs  as  soft  as  sleep; 

The  Earth  seemed  to  love  her. 

And  Heaven  smiled  above  her, 
As  she  Ungered  towards  the  deep. 

Then  Alpheus  bold, 

On  his  glacier  cold. 
With  his  trident  the  mountains  strook; 

And  opened  a  chasm 

In  the  rocks; — with  the  spasm 
AU  Erymanthus  shook. 

And  the  black  south  wind 

It  unsealed  behind 
The  urns  of  the  silent  snow, 

And  earthquake  and  thunder 

Did  rend  in  sunder 
The  bars  of  the  springs  below : 

And  the  beard  and  the  hair 

Of  the  River-god  were 
Seen  through  the  torrent's  sweep, 

As  he  followed  the  light 

Of  the  fleet  nymph's  flight 
To  the  brink  of  the  Dorian  deep. 


Arethusa 

"Oh,  save  me!    Oh,  guide  me! 

And  bid  the  deep  hide  me ! 
For  he  grasps  me  now  by  the  hair!" 

The  loud  Ocean  heard, 

To  its  bhic  depth  stirred, 
And  divided  at  her  prayer; 

And  under  the  water 

The  Earth's  white  daughter 
Fled  like  a  sunny  beam; 

Behind  her  descended. 

Her  billows,  unblended 
With  the  brackish  Dorian  stream. 

Like  a  gloomy  stain 

On  the  emerald  main, 
Alpheus  rushed  behind, — 

As  an  eagle  pursuing^ 

A  dove  to  its  ruin 
Down  the  streams  of  the  cloudy  wind. 

Under  the  bowers 
Where  the  Ocean  Powers 

Sit  on  their  pearled  thrones; 
Through  the  coral  woods 
Of  the  weltering  floods. 

Over  heaps  of  unvalued  stones; 
Through  the  dim  beams 
Which  amid  the  streams 

Weave  a  network  of  colored  light; 
And  under  the  caves 
Where  the  shadowy  waves 

Are  as  green  as  the  forest's  night  :- 
Outspeeding  the  shark. 
And  the  swordfish  dark, — 

Under  the  Ocean's  foam, 

And  up  through  the  rifts 
Of  the  mountain  clifts, 

They  passed  to  their  Dorian  home. 

And  now  from  their  fountains 
In  Enna's  mountains, 


I419 


1420  Poems   of  Nature 

Down  one  vale  where  the  morning  basks, 

Like  friends  once  parted 

Grown  single-hearted, 
They  ply  their  watery  tasks. 

At  sunrise  they  leap 

From  their  cradles  steep 
In  the  cave  of  the  shelving  hill; 

At  noontide  they  flow 

Through  the  woods  below 
And  the  meadows  of  asphodel; 

And  at  night  they  sleep 

In  the  rocking  deep 
Beneath  the  Ortygian  shore; — 

Like  spirits  that  lie 

In  the  azure  sky. 
When  they  love  but  live  no  more. 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [1792-182 2] 

THE   CATARACT  OF  LODORE 

"How  does  the  water 
Come  down  at  Lodore?" 
My  little  boy  asked  me 
Thus,  once  on  a  time; 
And  moreover  he  tasked  me 
To  tell  him  in  rhyme. 
Anon,  at  the  word, 
There  first  came  one  daughter, 
And  then  came  another, 
To  second  and  third 
The  request  of  their  brother, 
And  to  hear  how  the  water 
Comes  down  at  Lodore, 
With  its  rush  and  its  roar, 

As  many  a  time 
They  had  seen  it  before. 
So  I  told  them  in  rhyme, 
For  of  rhymes  I  had  store; 
And  'twas  in  my  vocation 
For  their  recreation 


The  Cataract  of  Lodore  142 1 

That  so  I  should  sing; 
Because  I  was  Laureate  '' 
To  them  and  the  King. 

From  its  sources  which  well 
In  the  tarn  on  the  fell; 
From  its  fountains 
In  the  mountains, 
Its  rills  and  its  gills; 
Through  moss  and  through  brake, 
It  runs  and  it  creeps 
For  a  while,  till  it  sleeps 

In  its  own  little  lake. 

And  thence  at  departing, 

Awakening  and  starting. 

It  runs  through  the  reeds. 

And  away  it  proceeds, 

Through  meadow  and  glade, 

•   In  sun  and  in  shade, 
And  through  the  wood-shelter, 
Among  crags  in  its  flurry, 
Helter-skelter, 
Hurry-skurry. 
Here  it  comes  sparkling, 
And  there  it  hes  darkling; 
Now  smoking  and  frothing 
Its  tumult  and  wrath  in, 
Till,  in  this  rapid  race 
On  which  it  is  bent. 
It  reaches  the  place 
Of  its  steep  descent. 

The  cataract  strong 
Then  plunges  along, 
Striking  and  raging 
As  if  a  war  raging 
Its  caverns  and  rocks  among; 

Rising  and  leaping, 

Sinking  and  creeping, 


1422  Poems  of  Nature 

Swelling  and  sweeping, 

Showering  and  springing, 
Flying  and  flinging. 
Writhing  and  ringing, 
Eddying  and  whisking. 
Spouting  and  frisking, 
Turning  and  twisting, 

'Around  and  around 
With  endless  rebound: 

Smiting  and  fighting, 

A  sight  to  delight  in ; 
Confounding,  astounding, 
Dizzying  and  deafening  the  ear  with  its  sound. 

Collecting,  projecting, 
Receding  and  speeding. 
And  shocking  and  rocking, 
And  darting  and  parting, 
And  threading  and  spreading, 
And  whizzing  and  hissing. 
And  dripping  and  skipping, 
And  hitting  and  sphtting, 
And  shining  and  twining. 
And  rattling  and  batthng. 
And  shaking  and  quaking, 
And  pouring  and  roaring. 
And  waving  and  raving, 
And  tossing  and  crossing, 
And  flowing  and  going. 
And  running  and  stunning, 
And  foaming  and  roaming. 
And  dinning  and  spinning. 
And  dropping  and  hopping. 
And  working  and  jerking. 
And  guggling  and  struggling, 
And  heaving  and  cleaving. 
And  moaning  and  groaning; 

And  glittering  and  frittering, 
And  gathering  and  feathering, 


Song  of  the  Chattahoochee       14-3 

And  whitening  and  brightening, 
And  quivering  and  shivering, 
And  hurrying  and  skurrying. 
And  thundering  and  floundering; 

Dividing  and  ghding  and  sHding, 
And  falling  and  brawhng  and  sprawling, 
And  driving  and  riving  and  striving, 
And  sprinkling  and  twinkling  and  wrinkhng, 
And  sounding  and  bounding  and  rounding. 
And  bubbling  and  troubling  and  doubling, 
And  grumbling  and  rumbling  and  tumbling. 
And  clattering  and  battering  and  shattering; 

Retreating  and  beating  and  meeting  and  sheeting. 
Delaying  and  straying  and  playing  and  spraying. 
Advancing  and  prancing  and  glancing  and  dancing, 
Recoiling,  turmoiling  and  toiling  and  boUing, 
And  gleaming  and  streaming  and  steaming  and  beaming. 
And  rushing  and  flushing  and  brushing  and  gushing. 
And  flapping  and  rapping  and  clapping  and  slapping, 
And  curling  and  whirling  and  purling  and  twirling. 
And  thumping  and  plumping  and  bumping  and  jumping, 
And  dashing  and  flashing  and  splashing  and  clashing; 
And  so  never  ending,  but  always  descending, 
Sounds  and  motions  for  ever  and  ever  are  blending 
All  at  once  and  all  o'er,  with  a  mighty  uproar, — 
And  this  way  the  water  comes  down  at  Lodore. 

Robert  Southcy  [1774-1843] 


SONG  OF  THE   CHATTAHOOCHEE 

Out  of  the  hills  of  Habersham, 

Down  the  valleys  of  Hall, 
I  hurry  amain  to  reach  the  plain. 
Run  the  rapid  and  leap  the  fall, 
Split  at  the  rock  and  together  again, 
Accept  my  bed,  or  narrow  or  wide. 
And  flee  from  folly  on  every  side 
With  a  lover's  pain  to  attain  the  plain 


1424  Poems  of  Nature 

Far  from  the  hills  of  Habersham, 
Far  from  the  valleys  of  Hall. 

All  down  the  hills  of  Habersham, 

All  through  the  valleys  of  Hall, 
The  rushes  cried  Abide,  abide, 
The  wilful  waterweeds  held  me  thrall. 
The  laving  laurel  turned  my  tide, 
The  ferns  and  the  fondling  grass  said  Stay, 
The  dewberry  dipped  for  to  work  delay, 
And  the  little  reeds  sighed  Abide,  abide, 

Here  in  the  hills  of  Habersham, 

Here  in  the  valleys  of  Hall. 

High  o'er  the  hiUs  of  Habersham, 

Veiling  the  valleys  of  Hall, 
The  hickory  told  me  manifold 
Fair  tales  of  shade,  the  poplar  tall 
Wrought  me  her  shadowy  self  to  hold. 
The  chestnut,  the  oak,  the  walnut,  the  pine, 
Overleaning,  with  flickering  meaning  and  sign, 
Said,  Pass  not,  so  cold,  these  manifold 

Deep  shades  of  the  hills  of  Habersham, 

These  glades  in  the  valleys  of  Hall. 

And  oft  in  the  hills  of  Habersham, 

And  oft  in  the  valleys  of  Hall, 
The  white  quartz  shone,  and  the  smooth  brook-stone 
Did  bar  me  of  passage  with  friendly  brawl, 
And  many  a  luminous  jewel  lone 
— Crystals  clear  or  a-cloud  with  mist, 
Ruby,  garnet  and  amethyst — 
Made  lures  with  the  lights  of  streaming  stone 

In  the  clefts  of  the  hills  of  Habersham, 

In  the  beds  of  the  valleys  of  Hall. 

But  oh,  not  the  hills  of  Habersham, 

And  oh,  not  the  valleys  of  Hall 
Avail:  I  am  fain  for  to  water  the  plain. 
Downward  the  voices  of  Duty  call — 


"Flow  Gently,  Sweet  Afton  "      1425 

Downward,  to  toil  and  be  mixed  with  the  main. 
The  dry  fields  burn,  and  the  mills  are  to  turn, 
And  a  myriad  flowers  mortally  yearn. 
And  the  lordly  main  from  beyond  the  plain 

Calls  o'er  the  hills  of  Habersham, 

Calls  through  the  valleys  of  Hall. 

Sidney  Lanier  [1842-1881] 


"FLOW  GENTLY,  SWEET  AFTON" 

Flow  gently,  sweet  Afton,  among  thy  green  braes; 
Flow  gently,  I'll  sing  thee  a  song  in  thy  praise; 
My  Mary's  asleep  by  thy  murmuring  stream, 
Flow  gently,  sweet  Afton,  disturb  not  her  dream. 

Thou  stock-dove  whose  echo  resounds  through  the  glen, 
Ye  wild  whistling  blackbirds  in  yon  thorny  den, 
Thou  green-crested  lapwing,  thy  screaming  forbear; 
I  charge  you  disturb  not  my  slumbering  fair. 

How  lofty,  sweet  Afton,  thy  neighboring  hills. 
Far  marked  with  the  courses  of  clear-winding  rills; 
There  daily  I  wander  as  noon  rises  high. 
My  flocks  and  my  Mary's  sweet  cot  in  my  eye. 

How  pleasant  thy  banks  and  green  valleys  below. 
Where  wild  in  the  woodlands  the  primroses  blow; 
There  oft  as  mild  evening  weeps  over  the  lea. 
The  sweet-scented  birk  shades  my  Mary  and  me. 

Thy  crystal  stream,  Afton,  how  lovely  it  ghdes. 

And  winds  by  the  cot  where  my  Mary  resides; 

How  wanton  thy  waters  her  snowy  feet  lave. 

As,  gathering  sweet  flowerets,  she  stems  thy  clear  wave. 

Flow  gently,  sweet  Afton,  am.ong  thy  green  braes; 
Flow  gently,  sweet  river,  the  theme  of  my  lays; 
My  Mary's  asleep  by  thy  murmuring  stream, 
Flow  gently,  sweet  Afton,  disturb  not  her  dream. 

Robert  Burns  [i 759-1 796] 


1426  Poems  of  Nature 

CANADIAN  BOAT -SONG 

WRITTEN    ON   THE   RIVER   ST.    LAWRENCE 

Faintly  as  tolls  the  evening  chime 
Our  voices  keep  tune  and  our  oars  keep  time. 
Soon  as  the  woods  on  shore  look  dim, 
We'll  sing  at  St.  Ann's  our  parting  hymn. 
Row,  brothers,  row,  the  stream  runs  fast, 
The  rapids  arc  near  and  the  dayhght's  past. 

Why  should  we  yet  our  sail  unfurl? 
There  is  not  a  breath  the  blue  wave  to  curl, 
But,  when  the  wind  blows  off  the  shore, 
Oh,  sweetly  we'll  rest  our  weary  oar. 
Blow,  breezes,  blow,  the  stream  runs  fast, 
The  rapids  are  near  and  the  daylight's  past. 

Utawas'  tide!  this  trembling  moon 
Shall  see  us  float  over  thy  surges,  soon. 
Saint  of  this  green  isle!  hear  our  prayers. 
Oh,  grant  us  cool  heavens  and  favoring  airs. 
Blow,  breezes,  blow,  the  stream  runs  fast, 
The  rapids  are  near  and  the  daylight's  past. 

Thomas  Moore  [1770-1852] 

THE   MARSHES   OF   GLYNN 

Glooms  of  the  live-oaks,  beautiful  braided  and  woven 
With  intricate  shades  of  the  vines  that  myriad-cloven 
Clamber  the  forks  of  the  multiform  boughs, — ■ 
Emerald  twilights, — 
Virginal  shy  lights, 
Wrought  of  the  leaves  to  allure  to  the  whisper  of  vows, 
When  lovers  pace  timidly  down  through  the  green  colon- 
nades 
Of  the  dim  sweet  woods,  of  the  dear  dark  woods. 

Of  the  heavenly  woods  and  glades,  / 1  /; 

That  run  to  the  radiant  marginal  sand-beach  within      1  r 
The  wide  sea-marshes  of  Glynn; — 


The   Marshes  of  Glynn  1427 

Beautiful  glooms,  soft  dusks  in  the  noonday  fire, — 

Wildwood  privacies,  closets  of  lone  desire, 

Chamber   from   chamber   parted   with   wavering   arras  of 

leaves, — 
Cells  for  the  passionate  pleasure  of  prayer  to  the  soul  that 

grieves, 
Pure  with  a  sense  of  the  passing  of  saints  through  the  wood, 
Cool  for  the  dutiful  weighing  of  ill  with  good; — 

O  braided  dusks  of  the  oak  and  woven  shades  of  the  vine, 
While  the  riotous  noonday  sun  of  the  June-day  long  did  shine 
Ye  held  me  fast  in  your  heart  and  I  held  you  fast  in  mine; 
But  now  when  the  noon  is  no  more,  and  riot  is  rest. 
And  the  sun  is  a-wait  at  the  ponderous  gate  of  the  West, 
And  the  slant  yellow  beam  down  the  wood-aisle  doth  seem 
Like  a  lane  into  heaven  that  leads  from  a  dream, — 
Ay,  now,  when  my  soul  all  day  hath  drunken  the  soul  of  the 

oak, 
And  my  heart  is  at  ease  from  men,  and  the  wearisome  sound 
ill!     of  the  stroke  [T 

Of  the  scythe  of  time  and  the  trowel  of  trade  is  low, 
And  belief  overmasters  doubt,  and  I  know  that  I  know, 
And  my  spirit  is  grown  to  a  lordly  great  compass  within, 
That  the  length  and  the  breadth  and  the  sweep  of  the 

marshes  of  Glynn 
Will  work  me  no  fear  like  the  fear  they  have  wrought  me  of 

yore 
When  length  was  fatigue,  and  when  breadth  was  but  bitter- 
ness sore. 
And  when  terror  and  shrinking  and  dreary  unnamable  pain 
Drew  over  me  out  of  the  merciless  miles  of  the  plain, — 

Oh,  now,  unafraid,  I  am  fain  to  face 

The  vast  sweet  visage  of  space. 
To  the  edge  of  the  wood  I  am  drawn,  I  am  drawn. 
Where  the  gray  beach  glimmering  runs,  as  a  belt  of  the  dawn, 

For  a  mete  and  a  mark 
,111  To  the  forest-dark: — 
\Xli  So: 

•  Aflfable  live-oak,  leaning  low, — 


14^8  Poems  of  Nature 

Thus — with  youK  favor — soft,  with  a  reverent  hand, ' ;  i  (j-jS 
(Not  hghtly  touching  your  person,  Lord  of  the  land!)       // 
Bending  your  beauty  aside,  with  a  step  I  stand 
On  the  firm-packed  sand. 

Free 
By  a  world  of  marsh  that  borders  a  world  of  sea. 

Sinuous  southward  and  sinuous  northward  the  shimmering 

band 
Of  the  sand-beach  fastens  the  fringe  of  the  marsh  to  the 

folds  of  the  land. 
Inward  and  outward  to  northward  and  southward  the  beach- 
;;■:      lines  linger  and  curl  •I'sri  sY 

As  a  silver-wrought  garment  that  clings  to  and  follows  the 

firm  sweet  limbs  of  a  girl. 
Vanishing,   swerving,   evermore  curving  again  into  sight, 
Softly  the  sand-beach  wavers  away  to  a  dim  gray  looping  of 
-       light. 
And  what  if  behind  me  to  westward  the  wall  of  the  woods 

stands  high? 
The  world  lies  east:  how  ample,  the  marsh  and  the  sea  and 

the  sky! 
A  league  and  a  league  of  marsh-grass,  waist-high,  broad  in 

the  blade. 
Green,  and  all  of  a  height,  and  unflecked  with  a  hght  or  a 

shade. 
Stretch  leisurely  off,  in  a  pleasant  plain. 
To  the  terminal  blue  of  the  main. 

Oh,  what  is  abroad  in  the  marsh  and  the  terminal  sea? 

Somehow  my  soul  seems  suddenly  free 
From  the  weighing  of  fate  and  the  sad  discussion  of  sin, 
By  the  length  and  the  breadth  and  the  sweep  of  the  marshes 
of  Glynn. 

Ye  marshes,  how  candid  and  simple  and  nothing-withhold- 
ing and  free  iVTBlh  nr 

Ye  publish  yourselves  to  the  sky  and  offer  yourselves  to  the 
sea! 

Tolerant  plains,  that  suffer  the  sea  and  the  rains  and  the  sun, 

Ye  spread  and  span  like  the  catholic  man  who  hath,  mightily 
won  J''^iJ  'jldjiiiA 


The   Marshes  of  Glynn  ^4-9 

God  out  of  knowledge  and  good  out  of  infinite  pain 
And  sight  out  of  blindness  and  purity  out  of  a  stain. 


{/■' 


As  the  marsh-hen  secretly  builds  on  the  watery  sod, 
Behold  I  will  build  me  a  nest  on  the  greatness  of  God: 
I  will  fly  in  the  greatness  of  God  as  the  marsh-hen  flies 
In  the  freedom  that  fills  all  the  space  'twixt  the  marsh  and 

the  skies: 
By  so  many  roots  as  the  marsh-grass  sends  in  the  sod 
I  will  heartily  lay  me  a-hold  on  the  greatness  of  God: 
Oh,  like  to  the  greatness  of  God  is  the  greatness  within 
The  range  of  the  marshes,  the  liberal  marshes  of  Glynn. 

And  the  sea  lends  large,  as  the  marsh:  lo,  out  of  his  plenty 

the  sea 
Pours  fast:  full  soon  the  time  of  the  flood-tide  must  be: 
Look  how  the  grace  of  the  sea  doth  go 
About  and  about  through  the  intricate  channels  that  flo\i 
Here  and  there, 
Everywhere, 
Till  his  waters  have  flooded  the  uttermost  creeks  and  the  low- 
lying  lanes. 
And  the  marsh  is  meshed  with  a  million  veins, 
That  like  as  with  rosy  and  silvery  essences  flow 
In  the  rosc-and-silvcr  evening  glow. 
Farewell,  my  lord  Sun! 
The  creeks  overflow:  a  thousand  rivulets  run 
'Twixt  the  roots  of  the  sod;  the  blades  of  the  marsh-grass 

stir; 
Passelh  a  hurrying  sound  of  wings  that  westward  whirr; 
Passeth,  and  all  is  stUl;  and  the  currents  cease  to  run; 
And  the  sea  and  the  marsh  are  one. 

How  still  the  plains  of  the  waters  be! 
The  tide  is  in  his  ecstasy; 
The  tide  is  at  his  highest  height: 
And  it  is  night. 

And  now  from  the  Vast  of  the  Lord  will  the  waters  of  sleep 
Roll  in  on  the  souls  of  men, 


1430  Poems  of  Nature 

But  who  will  reveal  to  our  waking  ken  ,^^ 

The  forms  that  swim  and  the  shapes  that  creep  ,.,,/, 

Under  the  waters  of  sleep? 
And  I  would  I  could  know  what  swimmeth  below  when  the 

tide  comes  in 
On  the  length  and  the  breadth  of  the  marvelous,  m^arshes  of, 

Glynn.  .a-oVr:   'tU  ;  f 

Sidney  Lanier  [1842-1881] 


THE  TROSACHS 

There's  not  a  nook  within  this  solemn  Pass 

But  were  an  apt  confessional  for  one 

Taught  by  his  summer  spent,  his  autumn  gone, 
That  Life  is  but  a  tale  of  morning  grass 
Withered  at  eve.    From  scenes  of  art  which  chase 

That  thought  away,  turn,  and  with  watchful  eyes 

Feed  it  'mid  Nature's  old  felicities, 
Rocks,  rivers,  and  smooth  lakes  more  clear  than  glass 
Untouched,  unbreathed  upon.    Thrice  happy  quest. 

If  from  a  golden  perch  of  aspen  spray 

(October's  workmanship  to  rival  May) 
The  pensive  warbler  of  the  ruddy  breast 

That  moral  sweeten  by  a  heaven-taught  lay, 
LulHng  the  year,  with  all  its  cares,  to  rest ! 

William  Wordsivorth  [i 770-1850] 


HYMN 

BEFORE  SUNRISE,   IN  THE   VALE   OF   CHAMOUNI 

Hast  thou  a  charm  to  stay  the  morning-star 
In  his  steep  course?     So  long  he  seems  to  pause 
On  thy  bald,  awful  head,  O  sovereign  Blanc! 
The  Arve  and  Arveiron  at  thy  base 
Rave  ceaselessly;  but  thou,  most  awful  Form, 
Risest  from  forth  thy  silent  sea  of  pines. 
How  silently!     Around  thee  and  above 
Deep  is  the  air  and  dark,  substantial,  black, 


Hymn  1431 

An  ebon  mass:  methinks  thou  piercesL  it, 
As  with  a  wedge!     But  when  I  look  again, 
It  is  thine  own  calm  home,  thy  crystal  shrine, 
Thy  habitation  from  eternity! 

0  dread  and  silent  Mount!     I  gazed  upon  thee, 
Till  thou,  still  present  to  the  bodily  sense, 

Didst  vanish  from  my  thought:  entranced  in  prayer 

1  worshiped  the  Invisible  alone. 

Yet,  like  some  sweet  beguiling  melody, 
So  sweet,  we  know  not  we  are  listening  to  it, 
Thou,  the  meanwhile,  wast  blending  with  my  thought. 
Yea,  with  my  Life  and  Life's  own  secret  joy: 
Till  the  dilating  Soul,  enrapt,  transfused, 
Into  the  mighty  vision  passing — there. 
As  in  her  natural  form,  swelled  vast  to  Heaven! 

Awake,  my  soul!  not  only  passive  praise 
Thou  owest!  not  alone  these  swelling  tears, 
Mute  thanks  and  secret  ecstasy!     Awake, 
Voice  of  sweet  song!     Awake,  my  Heart,  awake! 
Green  vales  and  icy  cliffs,  all  join  my  Hymn. 

Thou  first  and  chief,  sole  sovereign  of  the  Vale! 
O,  struggling  with  the  darkness  all  the  night, 
And  visited  all  night  by  troops  of  stars, 
Or  when  they  climb  the  skj^  or  when  they  sink: 
Companion  of  the  morning-star  at  dawn, 
Thyself  Earth's  rosy  star,  and  of  the  dawn 
Co-herald:  wake,  O  wake,  and  utter  praise! 
Who  sank  thy  sunless  pillars  deep  in  Earth? 
Who  filled  thy  countenance  with  rosy  light? 
Who  made  thee  parent  of  perpetual  streams? 

And  you,  ye  five  wild  torrents  fiercely  glad! 
Who  called  you  forth  from  night  and  utter  death, 
From  dark  and  icy  caverns  called  you  forth, 
Down  those  precipitous,  black,  jagged  rocks, 
For  ever  shattered  and  the  same  for  ever? 
Who  gave  you  your  invulnerable  life, 


1 43 2  Poems  of  Nature 

Your  strength,  your  speed,  your  fury,  and  your  joy, 
Unceasing  thunder  and  eternal  foam? 
And  who  commanded  (and  the  silence  came), 
Here  let  the  billows  stiffen,  and  have  rest? 

Ye  ice-falls!  ye  that  from  the  mountain's  brow 
Adown  enormous  ravines  slope  amain — 
Torrents,  methinks,  that  heard  a  mighty  voice. 
And  stopped  at  once  amid  their  maddest  plunge! 
Motionless  torrents!  silent  cataracts! 
Who  made  you  glorious  as  the  Gates  of  Heaven 
Beneath  the  keen  full  moon?     Who  bade  the  sun 
Clothe  you  with  rainbows?     Who,  with  living  flowers  - 
Of  loveliest  blue,  spread  garlands  at  your  feet? — 
God!  let  the  torrents,  like  a  shout  of  nations, 
Answer!  and  let  the  ice-plains  echo,  God! 
God!  sing  ye  meadow-streams  with  gladsome  voice! 
Ye  pine-groves,  with  your  soft  and  soul-like  sounds! 
And  they  too  have  a  voice,  yon  piles  of  snow,  ' 

And  in  their  perilous  fall  shall  thunder,  God! 

Ye  living  flowers  that  skirt  the  eternal  frost! 
Ye  wild  goats  sporting  round  the  eagle's  nest! 
Ye  eagles,  playmates  of  the  mountain-storm ! 
Ye  lightnings,  the  dread  arrows  of  the  clouds! 
Ye  signs  and  wonders  of  the  elements! 
Utter  forth  God,  and  fill  the  hifls  with  praise! 

Thou  too,  hoar  Mount!  with  thy  sky-pointing  peaks. 
Oft  from  whose  feet  the  avalanche,  unheard. 
Shoots  downward,  glittering  through  the  pure  serene, 
Into  the  depth  of  clouds  that  veil  thy  breast — 
Thou  too  again,  stupendous  Mountain!  thou 
That  as  I  raise  my  head,  awhile  bowed  low 
In  adoration,  upward  from  thy  base 
Slow  traveling  with  dim  eyes  suffused  with  tears. 
Solemnly  seemest,  like  a  vapory  cloud. 
To  rise  before  me — Rise,  O  ever  rise! 
Rise  like  a  cloud  of  incense,  from  the  Earth ! 
Thou  kingly  Spirit  throned  among  the  hills, 


The   Peaks  '433 

Thou  dread  ambassador  from  Earth  to  Heaven, 
Great  Hierarch!  tell  thou  the  silent  sky, 
And  tell  the  stars,  and  tell  yon  rising  sun, 
Earth,  with  her  thousand  voices,  praises  God. 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [i 772-1834] 


THE  PEAKS 

In  the  night 

Gray,  heavy  clouds  muffled  the  valleys, 

And  the  peaks  looked  toward  God  alone. 

"O  Master,  that  movest  the  wind  with  a  finger, 

Humble,  idle,  futile  peaks  are  we. 

Grant  that  we  may  run  swiftly  across  the  world 

To  huddle  in  worship  at  Thy  feet." 

In  the  morning 

A  noise  of  men  at  work  came  through  the  clear  blue  miles. 

And  the  little  black  cities  were  apparent. 

"O  Master,  that  knowest  the  meaning  of  raindrops. 

Humble,  idle,  futile  peaks  are  we. 

Give  voice  to  us,  we  pray,  O  Lord, 

That  we  may  sing  Thy  goodness  to  the  sun." 

In  the  evening 

The  far  valleys  were  sprinkled  with  tiny  lights. 

"O  Master, 

Thou  that  knowest  the  value  of  kings  and  birds, 

Thou  hast  made  us  humble,  idle,  futile  peaks. 

Thou  only  needest  eternal  patience; 

We  bow  to  Thy  wisdom,  O  Lord — 

Humble,  idle,  futile  peaks." 

In  the  night 

Gray,  heavy  clouds  muffled  the  valleys. 

And  the  peaks  looked  toward  God  alone. 

Stephen  Crane  [i 870-1 900] 


1434  Poems  of  Nature 


KINCHINJUNGA 

NEXT   TO   EVEREST   HIGHEST    OF   MOUNTAINS 

O  WHITE  priest  of  Eternity,  around 
Whose  lofty  summit  veiling  clouds  arise 
Of  the  earth's  immemorial  sacrifice 
To  Brahma,  in  whose  breath  all  lives  and  dies; 
O  hierarch  enrobed  in  timeless  snows. 
First-born  of  Asia,  whose  maternal  throes 
Seem  changed  now  to  a  million  human  woes, 
Holy  thou  art  and  still!     Be  so,  nor  sound 
One  sigh  of  all  the  mystery  in  thee  found. 

For  in  this  world  too  much  is  overclear, 
Immortal  ministrant  to  many  lands. 
From  whose  ice  altars  flow,  to  fainting  sands, 
Rivers  that  each  libation  poured  expands. 
Too  much  is  known,  O  Ganges-giving  sire: 
Thy  people  fathom  life,  and  find  it  dire; 
Thy  people  fathom  death,  and,  in  it,  fire 
To  live  again,  though  in  Illusion's  sphere, 
Behold  concealed  as  grief  is  in  a  tear. 

Wherefore  continue,  still  enshrined,  thy  rites, 
Though  dark  Tibet,  that  dread  ascetic,  falls. 
In  strange  austerity,  whose  trance  appals, — 
Before  thee,  and  a  suppliant  on  thee  calls. 
Continue  still  thy  silence  high  and  sure, 
That  something  beyond  fleeting  may  endure — 
Something  that  shall  forevermore  allure 
Imagination  on  to  mystic  flights 
Wherein  alone  no  wing  of  evil  lights. 

Yea,  wrap  thy  awful  gulfs  and  acolytes 

Of  lifted  granite  round  with  reachless  snows. 

Stand  for  eternity,  while  pilgrim  rows 

Of  all  the  nations  envy  thy  repose. 

Ensheath  thy  swart  sublimities,  unsealed; 

Be  that  alone  on  earth  which  has  not  failed; 

Be  that  which  never  yet  has  yearned  nor  ailed, 


The   Hills  1435 

But  since  primeval  Power  upreared  thy  heights 
Has  stood  above  all  deaths  and  all  delights. 

And  though  thy  loftier  brother  shall  be  king, 

High-priest  be  thou  to  Brahma  unrevealed, 

While  thy  white  sanctity  forever  sealed 

In  icy  silence  leaves  desire  congealed. 

In  ghostly  ministrations  to  the  sun, 

And  to  the  mendicant  stars  and  the  moon-nun, 

Be  holy  still,  till  east  to  west  has  run, 

And  till  no  sacrificial  suffering 

On  any  shrine  is  left  to  tell  life's  sting. 

Cale  Young  Rice  [1872- 

THE  HILLS 

MussooRlE  and  Chakrata  Hill 

The  Jumna  flows  between 
And  from  Chakrata's  hills  afar 

Mussoorie's  vale  is  seen. 
The  mountains  sing  together 
In  cloud  or  sunny  weather, 
The  Jumna,  through  their  tether. 

Foams  white  or  plunges  green. 

The  mountains  stand  and  laugh  at  Time, 

They  pillar  up  the  Earth, 
They  watch  the  ages  pass,  they  bring 

New  centuries  to  birth. 
They  feel  the  daybreak  shiver, 
They  see  Time  passing  ever, 
As  flows  the  Jumna  River 

As  breaks  the  white  sea-surf. 

They  drink  the  sun  in  a  golden  cup 

And  in  blue  mist  the  rain; 
With  a  sudden  brightening  they  meet  the  lightning 

Or  ere  it  strikes  the  plain. 
They  seize  the  sullen  thunder 
And  take  it  up  for  plunder  i  ^'/ 

And  cast  it  down  and  under,  L 

And  up  and  back  again.  .  .  . 


1436  Poems  of  Nature 

..f    .  .  .  Here,  in  the  hills  of  ages 
I  met  thee  face  to  face; 
O  mother  Earth,  O  lover  Earth, 
Look  down  on  me  with  grace. 
Give  me  thy  passion  burning, 
And  thy  strong  patience,  turning 
All  wrath  to  power,  all  yearning 
To  truth,  thy  dwelling-place. 

Julian  Greiifcll  [18    -igis] 

HEMLOCK  MOUNTAIN 

By  orange  grove  and  palm-tree,  we  walked  the  southern 

shore, 
Each  day  more  still  and  golden  than  was  the  day  before. 
That  calm  and  languid  sunsliine!     How  faint  it  made  us 

grow 
To  look  on  Hemlock  Mountain  when  the  storm  hangs  low! 

To  see  its  rocky  pastures,  its  sparse  but  hardy  corn. 
The  mist  roll  off  its  forehead  before  a  harvest  morn; 
To  hear  the  pine-trees  crashing  across  its  gulfs  of  snow 
Upon  a  roaring  midnight  when  the  whirlwinds  blow. 

Tell  not  of  lost  Atlantis,  or  fabled  Avalon; 
The  olive,  or  the  vineyard,  no  winter  breathes  upon; 
Away  from  Hemlock  Mountain  we  could  not  well  forego, 
For  all  the  summer  islands  where  the  gulf  tides  flow. 

Sarah  N.  Clcghorn  [1876-^ 

SUNRISE  ON  RYDAL  WATER 

Come  down  at  dawn  from  windless  hills 

Into  the  valley  of  the  lake. 
Where  yet  a  larger  quiet  fills 

The  hour,  and  mist  and  water  make 
With  rocks  and  reeds  and  island  boughs 

One  silence  and  one  element. 
Where  wonder  goes  surely  as  once 

It  went 

By  Galilean  prows. 


Sunrise   on    Rydal   Water  ^437 

Moveless  the  water  and  the  mist, 

Moveless  the  secret  air  above, 
Hushed,  as  upon  some  happy  tryst 

The  poised  expectancy  of  love; 
What  spirit  is  it  that  adores 

What  mighty  presence  yet  unseen? 
What  consummation  works  apace 

Between 

These  rapt  enchanted  sliores? 

Never  did  virgin  beauty  wake 

Devouter  to  the  bridal  feast 
Than  moves  this  hour  upon  the  lake 

In  adoration  to  the  east. 
Here  is  the  bride  a  god  may  know, 

Tlie  primal  will,  the  young  consent, 
Till  surely  upon  the  appointed  mood 

Intent 

The  god  shall  leap — and,  lo, 

Over  the  lake's  end  strikes  the  sun — 

White,  flameless  fire;  some  purity 
Thrilling  the  mist,  a  splendor  won 

Out  of  the  world's  heart.    Let  there  be 
Thoughts,  and  atonements,  and  desires; 

Proud  limbs,  and  undeliberate  tongue; 
Where  now  we  move  with  mortal  care 

Among 

Immortal  dews  and  fires. 

So  the  old  mating  goes  apace, 

Wind  with  the  sea,  and  blood  with  thought. 
Lover  with  lover;  and  the  grace 

Of  understanding  comes  unsought 
When  stars  into  the  twilight  steer. 

Or  thrushes  build  among  the  may, 
Or  wonder  moves  between  the  hills. 

And  day 

Comes  up  on  Rydal  mere. 

John  Drinkwatcr  (i88>- 


1438  I.'- Poems  of  Nature 


THE  DESERTED  PASTURE 

I  LOVE  the  stony  pasture 
That  no  one  else  will  have.  - 

The  old  gray  rocks  so  friendly  seem, 
So  durable  and  brave. 

In  tranquil  contemplation 
It  watches  through  the  year, 
Seeing  the  frosty  stars  arise, 
The  slender  moons  appear. 

Its  music  is  the  rain-wind, 
Its  choristers  the  birds, 
And  there  are  secrets  in  its  heart 
Too  wonderful  for  words. 

It  keeps  the  bright-eyed  creatures 
That  play  about  its  walls, 
Though  long  ago  its  milking  herds 
Were  banished  from  their  stalls. 

Only  the  children  come  there, 
For  buttercups  in  May, 
Or  nuts  in  autumn,  where  it  lies 
Dreaming  the  hours  away. 

Long  since  its  strength  was  given 
To  making  good  increase, 
And  now  its  soul  is  turned  again 
To  beauty  and  to  peace. 

There  in  the  early  springtime 
The  violets  are  blue, 
And  adder-tongues  in  coats  of  gola 
Are  garmented  anew. 

There  bayberry  and  aster 
Are  crowded  on  its  floors, 


To   Meadows  ^439 

When  marching  summer  halts  to  praise 
The  Lord  of  Out-of-doors. 

And  there  October  passes 
In  gorgeous  Hvery, — 
In  purple  ash,  and  crimson  oak, 
And  golden  tulip  tree. 

And  when  the  winds  of  winter 
Their  bugle  blasts  begin, 
The  snowy  hosts  of  heaven  arrive 
To  pitch  their  tents  therein. 

Bliss  Carman  [1861- 


TO  MEADOWS 

Ye  have  been  fresh  and  green; 

Ye  have  been  filled  with  flowers; 
And  ye  the  walks  have  been 

Where  maids  have  spent  their  hours. 

Ye  have  beheld  how  they 

With  wicker  arks  did  come 
To  kiss  and  bear  away 

The  richer  cowslips  home. 

Ye've  heard  them  sweetly  sing, 

And  seen  them  in  a  round. 
Each  virgin,  like  a  Spring, 

With  honeysuckles  crowned. 


But  now  we  see  none  here 
Whose  silvery  feet  did  tread. 

And  with  dishevelled  hair 
Adorned  this  smoother  mead. 


17/ 

Tf.nA 


Like  unthrifts,  having  spent 

Your  stock,  and  needy  grown, 
Ye're  left  here  to  lament 

Your  poor  estates,  alone. 

Robert  Ilerrick  [1591-1674] 


1440  Poems  of  Nature 


THE  CLOUD 

I  BRING  fresh  showers  for  the  thirsting  flowers 

From  the  seas  and  the  streams; 
I  bear  light  shade  for  the  leaves  when  laid '  ^ 

In  their  noonday  dreams. 
From  my  wings  are  shaken  the  dews  that  waken 

The  sweet  buds  every  one, 
When  rocked  to  rest  on  their  mother's  breast, 

As  she  dances  about  the  sun. 
I  wield  the  flail  of  the  lashing  hail. 

And  whiten  the  green  plains  under; 
And  then  again  I  dissolve  it  in  rain, 

And  laugh  as  I  pass  in  thunder. 

I  sift  the  snow  on  the  mountains  below. 

And  their  great  pines  groan  aghast; 
And  all  the  night  'tis  my  pillow  white, 

.While  I  sleep  in  the  arms  of  the  blast. 
Sublime  on  the  towers  of  my  skiey  bowers 

Lightning  my  pilot  sits; 
In  a  cavern  under  is  fettered  the  thunder, 

It  struggles  and  howls  at  fits. 

Over  earth  and  ocean,  vv'ith  gentle  motion, 

This  pilot  is  guiding  me. 
Lured  by  the  love  of  the  Genii  that  move 

In  the  depths  of  the  purple  sea; 
Over  the  rills,  and  the  crags,  and  the  hills, 

Over  the  lakes  and  the  plains. 
Wherever  he  dream,  under  mountain  or  stream, 

The  Spirit  he  loves  remains; 
And  I  all  the  while  bask  in  heaven's  blue  smile, 

Whilst  he  is  dissolving  in  rains. 

The  sanguine  Sunrise,  with  his  meteor  eyes. 
And  his  burning  plumes  outspread. 

Leaps  on  the  back  of  my  sailing  rack, 

When  the  morning  star  shines  dead, 


1  he   Cloud  1 44 1 

As  on  the  jag  of  a  mountain-crag,'  • 

Which  an  earthquake  rocks  and  swings, 
An  eagle  aht  one  moment  may  sit 

In  the  hght  of  its  golden  wings. 
And,  when  Sunset  may  breathe,  from  the  Ht  sea  beneath, 

Its  ardors  of  rest  and  of  love. 
And  the  crimson  pall  of  eve  may  fall  mi  A 

From  the  depth  of  heaven  above, 
With  wings  folded  I  rest  on  mine  airy  nest,  \.  I 

As  still  as  a  brooding  dove. 

That  orbed  maiden  with  white  fire  laden, 

Whom  mortals  call  the  Moon, 
Glides  glimmering  o'er  my  fleece-like  floor. 

By  the  midnight  breezes  strewn; 
And  wherever  the  beat  of  her  unseen  feet. 

Which  only  the  angels  hear, 
May  have  broken  the  woof  of  my  tent's  thin  roof. 

The  Stars  peep  behind  her  and  peer. 
And  I  laugh  to  see  them  whirl  and  flee 

Like  a  swarm  of  golden  bees, 
When  I  widen  the  rent  in  my  wind-built  tent. 

Till  the  calm  rivers,  lakes,  and  seas. 
Like  strips  of  the  sky  fallen  through  me  on  high. 

Are  each  paved  with  the  moon  and  these. 

I  bind  the  Sun's  throne  with  a  burning  zone. 

And  the  Moon's  with  a  girdle  of  pearl; 
The  volcanoes  are  dim,  and  the  Stars  reel  and  swim, 

When  the  Whirlwinds  my  banner  unfurl. 
From  cape  to  cape,  with  a  bridge-like  shape. 

Over  a  torrent  sea. 
Sunbeam-proof,  I  hang  Hke  a  roof; 

The  mountains  its  columns  be. 
The  triumphal  arch  through  which  I  march. 

With  hurricane,  fire,  and  snow, 
When  the  Powers  of  the  air  are  chained  to  my  chair, 

Is  the  million-colored  bow; 
The  Sphere-fire  above  its  soft  colors  wove, 

While  the  moist  Earth  was  laughing  below. 


144^  Poems  of  Nature 

I  am  the  daughter  of  Earth  and  Water,  ,f|J  no  aA 

And  the  nursling  of  the  Sky:  iljiriW 

I  pass  through  the  pores  of  the  ocean  and  shdreS;    ,  ni. 

I  change,  but  I  cannot  die. 
For  after  the  rain,  when  with  never  a  stain 

The  pavilion  of  heaven  is  bare, 
And  the  winds  and  sunbeams  with  their  convex  gleams 

Build  up  the  blue  dome  of  air, 
I  silently  laugh  at  my  own  cenotaph,  :  ■  '!! 

And  out  of  the  caverns  of  rain, 
Like  a  child  from  the  womb,  like  a  ghost  from  the  tomb, 

I  arise,  and  unbuild  it  again. 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [1792-1822] 


APRIL  RAIN 

It  is  not  raining  rain  for  mc, 

It's  raining  daffodils; 
In  every  dimpled  drop  I  see 

Wild  flowers  on  the  hills.  -j^- 


■-r]z  DjjIiJ 


The  clouds  of  gray  engulf  the  day 
And  overwhelm  the  town; 

It  is  not  raining  rain  to  me. 
It's  raining  roses  down. 

It  is  not  raining  rain  to  me, 
.  But  fields  of  clover  bloom, 
Where  any  buccaneering  bee 
Can  find  a  bed  and  room. 


ujrd  oriT 


A  health  unto  the  happy,  !< 

A  fig  for  him  who  frets! 
It  is  not  raining  rain  to  me. 

It's  raining  violets. 

Robert  Loveman  [1864- 


April   Rain  i443 


SUMMER  INVOCATION 


iT 


O  GENTLE,  gentle  summer  rain, 

Let  not  the  silver  lily  pine, 
The  drooping  Uly  pine  in  vain  ;  ji 

To  feel  that  dewy  touch  of  thine, — 
To  drink  thy  freshness  once  again, 
O  gentle,  gentle  summer  rain! 

In  heat  the  landscape  quivering  lies; 

The  cattle  pant  beneath  the  tree; 
Through  parching  air  and  purple  skies 

The  earth  looks  up,  in  vain,  for  thee; 
For  thee — for  thee,  it  looks  in  vain 
O  gentle,  gentle  summer  rain. 

Come  thou,  and  brim  the  meadow  streams, 

And  soften  aU  the  hills  with  mist, 
O  falling  dew!  from  burning  dreams 

By  thee  shall  herb  and  flower  be  kissed. 
And  Earth  shall  bless  thee  yet  again, 
O  gentle,  gentle  summer  rain. 

William  Cox  Bennett  [1820-1805] 

APRIL   RAIN 

The  April  raui,  the  April  rain. 
Comes  slanting  down  in  fitful  showers. 

Then  from  the  furrow  shoots  the  grain. 
And  banks  are  edged  with  nestling  flowers; 
And  in  gray  shaw  and  woodland  bowers 

The  cuckoo  through  the  April  rain 
Calls  once  again. 

The  April  sun,  the  April  sun, 
Glints  through  the  rain  in  fitful  splendor. 

And  in  gray  shaw  and  woodland  dun 
The  little  leaves  spring  forth  and  tender 
Their  infant  hands,  yet  weak  and  slender. 

For  warmth  towards  the  April  sun, 
One  after  one. 


1444  Poems  of  Nature 

And  between  shower  and  shine  hath  birth 
The  rainbow's  evanescent  glory; 

Heaven's  hght  that  breaks  on  mist  of  earth! 
Frail  symbol  of  our  human  story, 
It  flowers  through  showers  where,  looming  hoary, 
The  rain-clouds  flash  with  April  mirth, 
Like  Life  on  earth. 

Mathilde  Blind  [1841-1896] 


TO  THE   RAINBOW 

Triumphal  arch,  that  fill'st  the  sky 
When  storms  prepare  to  part, 

I  ask  not  proud  Philosophy 
To  teach  me  what  thou  art; — 

StiU  seem,  as  to  my  childhood's  sight, 

A  midway  station  given 
For  happy  spirits  to  alight 

Betwixt  the  earth  and  heaven. 

Can  aU  that  Optics  teach  unfold 

Thy  form  to  please  me  so. 
As  when  I  dreamt  of  gems  and  gold 

Hid  in  thy  radiant  bow? 

When  Science  from  Creation's  face 
Enchantment's  veil  withdraws, 

What  lovely  visions  yield  their  place 
To  cold  material  laws! 

And  yet,  fair  bow,  no  fabhng  dreams, 
But  words  of  the  Most  High, 

Have  told  why  first  thy  robe  of  beams 
Was  woven  in  the  sky. 

When  o'er  the  green,  undcluged  earth 
Heaven's  covenant  thou  didst  shine, 

How  came  the  world's  gray  fathers  forth 
To  watch  thy  sacred  sign! 


To   the    Rainbow  ^445 

And  when  its  yellow  luster  smiled 

O'er  mountains  yet  untrod, 
Each  mother  held  aloft  her  child 

To  bless  the  bow  of  God. 

Methinks,  thy  jubilee  to  keep, 

The  first-made  anthem  rang 
On  earth,  delivered  from  the  deep. 

And  the  lirst  poet  sang. 

Nor  ever  shall  the  Muse's  eye 

Unraptured  greet  thy  beam; 
Theme  of  primeval  prophecy, 

Be  still  the  prophet's  theme! 

The  earth  to  thee  her  incense  >ields, 

The  lark  thy  welcome  sings, 
When,  glittering  in  the  freshened  fields, 

The  snowy  mushroom  springs. 

How  glorious  is  thy  girdle,  cast 

O'er  mountain,  tower,  and  town, 
Or  mirrored  in  the  ocean  vast, 

A  thousand  fathoms  down! 

As  fresh  in  yon  horizon  dark. 

As  young  thy  beauties  seem. 
As  when  the  eagle  from  the  ark 

First  sported  in  thy  beam: 

For,  faithful  to  its  sacred  page, 

Heaven  stiU  rebuilds  thy  span; 
Nor  lets  the  type  grow  pale  with  age. 

That  first  spoke  peace  to  man. 

Thomas  Campbell  [17  7  7-1844] 


i-l-i 


■jjiilli/  >.][  a'jd-H  [•■ 


GREEN  THINGS  GROWING 

MY   GARDEN 

A  GARDEN  is  a  lovesome  thing,  God  wot! 
Rose  plot, 

Fringed  pool, 
Ferned  grot — 
The  veriest  school 
Of  peace;  and  yet  the  fool 
Contends  that  God  is  not — 
Not  God!  in  gardens!  when  the  eve  is  cool? 
Nay,  but  I  have  a  sign: 
'Tis  very  sure  God  walks  in  mine. 

Thomas  Edward  Brown  [i  830-1 897] 


THE  GARDEN 

How  vainly  men  themselves  amaze 
To  win  the  palm,  the  oak,  or  bays. 
And  their  incessant  labors  see 
Crowned  from  some  single  herb  or  tree, 
Whose  short  and  narrow-verged  shade 
Does  prudently  their  toils  upbraid; 
While  aU  the  flowers  and  trees  do  close 
To  weaye  the  garlands  of  repose! 

Fair  Quiet,  have  I  found  thee  here, 
And  Innocence,  thy  sister  dear? 
Mistaken  long,  I  sought  you  then 
In  busy  companies  of  men: 
Your  sacred  plants,  if  here  below. 
Only  among  the  plants  will  grow; 
Society  is  all  but  rude 
To  this  delicious  solitude. 
1446 


The  Garden  i447 


No  white  nor  red  was  ever  seen 
So  amorous  as  this  lovely  green. 
Fond  lovers,  cruel  as  Iheir  flame, 
Cut  in  these  trees  their  mistress'  name: 
Little,  alas!  they  know  or  heed 
How  far  these  beauties  hers  exceed! 
Fair  trees!  where'er  your  barks  I  wound. 
No  name  shall  but  your  own  be  found. 

When  we  have  run  our  passions'  heat, 
Love  hither  makes  lus  best  retreat: 
The  gods,  that  mortal  beauty  chase, 
Still  in  a  tree  did  end  their  race; 
Apollo  hunted  Daphne  so 
Only  that  she  might  laurel  grow; 
And  Pan  did  after  Syrinx  speed, 
Not  as  a  nymph,  but  for  a  reed. 

What  wondrous  life  is  this  I  lead! 
Ripe  apples  drop  about  my  head; 
The  luscious  clusters  of  the  vine 
Upon  my  mouth  do  crush  their  wine; 
The  nectarine  and  curious  peach 
Into  my  hands  themselves  do  reach; 
Stumbling  on  melons,  as  I  pass, 
Ensnared  with  flowers,  I  fall  on  grass. 

Meanwhile  the  mind,  from  pleasure  less, 

Withdraws  into  its  happiness; 

The  mind,  that  ocean  where  each  kind 

Does  straight  its  own  resemblance  find; 

Yet  it  creates,  transcending  these. 

Far  other  worlds,  and  other  seas; 

Annihilating  all  that's  made 

To  a  green  thought  in  a  green  shade. 

Here  at  the  fountain's  sliding  foot. 
Or  at  some  fruit-tree's  mossy  root. 
Casting  the  body's  vest  aside, 
My  soul  into  the  boughs  does  glide; 


H48  Poems  of  Nature 

There,  like  a  bird,  it  sits  and  sings, 
Then  whets  and  conilDS  its  silver  wings. 
And,  till  prepared  for  longer  flight. 
Waves  in  its  plumes  the  various  light. 

Such  was  that  happy  Garden-state 
While  man  there  walked  without  a  mate: 
After  a  place  so  pure  and  sweet, 
What  other  help  could  yet  be  meet! 
But  'twas  beyond  a  mortal's  share 
To  wander  solitary  there: 
Two  paradises  'twere  in  one, 
To  live  in  Paradise  alone. 

How  well  the  skilful  gardener  drew 
Of  flowers  and  herbs  this  dial  new! 
Where,  from  above,  the  milder  sun 
Docs  through  a  fragrant  zodiac  run: 
And,  as  it  works,  the  industrious  bee 
Computes  its  time  as  well  as  we. 
How  could  such  sweet  and  wholesome  hours 
Be  reckoned,  but  with  herbs  and  flowers! 

A  ndrew  Marvel!  [  1 6  2 1  - 1 6  7  8) 


A  GARDEN 

WRITTEN   AFTER   THE   CIVIL    WARS 

See  how  the  flowers,  as  at  parade, 

Under  their  colors  stand  displayed: 

Each  regiment  in  order  grows. 

That  of  the  tulip,  pink,  and  rose. 

But  when  the  vigilant  patrol 

Of  stars  walks  round  about  the  pole. 

Their  leaves,  that  to  the  stalks  are  curled, 

Seem  to  their  staves  the  ensigns  furled. 

Then  in  some  flower's  beloved  hut 

Each  bee,  as  sentinel,  is  shut, 

And  sleeps  so  too;  but  if  once  stirred. 

She  runs  you  through,  nor  asks  the  word. 


A   Garden   Song  1449 

O  thou,  that  dear  and  happy  Isle, 
The  garden  of  the  world  ere  while, 
Thou  Paradise  of  the  four  seas 
Which  Heaven  planted  us  to  please, 
But,  to  exclude  the  world,  did  guard 
With  watery  if  not  flaming  sword; 
What  luckless  apple  did  we  taste 
To  make  us  mortal  and  thee  waste! 
Unhappy!  shall  we  never  more 
That  sweet  milida  restore. 
When  gardens  only  had  their  towers, 
And  all  the  garrisons  were  flowers; 
\\'hen  roses  only  arms  might  bear. 
And  men  did  rosy  garlands  wear? 

Andrew  Marvdl  [1621-1678] 


A   GARDEN  SONG 

Here,  in  this  sequestered  close 
Bloom  the  hyacinth  and  rose; 
Here  beside  the  modest  stock 
Flaunts  the  flaring  hollyhock; 
Here,  without  a  pang,  one  sees 
Ranks,  conditions,  and  degrees. 

All  the  seasons  run  their  race 
In  this  quiet  resting-place; 
Peach,  and  apricot,  and  fig 
Here  will  ripen,  and  grow  big; 
Here  is  store  and  overplus, — 
More  had  not  Alcinoiis ! 


Here,  in  alleys  cool  and  green. 
Far  ahead  the  thrush  is  seen ; 
Here  along  the  southern  wall 
Keeps  the  bee  his  festival; 
All  is  quiet  else — afar 
Sounds  of  toil  and  turmoil  are. 

Here  be  shadows  large  and  long; 
Here  be  spaces  meet  for  song; 


;;}'// 


1450  Poems  of  Nature 

Grant,  O  garden-god,  that  I,    ,.,^jj  ,-, 
Now  that  none  profane  is  nigh, — 
Now  that. mood  and  moment  please, 
Find  the  fair  Pierides! 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


"IN  GREEN  OLD   GARDENS" 

In  green  old  gardens,  hidden  away 

From  sight  of  revel  and  sound  of  strife, 
Where  the  bird  may  sing  out  his  soul  ere  he  die, 
Nor  fears  for  the  night,  so  he  lives  his  day; 
Where  the  high  red  walls,  which  are  growing  gray 
With  their  lichen  and  moss  embroideries, 
Seem  sadly  and  sternly  to  shut  out  life, 
Because  it  is  often  as  red  as  they; 

Where  even  the  bee  has  time  to  glide 
(Gathering  gayly  his  honey's  store) 
Right  to  the  heart  of  the  old-world  flowers — 
China-asters  and  purple  stocks. 
Dahlias  and  tall  red  hollyhocks, 

Laburnums  raining  their  golden  showers. 
Columbines  prim  of  the  folded  core. 
And  lupins,  and  larkspurs,  and  "London  pride"; 

Where  the  heron  is  waiting  amongst  the  reeds. 
Grown  tame  in  the  silence  that  reigns  around, 
Broken  only,  now  and  then. 
By  shy  woodpecker  or  noisy  jay, 
By  the  far-ofif  watch-dog's  muffled  bay; 

But  where  never  the  purposeless  laughter  of  men, 
Or  the  seething  city's  murmurous  sound 
Will  float  up  over  the  river-weeds. 

Here  may  I  live  what  life  I  please, 
Married  and  buried  out  of  sight, — 

Married  to  pleasure,  and  buried  to  pain, — 
Hidden  away  amongst  scenes  like  these, 
Under  the  fans  of  the  chestnut  trees; 


A   Benedictine   Garden  HS^ 

Living  my  child-life  o\'er  again,,:   .  jr 
With  the  further  hope  of  a  fallen  delight, 
Blithe  as  the  birds  and  wise  as  the  bees.  . 


In  green  old  gardens,  hidden  away 

From  sight  of  revel  and  sound  of  strife, — 
Here  have  I  leisure  to  breathe  and  move, 
And  to  do  my  work  in  a  nobler  way; 
To  sing  my  songs,  and  to  say  my  say ; 

To  dream  my  dreams,  and  to  love  my  love; 
To  hold  my  faith,  and  to  live  my  life, 
Making  the  most  of  its  shadowy  day. 

Violcl  Fane  [i8     - 


A  BENEDICTINE  GARDEN 

Through  all  the  wind-blown  aisles  of  May, 
Faint  bells  of  perfume  swing  and  fall. 
Within  this  apple-petalled  wall 
(A  gray  east,  flecked  with  rosy  day) 
The  pink  laburnum  lays  her  cheek 
In  married,  matchless,  lovely  bhss. 
Against  her  golden  mate,  to  seek 
His  airy  kiss. 

Tulips,  in  faded  splendor  drest. 
Brood  o'er  their  beds,  a  slumbrous  gloom. 
Dame  Peony,  red  and  ripe  with  bloom, 
Swells  the  silk  housing  of  her  breast. 
The  Lilac,  drunk  to  ecstasy. 
Breaks  her  full  flagons  on  the  air, 
And  drenches  home  the  reeling  bee 
Who  found  her  fair. 

O  cowled  Legion  of  the  Cross,  ,j 

What  solemn  pleasantry  is  thine,  p 

Vowing  to  seek  the  life  divine  /. 

Through  abnegation  and  through  loss!  : 


145^  Poems  of  Nature  ^- 

Men  but  make  monuments  of  sin 
Who  walk  the  earth's  ambitious  round; 
Thou  hast  the  richer  realm  within 
This  garden  ground. 

No  woman's  voice  takes  sweeter  note 

Than  chanting  of  this  plumed  choir. 

No  jewel  ever  wore  the  fire 

Hung  on  a  dewdrop's  quivering  throat. 

A  ruddier  pomp  and  pageantry 

Than  world's  dehght  o'erfleets  thy  sod; 

And  choosing  this,  thou  hast  in  fee 

The  peace  of  God. 

Alice  Brown  [1857- 


AN  AUTUMN   GARDEN 

My  tent  stands  in  a  garden 
Of  aster  and  golden-rod, 
Tilled  by  the  rain  and  the  sunshine, 
And  sown  by  the  hand  of  God, — 
An  old  New  England  pasture 
Abandoned  to  peace  and  time, 
And  by  the  magic  of  beauty 
Reclaimed  to  the  sublime. 

About  it  are  golden  woodlands 

Of  tulip  and  hickory; 

On  the  open  ridge  behind  it 

You  may  mount  to  a  glimpse  of  sea,- 

The  far-off,  blue,  Homeric 

Rim  of  the  world's  great  shield, 

A  border  of  boundless  glamor 

For  the  soul's  familiar  field. 

In  purple  and  gray-wrought  Hchen 
The  boulders  lie  in  the  sun; 
Along  its  grassy  footpath, 
The  white-tailed  rabbits  run. 


An    Autumn   Garden  H53 

The  crickets  work  and  chirrup 
Through  the  still  afternoon; 
And  the  owl  calls  at  twilight 
Under  the  frosty  moon. 

The  odorous  wild  grape  clambers 

Over  the  tumbling  wall, 

And  through  the  autumnal  quiet 

The  chestnuts  open  and  fail. 

Sharing  time's  freshness  and  fragrance, 

Part  of  the  earth's  great  soul, 

Here  man's  spirit  may  ripen 

To  wisdom  serene  and  whole. 

Shall  we  not  grow  with  the  asters?— 
Never  reluctant  nor  sad. 
Not  counting  the  cost  of  being, 
Living  to  dare  and  be  glad. 
Shall  we  not  lift  with  the  crickets 
A  chorus  of  ready  cheer, 
Braving  the  frost  of  oblivion, 
Quick  to  be  happy  here? 

The  deep  red  cones  of  the  sumach 
And  the  woodbine's  crimson  sprays 
Have  bannered  the  common  roadside 
For  the  pageant  of  passing  days. 
These  are  the  oracles  Nature 
Fills  with  her  holy  breath, 
Giving  them  glory  of  color, 
Transcending  the  shadow  of  death. 

Here  in  the  sifted  sunlight 

A  spirit  seems  to  brood 

On  the  beauty  and  worth  of  being. 

In  tranquil,  instinctive  mood; 

And  the  heart,  athrob  with  gladness 

Such  as  the  wise  earth  knows. 

Wells  with  a  full  thanksgiving 

For  the  gifts  that  life  bestows: 


1454  Poems  of  Nature 

For  the  ancient  and  virile  nurture 
Of  the  teeming  primordial  ground, 
For  the  splendid  gospel  of  color, 
The  rapt  revelations  of  sound; 
For  the  morning-blue  above  us 
And  the  rusted  gold  of  the  fern, 
For  the  chickadee's  call  to  valor 
Bidding  the  faint-heart  turn; 

For  fire  and  running  water, 
Snowfall  and  summer  rain; 
For  sunsets  and  quiet  meadows, 
The  fruit  and  the  standing  grain; 
For  the  solemn  hour  of  moonrise 
Over  the  crest  of  trees, 
When  the  mellow  lights  are  kindled 
In  the  lamps  of  the  centuries. 

For  those  who  wrought  aforetime, 
Led  by  the  mystic  strain 
To  strive  for  the  larger  freedom, 
And  live  for  the  greater  gain ; 
For  plenty  and  peace  and  playtime, 
The  homely  goods  of  earth, 
And  for  rare  immaterial  treasures 
Accounted  of  little  worth; 

For  art  and  learning  and  friendship. 
Where  beneficent  truth  is  supreme. 
Those  everlasting  cities 
Built  on  the  hills  of  dream; 
For  all  things  growing  and  goodly 
That  foster  this  life,  and  breed 
The  immortal  flower  of  wisdom 
Out  of  the  mortal  seed. 

But  most  of  all  for  the  spirit 
That  can  not  rest  nor  bide 
In  stale  and  sterile  conveniencej 
Nor  safety  proven  and  tried, 


The   Deserted  Garden  1455 

But  still  inspired  and  driven, 
Must  seek  what  better  may  be, 
And  up  from  the  loveliest  garden 
Must  climb  for  a  glimpse  of  sea. 

Bliss  Carman  [1861- 


UNGUARDED 

The  Mistress  of  the  Roses 

Is  haply  far  away, 
And  through  her  garden  closes 

What  strange  intruders  stray. 

See  on  its  rustic  spindles 
The  sundrop's  amber  fire! 

And  the  goldenrod  enkindles 
The  embers  on  its  spire. 

The  dodder's  shining  tangle 

From  the  meadow  brook  steals  in, 

Where  in  this  shadowed  angle 
The  pale  lace-makers  spin. 

Here's  Black-Eyed  Susan  weeping 

Into  exotic  air, 
And  Bouncing  Bet  comes  creeping 

Back  to  her  old  parterre. 

Now  in  this  pleasant  weather — 

So  sweetly  reconciled — 
They  dwell  and  dream  together, 

The  kin  of  court  and  wild. 

Ada  Foster  Murray  [i 


THE  DESERTED    GARDEN 

I  MIND  me  in  the  days  departed. 
How  often  underneath  the  sun, 
With  childish  bounds  I  used  to  run 
To  a  garden  long  deserted. 


1456  Poems   of  Nature  • 

The  beds  and  walks  were  vanished  quite; 
And  wheresoe'er  had  struck  the  spade, 
The  greenest  grasses  Nature  laid 
To  sanctify  her  right. 

I  called  the  place  my  wilderness; 
For  no  one  entered  there  but  I; 
The  sheep  looked  in,  the  grass  to  espy, 
And  passed  it  ne'ertheless. 

The  trees  were  interwoven  wild, 
And  spread  their  boughs  enough  about 
To  keep  both  sheep  and  shepherd  out. 
But  not  a  happy  child. 

Adventurous  joy  it  was  for  me! 
I  crept  beneath  the  boughs,  and  found 
A  circle  smooth  of  mossy  ground 
Beneath  a  poplar  tree. 

Old  garden  rose-trees  hedged  it  in, 
Bedropt  with  roses  waxen-white. 
Well  satisfied  with  dew  and  light 
And  careless  to  be  seen. 

Long  years  ago,  it  might  befall. 
When  all  the  garden  flowers  were  trim, 
The  grave  old  gardener  prided  him 
On  these  the  most  of  all. 

Some  lady,  stately  overmuch. 
Here  moving  with  a  silken  noise. 
Has  blushed  beside  them  at  the  voice 
That  likened  her  to  such. 

Or  these,  to  make  a  diadem. 
She  often  may  have  plucked  and  twined, 
Half-smiling  as  it  came  to  mind, 
That  few  would  look  at  them. 


The   Deserted   Garden  145 7 

Oh,  little  thought  that  lady  proud, 
A  child  would  watch  her  fair  white  rose, 
When  buried  lay  her  whiter  brows, 
And  silk  was  changed  for  shroud! 

Nor  thought  that  gardener,  (full  of  scorns 
For  men  unlearned  and  simple  phrase,) 
A  child  would  bring  it  all  its  praise 
By  creeping  through  the  thorns! 

To  me  upon  my  low  moss  seat. 
Though  never  a  dream  the  roses  sent 
Of  science  or  love's  compliment, 
I  ween  they  smelt  as  sweet. 

It  did  not  move  my  grief  to  see 
The  trace  of  human  step  departed: 
Because  the  garden  was  deserted, 
The  blither  place  for  me! 

Friends,  blame  me  not!  a  narrow  ken 
Hath  childhood  'twixt  the  sun  and  sward; 
We  draw  the  moral  afterward, 
We  feel  the  gladness  then. 

And  gladdest  hours  for  me  did  glide 
In  silence  at  the  rose-tree  wall: 
A  thrush  made  gladness  musical 
Upon  the  other  side. 

Nor  he  nor  I  did  e'er  incline 
To  peck  or  pluck  the  blossoms  white; 
How  should  I  know  but  roses  might    ; 
Lead  lives  as  glad  as  mine? 

To  make  my  hermit-home  complete, 
I  brought  clear  water  from  the  spring 
Praised  in  its  own  low  murmuring, 
And  cresses  glossy  wet. 


1458  Poems  of  Nature 

And  so,  I  thought,  my  likeness  grew 
(Without  the  melancholy  tale) 
To  "gentle  hermit  of  the  dale," 
And  Angelina  too. 

For  oft  I  read  within  my  nook 
Such  minstrel  stories;  till  the  breeze 
Made  sounds  poetic  in  the  trees, 
And  then  I  shut  the  book. 

If  I  shut  this  wherein  I  write, 
I  hear  no  more  the  wind  athwart 
Those  trees,  nor  feel  that  childish  heart 
Delighting  in  delight. 

My  childhood  from  my  life  is  parted, 
My  footstep  from  the  moss  which  drew 
Its  fairy  circle  round:  anew 
The  garden  is  deserted. 

Another  thrush  may  there  rehearse 
The  madrigals  which  sweetest  are; 
No  more  for  me!  myself  afar 
Do  sing  a  sadder  verse. 

Ah  me,  ah  me!  when  erst  I  lay 
In  that  child's-nest  so  greenly  wrought, 
I  laughed  unto  myself  and  thought 
"The  time  will  pass  away." 

And  still  I  laughed,  and  did  not  fear 
But  that,  whene'er  was  passed  away 
The  childish  time,  some  happier  play 
My  womanhood  would  cheer. 

I  knew  the  time  would  pass  away, 
And  yet,  beside  the  rose-tree  wall, 
Dear  God,  how  seldom,  if  at  all, 
Did  I  look  up  to  pray! 


A   Forsaken  Garden  145  9 

The  time  is  past;  and  now  that  grows 
The  cypress  high  among  the  trees, 
And  I  behold  white  sepulchres 
As  well  as  the  white  rose, — 

When  graver,  meeker  thoughts  are  given, 
And  I  have  learnt  to  Uft  my  face, 
Reminded  how  earth's  greenest  place 
The  color  draws  from  heaven, — 

It  something  saith  for  earthly  pain. 
But  more  for  Heavenly  promise  free, 
That  I  who  was,  would  shrink  to  be 
That  happy  child  again. 

Elizubt'th  Barrett  Browning  [1806-1861] 


A  FORSAKEN   GARDEN 

In  a  coign  of  the  cliff  between  lowland  and  highland. 

At  the  sea-down's  edge  between  windward  and  lee,  * 
Walled  round  with  rocks  as  an  inland  island, 

The  ghost  of  a  garden  fronts  the  sea. 
A  girdle  of  brushwood  and  thorn  encloses 

The  steep,  square  slope  of  the  blossomless  bed 
Where  the  weeds  that  grew  green  from  the  graves  of  its 
roses 

Now  lie  dead. 

I'he  fields  fall  southward,  abrupt  and  broken. 

To  the  low  last  edge  of  the  long  lone  land. 
If  a  step  should  sound  or  a  word  be  spoken, 

Would  a  ghost  not  rise  at  the  strange  guest's  hand? 
So  long  have  the  gray,  bare  walks  lain  guestless. 

Through  branches  and  briers  if  a  man  make  w-ay. 
He  shall  find  no  life  but  the  sea-wind's,  restless 
Night  and  day. 

The  dense,  hard  passage  is  bUnd  and  stifled 
That  crawls  by  a  track  none  turn  to  cHmb 

To  the  strait  waste  place  that  the  years  have  rifled 
Of  all  but  the  thorns  that  are  touched  not  of  Time. 


1460  Poems  of  Nature 

The  thorns  he  spares  when  the  rose  is  taken; 

The  rocks  are  left  when  he  wastes  the  plain. 
The  wind  that  wanders,  the  weeds  wind-shaken, 
These  remain. 

Not  a  flower  to  be  pressed  of  the  foot  that  falls  not; 

As  the  heart  of  a  dead  man  the  seed-plots  are  dry; 
From  the  thicket  of  thorns  whence  the  nightingale  calls  not, 

Could  she  call,  there  were  never  a  rose  to  reply. 
Over  the  meadows  that  blossom  and  wither 

Rings  but  the  note  of  a  sea-bird's  song; 
Only  the  sun  and  the  rain  come  hither 
All  year  long. 

The  sun  burns  sere  and  the  rain  dishevels 
One  gaunt  bleak  blossom  of  scentless  breath. 

Only  the  wind  here  hovers  and  revels- 

In  a  round  where  hfe  seems  barren  as  death. 

Here  there  was  laughing  of  old,  there  was  weeping, 
Haply,  of  lovers  none  ever  will  know, 

Whose  eyes  went  seaward  a  hundred  sleeping 
Years  ago. 

Heart  handfast  in  heart  as  they  stood,  "Look  thither," 
Did  he  whisper?     "Look  forth  from  the  flowers  to  the 
sea; 
For  the  foam-flowers  endure  when  the  rose-blossoms  wither, 

And  men  that  love  lightly  may  die — but  we?" 
And  the  same  wind  sang  and  the  same  waves  whitened, 

And  or  ever  the  garden's  last  petals  were  shed, 
In  the  lips  that  had  whispered,  the  eyes  that  had  lightened. 
Love  was  dead. 

Or  they  loved  their  life  through,  and  then  went  whither? 

And  were  one  to  the  end — but  what  end  who  knows?' 
Love  deep  as  the  sea  as  a  rose  must  wither. 

As  the  rose-red  seaweed  that  mocks  the  rose. 
Shall  the  dead  take  thought  for  the  dead  to  love  them? 

What  love  was  ever  as  deep  as  a  grave? 
They  are  loveless  now  as  the  grass  above  them 
Or  the  wave. 


Green   Things   Growing  1461 

All  are  at  one  now,  roses  and  lovers, 

Not  known  of  the  cliffs  and  the  fields  and  the  sea. 
Not  a  breath  of  the  time  that  has  been  hovers.. .1;  ,;.;  jt_,i 

In  the  air  now  soft  with  a  summer  to  be.      .■   .;[?  rfjiW 
Not  a  breath  shall  there  sweeten  the  seasons  hereafter 

Of  the  flowers  or  the  lovers  that  laugh  now  or  weep,  ' 
When,  as  they  that  are  free  now  of  weeping  and  laughter. 
We  shall  sleep. 

Here  death  may  deal  not  again  forever; 

Here  change  may  come  not  till  all  change  end. 
From  the  graves  they  have  made  they  shall  rise  up  never, 

Who  have  left  naught  living  to  ravage  and  rend. 
Earth,  stones,  and  thorns  of  the  wild  ground  growing, 

While  the  sun  and  the  rain  live,  these  shall  be; 
Till  a  last  wind's  breath,  upon  all  these  blowing. 
Roll  the  sea. 

Till  the  slow  sea  rise  and  the  sheer  cliff  crumble. 
Till  terrace  and  meadow  the  deep  gulfs  drink, 
Till  the  strength  of  the  waves  of  the  high  tides  humble 

The  fields  that  lessen,  the  rocks  that  shrink; 
Here  now  in  his  triumph  where  all  things  falter, 

Stretched  out  on  the  spoils  that  his  own  hand  spread. 
As  a  god  self-slain  on  his  own  strange  altar, 
Death  lies  dead. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [i8i7-igog] 


GREEN  THINGS   GROWING 

0  THE  green  things  growing,  the  green  things  growing, 
The  faint  sweet  smell  of  the  green  things  growing! 

1  should  like  to  live,  whether  I  smile  or  grieve. 

Just  to  watch  the  happy  life  of  my  green  things  growing. 

O  the   fluttering  a-nd  the  pattering  of  those  green  things 


growmg 


How  they  talk  each  to  each,  when  none  of  us  are  knowing; 

In  the  wonderful  white  of  the  weird  moonlight 

Or  the  dim  dreamy  dawn  when  the  cocks  are  crowing. 


1462  '      Poems  of  Nature     ' 

I  love,  I  love  them  so — my  green  things  growing!  ii/-. 

And  I  think  that  they  love  me,  without  false  showing;! 
For  by  many  a  tender  touch,  they  comfort  me  so  much. 
With  the  soft  mute  comfort  of  green  things  growing. 

f  ,fi  :to/[ 
And  in  the  rich  store  of  their  blossoms  glowing      ■  *  "  • 
Ten  for  one  I  take  they're  on  me  bestowing: 
Oh,  I  should  like  to  see,  if  God's  will  it  may  be, 
Many,  many  a  summer  of  my  green  things  growing! 

b  313H 

But  if  I  must  be  gathered  for  the  angel's  sowing,  •'   -^ 
■^  Sleep  out  of  sight  awhile,  like  the  green  things  growing, 
Though  dust  to  dust  return,  I  think  I'll  scarcely  mourn, 
If  I  may  change  into  green  things  growing. 

Dinah  Maria  Mulock  Craik  [182 6-1 887] 


A   CHANTED   CALENDAR 

From  "  Balder  " 

First  came  the  primrose. 

On  the  bank  high. 

Like  a  maiden  looking  forth 

From  the  window  of  a  tower 

When  the  battle  rolls  below. 

So  looked  she, 

And  saw  the  storms  go  by. 

Then  came  the  wind-flower 
In  the  valley  left  behind. 
As  a  wounded  maiden,  pale 
With  purple  streaks  of  woe, 
When  the  battle  has  rolled  by 
Wanders  to  and  fro, 
So  tottered  she. 
Dishevelled  in  the  wind. 

Then  came  the  daisies. 

On  the  first  of  May, 

Like  a  bannered  show's  advance 


Flowers  1463 

While  the  crowd  runs  by  the  way, 
With  ten  thousand  flowers  about  them  they  came  trooping 
through  the  fields. 

As  a  happy  people  come, 

So  came  they, 

As  a  happy  people  come 

When  the  war  has  rolled  away. 

With  dance  and  tabor,  pipe  and  drum, 

And  all  make  holiday. 

Then  came  the  cowslip, 
Like  a  dancer  in  the  fair. 
She  spread  her  little  mat  of  green, 
And  on  it  danced  she. 
With  a  fillet  bound  about  her  brow, 
;y  A  fillet  round  her  happy  brow,  t" 

A  golden  fillet  round  her  brow, 
And  rubies  in  her  hair. 

Sydney  Dobcll  [1824-1874] 

FLOWERS  ■  '^ 

Spake  full  well,  in  language  quaint  and  olden 
One  who  dwelleth  by  the  castled  Rhine, 

W^hen  he  called  the  flowers,  so  blue  and  golden, 
Stars,  that  in  earth's  firmament  do  shine. 

Stars  they  are,  wherein  we  read  our  history, 

As  astrologers  and  seers  of  eld; 
Yet  not  wrapped  about  with  awful  mystery, 

Like  the  burning  stars,  which  they  beheld. 

,  /' 

Wondrous  truths,  and  manifold  as  woniifous, 
God  hath  written  in  those  stars  above; 

But  not  less  in  the  bright  flowerets  under  us 
Stands  the  revelation  of  his  love. 

Bright  and  glorious  is  that  revelation. 
Writ  all  over  this  great  world  of  ours; 

Making  evident  our  own  creation, 

In  these  stars  of  earth,  these  golden  flowers. 


1464  Poems   ot   Nature 

And  the  Poet,  faithful  and  far-seeing, 
■r,^  Sees,  alike  in  stars  and  flowers,  a  part  .  f/ 

Of  the  self-same,  universal  being, 

Which  is  throbbing  in  his  brain  and  heart. 

Gorgeous  flowerets  in  the  sunlight  shining. 
Blossoms  flaunting  in  the  eye  of  day. 

Tremulous  leaves,  with  soft  and  silver  lining, 
Buds  that  open  only  to  ^ecay; 

•  i   LjAtilix    I 

Brilliant  hopes,  all  woven  in  gorgeous  tissues, 
Flaunting  gayly  in  the  golden  light; 

Large  desires,  with  most  uncertain  issues. 
Tender  wishes,  blossoming  at  night! 

These  in  flowers  and  men  are  more  than  seeming; 

Workings  are  they  of  the  self-same  powers 
Which  the  Poet,  in  no  idle  dreaming, 

Seeth  in  himself  and  in  the  flowers. 

Everywhere  about  us  are  they  glowing. 
Some  like  stars,  to  tell  us  Spring  is  born; 

Others,  their  blue  eyes  with  tears  o'erflowing. 
Stand  like  Ruth  amid  the  golden  corn; 

Not  alone  in  Spring's  armorial  bearing, 
And  in  Summer's  green-emblazoned  field, 

But  in  arms  of  brave  old  Autumn's  wearing. 
In  the  centre  of  his  brazen  shield; 

Not  alone  in  meadows  and  green  alleys, 
On  the  mountain-top,  and  by  the  brink 

Of  sequestered  pools  in  woodland  valle3's, 
Where  the  slaves  of  nature  stoop  to  drink; 

Not  alone  in  her  vast  dome  of  glory, 
•    Not  on  graves  of  bird  and  beast  alone. 
But  in  old  cathedrals,  high  and  hoary. 
On  the  tombs  of  heroes,  carved  in  stone; 


Flowers  146  5 

In  the  cottage  of  the  rudest  peasant; 

In  ancestral  homes,  whose  crumbHng  towers, 
Speaking  of  the  Past  unto  the  Present, 

Tell  us  of  the  ancient  Games  of  Flowers; 

In  all  places,  then,  and  in  all  seasons. 

Flowers  expand  their  light  and  soul-like  wings, 

Teaching  us,  by  most  persuasive  reasons. 
How  akin  they  are  to  human  things. 

And  with  childlike,  credulous  affection. 

We  behold  their  tender  buds  expand; 
Emblems  of  our  own  great  resurrection. 

Emblems  of  the  bright  and  better  land. 

Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 


FLOWERS 

I  WILL  not  have  the  mad  Clytie, 

Whose  head  is  turned  by  the  sun; 
The  tulip  is  a  courtly  quean, 

W'hom,  therefore,  I  will  shun: 
The  cowslip  is  a  country  wench, 

The  violet  is  a  nun; — 
But  I  will  woo  the  dainty  rose. 

The  queen  of  every  one. 

The  pea  is  but  a  wanton  witch, 

In  too  much  haste  to  wed. 
And  clasps  her  rings  on  every  hand; 

The  wolfsbane  I  should  dread; 
Nor  will  I  dreary  rosemarye, 

That  always  mourns  the  dead; 
But  I  will  woo  the  dainty  rose. 

With  her  cheeks  of  tender  red. 

The  lily  is  all  in  white,  like  a  saint. 

And  so  is  no  mate  for  me; 
And  the  daisy's  cheek  is  tipped  with  a  blush. 

She  is  of  such  low  degree; 


1466  Poems   of  Nature 

Jasmine  is  sweet,  and  has  many  loves, 
And  the  broom's  betrothed  to  the  bee; — 

But  I  will  plight  with  the  dainty  rose, 
For  fairest  of  all  is  she. 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 

'^A   CONTEMPLATION  UPON  FLOWERS 

Brave  flowers — that  I  could  gallant  it  like  you, 

And  be  as  little  vain! 
You  come  abroad,  and  make  a  harmless  show, 

And  to  your  beds  of  earth  again. 
You  are  not  proud:  you  know  your  birth: 
For  your  embroidered  garments  are  from  earth. 

You  do  obey  your  months  and  times,  but  I 

Would  have  it  ever  Spring: 
My  fate  would  know  no  Winter,  never  die, 

Nor  think  of  such  a  thing. 
0  that  I  could  my  bed  of  earth  but  view 
And  smile,  and  look  as  cheerfully  as  you! 

O  teach  me  to  see  Death  and  not  to  fear, 

But  rather  to  take  truce! 
How  often  have  I  seen  you  at  a  bier, 

And  there  look  fresh  and  spruce! 
You  fragrant  flowers!  then  teach  me,  that  my  breath 
Like  yours  may  sweeten  and  perfume  my  death. 

Henry  King  [1592-1669] 

ALMOND   BLOSSOM 

Blossom  of  the  almond  trees, 
April's  gift  to  April's  bees. 
Birthday  ornament  of  Spring, 
Flora's  fairest  daughterling; 
Coming  when  no  flowerets  dare 
Trust  the  cruel  outer  air; 
P  When  the  royal  kingcup  bold 

Dares  not  don  his  coat  of  gold; 


White  Azaleas  '  1467 

Jf^nd  the  sturdy  black-thorn  spray 

Keeps  his  silver  for  the  May; — 

Coming  when  no  flowerets  would, 

Save  thy  lowly  sisterhood, 

Early  violets,  blue  and  white. 

Dying  for  their  love  of  light; — 

Almond  blossom,  sent  to  teach  us 

That  the  spring  days  soon  will  reach  us, 

Lest,  with  longing  over-tried. 

We  die,  as  the  violets  died; — 

Blossom,  clouding  all  the  tree 

With  thy  crimson  broidery, 

Long  before  a  leaf  of  green 

On  the  bravest  bough  is  seen; — 

Ah !  when  winter  winds  are  swinging 

All  thy  red  bells  into  ringing. 

With  a  bee  in  every  bell, 

Almond  bloom,  we  greet  thee  well. 

Edwin  Arnold  [183 2- 1904] 


WHITE  AZALEAS 

Azaleas — whitest  of  white! 

White  as  the  drifted  snow 
Fresh-fallen  out  of  the  night. 

Before  the  coming  glow 
Tinges  the  morning  light; 

When  the  light  is  like  the  snow, 
White, 
And  the  silence  is  like  the  light: 

Light,  and  silence,  and  snow, — 
All— white! 

White!  not  a  hint 
Of  the  creamy  tint 

A  rose  will  hold, 

The  whitest  rose,  in  its  inmost  fold; 
Not  a  possible  blush; 
White  as  an  embodied  hush; 


1468  Poems   of  Nature 

A  very  rapture  of  white; 
A  wedlock  of  silence  and  light : 
White,  white  as  the  wonder  undefiled 
Of  Eve  just  wakened  in  Paradise; 
Nay,  white  as  the  angel  of  a  child 

That  looks  into  God's  own  eyes! 

Harriet  McEwen  Kimball  [1834- 

BUTTERCUPS 

There  must  be  fairy  miners 
Just  underneath  the  mould, 

Such  wondrous  quaint  designers 
Who  live  in  caves  of  gold. 

They  take  the  shining  metals, 
And  beat  them  into  shreds; 

And  mould  them  into  petals, 
To  make  the  flowers'  heads. 

Sometimes  they  melt  the  flowers 
To  tiny  seeds  like  pearls. 

And  store  them  up  in  bowers 
For  Httle  boys  and  girls. 

And  still  a  tiny  fan  turns 

Above  a  forge  of  gold, 
To  keep,  with  fairy  lanterns. 

The  world  from  growing  old. 

Wilfrid  Thorky  [1878- 

THE  BROOM   FLOWER 

Oh  the  Broom,  the  yellow  Broom, 
The  ancient  poet  sung  it, 

And  dear  it  is  on  summer  days 
To  lie  at  rest  among  it. 

I  know  the  realms  where  people  say 
The  flowers  have  not  their  fellow; 

I  know  where  they  shine  out  like  suns, 
The  crimson  and  the  yellow. 


The  Small   Celandine  1469 

,fm£7/5  I  know  where  ladies  live  enchained 
'  '  In  luxury's  silken  fetters, 

And  flowers  as  bright  as  glittering  gems 
Are  used  for  written  letters. 

But  ne'er  was  flower  so  fair  as  this, 

In  modern  days  or  olden ; 
It  groweth  on  its  nodding  stem 

Like  to  a  garland  golden. 

And  all  about  my  mother's  door 
Shine  out  its  glittering  bushes, 

And  down  the  glen,  where  clear  as  light 

The  mountain-water  gushes.       -^  2Ji  3uti. 

Take  all  the  rest;  but  give  me  this,  '^  ' 

And  the  bird  that  nestles  in  it ; 

I  love  it,  for  it  loves  the  Broom — 
The  green  and  yellow  hnnet. 

Well  call  the  rose  the  queen  of  flowers, 

And  boast  of  that  of  Sharon, 
Of  lilies  like  to  marble  cups. 

And  the  golden  rod  of  Aaron: 

I  care  not  how  these  flowers  may  be 

Beloved  of  man  and  woman; 
The  Broom  it  is  the  flower  for'  me, 

That  groweth  on  the  common. 

Oh  the  Broom,  the  yeUow  Broom, 

The  ancient  poet  sung  it. 
And  dear  it  is  on  summer  days 

To  lie  at  rest  among  it. 

Ma  ry  Iloicilt  [  1 7  g  9- 1 8  8  8] 

THE   S]\L\LL   CELANDINE 

There  is  a  Flower,  the  lesser  Celandine, 
That  shrinks,  like  many  more,  from  cold  and  rain; 
And,  the  first  moment  that  the  sun  may  shine. 
Bright  as  the  sun  himself,  'tis  out  again! 


1470  Poems  of  Nature- 

When  hailstones  have  been  falhng,  swarm  on  swarm, 
Or  blasts  the  green  field  and  the  trees  distressed, 
Oft  have  I  seen  it  muffled  up  from  harm. 
In  close  self-shelter,  like  a  thing  at  rest. 

But  lately,  one  rough  day,  this  Flower  I  passed 
And  recognized  it,  though  an  altered  form. 
Now  standing  forth  an  offering  to  the  blast. 
And  buffeted  at  will  by  rain  and  storm. 

I  stopped,  and  said  with  inly-muttered  voice, 
"It  doth  not  love  the  shower,  nor  seek  the  cold: 
This  neither  is  its  courage,  nor  its  choice. 
But  its  necessity  in  being  old. 

"The  sunshine  may  not  cheer  it,  nor  the  dew; 
It  cannot  help  itself  in  its  decay; 
Stiff  in  its  members,  withered,  changed  of  hue." 
And,  in  my  spleen,  I  smiled  that  it  was  gray. 

To  be  a  Prodigal's  Favorite — then,  worse  truth, 
A  Miser's  Pensioner — behold  our  lot ! 
O  Man,  that  from  thy  fair  and  shining  youth 
Age  might  but  take  the  things  Youth  needed  not! 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 


TO  THE  SMALL  CELANDINE 

Pansies,  lilies,  kingcups,  daisies, 
Let  them  live  upon  their  praises; 

Long  as  there's  a  sun  that  sets, 
Primroses  will  have  their  glory; 

Long  as  there  are  violets. 
They  will  have  a  place  in  story: 
There's  a  flower  that  shall  be  mine, 
'Tis  the  little  Celandine.  ; 

Eyes  of  some  men  travel  far  ^i  asrsHT 

For  the  finding  of  a  star;  .-.rlT 

Up  and  down  the  heavens  they  go,       .y^f. 

Men  that  keep  a  mighty  rout!  oclj  as  jiijiiiH 


To  the  Small   Celandine  i47i 

I'm  as  great  as  them,  I  trow, 
Since  the  day  I  found  thee  out. 
Little  Flower! — I'll  make  a  stir, 
Like  a  sage  astronomer. 

Modest,  yet  withal  an  Elf 
Bold,  and  lavish  of  thyself; 

Since  we  needs  must  first  have  met, 
I  have  seen  thee,  high  and  low. 

Thirty  years  or  more,  and  yet 
'Twas  a  face  I  did  not  know; 
Thou  hast  now,  go  where  I  may, 
Fifty  greetings  in  a  day. 

Ere  a  leaf  is  on  a  bush,' ' 

In  the  time  before  the  thrush 

Has  a  thought  about  her  nest, 
Thou  wilt  come  with  half  a  call, 

Spreading  out  thy  glossy  breast 
Like  a  careless  Prodigal; 
Telling  tales  about  the  sun, 
When  we've  little  warmth,  or  none. 


Poets,  vain  men  in  their  mood! 
Travel  with  the  multitude: 

Never  heed  them ;  I  aver 
That  they  all  are  wanton  wooers; 

But  the  thrifty  cottager. 
Who  stirs  little  out  of  doors, 
Joys  to  spy  thee  near  her  home; 
Spring  is  coming,  Thou  art  come! 

Comfort  have  thou  of  thy  merit, 
Kindly,  unassuming  Spirit! 

Careless  of  thy  neighborhood. 
Thou  dost  show  thy  pleasant  face 

On  the  moor,  and  in  the  wood, 
In  the  lane; — there's  not  a  place, 
Howsoever  mean  it  be, 
But  'tis  good  enough  for  thee. 


-"^r  ofiO 


1472  Poems  of  Nature 

111  befall  the  yellovr  flowers, 
Children  of  the  flaring  hours! 

Buttercups,  that  will  be  seen,  1 
Whether  we  will  see  or  no;  i 

Others,  too,  of  lofty  mien ; 
They  have  done  as  worldings  do, 
Taken  praise  that  should  be  thine, 
Little,  humble  Celandine! 

Prophet  of  delight  and  mirth, 
Ill-requited  upon  earth; 

Herald  of  a  mighty  band. 
Of  a  joyous  train  ensuing. 

Serving  at  my  heart's  command, 
Tasks  that  are  no  tasks  renewing,  j 
I  will  sing,  as  dost  behove,  7 

Hymns  in  praise  of  what  I  love! 

Willia,m  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 

FOUR-LEAF   CLOVER 

I  KNOW  a  place  where  the  sun  is  like  gold, 
And  the  cherry  blossoms  burst  with  snow, 

And  down  underneath  is  the  loveliest  nook. 
Where  the  four-leaf  clovers  grow. 

One  leaf  is  for  hope,  and  one  is  for  faith. 

And  one  is  for  love,  you  know. 
And  God  put  another  in  for  luck, — 

If  you  search,  you  will  find  where  they  grow. 

But  you  must  have  hope,  and  you  must  have  faith. 
You  must  love  and  be  strong — and  so, 

If  you  work,  if  you  wait,  you  will  find  the  place 
Where  the  four-leaf  clovers  grow. 

Ella  Higginson  [1S62- 

SWEET   CLOVER 

Within  -what  weeks  the  melilot 
Gave  forth  its  fragrance,  I,  a  lad,  • 

Or  never  knew  or  quite  forgot, 

Save  that  'twas  while  the  year  is  glad. 


I    Wandered   Lonely  as  a  Cloud"     1473 

Now  know  I  that  in  bright  July 

It  blossoms;  and  the  perfume  fine 
Brings  back  my  boyhood,  until  I 

Am  steeped  in  memory  as  with  wine. 

Now  know  I  that  the  whole  year  long, 
Though  Winter  chills  or  Summer  cheers, 

It  writes  along  the  weeks  its  song, 

Even  as  my  youth  sings  through  my  years. 
Wallace  Rice  [1859- 


'a  WANDERED  LONELY  AS  A  CLOUD" 

I  WANDERED  lonely  as  a  cloud 

That  floats  on  high  o'er  vales  and  hills, 

When  all  at  once  I  saw  a  crowd, 

A  host,  of  golden  daffodils;  ' ' 

Beside  the  lake,  beneath  the  trees. 

Fluttering  and  dancing  in  the  breeze. 

Continuous  as  the  stars  that  shine 
And  twinkle  in  the  milky  way, 
They  stretched  in  never-ending  line 
Along  the  margin  of  a  bay: 
Ten  thousand  saw  I  at  a  glance, 
Tossing  their  heads  in  sprightly  dance. 

The  waves  beside  them  danced;  but  they 
Out-did  the  sparkling  waves  in  glee:   ■; 
A  poet  could  not  but  be  gay,  |- 

In  such  a  jocund  company:  r 

I  gazed — and  gazed — but  little  thought 
What  wealth  the  show  to  me  had  brought: 

For  oft,  when  on  my  couch  I  lie 
In  vacant  or  in  pensive  mood, 
They  flash  upon  that  inward  eye 
Which  is  the  bliss  of  solitude; 
And  then  my  heart  with  pleasure  fills, 
And  dances  with  the  dafifodils. 

William  Wordsworth  [ 1 7 7 o- 1 8 5 o] 


1474  Poems  of  Nature 

TO  DAFFODILS 

Fair  Daffodils,  we  weep  to  see 

You  haste  away  so  soon; 
As  yet  the  early-rising  sun 

Has  not  attained  his  noon. 
■'^^^■"'.'  Stay,  stay, 

Until  the  hasting  day 

Has  run 

But  to  the  even-song; 
And,  having  prayed  together,  we 

Will  go  with  you  along. 

We  have  short  time  to  stay  as  you, 

We  have  as  short  a  spring; 
As  quick  a  growth  to  meet  decay, 
As  you,  or  any  thing. 

We  die 
As  your  hours  do,  and  dry 

Away, 
Like  to  the  summer's  rain; 
Or  as  the  pearls  of  morning's  dew, 
Ne'er  to  be  found  again. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 

TO  A  MOUNTAIN  DAISY 

ON  TURNING  ONE  DOWN  WITH  THE  PLOUGH,  IN  APRIL  1 786 

Wee,  modest,  crimson-tipped  flower,    ' 
Thou's  met  me  in  an  evil  hour; 
For  I  maun  crush  amang  the  stoure 

Thy  slender  stem: 
To  spare  thee  now  is  past  my  power. 

Thou  bonny  gem. 

Alas!  it's  no  thy  neibor  sweet, 
The  bonny  lark,  companion  meet, 
Bending  thee  'mang  the  dewy  weet, '  'j 

Wi'  speckled  breast. 
When  upward-springing,  blithe,  to  greet 
,  iji'rAiw  M     xhe  purpling  east! 


To   a   Mountain   Daisy  ^475 

Cauld  blew  the  bitter-biting  north 
Upon  thy  early,  humble  birth; 
Yet  cheerfully  thou  glinted  forth 

Amid  the  storm, 
Scarce  reared  above  the  parent  earth     :i  , 

Thy  tender  form. 

The  flaunting  flowers  our  gardens  yield 
High  sheltering  woods  and  wa's  maun  shield; 
But  thou,  beneath  the  random  bield 

O'  clod,  or  stane, 
Adorns  the  histie  stibble-field, 

Unseen,  alane. 

There,  in  thy  scanty  mantle  clad, 
Thy  snawie  bosom  sunward  spread, 
Thou  lifts  thy  unassuming  head 

In  humble  guise; 
But  now  the  share  uptears  thy  bed, 

And  low  thou  lies! 

Such  is  the  fate  of  artless  maid. 
Sweet  floweret  of  the  rural  shade! 
By  love's  simplicity  betrayed, 

And  guileless  trust. 
Till  she,  like  thee,  all  soiled,  is  laid 

Low  i'  the  dust. 

Such  is  the  fate  of  simple  bard. 

On  life's  rough  ocean  luckless  starred! 

Unskillful  he  to  note  the  card 

Of  prudent  lore, 
Till  billows  rage,  and  gales  blow  hard, 
And  whelm  him  o'er! 

Such  fate  to  suffering  worth  is  given. 
Who  long  with  wants  and  woes  has  striven, 
By  human  pride  or  cunning  driven 

To  misery's  brink. 
Till,  wrenched  of  every  stay  but  Heaven, 

He,  ruined,  sink! 


1476  Poems  of  Nature 

Even  thou  who  mourn 'st  the  Daisy's  fate, 
That  fate  is  thine — no  distant  date; 
Stern  Ruin's  ploughshare  drives,  elate. 

Full  on  thy  bloom, 
Till  crushed  beneath  the  furrow's  weight 

Shall  be  thy  doom. 

Robert  Bums  [1759-1796] 

dsiH 
A  FIELD  FLOWER 

There  is  a  flower,  a  little  flower 
With  silver  crest  and  golden  eye, 

That  welcomes  every  changing  hour, 
And  weathers  every  sky. 

The  prouder  beauties  of  the  field 
In  gay  but  quick  succession  shine; 

Race  after  race  their  honors  yield. 
They  flourish  and  decline. 

But  this  small  flower,  to  Nature  dear,  ^^ 
While  moons  and  stars  their  courses  run, 

W'reathcs  the  whole  circle  of  the  year. 
Companion  of  the  Sun. 

It  smiles  upon  the  lap  of  May, 

To  sultry  August  spreads  its  charms, 

Lights  pale  October  on  his  way, 
And  twines  December's  arms. 

The  purple  heath  and  golden  broom 
On  moory  mountains  catch  the  gale; 

O'er  lawns  the  lily  sheds  perfume. 
The  violet  in  the  vale. 

But  this  bold  floweret  climbs  the  hill. 
Hides  in  the  forest,  haunts  the  glen. 

Plays  on  the  margin  of  the  rill. 
Peeps  round  the  fox's  den. 


To   Daisies,   Not  to  Shut  so  Soon     1477 

Within  the  garden's  cultured  round 
It  shares  the  sweet  carnation's  bed; 

And  blooms  on  consecrated  ground 
In  honor  of  the  dead. 

The  lambkin  crops  its  crimson  gem; 

The  wild  bee  murmurs  on  its  breast; 
The  blue-fly  bends  its  pensile  stem 

Light  o'er  the  skylark's  nest. 

'Tis  Flora's  page, — in  every  place, 

In  every  season,  fresh  and  fair; 
It  opens  with  perennial  grace, 

And  blossoms  everyAvhere. 

On  waste  and  woodland,  rock  and  plain, 

Its  humble  buds  unheeded  rise; 
The  Rose  has  but  a  summer  reign; 

The  Daisy  never  dies! 

James  Montgomery  [1771-1854] 


TO  DAISIES,   NOT  TO   SHUT  SO  SOON 

Shut  not  so  soon;  the  dull-eyed  night 

Has  not  as  yet  begun 
To  make  a  seizure  on  the  light, 

Or  to  seal  up  the  sun. 

No  marigolds  yet  closed  are, 

No  shadows  great  appear; 
Nor  doth  the  early  shepherd's  star 

Shine  like  a  spangle  here. 

Stay  but  till  my  Julia  close 

Her  life-begetting  eye, 
And  let  the  whole  world  then  dispose 

Itself  to  live  or  die. 

Robert  Herrick  [i  591-1674] 


1 47 8  Poems  of  Nature 


DAISIES 

Over  the  shoulders  and  slopes  of  the  dune 
I  saw  the  white  daisies  go  down  to  the  sea, 
A  host  in  the  sunshine,  an  army  in  June, 
The  people  God  sends  us  to  set  our  heart  free. 

The  bobolinks  rallied  them  up  from  the  dell. 
The  orioles  whistled  them  out  of  the  wood; 
And  all  of  their  saying  was,  "Earth,  it  is  well!" 
And  all  of  their  dancing  was,  "Life,  thou  art  good! 

Bliss  Carman  fi86i- 


TO  THE  DAISY 

With  httle  here  to  do  or  see 

Of  things  that  in  the  great  world  be, 

Daisy!  again  I  talk  to  thee, 

For  thou  art  worthy: 
Thou  unassuming  common-place 
Of  Nature,  with  that  homely  face. 
And  yet  with  something  of  a  grace. 

Which  love  makes  for  thee! 

Oft  on  the  dappled  turf  at  ease, 

I  sit,  and  play  with  similies, 

Loose  types  of  things  through  all  degrees, 

Thoughts  of  thy  raising.: 
And  many  a  fond  and  idle  name 
I  give  to  thee,  for  praise  or  blame, 
As  is  the  humor  of  the  game. 

While  I  am  gazing. 

A  nun  demure,  of  lowly  port ; 

Or  sprightly  maiden  of  love's  court, 

In  thy  simplicity  the  sport 

Of  all  temptations; 
A  queen  in  crown  of  rubies  dressed 
A  starveling  in  a  scanty  vest ; 
Are  all,  as  seem  to  suit  thee  best. 

Thy  appellations. 


To   Daisies  ^479 

A  little  Cyclops,  with  one  eye 

Staring  to  threaten  and  defy — 

That  thought  comes  next — and  instantly 

The  freak  is  over. 
The  shape  will  vanish, — and  behold! 
A  silver  shield  with  boss  of  gold, 
That  spreads  itself,  some  fairy  bold 

In  fight  to  cover. 

I  see  thee  glittering  from  afar; — 
And  then  thou  art  a  pretty  star; 
Not  quite  so  fair  as  many  are 

In  heaven  above  thee! 
Yet  hke  a  star,  with  ghttering  crest. 
Self-poised  in  air,  thou  seem'st  to  rest; — 
May  peace  come  never  to  his  nest 

Who  shall  reprove  thee! 

Bright  Flower!  for  by  that  name  at  last, 
When  all  my  reveries  are  past, 
I  call  thee,  and  to  that  cleave  fast. 

Sweet  silent  creature! 
That  breath 'st  with  me  in  sun  and  air, 
Do  thou,  as  thou  art  wont,  repair 
My  heart  with  gladness,  and  a  share 

Of  thy  meek  nature! 

William  Wordsioorlh  [1770-1850] 

TO  DAISIES 

Ah,  drops  of  gold  in  whitening  flame 
Burning,  we  know  your  lovely  name — 
Daisies,  that  little  children  pull!  ,,:■ 

Like  all  weak  things,  over  the  strong 
Ye  do  not  know  your  power  for  wrong, 
And  iti.uch  abuse  your  feebleness. 
Daisies,  that  little  children  pull. 
As  ye  are  weak,  be  merciful! 
O  hide  your  eyes!  they  are  to  me 
Beautiful  insupportably. 


1480  Poems  of  Nature 

Or  be  but  conscious  ye  are  fair, 

And  I  your  loveliness  could  bear, 

But,  being  fair  so  without  art, 

Ye  vex  the  silted  memories  of  my  heart! 

As  a  pale  ghost  yearning  strays 

With  sundered  gaze, 

'Mid  corporal  presences  that  are 

To  it  impalpable — such  a  bar 

Sets  you  more  distant  than  the  morning-star. 

Such  wonder  is  on  you,  and  amaze, 

I  look  and  marvel  if  I  be 

Indeed  the  phantom,  or  are  ye? 

The  light  is  on  your  innocence 

Which  fell  from  me. 

The  fields  ye  still  inhabit  whence 

My  world-acquainted  treading  strays, 

The  country  where  I  did  commence; 

And  though  ye  shine  to  me  so  near, 

So  close  to  gross  and  visible  sense, — 

Between  us  Hes  impassable  year  on  year. 

To  other  time  and  far-ofif  place 

Belongs  your  beauty:  silent  thus. 

Though  to  other  naught  you  tell. 

To  me  your  ranks  are  rumorous 

Of  an  ancient  miracle. 

Vain  does  my  touch  your  petals  graze, 

I  touch  you  not;  and  though  ye  blossom  here, 

Your  roots  are  fast  in  alienated  days. 

Ye  there  are  anchored,  while  Time's  stream 

Has  swept  me  past  them:  your  white  ways 

And  infantile  delights  do  seem 

To  look  in  on  me  like  a  face, 

Dead  and  sweet,  come  back  through  dream. 

With  tears,  because  for  old  embrace 

It  has  no  arms. 

These  hands  did  toy, 
Children,  with  you,  when  I  was  child,  ■[ 


To  the   Dandelion  1481 

And  in  each  other's  eyes  we  smiled: 

Not  yours,  not  yours  the  grievous-fair 

Apparelling 

With  which  you  wet  mine  eyes;  you  wear, 

Ah  me,  the  garment  of  the  grace 

I  wove  you  when  I  was  a  boy; 

O  mine,  and  not  the  year's  your  stolen  Spring! 

And  since  ye  wear  it, 

Hide  your  sweet  selves!     I  cannot  bear  it. 

For  when  ye  break  the  cloven  earth 

With  your  young  laughter  and  endearment, 

No  blossomy  carillon  'tis  of  mirth 

To  me;  I  see  my  slaughtered  joy 

Bursting  its  cerement. 

Francis  Thompson  [iSsgP-igo;] 


TO  THE  DANDELION 

Dear  common  flower,  that  grow'st  beside  the  way, 
Fringing  the  dusty  road  with  harmless  gold. 

First  pledge  of  blithesome  May, 
Which  children  pluck,  and,  full  of  pride,  uphold. 

High-hearted  buccaneers,  o'er  joyed  that  they 
An  Eldorado  in  the  grass  have  found. 
Which  not  the  rich  earth's  ample  round 

May  match  in  wealth,  thou  art  more  dear  to  me 

Than  all  the  prouder  summer-blooms  may  be. 

Gold  such  as  thine  ne'er  drew  the  Spanish  prow 
Through  the  primeval  hush  of  Indian  seas. 

Nor  wrinkled  the  lean  brow 
Of  age,  to  rob  the  lover's  heart  of  ease; 

'Tis  the  Spring's  largess,  which  she  scatters  now 
To  rich  and  poor  alike,  with  lavish  hand, 
Though  most  hearts  never  understand 

To  take  it  at  God's  value,  but  pass  by 

The  offered  wealth  with  unrewarded  eye. 


1482 


Poems   of  Nature 


Thou  art  my  tropics  and  mine  Italy; 
To  look  at  thee  unlocks  a  warmer  clime; 

The  eyes  thou  givest  me 
Are  in  the  heart,  and  heed  not  space  or  time: 

Not  in  mid  June  the  golden-cuirassed  bee 
Feels  a  more  summer-like  warm  ravishment 
In  the  white  lily's  breezy  tent, 

His  fragrant  Sybaris,  than  I,  when  first 

From  the  dark  green  thy  yellow  circles  burst. 

Then  think  I  of  deep  shadows  on  the  grass, 
Of  meadows  where  in  sun  the  cattle  graze, 

Where,  as  the  breezes  pass. 
The  gleaming  rushes  lean  a  thousand  ways, 

Of  leaves  that  slumber  in  a  cloudy  mass, 
Or  whiten  in  the  wind,  of  waters  blue 
That  from  the  distance  sparlde  through 

Some  woodland  gap,  and  of  a  sky  above. 

Where  one  white  cloud  like  a  stray  lamb  doth  move. 

My  childhood's  earliest  thoughts  arc  linked  with  thee; 
The  sight  of  thee  calls  back  the  robin's  song. 

Who,  from  the  dark  old  tree 
Beside  the  door,  sang  clearly  all  day  long, 

And  I,  secure  in  childish  piety,  '"  " 

Listened  as  if  I  heard  an  angel  sing 
With  news  from  heaven,  which  he  could  bring 

Fresh  every  day  to  my  untainted  ears 

When  birds  and  flowers  and  I  were  happy  peers. 

How  hke  a  prodigal  doth  nature  seem, 
When  thou,  for  all  thy  gold,  so  common  art! 

Thou  teachest  me  to  deem  n  i 

More  sacredly  of  every  human  heart. 

Since  each  reflects  in  joy  its  scanty  gleam  "1*  ^ 

Of  heaven,  and  could  some  wondrous  secret  show, 
Did  we  but  pay  the  love  we  owe,  ' 

And  with  a  child's  undoubting  wisdom  look 

On  all  these  living  pages  of  God's  book. 

James  Russell  Lowell  [1819-1891] 


The   Dandelions  I483 


DANDELION 

At  dawn,  when  England's  childish  tongue 

Lisped  happy  truths,  and  men  were  young, 

Her  Chaucer,  with  a  gay  content 

Hummed  through  the  shining  fields,  scarce  bent 

By  poet's  foot,  and,  plucking,  set. 

All  lusty,  sunny,  dewy-wet, 

A  dandelion  in  his  verse. 

Like  the  first  gold  in  childhood's  purse. 

At  noon,  when  harvest  colors  die 

On  the  pale  azure  of  the  sky. 

And  dreams  through  dozing  grasses  creep 

Of  winris  that  are  themselves  asleep. 

Rapt  Shelley  found  the  airy  ghost 

Of  that  bright  flower  the  spring  loves  most, 

And  ere  one  silvery  ray  was  blown 

From  its  full  disk  made  it  his  own. 

Now  from  the  stubble  poets  glean 

Scant  flowers  of  thought;  the  JNIuse  would  wean 

Her  myriad  nurslings,  feeding  them 

On  petals  plucked  from  a  dry  stem. 

For  one  small  plumule  still  adrift, 

The  wind-blown  dandelion's  gift, 

The  fields  once  blossomy  we  scour 

Where  the  old  poets  plucked  the  flower. 

Annie  Rankin  Annan  fi8    - 


THE  DANDELIONS 

Upon  a  showery  night  and  still, 
Without  a  sound  of  warning, 

A  trooper  band  surprised  the  hill. 
And  held  it  in  the  morning. 

We  were  not  waked  by  bugle-notes. 
No  cheer  our  dreams  invaded, 

And  yet,  at  dawn,  their  yellow  coats 
On  the  green  slopes  paraded. 


1484  Poems  of  Nature 

We  careless  folk  the  deed  forgot; 

Till  one  day,  idly  walking, 
We  marked  upon  the  self-same  spot 

A  crowd  of  veterans  talking. 

They  shook  their  trembling  heads  and  gray 
With  pride  and  noiseless  laughter; 

When,  well-a-day!  they  blew  away, 
And  ne'er  were  heard  of  after! 

Helen  Gray  Cone  [1859- 


TO  THE  FRINGED   GENTIAN 

Thou  blossom  bright  with  autumn  dew, 
And  colored  with  the  heaven's  own  blue, 
That  openest  when  the  quiet  light 
Succeeds  the  keen  and  frosty  night, 

Thou  comest  hot  when  violets  lean 
O'er  wandering  brooks  and  springs  unseen. 
Or  columbines,  in  purple  dressed, 
Nod  o'er  the  ground-bird's  hidden  nest. 

Thou  waitest  late  and  com'st  alone. 
When  woods  are  bare  and  birds  are  flown. 
And  frost  and  shortening  days  portend 
The  aged  year  is  near  his  end. 

Then  doth  thy  sweet  and  quiet  eye 
Look  through  its  fringes  to  the  sky. 
Blue — blue — as  if  that  sky  let  fall 
A  flower  from  its  cerulean  wall. 

I  would  that  thus,  when  I  shall  see 
The  hour  of  death  draw  near  to  me, 
Hope,  blossoming  within  my  heart, 
May  look  to  heaven  as  I  depart. 

Williafn  Cullen  Bryant  [1794-1878] 


Goldenrod  H^S 


GOLDENROD 

When  the  wayside  tangles  blaze 

In  the  low  September  sun, 
When  the  flowers  of  Summer  days 

Droop  and  wither,  one  by  one. 
Reaching  up  through  bush  and  brier,  ^r 

Sumptuous  brow  and  heart  of  fire, 
Flaunting  high  its  wind-rocked  plume, 
Brave  with  wealth  of  native  bloom, — 
Goldenrod! 

When  the  meadow,  lately  shorn,    ,.,  obift-Uid  orl)  (\'i 
Parched  and  languid,  swoons  with  pain, 

When  her  life-blood,  night  and  morn. 

Shrinks  in  ever}'  throbbing  vein,  j 

Round  her  fallen,  tarnished  urn  '' 

Leaping  watch-fires  brighter  burn ; 

Royal  arch  o'er  Autumn's  gate. 

Bending  low  with  lustrous  weight, — - 
Goldenrod! 

In  the  pasture's  rude  embrace, 

All  o'errun  with  tangled  vines,  'i  J 

Where  the  thistle  claims  its  place,  , ') 

And  the  straggling  hedge  confines, 
Bearing  still  the  sweet  impress 
Of  unfettered  loveliness, 
lilaam    In  the  field  and  by  the  wall. 

Binding,  clasping,  crowning  all, — 
Goldenrod! 


:a 


Nature  lies  disheveled,  pale. 
With  her  feverish  lips  apart, — 

Day  by  daj^  the  pulses  fail. 
Nearer  to  her  bounding  heart ; 

Yet  that  slackened  grasp  doth  hold 

Store  of  pure  and  genuine  gold; 


I486  Poems  of  Nature 


Quick  thou  comest,  strong  and  free, 
Type  of  all  the  wealth  to  be, — 
Goldenrod ! 
Elaine  Goodale  Eastman  [1863- 


LESSONS   FROM  THE   GORSE 

Mountain  gorses,  ever-golden, 
Cankered  not  the  whole  year  long! 
Do  ye  teach  us  to  be  strong, 
Howsoever  pricked  and  holden. 
Like  your  thorny  blooms,  and  so 
Trodden  on  by  rain  and  snow, 
Up  the  hill-side  of  this  life,  as  bleak  as  where  ye  grow? 

Mountain  blossoms,  shining  blossoms. 
Do  ye  teach  us  to  be  glad 
When  no  summer  can  be  had. 
Blooming  in  our  inward  bosoms? 
Ye  whom  God  preserveth  still. 
Set  as  lights  upon  a  hill. 
Tokens  to  the  wintry  earth  that  Beauty  livcth  still! 

Mountain  gorscs,  do  ye  teach  us 
From  that  academic  chair 
Canopied  with  azure  air. 
That  the  wisest  word  man  reaches 
•  Is  the  humblest  he  can  speak? 
Ye,  who  live  on  mountain  peak. 
Yet  live  low  along  the  ground,  beside  the  grasses  meek! 

Mountain  gorses,  since  Linnaeus 
Knelt  beside  you  on  the  sod, 
For  your  beauty  thanking  God,— -  iir/ 

For  your  teaching,  ye  should  see  us 
Bowing  in  prostration  new! 
Whence  arisen, — if  one  or  two 
Drops  be  on  our  cheeks — O  world,  they  are  not  tears  but  dew. 
Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [1806-1861] 


The   Voice  of  the  Grass  148  7 


THE   VOICE   OF  THE   GRASS 

Here  I  come  creeping,  creeping  everywhere; 

By  the  dusty  roadside, 

On  the  sunny  hillside, 

Close  by  the  noisy  brook, 

In  every  shady  nook, 
I  come  creeping,  creeping  everywhere. 

Here  I  come  creeping,  smiling  everywhere; 

All  round  the  open  door. 

Where  sit  the  aged  poor; 

Here  where  the  children  play. 

In  the  bright  and  merry  May, 
I  come  creeping,  creeping  everywhere. 

Here  I  come  creeping,  creeping  everywhere; 

In  the  noisy  city  street 

My  pleasant  face  you'll  meet. 

Cheering  the  sick  at  heart 

Toiling  his  busy  part, — 
Silently  creeping,  creeping  everywhere. 

Here  I  come  creeping,  creeping  everywhere; 
You  cannot  see  me  coming. 
Nor  hear  my  low  sweet  humming; 
For  in  the  starry  night, 
And  the  glad  morning  light, 

I  come  quietly  creeping  everywhere. 

Here  I  come  creeping,  creeping  everywhere; 
More  welcome  than  the  flowers 
In  summer's  pleasant  hours;     ■,,  , 
The  gentle  cow  is  glad. 
And  the  merry  bird  not  sad. 

To  see  me  creeping,  creeping  everywhere. 

Here  I  come  creeping,  creeping  everywhere; 
When  you're  numbered. with  the  dead 
In  your  still  and  narrow  bed, 


1488  Poems  of  Nature 

In  the  happy  spring  I'll  come 
And  deck  your  silent  home, — 
Creeping,  silently  creeping  everywhere. 

Here  I  come  creeping,  creeping  everywhere; 

My  humble  song  of  praise 

Most  joyfully  I  raise 

To  Him  at  whose  command 

I  beautify  the  land. 
Creeping,  silently  creeping  everywhere. 

Sarah  Roberts  Boyle  [1812-1869] 


A  SONG  THE   GRASS  SINGS 

The  violet  is  much  too  shy, 

The  rose  too  little  so; 
I  think  I'll  ask  the  buttercup 

If  I  may  be  her  beau. 

When  winds  go  by,  I'll  nod  to  her 

And  she  will  nod  to  me. 
And  I  will  kiss  her  on  the  check 

As  gently  as  may  be. 

And  when  the  mower  cuts  us  down, 

Together  we  will  pass, 
I  smiling  at  the  buttercup. 

She  smiling  at  the  grass. 

Charles  G.  Bland  en  [1857- 


THE   WILD   HONEYSUCKLE 

Fair  flower,  that  dost  so  comely  grow, 

Hid  in  this  silent,  dull  retreat, 
Untouched  thy  honied  blossoms  blow. 
Unseen  thy  little  branches  greet: 
No  roving  foot  shall  crush  thee  here, 
No  busy  hand  provoke  a  tear. 


The   Ivy   Green  1489 

By  Nature's  self  in  white  arrayed, 

She  bade  thee  shun  the  vulgar  eye, 
And  planted  here  the  guardian  shade, 
And  sent  soft  waters  murmuring  by; 
Thus  quietly  thy  summer  goes. 
Thy  days  declining  to  repose. 

Smit  with  those  charms,  that  must  decay, 

I  grieve  to  see  your  future  doom; 
They  died — nor  were  those  flowers  more  gay. 
The  flowers  that  did  in  Eden  bloom; 
Unpitying  frosts  and  Autumn's  power 
Shall  leave  no  vestige  of  this  flower. 

From  morning  suns  and  evening  dews 

At  first  thy  little  being  came; 
If  nothing  once,  3'ou  nothing  lose. 
For  when  you  die  you  are  the  same; 
The  space  between  is  but  an  hour, 
The  frail  duration  of  a  flower. 

Philip  Frencau  [1752-1832] 


THE   IVY   GREEN 

Oh,  a  dainty  plant  is  the  Ivy  green. 

That  creepeth  o'er  ruins  old! 
Of  right  choice  food  are  his  meals  I  ween, 

In  his  cell  so  lone  and  cold. 
The  wall  must  be  crumbled,  the  stone  decayed^  ( 

To  pleasure  his  dainty  whim; 
And  the  mouldering  dust  that  years  have  made 

Is  a  merry  meal  for  him. 

Creeping  where  no  life  is  seen, 
A  rare  old  plant  is  the  Ivy  green. 

Fast  he  stealeth  on,  though  he  wears  no  wings. 

And  a  staunch  old  heart  has  he. 
How  closely  he  twineth,  how  tight  he  clings 

To  his  friend  the  huge  Oak  Tree! 


1490  Poems  of  Nature 

And  slily  he  traileth  along  the  ground, 

And  his  leaves  he  gently  waves, 
As  he  joyously  hugs  and  crawleth  round 
The  rich  mould  of  dead  men's  graves. 
Creeping  where  grim  death  has  been, 
A  rare  old  plant  is  the  Ivy  green. 

Whole  ages  have  fled  and  their  works  decayed, 

And  nations  have  scattered  been; 
But  the  stout  old  Ivy  shall  never  fade, 

From  its  hale  and  hearty  green. 
The  brave  old  plant,  in  its  lonely  days, 

Shall  fatten  upon  the  past : 
For  the  stateliest  building  man  can  raise 
Is  the  Ivy's  food  at  last. 

Creeping  on,  where  time  has  been, 
A  rare  old  plant  is  the  Ivy  green. 

Charles  Dickens  [1812-1870] 


YELLOW  JESSAMINE 

In  tangled  wreaths,  in  clustered  gleaming  stars, 

In  floating,  curling  sprays. 
The  golden  flower  comes  shining  through  the  woods 

These  February  days; 
Forth  go  all  hearts,-  all  hands,  from  out  the  town. 

To  bring  her  gayly  in, 
This  wild,  sweet  Princess  of  far  Florida — 

The  yellow  jessamine. 

The  live-oaks  smile  to  see  her  lovely  face 

Peep  from  the  thickets;  shy. 
She  hides  behind  the  leaves  her  golden  buds 

Till,  bolder  grown,  on  high 
She  curls  a  tendril,  throws  a  spray,  then  flings 

Herself  aloft  in  glee, 
And,  bursting  into  thousand  blossoms,  swings 

In  wreaths  from  tree  to  tree. 


Knapweed  i^^j 


The  dwarf -palmetto  on  his  knees  adores 

This  Princess  of  the  air;  H 

The  lone  pine-barren  broods  afar  and  sighs,     ^ 

"Ah!  come,  lest  I  despair;" 
The  myrtle-thickets  and  ill-tempered  thorns 

Quiver  and  thrill  within, 
As  through  their  leaves  they  feel  the  dainty  touch 

Of  yellow  jessamine. 

The  garden-roses  wonder  as  they  see 

The  wreaths  of  golden  bloom, 
Brought  in  from  the  far  woods  with  eager  haste 

To  deck  the  poorest  room, 
The  rich  man's  house,  alike;  the  loaded  hands 

Give  sprays  to  all  they  meet. 
Till,  gay  with  flowers,  the  people  come  and  go, 

And  all  the  air  is  sweet. 

The  Southern  land,  well  weary  of  its  green 

Which  may  not  fall  nor  fade. 
Bestirs  itself  to  greet  the  lovely  flower 

With  leaves  of  fresher  shade; 
The  pine  has  tassels,  and  the  orange-trees 

Their  fragrant  work  begin: 
The  spring  has  come — has  come  to  Florida,  '  '^ 

With  yellow  jessamine. 

Constance  Fenimore  Woolson  [i  840-1 894] 


KNAPWEED 

.  ,v; 

By  copse  and  hedgerow,  waste  and  wall. 

He  thrusts  his  cushions  red; 
O'er  burdock  rank,  o'er  thistles  tall. 

He  rears  his  hardy  head: 
Within,  without,  the  strong  leaves  press, 

He  screens  the  mossy  stone,  / 

Lord  of  a  narrow  wilderness,  i 

Self-centred  and  alone. 


1492 


ii-Q'^- 


Poems  of  Nature 

He  numbers  no  observant  friends,  '  ■ 

He  soothes  no  childish  woes, 
Yet  nature  nurtures  him,  and  tends  ,i  j 

As  duly  as  the  rose; 
He  drinks  the  blessed  dew  of  heaven, 

The  wind  is  in  his  ears, 
To  guard  his  growth  the  planets  seven 

Swing  in  their  airy  spheres. 

The  spirits  of  the  fields  and  woods  _.t\T 

Throb  in  his  sturdy  veins: 
He  drinks  the  secret,  stealing  floods,  ,•;! 

And  swills  the  volleying  rains: 
And  when  the  bird's  note  showers  and  breaks 

The  wood's  green  heart  within, 
He  stirs  his  plumy  brow  and  wakes 

To  draw  the  sunlight  in. 

Mute  sheep  that  pull  the  grasses  soft 

Crop  close  and  pass  him  by. 
Until  he  stands  alone,  aloft, 

In  surly  majesty. 
No  fly  so  keen,  no  bee  so  bold, 

To  pierce  that  knotted  zone: 
He  frowns  as  though  he  guarded  gold, 

And  yet  he  garners  none. 

And  so  when  autumn  winds  blow  late, 

And  whirl  the  chilly  wave, 
He  bows  before  the  common  fate. 

And  drops  beside  his  grave. 
None  ever  owed  him  thanks  or  said 

"A  gift  of  gracious  heaven."  '    vS 

Down  in  the  mire  he  droops  his  head;' ' 

Forgotten,  not  forgiven. 

Smile  on,  brave  weed!  let  none  inquire 

What  made  or  bade  thee  rise: 
Toss  thy  tough  fingers  high  and  higher 

To  flout  the  drenching  skies. 


Moly  1493 

Let  others  toil  for  oihers'  good, 

And  miss  or  mar  their  own; 
Thou  hast  brave  health  and  fortitude 

To  live  and  die  alone! 

Arthur  Christopher  Benson  [1S62T -j 

MOLY 

The  root  is  hard  to  loose 
From  hold  of  earth  by  mortah;  hut  Cod's  power 
Can  all  things  do.    'Tis  black,  but  bears  a  flower 
As  white  as  milk.  :  ' 

— Chapman's  Homer 

Traveler,  pluck  a  stem  of  moly, 

If  thou  touch  at  Circe's  isle, — 

Hermes'  moly,  growing  solely 

To  undo  enchanter's  wile! 

When  she  profifers  thee  her  chalice, — 

Wine  and  spices  mixed  with  malice, — 

When  she  smites  thee  with  her  staff, 

To  transform  thee,  do  thou  laugh! 

Safe  thou  art  if  thou  but  bear 

The  least  leaf  of  moly  rare. 

Close  it  grows  beside  her  portal. 

Springing  from  a  stock  immortal, — 

Yes!  and  often  has  the  Witch 

Sought  to  tear  it  from  its  niche;  ^ 

But  to  thwart  her  cruel  will 

The  wise  God  renews  it  still. 

Though  it  grows  in  soil  perverse, 

Heaven  hath  been  its  jealous  nurse. 

And  a  flower  of  snowy  mark 

Springs  from  root  and  sheathing  dark; 

Kingly  safeguard,  only  herb 

That  can  brutish  passion  curb!  ' 

Some  do  think  its  name  should  be 

Shield-Heart,  White  Integrity. 

Traveler,  pluck  a  stem  of  moly, 

If  thou  touch  at  Circe's  isle, — •  ^'  ' 

Hermes'  moly,  growing  solely 

To  undo  enchanter's  wile!  ''''' 

Edith  M.  Thomas  [1854- 


1494  Poems  of  Nature 


THE  MORNING-GLORY 

Was  it  worth  while  to  paint  so  fair 

Thy  every  leaf — to  vein  with  faultless  art 

Each  petal,  taking  the  boon  light  and  air 
Of  summer  so  to  heart? 

To  bring  thy  beauty  unto  perfect  flower, 
Then,  like  a  passing  fragrance  or  a  smile, 

Vanish  away,  beyond  recovery's  power — 
Was  it,  frail  bloom,  worth  while?  .,, 

Thy  silence  answers:  "Life  was  mine! 

And  I,  who  pass  without  regret  or  grief, 
Have  cared  the  more  to  make  my  moment  fine, 

Because  it  was  so  brief. 

"In  its  first  radiance  I  have  seen 

The  sun ! — why  tarry  then  till  comes  the  night? 
I  go  my  way,  content  that  I  have  been 

Part  of  the  morning  light!" 

Florence  Earlc  Coates  [1850- 


THE  MOUNTAIN  HEART'S-EASE 

By  scattered  rocks  and  turbid  waters  shifting, 

By  furrowed  glade  and  dell. 
To  feverish  men  thy  calm,  sweet  face  uplifting. 

Thou  stayest  them  to  tell 

The  dehcate  thought  that  cannot  find  expression, 

For  ruder  speech  too  fair, 
That,  like  thy  petals,  trembles  in  possession. 

And  scatters  on  the  air. 

The  miner  pauses  in  his  rugged  labor. 

And,  leaning  on  his  spade, 
Laughingly  calls  unto  his  comrade-neighbor 

To  see  thy  charms  displayed. 


The   Primrose  ^-^95 

But  in  his  eyes  a  mist  unwonted  rises, 

And  for  a  moment  clear 
Some  sweet  home  face  his  fooKsh  thought  surprises 

And  passes  in  a  tear, — 

Some  boyish  vision  of  his  Eastern  village, 

Of  uneventful  toil. 
Where  golden  harvests  followed  quiet  tillage 

Above  a  peaceful  soil. 

One  moment  only,  for  the  pick,  uplifting, 

Through  root  and  fibre  cleaves. 
And  on  the  muddy  current  slowly  drifting 

Are  swept  thy  bruised  leaves. 

And  yet,  O  poet,  in  thy  homely  fashion, 

Thy  work  thou  dost  fulfil. 
For  on  the  turbid  current  of  his  passion 

Thy  face  is  shining  still! 

Brei  Hartc  [1839-1902] 


THE  PRIMROSE 

Ask  me  why  I  send  you  here 

This  sweet  Infanta  of  the  year? 

Ask  me  why  I  send  to  you 

This  Primrose,  thus  bepearled  with  dew? 

I  will  whisper  to  your  ears: — 

The  sweets  of  love  are  mixed  with  tears. 

Ask  me  why  this  flower  does  show 
So  yellow-green,  and  sickly  too? 
Ask  me  why  the  stalk  is  weak 
And  bending,  yet  it  doth  not  break? 
I  will  answer: — These  discover 
What  fainting  hopes  are  in  a  lover. 

Robert  Ilerrick  [1591-1674! 


I496  Poems   of  Nature 


TO   PRIMROSES   FILLED   WITH   MORNING   DEW 

Why  do  ye  weep,  sweet  babes?    Can  tears ,     . 
•"    ^       ,       .  f  .  I  IktA 

Speak  grief  in  you, 

Who  were  but  born 

Just  as  the  modest  morn 

Teemed  her  refreshing  dew? 

Alas,  you  have  not  known  that  shower 

That  mars  a  flower, 

Nor  felt  the  unkind 

Breath  of  a  blasting  wind,  ■''^' 

Nor  are  ye  worn  with  years, 

Or  warped,  as  we. 

Who  think  it  strange  to  see 

Such  pretty  flowers,  like  to  orphans  young. 

To  speak  by  tears,  before  ye  have  a  tongue. 

Speak,  whimpering  younglings,  and  make  known 
The  reason  why 
Ye  droop  and  weep; 
Is  it  for  want  of  sleep, 
Or  childish  lullaby? 
Or  that  ye  have  not  seen  as  yet 
The  violet? 
Or  brought  a  kiss 
From  that  Sweet-heart,  to  this? 
— No,  no,  this  sorrow  shown 

By  your  tears  shed, 
Would  have  this  lecture  read. 
That  things  of  greatest,  so  of  meanest  worth. 
Conceived  with  grief  are,  and  with  tears  brought  forth. 
Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


TO   AN  EARLY  PRIMROSE 

Mild  offspring  of  a  dark  and  sullen  sire! 
Whose  modest  form,  so  delicately  fine, 

Was  nursed  in  whirling  storms 
[^\i?  And  cradled  in  the  winds; 


I'he   Rhodora  i497 

Thee,  when  young  Spring  first  questioned  Winter's  sway, 
And  dared  the  sturdy  blusterer  to  the  fight, 

Thee  on  this  bank  he  threw 

To  mark  his  victory. 

In  this  low  vale,  the  promise  of  the  year, 
Serene,  thou  openest  to  the  nipping  gale, 

Unnoticed  and  alone, 

Thy  tender  elegance. 

So  Virtue  bfooms,  brought  forth  amid  the  storms 
Of  chill  adversity;  in  some  lone  walk 

Of  life  she  rears  her  head. 

Obscure  and  unobserved; 

While  every  bleaching  breeze  that  on  her  blows 
Chastens  her  spotless  purity  of  breast, 

And  hardens  her  to  bear  i  V 

Serene  the  ills  of  life. 

Henry  Kirke  White  [1785-1806] 

THE   RHODORA 

ON  BEING  ASKED   WHENCE   IS   THE  FLOWER 

In  May,  when  sea-winds  pierced  our  solitudes, 
I  found  the  fresh  Rhodora  in  the  woods, 
Spreading  its  leafless  blooms  in  a  damp  nook, 
To  please  the  desert  and  the  sluggish  brook. 
The  purple  petals,  fallen  in  the  pool, 
Made  the  black  water  with  their  beauty  gay; 
Here  might  the  red-bird  come  his  plumes  to  cool, 
And  court  the  flower  that  cheapens  his  array. 
Rhodora!  if  the  sages  ask  thee  why 
This  charm  is  wasted  on  the  earth  and  sky, 
Tell  them,  dear,  that  if  eyes  were  made  for  seeing. 
Then  Beauty  is  its  own  excuse  for  being: 
Why  thou  wert  there,  O  rival  of  the  rose! 
I  never  thought  to  ask,  I  never  knew: 
Rut,  in  my  simple  ignorance,  suppose 
The  self-same  Power  that  brought  me  there  brought  you. 
Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [i  803-1 88 2] 


J  ,gg  Poems  of  Nature 


THE  ROSE 

A  ROSE,  as  fair  as  ever  saw  the  North, 
Grew  in  a  httle  garden  all  alone; 
A  sweeter  flower  did  Nature  ne'er  put  forth, 
Nor  fairer  garden  yet  was  never  known : 
The  maidens  danced  about  it  morn  and  noon, 
And  learned  bards  of  it  their  ditties  made; 
The  nimble  fairies  by  the  pale-faced  moon 
Watered  the  root  and  kissed  her  pretty  shade. 
But  well-a-day! — the  gardener  careless  grew; 
The  maids  and  fairies  both  were  kept  away. 
And  in  a  drought  the  caterpillars  threw 
Themselves  upon  the  bud  and  every  spray. 

God  shield  the  stock!    If  heaven  send  no  supplies. 
The  fairest  blossom  of  the  garden  dies. 

William  Browne  [1591-1643] 


[dc 


WILD  ROSES 

On  long,  serene  midsummer  days 
Of  ripening  fruit  and  yellow  grain, 

How  sweetly,  by  dim  woodland  ways. 
In  tangled  hedge  or  leafy  lane, 

Fair  wild-rose  thickets,  you  unfold 

Those  pale  pink  stars  with  hearts  of  gold! 

Your  sleek  patrician  sisters  dwell 

On  lawns  where  gleams  the  shrub's  trim  bosk, 
In  terraced  gardens,  tended  well, 

Near  pebbled  walk  and  quaint  kiosk. 
In  costHest  urns  their  colors  rest; 
They  beam  on  beauty's  fragrant  breast  \ 

But  you  in  lowly  calm  abide, 

Scarce  heeded  save  by  breeze  or  bee; 

You  know  what  splendor,  pomp  and  pride 
Full  oft  your  brilliant  sisters  see; 

What  sorrow  too,  and  bitter  fears; 

What  mad  farewells  and  hopeless  tears. 


The   Rose  of  May  I499 

How  some  are  kept  in  old,  dear  books,'r^^ 
That  once  in  bridal  wreaths  were  worn; 

How  some  are  kissed,  with  tender  looks, 
And  later  tossed  aside  with  scorn; 

How  some  their  taintless  petals  lay 

On  icy  foreheads,  pale  as  they! 

So,  while  these  truths  you  vaguely  guess, 

A-bloom  in  many  a  lonesome  spot. 
Shy  roadside  roses,  may  you  bless 

The  fate  that  rules  your  modest  lot, 
Like  rustic  maids  that  meekly  stand 
Below  the  ladies  of  their  land! 

Edgar  Fawcelt  [1847-1904] 


THE  ROSE  OF  MAY 

Ah!  there's  the  Hly,  marble  pale. 
The  bonny  broom,  the  cistus  frail; 
The  rich  sweet  pea,  the  iris  blue. 
The  larkspur  with  its  peacock  hue; 
All  these  are  fair,  yet  hold  I  will 
That  the  Rose  of  May  is  fairer  still. 

'Tis  grand  'neath  palace  walls  to  grow. 
To  blaze  where  lords  and  ladies  go; 
To  hang  o'er  marble  founts,  and  shine 
In  modern  gardens,  trim  and  fine; 
But  the  Rose  of  May  is  only  seen 
Where  the  great  of  other  days  have  been. 

The  house  is  mouldering  stone  by  stone. 
The  garden-walks  are  overgrown; 
The  flowers  are  low,  the  weeds  are  high, 
The  fountain-stream  is  choked  and  dry. 
The  dial-stone  with  moss  is  c:reen, 
Where'er  the  Rose  of  May  is  seen. 


1500  Poems  of  Nature 

The  Rose  of  May  its  pride  displayed      ,;  i 
Along  the  old  stone  balustrade; 
And  ancient  ladies,  quaintly  dight,j;,  //oH 
In  its  pink  blossoms  took  dehght;  f  i-,.-t,* 
And  on  the  steps  would  make  a  stand 
To  scent  its  fragrance — fan  in  hand. 

Long  have  been  dead  those  ladies  gay; 
Their  very  heirs  have  passed  away; 
And  their  old  portraits,  prim  and  tall, 
Are  mouldering  in  the  mouldering  hal! ; 
The  terracf  and  the  balustrade 
Lie  broken,  weedy  and  decayed. 

But  bhthe  and  tall  the  Rose  of  May 
Shoots  upward  through  the  ruin  gray; 
With  scented  flower,  and  leaf  pale  green, 
Such  rose  as  it  hath  never  been, 
Left,  like  a  noble  deed,  to  grace 
The  memory  of  an  ancient  race. 

Mary  Howitt  [1709-1888] 

A  ROSE 

Blown  in  the  morning,  thou  shalt  fade  ere  noon. 

What  boots  a  life  which  in  such  haste  forsakes  thee? 

Thou'rt  wondrous  frolic,  being  to  die  so  soon, 

And  passing  proud  a  little  color  makes  thee. 

If  thee  thy  brittle  beauty  so  deceives. 

Know  then  the  thing  that  swells  thee  is  thy  bane; 

For  the  same  beauty  doth,  in  bloody  leaves, 

The  sentence  of  thy  early  death  contain. 

Some  clown's  coarse  lungs  will  poison  thy  sweet  flower, 

If  by  the  careless  plough  thou  shalt  be  torn; 

And  many  Herods  lie  in  wait  each  hour 

To  murder  thee  as  soon  as  thou  art  born — 

Nay,  force  thy  bud  to  blow — their  tyrant  breath 

Anticipating  life,  to  hasten  death! 

Richard  Fanshawe  \  1 608- 1666] 


To  Violets  1 50 1 


THE   SHAMROCK 

When  April  rains  make  flowers  bloom 

And  Johnny-jump-ups  come  to  light, 
And  clouds  of  color  and  perfume 

Float  from  the  orchards  pink  and  white, 
I  see  my  shamrock  in  the  rain, 

An  emerald  spray  with  raindrops  set. 
Like  jewels  on  Spring's  coronet, 

So  fair,  and  yet  it  breathes  of  pain. 

The  shamrock  on  an  older  shore 

Sprang  from  a  rich  and  sacred  soil 
Where  saint  and  hero  lived  of  yore, 

And  where  their  sons  in  sorrow  toil; 
And  here,  transplanted,  it  to  me 

Seems  weeping  for  the  soil  it  left: 
The  diamonds  that  all  others  see 

Are  tears  drawn  from  its  heart  bereft. 

When  April  rain  makes  flowers  grow. 

And  sparkles  on  their  tiny  buds 
That  in  June  nights  will  over-blow 

And  fill  the  world  with  scented  floods. 
The  lonely  shamrock  in  our  land — 

So  fine  among  the  clover  leaves — 
For  the  old  springtime  of  ten  grieves, — 

I  feel  its  tears  upon  my  hand. 

Maurice  Francis  Egan  [1852 


TO  VIOLETS 

Welcome,  maids  of  honor, 

You  do  bring 

In  the  Spring, 
And  wait  upon  her. 


i£02  Poems  of  Nature 

She  has  virgins  many, 
Fresh  and  fair; 
Yet  you  are 

More  sweet  than  any. 

You're  the  maiden  posies, 
And,  so  graced, 
To  be  placed 

'Fore  damask  roses. 


Yet,  though  thus  respected. 

By  and  by 

Ye  do  lie. 
Poor  girls,  neglected. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


THE  VIOLET 

O  FAINT,  dehcious,  spring-time  violet! 

Thine  odor,  like  a  key, 
Turns  noiselessly  in  memory's  wards  to  let 

A  thought  of  sorrow  free. 

The  breath  of  distant  fields  upon  my  brow 

Blows  through  that  open  door 
The  sound  of  wind-borne  bells,  more  sweet  and  low, 

And  sadder  than  of  yore. 

It  comes  afar,  from  that  beloved  place. 

And  that  beloved  hour, 
When  life  hung  ripening  in  love's  golden  grace. 

Like  grapes  above  a  bower. 

A  spring  goes  singing  through  its  reedy  grass; 

The  lark  sings  o'er  my  head, 
Drowned  in  the  sky— O,  pass,  ye  visions,  pass! 

I  would  that  I  were  dead! — 

Why  hast  thou  opened  that  forbidden  door. 

From  which  I  ever  flee? 
O  vanished  Joy!   O  Love,  that  art  no  more, 

Let  my  vexed  spirit  be! 


To  a  Wind-Flower  1503 

O  violet!  thy  odor  through  my  brain 

Hath  searched,  and  stung  to  grief 

This  sunny  day,  as  if  a  curse  did  stain 
Thy  velvet  leaf. 

William  Wetmore  Story  [iSiq-iSqs] 

TO  A  WOOD-VIOLET 

In  this  secluded  shrine, 

O  miracle  of  grace, 
No  mortal  eye  but  mine 

Hath  looked  upon  thy  face. 

No  shadow  but  mine  own 

Hath  screened  thee  from  the  sight 

Of  Heaven,  whose  love  alone 
Hath  led  me  to  thy  light. 

Whereof — as  shade  to  shade 

Is  wedded  in  the  sun — 
A  moment's  glance  hath  made 

Our  souls  forever  one. 

Jo/tn  Banister  Tabb  [184S-1Q09J 

THE   VIOLET  AND   THE  ROSE 

The  violet  in  the  wood,  that's  sweet  to-day, 

Is  longer  sweet  than  roses  of  red  June; 
Set  me  sweet  violets  along  my  way. 

And  bid  the  red  rose  flower,  but  not  too  soon. 
Ah  violet,  ah  rose,  why  not  the  two? 
Why  bloom  not  all  fair  flowers  the  whole  year  through? 

Why  not  the  two,  young  violet,  ripe  rose? 

Why  dies  one  sweetness  when  another  blows? 

Augusta  Webster  [1837- 1894] 

TO  A  WIND-FLOWER 

Teach  me  the  secret  of  thy  loveliness, 

That,  being  made  wise,  I  may  aspire  to  be 

As  beautiful  in  thought,  and  so  express 
Immortal  truths  to  earth's  mortality; 


1 504  Poems  of  Nature 

Though  to  my  soul  ability  be  less 
Than  'tis  to  thee,  O  sweet  anemone. 

Teach  me  the  secret  of  thy  innocence, 

That  in  simplicity  I  may  grow  wise. 
Asking  from  Art  no  other  recompense 

Than  the  approval  of  her  own  just  eyes; 
So  may  I  rise  to  some  fair  eminence, 

Though  less  than  thine,  O  cousin  of  the  skies. 

Teach  me  these  things,  through  whose  high  knowledge,  I, 
When  Death  hath  poured  oblivion  through  my  veins, 

And  brought  me  home,  as  all  are  brought,  to  lie 
In  that  vast  house,  common  to  serfs  and  thanes, — 

I  shall  not  die,  I  shall  not  utterly  die, 
For  beauty  born  of  beauty — that  remains. 

Madison  Cawein  [1865-1C14] 


TO  BLOSSOMS 

Fair  pledges  of  a  fruitful  tree, 

Why  do  ye  fall  so  fast? 

Your  date  is  not  so  past 
But  you  may  stay  yet  here  awhile 

To  blush  and  gently  smile, 
And  go  at  last. 

What !  were  ye  born  to  be 

An  hour  or  half's  delight, 

And  so  to  bid  good-night? 
'Twas  pity  Nature  brought  you  forth 

Merely  to  show  your  worth 
And  lose  you  quite. 

But  you  are  lovely  leaves,  where  we 
May  read  how  soon  things  have 
Their  end,  though  ne'er  so  brave: 
And  after  they  have  shown  their  pride  T 
Like  you  awhile,  they  glide 
Into  the  grave. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


The   Death  of  the   Flowers 


1505 


,n  -;n  .....  _.-.ir7; 

"'TIS  THE  LAST  ROSE  OF  SUMMER" 

'Tis  the  last  rose  of  summer,  'm 

Left  blooming  alone;  '''^'- 

All  her  lovely  con'panions  ■''''' 

Are  faded  and  gone;  ''  ' 

No  flower  of  her  kindred, 

No  rose-bud  is  nigh, 
To  reflect  back  her  blushes. 

Or  give  sigh  for  sigh. 

I'll  not  leave  thee,  thou  lone  one! 

To  pine  on  the  stem ; 
Since  the  lovely  are  sleeping. 

Go,  sleep  thou  with  them. 
Thus  kindly  I  scatter 

Thy  leaves  o'er  the  bed 
Where  thy  mates  of  the  garden 

Lie  scentless  and  dead. 

So  soon  may  /  follow, 

When  friendships  decay. 
And  from  Love's  shining  circle 

The  gems  drop  away. 
When  true  hearts  lie  withered. 

And  fond  ones  are  flown, 
O  who  would  inhabit 

This  bleak  world  alone? 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 

THE  DEATH  CF  THE   FLOWERS 

The  melancholy  days  are  come,  the  saddest  of  the  year, 
Of  wailing  winds,  and  naked  woods,  and  meadows  brown 

and  sere. 
Heaped  in  the  hollows  of  the  grove,  the  autumn  leaves  lie 

dead; 
iThey  rustle  to  the  eddying  gust,  and  to  the  rabbit's  tread; 
The  robin  and  the  wren  are  flown,  and  from  the  shrubsthe  jay, 
And  from  the  wood-top  calls  the  crow  through  all  the  gloomy 

day. 


1506  Poems  of  Nature 

Where  are  the  flowers,  the  fair  young  flowers,  that  lately 

sprang  and  stood 
In  brighter  Hght  and  softer  airs,  a  beauteous  sisterhood? 
Alas!  they  all  are  in  their  graves,  the  gentle  race  of  flowers 
Are  lying  in  their  lowly  beds,  with  the  fair  and  good  of  ours. 
The  rain  is  falling  where  they  lie,  but  the  cold  November 

rain 
Calls  not  from  out  the  gloomy  earth  the  lovely  ones  again. 

The  wind-flower  and  the  violet,  they  perished  long  ago, 
And  the  brier-rose  and  the  orchis  died  amid  the  summer 

glow; 
But  on  the  hill  the  golden-rod,  and  the  aster  in  the  wood. 
And  the  yellow  sun-flower  by  the  brook,  in  autumn  beauty 

stood, 
Till  fell  the  frost  from  the  clear  cold  heaven,  as  falls  the 

plague  on  men, 
And  the  brightness  of  their  smile  was  gone,  from  upland, 

glade,  and  glen. 

And  now,  when  comes  the  calm  mild  day,  as  still  such  days 

will  come, 
To  call  the  squirrel  and  the  bee  from  out  their  winter  home; 
When  the  sound  of  dropping  nuts  is  heard,  though  aU  the 

trees  are  still. 
And  twinkle  in  the  smoky  light  the  waters  of  the  rill. 
The  south  wind  searches  for  the  flowers  whose  fragrance 

late  he  bore. 
And  sighs  to  find  them  in  the  wood  and  by  the  stream  no 

more. 

And  then  I  think  of  one  who  in  her  youthful  beauty  died, 
The  fair  meek  blossom  that  grew  up  and  faded  by  my  side. 
In  the  cold  moist  earth  we  laid  her,  when  the  forest  ca^t  the 
0        leaf,  1  orit  ni  baqcylf 

And  we  wept  that  one  so  lovely  should  have  a  life  so  brief: 
Yet  not  unmeet  it  was  that  one  like  that  young  friend  of 

ours, 
So  gentle  and  so  beautiful,  should  perish  with  the  flowers. 
William  Cullen  Bryant  [i  794-1878] 


Ho>T 


GOD'S  CREATURES 

ONCE  ON  A  TIME 

Once  on  a  time  I  used  to  dream 

Strange  spirits  moved  about  my  way. 
And  I  might  catch  a  vagrant  gleam, 

A  ghnt  of  pixy  or  of  fay; 
Their  Hves  were  mingled  with  my  own, 

So  far  they  roamed,  so  near  they  drew; 
And  when  I  from  a  child  had  grown, 

I  woke — and  found  my  dream  was  true. 

For  one  is  clad  in  coat  of  fur. 

And  one  is  decked  with  feathers  gay; 
Another,  wiser,  will  prefer 

A  sober  suit  of  Quaker  gray: 
This  one's  your  servant  from  his  birth. 

And  that  a  Princess  you  must  please, 
And  this  one  loves  to  wake  your  mirth, 

And  that  one  hkes  to  share  your  ease. 

O  gracious  creatures,  tiny  souls! 

You  seem  so  near,  so  far  away, 
Yet  while  the  cloudland  round  us  rolls, 

We  love  you  better  every  day. 

Margaret  Benson  [i8    - 

TO  A  MOUSE 

ON  TURNING  UP  HER  NEST  WITH  THE  PLOW,  NOVEMBER,  1 78.5 

Wee,  sleekit,  cow'rin',  tim'rous  beastie, 
O,  what  a  panic's  in  thy  breastie! 
Thou  need  na  start  awa'  sae  hasty, 

Wi'  bickering  brattle! 
I  wad  be  laith  to  rin  an'  chase  thee, 

Wi'  murd'ring  pattle! 
1507 


1508  Poems  of  Nature 

I'm  truly  sorry  man's  dominion 
Has  broken  Nature's  social  union, 
An'  justifies  that  ill  opinion, 

Which  makes  thee  startle 
At  me,  thy  poor,  earth-born  companion, 

An'  fellow-mortal! 

I  doubt  na,  whiles,  but  thou  may  thieve; 
What  then?  poor  beastie,  thou  maun  live! 
A  daimen  icker  in  a  thrave 

'S  a  sma'  request; 
I'll  get  a  blessin'  wi'  the  laive, 

And  never  miss't! 

Thy  wee  bit  housie,  too,  in  ruin! 
Its  silly  wa's  the  win's  are  strewin'! 
An'  naething,  now,  to  big  a  new  ane, 

O'  foggage  green! 
An'  bleak  December's  winds  ensuin', 

Baith  snell  an'  keen! 

Thou  saw  the  fields  laid  bare  an'  waste, 
An'  weary  winter  comin'  fast, 
An'  cozie  here,  beneath  the  blast. 

Thou  thought  to  dwell, — 
Till,  crash!  the  cruel  coulter  passed 

Out  through  thy  cell. 

That  wee  bit  heap  o'  leaves  an'  stibble 
Has  cost  thee  mony  a  weary  nibble! 
Now  thou's  turned  out,  for  a'  thy  trouble, 

But  house  or  hald, 
To  thole  the  winter's  sleety  dribble, 

An'  cranreuch  cauld! 

But,  Mousie,  thou  art  no  thy  lane, 
In  proving  foresight  may  be  vain : 
The  best-laid  schemes  o'  mice  an'  men, 

Gang  aft  a-gley, 
An'  lea'e  us  naught  but  grief  an'  pain, 

For  promised  joy! 


The  Grasshopper  i  5^9 

Still  thou  art  blest,  compared  \vi'  me! 
The  present  only  toucheth  thee: 
But,  och!  I  backward  cast  my  e'e 

On  prospects  drear! 
An'  forward,  though  I  canna  see, 

I  guess  an'  fear! 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 

THE   GRASSHOPPER 

Happy  insect,  what  can  be 

In  happiness  compared  to  thee? 

Fed  with  nourishment  divine. 

The  dewy  morning's  gentle  wine! 

Nature  waits  upon  thee  still. 

And  thy  verdant  cup  does  fill; 

'Tis  filled  wherever  thou  dost  tread. 

Nature's  self's  thy  Ganym.ede. 

Thou  dost  drink,  and  dance,  and  sing, 

Happier  than  the  happiest  king! 

All  the  fields  which  thou  dost  see, 

All  the  plants  belong  to  thee ; 

All  the  summer  hours  produce, 

Fertile  made  with  early  juice. 

Man  for  thee  does  sow  and  plow. 

Farmer  he,  and  landlord  thou! 

Thou  dost  innocently  enjoy; 

Nor  does  thy  luxury  destroy. 

The  shepherd  gladly  heareth  thee, 

More  harmonious  than  he. 

Thee  country  hinds  with  gladness  hear, 

Prophet  of  the  ripened  year! 

Thee  Phoebus  loves,  and  does  inspire 

Phoebus  is  himself  thy  sire. 

To  thee,  of  all  things  upon  earth, 

Life  is  no  longer  than  thy  mirth. 

Happy  insect!  happy  thou, 

Dost  neither  age  nor  winter  know; 

But  when  thou'st  drunk,  and  danced,  and  sung 

Thy  fill,  the  flowery  leaves  among. 


15^*^  Poems  of  Nature 

(Voluptuous  and  wise  withal, 
Epicurean  animal!) 
Sated  with  thy  summer  feast, 
Thou  retir'st  to  endless  rest. 
After  Anacreon,  by  Abraham  Cowley  [1618-1667] 


ON  THE  GRASSHOPPER  AND  CRICKET 

The  poetry  of  earth  is  never  dead: 

When  all  the  birds  are  faint  with  the  hot  sun, 

And  hide  in  cooling  trees,  a  voice  will  run 

From  hedge  to  hedge  about  the  new-mown  mead: 

That  is  the  Grasshopper's — he  takes  the  lead 

In  summer  luxury, — he  has  never  done 

With  his  delights,  for  when  tired  out  with  fun, 

He  rests  at  ease  beneath  some  pleasant  weed. 

The  poetry  of  earth  is  ceasing  never: 

On  a  lone  winter  evening,  when  the  frost 

Has  wrought  a  silence,  from  the  stove  there  shrills 

The  Cricket's  song,  in  warmth  increasing  ever, 

And  seems  to  one  in  drowsiness  half -lost. 

The  Grasshopper's  among  the  grassy  hills. 

John  Keals  [1795-1821] 


TO  THE  GRASSHOPPER  AND  THE  CRICKET 

Green  little  vaulter  in  the  sunny  grass, 
Catching  your  heart  up  at  the  feel  of  June; 
Sole  voice  that's  heard  amidst  the  lazy  noon, 
When  even  the  bees  lag  at  the  summoning  brass; 
And  you,  warm  little  housekeeper,  who  class 
With  those  who  think  the  candles  come  too  soon, 
Loving  the  lire,  and  with  your  tricksome  tune 
Nick  the  glad  silent  moments  as  they  pass;''''*-i 
O  sweet  and  tiny  cousins,  that  belong  i-'!;f 

One  to  the  fields,  the  other  to  the  hearth,    {dP 


The  Cricket  151 1 

Both  have  your  sunshine;  both,  though  small,  are  strong 
At  your  clear  hearts;  and  both  seem  given  to  earth 
To  sing  in  thoughtful  ears  their  natural  song — ■ 
In-doors  and  out,  summer  and  winter.  Mirth. 

Leigh  lIiDit  [1784-185Q] 


THE   CRICKET 

Little  inmate,  full  of  mirth, 
Chirping  on  my  kitchen  hearth, 
Wheresoe'er  be  thine  abode 
Always  harbinger  of  good; 
Pay  me  for  thy  warm  retreat 
With  a  song  more  soft  and  sweet; 
In  return  thou  shalt  receive 
Such  a  strain  as  I  can  give. 

Thus  thy  praise  shall  be  expressed, 
Inoffensive,  welcome  guest! 
While  the  rat  is  on  the  scout, 
And  the  mouse  with  curious  snout, 
With  what  vermin  else  infest 
Every  dish,  and  spoil  the  best; 
Frisking  thus  before  the  fire, 
Thou  hast  all  thy  heart's  desire. 

Though  in  voice  and  shape  they  be    f  I 
Formed  as  if  akin  to  thee, 
Thou  surpassest,  happier  far. 
Happiest  grasshoppers  that  are; 
Theirs  is  but  a  summer's  song, 
Thine  endures  the  winter  long^jg  I'lO 
Unimpaired,  and  shrill,  and  clear,  '''f! T 
Melody  throughout  the  year.  ■  T 

Neither  night  nor  dawn  of  day 
Puts  a  period  to  thy  play: 
Sing  then — and  extend  thy  span 
Far  beyond  the  date  of  man; 


1512  Poems  of  Nature 

Wretched  man,  whose  years  are  spent   . ,. ,  ,1  jijij;; 
In  repining  discontent,  ,..,r-j  -mow  JA 

Lives  not,  aged  though  he  be,  ,ij,jg  Q'p 

Half  a  span,  compared  with  thee.  ,,„,r,-nT 

From  the  Latin  of  Vincent  Bourne, 

by  William  Coivper  [i  731-1800] 


TO  A   CRICKET 

Voice  of  summer,  keen  and  shrill, 

Chirping  round  my  winter  fire. 

Of  thy  song  I  never  tire, 
Weary  others  as  they  will. 
For  thy  song  with  summer's  filled — 

Filled  \^'ith  sunshine,  filled  with  June; 

Firelight  echo  of  that  noon 
Heard  in  fields  when  all  is  stilled 

In  the  golden  light  of  May, 

Bringing  scents  of  new-mown  hay, 

Bees,  and  birds,  and  flovv^ers  away. 
Prithee,  haunt  my  fireside  still, 
Voice  of  summer,  keen  and  shrill. 

William  Cox  Bennett  [1820-1895] 


TO  AN  INSECT 

I  LOVE  to  hear  thine  earnest  voice, 

Wherever  thou  art  hid. 
Thou  testy  httle  dogmatist. 

Thou  pretty  Katydid! 
Thou  mindest  me  of  gentlefolks, — 

Old  gentlefolks  are  they, — 
Thou  say'st  an  undisputed  thing 

In  such  a  solemn  way. 

Thou  art  a  female,  Katydid! 

I  know  it  by  the  trill 
That  quivers  through  thy  piercing  notes, 

So  petulant  and  shrill; 


To  an    Insect  ^5^3 

I  think  there  is  a  knot  of  you 

Beneath  the  hollow  tree, — 
A  knot  of  spinster  Katydids, — 

Do  Katydids  drink  tea? 

Oh,  tell  me  where  did  Katy  live, 

And  what  did  Katy  do? 
And  was  she  very  fair  and  young, 

And  yet  so  wicked,  too? 
Did  Katy  love  a  naughty  man. 

Or  kiss  more  cheeks  than  one? 
I  warrant  Katy  did  no  more 

Than  many  a  Kate  has  done. 

Dear  me!    I'll  tell  you  all  about 

My  fuss  with  little  Jane, 
And  Ann.  with  whom  I  used  to  walk 

So  often  down  the  lane. 
And  all  that  tore  their  locks  of  black, 

Or  wet  their  eyes  of  blue, — 
Pray  tell  me,  sweetest  Katydid, 

What  did  poor  Katy  do? 

Ah  no!  the  living  oak  shall  crash. 

That  stood  for  ages  still, 
The  rock  shall  rend  its  mossy  base 

And  thunder  down  the  hill. 
Before  the  little  Katydid 

Shall  add  one  word,  to  tell 
The  mystic  story  of  the  maid 

Whose  name  she  knows  so  well. 

Peace  to  the  ever-murmuring  race! 

And  when  the  latest  one 
Shall  fold  in  death  her  feeble  wings 

Beneath  the  autumn  sun, 
Then  shall  she  raise  her  fainting  voice, 

And  lift  her  drooping  lid, 
And  then  the  child  of  future  years 

Shall  hear  what  Katy  did. 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [1809- 1894] 


15^4  Poems  of  Nature 


THE  SNAIL 

To  grass,  or  leaf,  or  fruit,  or  wall, 
The  snail  sticks  close,  nor  fears  to  fall, 
As  if  he  grew  there,  house  and  all 
Together. 

Within  that  house  secure  he  hides. 
When  danger  imminent  betides, 
Of  storm,  or  other  harm  besides 
Of  weather. 

Give  but  his  horns  the  slightest  touch, 
His  self-collecting  power  is  such, 
He  shrinks  into  his  house  with  much 
Displeasure. 

Where'er  he  dwells,  he  dwells  alone, 
Except  himself,  has  chattels  none, 
Well  satisfied  to  be  his  own 

Whole  treas'ure. 

Thus,  hermit-like,  his  life  he  leads, 
Nor  partner  of  his  banquet  needs. 
And  if  he  meets  one,  only  feeds 
The  faster. 

Who  seeks  him  must  be  worse  than  blind 
(He  and  his  house  are  so  combined), 
If,  finding  it,  he  fails  to  find 
Its  master. 
From  (he  Latin  of  Vincent  Bourne, 

by  William  Coiupcr  [i  731-1800] 


THE  HOUSEKEEPER   ' 

The  frugal  snail,  with  forecast  of  repose, 
Carries  his  house  with  him  where'er  he  goes; 
Peeps  out, — and  if  there  comes  a  shower  of  rain, 
Retreats  to  his  small  domicile  amain. 


The   Humble- Bee 


'5^5 


Touch  but  a  tip  of  him,  a  horn, — 'tis  well, — 
He  curls  up  in  his  sanctuary  shell. 
He's  his  own  landlord,  his  own  tenant;  stay 
Long  as  he  will,  he  dreads  no  Quarter  Day. 
Himself  he  boards  and  lodges;  both  invites 
And  feasts  himself;  sleeps  with  himself  o'  nights. 
He  spares  the  upholsterer  trouble  to  procure 
Chattels;  himself  is  his  own  furniture,        // 
And  his  sole  riches.    Whereso'er  he  roam, — 
Knock  when  you  will, — he's  sure  to  be  at  home. 
From  the  Latin  of  Vincent  Bourne, 

by  Charles  Lamb  [1775-1834] 


THE  HUMBLE-BEE 

Burly,  dozing  humble-bee, 
Where  thou  art  is  clime  for  me. 
Let  them  sail  for  Porto  Rique, 
Far-ofT  heats  through  seas  to  seek; 
I  will  follow  thee  alone, 
Thou  animated  torrid-zone! 
Zigzag  steerer,  desert  cheerer, 
Let  me  chase  thy  waving  lines; 
Keep  me  nearer,  me  thy  hearer, 
Singing  over  shrubs  and  vines. 

Insect  lover  of  the  sun, 

Joy  of  thy  dominion! 

Sailor  of  the  atmosphere; 

Swimmer  through  the  waves  of  air; 

Voyager  of  light  and  noon ;  // 

Epicurean  of  June; 

Wait,  I  prithee,  till  I  come 

Within  earshot  of  thy  hum, — 

All  without  is  martyrdom. 

1 
When  the  south  wind,  in  May  days, 

With  a  net  of  shining  haze 

Silvers  the  horizon  wall. 

And  with. softness  tpuching  all,      , 


1516  J^oems  of  Nature 

Tints  the  human  countenance 
With  a  color  of  romance, 
And  infusing  subtle  heats, 
Turns  the  sod  to  violets, 
Thou,  in  sunny  solitudes, 
Rover  of  the  underwoods, 
The  green  silence  dost  displace 
With  thy  mellow,  breezy  bass. 

Hot  midsummer's  petted  crone. 
Sweet  to  me  thy  drowsy  tone 
Tells  of  countless  sunny  hours, 
Long  days,  and  solid  banks  of  flowers; 
Of  gulfs  of  sweetness  without  bound 
In  Indian  wildernesses  found; 
Of  Syrian  peace,  immortal  leisure. 
Firmest  cheer,  and  birdlike  pleasure. 

Aught  unsavory  or  unclean 
Hath  my  insect  never  seen; 
But  violets  and  bilberry  bells, 
Maple-sap  and  daffodels, 
Grass  with  green  flag  half-mast  high, 
Succory  to  match  the  sky, 
Columbine  with  horn  of  honey, 
Scented  fern,  and  agrimony. 
Clover,  catchfly,  adder's  tongue 
And  brier-roses,  dwelt  among; 
All  beside  was  unknown  waste. 
All  was  picture  as  he  passed. 

Wiser  far  than  human  seer. 
Yellow-breeched  philosopher! 
Seeing  only  what  is  fair. 
Sipping  only  what  is  sweet,  ;,  /, 

Thou  dost  mock  at  fate  and  care,)',' 
Leave  the  chaff,  and  take  the  wheat. 
When  the  fierce  northwestern  blast 
Cools  sea  and  land  so  far  and  fast. 
Thou  already  slumberest  deep; 
Woe  and  want  thou  canst  outsleep; 


Ode   to  a   Butterfly  ^5^7 

Want  and  woe,  which  torture  us, 
Thy  sleep  makes  ridiculous. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-1882] 


TO  A  BUTTERFLY 

I've  watched  you  now  a  full  half-hour, 
Self-poised  upon  that  yellow  flower; 
And,  little  Butterfly!  indeed 
I  know  not  if  you  sleep  or  feed. 
How  motionless!  not  frozen  seas 
More  motionless!  and  then 
What  joy  awaits  you,  when  the  breeze 
Has  found  you  out  among  the  trees, 
And  calls  you  forth  again! 

This  plot  of  orchard -ground  is  ours; 

My  trees  they  are,  my  Sister's  flowers; 

Here  rest  your  wings  when  they  are  weary; 

Here  lodge  as  in  a  sanctuary! 

Come  often  to  us,  fear  no  wrong; 

Sit  near  us  on  the  bough! 

We'll  talk  of  sunshine  and  of  song, 

And  summer  days,  when  we  are  young; 

Sweet  childish  days,  that  were  as  long 

As  twenty  days  are  now. 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 


ODE  TO  A  BUTTERFLY 

Thou  spark  of  life  that  wavest  wings  of  gold, 
Thou  songless  wanderer  mid  the  songful  birds. 
With  Nature's  secrets  in  thy  tints  unrolled 
Through  gorgeous  cipher,  past  the  reach  of  words. 

Yet  dear  to  every  child 

In  glad  pursuit  beguiled. 
Living  his  unspoiled  days  mid  flowers  and  flocks  and  herds.' 


1518  Poems  of  Nature 

Thou  winged  blossom,  liberated  thing, 
What  secret  tie  binds  thee  to  other  flowers, 
Still  held  within  the  garden's  fostering? 
Will  they  too  soar  with  the  completed  hours, 

Take  flight,  and  be  like  thee 

Irrevocably  free, 
Hovering  at  will  o'er  their  parental  bowers? 

Or  is  thy  luster  drawn  from  heavenly  hues, — 
A  sumptuous  drifting  fragment  of  the  sky, 
Caught  when  the  sunset  its  last  glance  imbues 
With  sudden  splendor,  and  the  tree-tops  high 

Grasp  that  swift  blazonry. 

Then  lend  those  tints  to  thee. 
On  thee  to  float  a  few  short  hours,  and  die? 

Birds  have  their  nests;  they  rear  their  eager  young. 
And  flit  on  errands  all  the  livelong  day; 
Each  iieldmouse  keeps  the  homestead  whence  it  sprung; 
But  thou  art  Nature's  freeman, — free  to  stray 

Unfettered  through  the  wood, 

Seeking  thine  airy  food. 
The  sweetness  spiced  on  every  blossomed  spray. 

The  garden  one  wide  banquet  spreads  for  thee, 

O  daintiest  reveller  of  the  joyous  earth! 

One  drop  of  honey  gives  satiety; 

A  second  draught  would  drug  thee  past  all  mirth. 

Thy  feast  no  orgy  shows; 

Thy  calm  eyes  never  close. 
Thou  soberest  sprite  to  which  the  sun  gives  birth. 


!8  UOHl 


And  yet  the  soul  of  man  upon  thy  wings 
Forever  soars  in  aspiration;  thou 
His  emblem  of  the  new  career  that  springs 
When  death's  arrest  bids  all  his  spirit  bow. 

He  seeks  his  hope  in  thee 

Of  immortality: 
Symbol  of  life,  me  with  such  faith  endow! 

Thomas  Wcntiiorth  Higginson  [1823-1911] 


Fireflies  15^9 


THE  BUTTERFLY 

I  HOLD  you  at  last  in  my  hand, 

Exquisite  child  of  the  air. 
Can  I  ever  understand 

How  you  grew  to  be  so  fair? 

You  came  to  my  linden  tree 

To  taste  its  delicious  sweet, 
I  sitting  here  in  the  shadow  and  shine 

Playing  around  its  feet. 

Now  I  hold  you  fast  in  my  hand, 

You  marvelous  butterfly. 
Till  you  help  me  to  understand 

The  eternal  mystery. 

From  that  creeping  thing  in  the  dust 
To  this  shining  bUss  in  the  blue! 

God  give  me  courage  to  trust 
I  can  break  my  chrysalis  too! 

Alice  Freeman  Palmer  [1855-1902] 

FIREFLIES 

I  SAW,  one  sultry  night  above  a  swamp, 
The  darkness  throbbing  with  their  golden  pomp! 
And  long  my  dazzled  sight  did  they  entrance 
With  the  weird  chaos  of  their  dizzy  dance! 
Quicker  than  yellow  leaves,  when  gales  despoil, 
Quivered  the  brilliance  of  their  mute  turmoil, 
Within  whose  light  was  intricately  blent 
Perpetual  rise,  perpetual  descent. 
As  though  their  scintillant  flickerings  had  met 
In  the  vague  meshes  of  some  airy  net! 
And  now  mysteriously  I  seemed  to  guess, 
While  watching  their  tumultuous  loveliness, 
What  fervor  of  deep  passion  strangely  thrives 
In  the  warm  richness  of  these  tropic  lives, 
Whose  wings  can  never  tremble  but  they  show 
These  hearts  of  living  fire  that  beat  below! 

Edgar  Fawccll  [1847-1904I 


1520  Poems   of  Nature 


THE  BLOOD   HORSE 

Gamarra  is  a  dainty  steed, 

Strong,  black,  and  of  a  noble  breed, 

Full  of  fire,  and  full  of  bone, 

With  all  his  line  of  fathers  known; 

Fine  his  nose,  his  nostrils  thin, 

But  blown  abroad  by  the  pride  within! 

His  mane  is  like  a  river  flowing, 

And  his  eyes  like  embers  glowing 

In  the  darkness  of  the  night, 

And  his  pace  as  swift  as  light. 

Look, — how  'round  his  straining  throat 

Grace  and  shifting  beauty  float! 

Sinewy  strength  is  in  his  reins. 

And  the  red  blood  gallops  through  his  veins; 

Richer,  redder,  never  ran 

Through  the  boasting  heart  of  man. 

He  can  trace  his  lineage  higher 

Than  the  Bourbon  dare  aspire, — ■ 

Douglas,  Guzman,  or  the  Guelph, 

Or  O'Brien's  blood  itself! 

■dr  ^'nw 
He,  who  hath  no  peer,  was  born, 
Here,  upon  a  red  March  morn ; 
But  his  famous  fathers  dead 
Were  Arabs  all,  and  Arab  bred. 
And  the  last  of  that  great  line 
Trod  like  one  of  a  race  divine! 
And  yet, — he  was  but  friend  to  one 
Who  fed  him  at  the  set  of  sun,  '-^'^ 

By  some  lone  fountain  fringed  with  green'/- 
With  him,  a  roving  Bedouin, 
He  lived,  (none  else  would  he  obey 
Through  all  the  hot  Arabian  day). 
And  died  untamed  upon  the  sands 
Where  Balkh  amidst  the  desert  stands. 

Bryan  Waller  Procter  [1787-1874] 


Birds  1521 


BIRDS 

Sure  maybe  ye've  heard  the  storm-thrush 

Whisthn'  bould  in  March, 
Before  there's  a  primrose  peepin'  out. 

Or  a  wee  red  cone  on  the  larch; 
Whistlin'  the  sun  to  come  out  o'  the  cloud, 

An'  the  wind  to  come  over  the  sea, 
But  for  all  he  can  whistle  so  clear  an'  loud, 

He's  never  the  bird  for  me. 

Sure  maybe  ye'vc  seen  the  song-thrush 

After  an  April  rain 
Slip  from  in-undher  the  drippin'  leaves, 

Wishful  to  sing  again; 
An'  low  wi'  love  when  he's  near  the  nest. 

An'  loud  from  the  top  o'  the  tree, 
But  for  all  he  can  flutter  the  heart  in  your  breast. 

He's  never  the  bird  for  me. 

Sure  maybe  ye've  heard  the  cushadoo 

Callin'  his  mate  in  May, 
When  one  sweet  thought  is  the  whole  of  his  life, 

An'  he  tells  it  the  one  sweet  way. 
But  my  heart  is  sore  at  the  cushadoo 

Filled  wid  his  own  soft  glee. 
Over  an'  over  his  "me  an'  you!" 

He's  never  the  bird  for  me. 

Sure  maybe  ye've  heard  the  red-breast 

Singin'  his  lone  on  a  thorn, 
Mindin'  himself  o'  the  dear  days  lost, 

Brave  wid  his  heart  forlorn. 
The  time  is  in  dark  November, 

An'  no  spring  hopes  has  he: 
"Remember,"  he  sings,  "remember!" 

Ay,  thongs  the  wee  bird  for  me.  • 

Moira  O'Neill  [i8 


1522 


Poems  of  Nature 


BIRDS 

Birds  are  singing  round  my  window, 

Tunes  the  sweetest  ever  heard, 
And  I  hang  my  cage  there  daily. 

But  I  never  catch  a  bird. 

So  with  thoughts  my  brain  is  peopled. 
And  they  sing  there  all  day  long: 

But  they  will  not  fold  their  pinions 
In  the  little  cage  of  Song! 

Richard  Henry  Stoddard  [1825-1903] 

SEA-BIRDS 

O  LONESOME  sea-gull,  floating  far  ,;[>• 

Over  the  ocean's  icy  waste,  7 

Aimless  and  wide  thy  wanderings  are, 
Forever  vainly  seeking  rest : — 
Where  is  thy  mate,  and  where  thy  nest?     ;     [ 

'Twixt  wintry  sea  and  wintry  sky. 
Cleaving  the  keen  air  with  thy  breast. 

Thou  sailest  slowly,  solemnly; 

No  fetter  on  thy  wing  is  pressed: — 
Where  is  thy  mate,  and  where  thy  nest? 

O  restless,  homeless  human  soul, 

Following  for  aye  thy  nameless  quest, 

The  gulls  float,  and  the  billows  roll; 
Thou  watchest  still,  and  questionest: — 
Where  is  thy  mate,  and  where  thy  nest? 

Elizabeth  Akers  [ 1 83 2- 1 9 1 1 ] 

THE  LITTLE  BEACH-BIRD 

Thou  little  bird,  thou  dwefler  by  the  sea,     r 
Why  takest  thou  its  melancholy  voice, 
And  with  that  boding  cry 
Why  o'er  the  waves  dost  fly?  4  • 

O,  rather,  bird,  with  me 

Through  the  fair  land  rejoice! 


The   Blackbird  ^S'^S 

Thy  flitting  form  comes  ghostly  dim  and  pale, 
As  driven  by  a  beating  storm  at  sea; 
Thy  cry  is  weak  and  scared, 
As  if  thy  mates  had  shared 
The  doom  of  us.    Thy  wail, — 
What  doth  it  bring  to  me? 

Thou  call 'st  along  the  sand,  and  haunt'st  the  surge, 
Restless,  and  sad;  as  if,  in  strange  accord 
With  the  motion  and  the  roar 
Of  waves  that  drive  to  shore, 
One  spirit  did  ye  urge — 
The  Mystery — the  Word. 

Of  thousands,  thou,  both  sepulchre  and  pall, 
Old  Ocean!    A  requiem  o'er  the  dead, 
From  out  thy  gloomy  cells, 
A  tale  of  mourning  tells, —  ^ 

Tells  of  man's  woe  and  fall. 

His  sinless  glory  fled.  '  ' 

Then  turn  thee,  little  bird,  and  take  thy  flight 
Where  the  complaining  sea  shall  sadness  bring 
Thy  spirit  nevermore. 
Come,  quit  with  me  the  shore. 
For  gladness  and  the  light. 
Where  birds  of  summer  sing. 

Richard  Henry  Dana  [1787-1870] 

THE   BLACKBIRD 

How  sweet  the  harmonies  of  afternoon: 
The  Blackbird  sings  along  the  sunny  breeze 

His  ancient  song  of  leaves,  and  summer  boon; 

Rich  breath  of  hayfields  streams  through  whispering  trees; 

And  birds  of  morning  trim  their  bustling  wings, 

And  listen  fondly — while  the  Blackbird  sings. 

How  soft  the  lovelight  of  the  West  reposes 

On  this  green  valley's  cheery  solitude, 
On  the  trim  cottage  with  its  screen  of  roses. 
On  the  gray  belfry  with  its  ivy  hood, 


1524  Poems   of  Nature 

And  murmuring  mill-race,  and  the  wheel  that  flings 
Its  bubbling  freshness — while  the  Blackbird  sings. 

The  very  dial  on  the  village  church 

Seems  as  'twere  dreaming  in  a  dozy  rest ; 
The  scribbled  benches  underneath  the  porch 

Bask  in  the  kindly  welcome  of  the  West; 
But  the  broad  casements  of  the  old  Three  Kings 
Blaze  like  a  furnace — while  the  Blackbird  sings. 

And  there  beneath  the  immemorial  elm 

Three  rosy  revellers  round  a  table  sit, 
And  through  gray  clouds  give  laws  unto  the  realm, 

Curse  good  and  great,  but  worship  their  own  wit, 
And  roar  of  fights,  and  fairs,  and  junketings. 
Corn,  colts,  and  curs — the  while  the  Blackbird  sings^i!  • 

Before  her  home,  in  her  accustomed  seat, 
The  tidy  Grandam  spins  beneath  the  shade 

Of  the  old  honeysuckle,  at  her  feet 

The  dreaming  pug,  and  purring  tabby  laid; 

To  her  low  chair  a  little  maiden  clings. 

And  spells  in  silence — while  the  Blackbird  sings. 

Sometimes  the  shadow  of  a  lazy  cloud 

Breathes  o'er  the  hamlet  with  its  gardens  green, 

While  the  far  fields  with  sunlight  overflowed 
Like  golden  shores  of  Fairyland  are  seen; 

Again,  the  sunshine  on  the  shadow  springs, 

And  fires  the  thicket  where  the  Blackbird  sings. 

The  woods,  the  lawn,  the  peaked  Manorhouse, 
With  its  peach-covered  walls,  and  rookery  loud. 

The  trim,  quaint  garden  alleys,  screened  with  boughs, 
The  lion-headed  gates,  so  grim  and  proud. 

The  mossy  fountain  with  its  murmurings, 

Lie  in  warm  sunshine — while  the  Blackbird  sings. 

The  ring  of  sflver  voices,  and  the  sheen 

Of  festal  garments — and  my  Lady  streams  , 

With  her  gay  court  across  the  garden  green; 

Some  laugh,  and  dance,  some  whisper  their  love-dreams; 


The   Blackbird  ^S'^S 

And  one  calls  for  a  little  page;  he  strings 

Her  lute  beside  her — while  the  Blackbird  sings. 

A  little  while — and  lo!  the  charm  is  heard, 

A  youth,  whose  life  has  been  all  Summer,  steals 
Forth  from  the  noisy  guests  around  the  board,  '■ 

•     Creeps  by  her  softly;  at  her  footstool  kneels; 
And,  when  she  pauses,  murmurs  tender  things         - 
Into  her  fond  ear — while  the  Blackbird  sings. 

The  smoke-wreaths  from  the  chimneys  curl  up  higher, 

And  dizzy  things  of  eve  begin  to  float 
Upon  the  light;  the  breeze  begins  to  tire; 

Half  way  to  sunset  with  a  drowsy  note 
The  ancient  clock  from  out  the  valley  swings; 
The  Grandam  nods — and  still  the  Blackbird  sings. 

Far  shouts  and  laughter  from  the  farmstead  peal, 
Where  the  great  stack  is  piling  in  the  sun ; 

Through  narrow  gates  o'erladen  wagons  reel. 
And  barking  curs  into  the  tumult  run; 

While  the  inconstant  wind  bears  off,  and  brings 

The  merry  tempest — and  the  Blackbird  sings. 

On  the  high  wold  the  last  look  of  the  sun 
Burns,  like  a  beacon,  over  dale  and  stream; 

The  shouts  have  ceased,  the  laughter  and  the  fun; 
The  Grandam  sleeps,  and  peaceful  be  her  dream; 

Only  a  hammer  on  an  anvil  rings; 

The  day  is  dying — still  the  Blackbird  sings. 

Now  the  good  Vicar  passes  from  his  gate 
Serene,  with  long  white  hair;  and  in  his  eye 

Burns  the  clear  spirit  that  hath  conquered  Fate, 
And  felt  the  wings  of  immortahty; 

His  heart  is  thronged  with  great  imaginings, 

And  tender  mercies — while  the  Blackbird  sings. 

Down  by  the  brook  he  bends  his  steps,  and  through 

A  lowly  wicket;  and  at  last  he  stands 
Awful  beside  the  bed  of  one  who  grew 

From  boyhood  with  him — who,  with  lifted  hands 


If '26  Poems   of  Nature 

And  eyes,  seems  listening  to  far  welcomings,    o  {^nA 
And  sweeter  music  than  the  Blackbird  sings,   ul  laH 

Two  golden  stars,  like  tokens  from  the  Blest,  ,,  mh  a 
Strike  on  his  dim  orbs  from  the  setting  sun; 

His  sinking  hands  seem  pointing  to  the  West; 

He  smiles  as  though  he  said — "Thy  will  be  done": 

His  eyes,  they  see  not  those  illuminings;  /^ 

His  ears,  they  hear  not  what  the  Blackbird  sings,    i 
Frederick  Tennyson  [1807-1808] 


THE  BLACKBIRD 

J 

When  smoke  stood  up  from  Ludlow 

And  mist  blew  off  from  Teme,  T 

And  blithe  afield  to  ploughing        iius'.  >  jilT 
Against  the  morning  beam 
I  strode  beside  my  team, 

The  blackbird  in  the  coppice  uojiiT 

Looked  out  to  see  me  stride,  .r;A 

And  hearkened  as  I  whistled  // 

The  trampling  team  beside^n  j]  /rio;.'!  orlT 
And  fluted  and  replied: 

"Lie  down,  lie  down,  young  yeoman; 

What  use  to  rise  and  rise? 
Rise  man  a  thousand  mornings 

Yet  down  at  last  he  lies. 

And  then  the  man  is  wise." 

I  heard  the  tune  he  sang  me. 

And  spied  his  yellow  bill; 
I  picked  a  stone  and  aimed  it 

And  threw  it  with  a  will: 

Then  the  bird  was  still. 


Then  my  soul  within  me 

Took  up  the  blackbird's  strain, 

And  still  beside  the  horses 
Along  the  dewy  lane 
It  sang  the  song  again: 


'D/;. 


The   Blackbird  1527 

"Lie  down,  lie  down,  young  yeoman; 

The  sun  moves  always  west; 
The  road  one  treads  to  labor 

Will  lead  one  home  to  rest,' 

And  that  will  be  the  best." 

Alfred  Edward  Housman  [1859- 


a\A 


THE  BLACKBIRD 


The  nightingale  has  a  lyre  of  gold; 

The  lark's  is  a  claiion  call, 
And  the  blackbird  plays  but  a  box-wood  flute, 

But  I  love  him  best  of  all. 

For  his  song  is  all  of  the  joy  of  hfe. 
And  we  in  the  mad,  spring  w'eather, 

We  too  have  listened  till  he  sang 
Our  hearts  and  lips  together. 

William  Ernest  Henley  [1849- 1903] 


THE  BLACKBIRD 

Ov  all  the  birds  upon  the  wing 
Between  the  zunny  showers  o'  spring, — 
Vor  all  the  lark,  a-swingen  high, 
Mid  zing  below  a  cloudless  sky. 
An'  sparrows,  clust'ren  roun'  the  bough, 
Mid  chatter  to  the  men  at  plough, — 
The  blackbird,  whisslen  in  among 
The  boughs,  do  zing  the  gayest  zong.  T /I 

Vor  we  do  hear  the  blackbird  zing 
His  sweetest  ditties  in  the  spring. 
When  nippen  win's  noo  mwore  do  blow 
Vrom  northern  skies,  wi'  sleet  or  snow, 
But  dreve  light  doust  along  between 
The  leane-zide  hedges,  thick  an'  green;  , 
An'  zoo  the  blackbird  in  among 
The  boughs  do  zing  the  gayest  zong. 


1528  Poems   of  Nature 

'Tis  blithe,  wi'  newly-opened  eyes, 

To  zee  the  mornen's  ruddy  skies; 

Or,  out  a-haulen  frith  or  lops 

Vrom  new-pleshed  hedge  or  new- veiled  copse, 

To  rest  at  noon  in  primrwose  beds 

Below  the  white-barked  woak-trees'  heads; 

But  there's  noo  time,  the  whole  day  long, 

Lik'  evenen  wi'  the  blackbird's  zong. 

Vor  when  my  work  is  all  a-done 
Avore  the  zetten  o'  the  zun, 
Then  blushen  Jeane  do  walk  along 
The  hedge  to  meet  me  in  the  drong, 
An'  stay  till  all  is  dim  an'  dark 
Bezides  the  ashen  tree's  white  bark; 
An'  all  bezides  the  blackbird's  shrill 
An'  runnen  evenen-whissle's  still. 

An'  there  in  bwoyhood  I  did  rove 

Wi'  pryen  eyes  along  the  drove 

To  vind  the  nest  the  blackbird  meade 

O'  grass-stalks  in  the  high  bough's  sheade; 

Or  climb  aloft,  wi'  cHngen  knees, 

Vor  crows'  aggs  up  in  swayen  trees, 

While  frightened  blackbirds  down  below 

Did  chatter  o'  their  little  foe. 

An'  zoo  there's  noo  pleiice  lik'  the  drong, 

Where  I  do  hear  the  blackbird's  zong. 

William  Barnes  [1801-] 

ROBERT  OF  LINCOLN 

Merrily  swinging  on  brier  and  weed, 
Near  to  the  nest  of  his  little  dame. 
Over  the  mountain-side  or  mead,       •;  7 
Robert  of  Lincoln  is  telling  his  name: 
Bob-o'-link,  bob-o'-link, 
Spink,  spank,  spink; 
Snug  and  safe  is  that  nest  of  ours, 
Hidden  among  the  summer  flowers. 

Chee,  chee,  chee. 


Robert  of  Lincoln  ^S'^9 

Robert  of  Lincoln  is  gayly  dressed, 

Wearing  a  bright  black  wedding-coat; 
White  are  his  shoulders  and  white  his  crest. 
Hear  him  call  in  his  merry  note : 
Bob-o'-link,  bob-o'-link, 
Spink,  spank,  spink; 
Look,  what  a  nice  new  coat  is  mine. 
Sure  there  was  never  a  bird  so  fine. 

Chee,  chee,  chee. 

Robert  of  Lincoln's  Quaker  wife. 

Pretty  and  quiet,  with  plain  brown  wings, 
Passing  at  home  a  patient  hfe, 

Broods  in  the  grass  while  her  husband  sings: 
Bob-o'-link,  bob-o'-link, 
Spink,  spank,  spink; 
Brood,  kind  creature;  you  need  not  fear 
Thieves  and  robbers  while  I  am  here. 

Chee,  chee,  chee. 

Modest  and  shy  as  a  nun  is  she; 

One  weak  chirp  is  her  only  note. 
Braggart  and  prince  of  braggarts  is  he, 
Pouring  boasts  from  his  little  throat: 
Bob-o'-link,  bob-o'-link, 
Spink,  spank,  spink; 
Never  was  I  afraid  of  man; 
Catch  me,  cowardly  knaves,  if  you  can! 
Chee,  chee,  chee. 

Six  white  eggs  on  a  bed  of  hay. 

Flecked  with  purple,  a  pretty  sight! 
There  as  the  mother  sits  all  day, 
Robert  is  singing  with  all  his  might: 
Bob-o'-link,  bob-o'-link, 
Spink,  spank,  spink; 
Nice  good  wife,  that  never  goes  out, 
Keeping  house  while  I  frolic  about. 

Chee,  chee,  chee. 


1530  Poems  of  Nature 

Soon  as  the  little  ones  chip  the  shell,       , [,,f}- 

Six  wide  mouths  are  open  for  food;      // 
Robert  of  Lincoln  bestirs  him  well, 
Gathering  seeds  for  the  hungry  brood. 
Bob-o'-link,  bob-o'-hnk, 
Spink,  spank,  spink; 
This  new  life  is  likely  to  be 
Hard  for  a  gay  young  fellow  like  me. 

Chee,  chee,  chee. 

Robert  of  Lincoln  at  length  is  made 

Sober  with  work,  and  silent  with  care; 
Off  is  his  holiday  garment  laid. 
Half  forgotten  that  merry  air: 
-'=.         Bob-o'-link,  bob-o'-link, 
Spink,  spank,  spink; 
Nobody  knows  but  my  mate  and  I 
Where  our  nest  and  our  nestlings  lie. 

Chee,  chee,  chee. 

Summer  wanes;  the  children  are  grown; 

Fun  and  frolic  no  more  he  knows; 
Robert  of  Lincoln's  a  humdrum  crone; 
Off  he  flies,  and  we  sing  as  he  goes : 
Bob-o'-link,  bob-o'-link, 
Spink,  spank,  spink; 
When  you  can  pipe  that  merry  old  strain, 
Robert  of  Lincoln,  come  back  again. 

Chee,  chee,  chee. 
William   Cullen  Bryant  [1794-1878] 


THE  O'LINCON  FAMILY 

A  FLOCK  of  merry  singing-birds  were  sporting  in  the  grove; 
Some  were  warbling  cheerily,  and  some  were  making  love: 
There  were  Bobolincon,  Wadolincon,  Winterseeble,   Con- 

quedle, — 
A  livelier  set  was  never  led  by  tabor,  pipe,  or  fiddle, — 
Crying,  "Phew,  shew,  Wadolincon,  see,  see,  Bobolincon, 
Down  among  the  tickletops,  hiding  in  the  buttercups! 


The   Bobolink  1531 

I  know  a  saucy  chap,  I  see  his  shining  cap 
Bobbing  in  the  clover  there — see,  see,  see!" 

Up  flies  Bobolincon,  perching  on  an  apple-tree, 
Startled  by  his  rival's  song,  quickened  by  his  raillery, 
Soon  he  spies  the  rogue  afloat,  curveting  in  the  air, 
And  merrily  he  turns  about,  and  warns  him  to  beware! 
"  'Tis  you  that  would  a- wooing  go,  down  among  the  rushes 

O! 
But  wait  a  week,  till  flowers  are  cheery, — wait  a  week,  and, 

ere  you  marry. 
Be  sure  of  a  house  wherein  to  tarry! 
Wadolink,  Whiskodink,  Tom  Denny,  wait,  wait,  wait!" 

Every  one's  a  funny  fellow;  every  one's  a  little  mellow; 

Follow,  follow,  follow,  follow,  o'er  the  hill  and  in  the  hollow! 

Merrily,  merrily,  there  they  hie;  now  they  rise  and  now  they 
fly; 

They  cross  and  turn,  and  in  and  out,  and  down  in  the  mid- 
dle and  wheel  about,-  "" '  ^'"^^  ;  "^'^ ' 

With  a  "Phew,  shew,  Wadolincon!  listen  to  me,  Bobo- 
lincon!— 

Happy's  the  wooing  that's  speedily  doing,  that's  speedily 
doing. 

That's  merry  and  over  with  the  bloom  of  the  clover! 

Bobolincon,  Wadolincon,  Winterseeble,  follow,  follow,  fol- 
low me!" 

Wilson  Flagg  [1805-1884] 


THE  BOBOLINK 

Bobolink!  that  in  the  meadow. 
Or  beneath  the  orchard's  shadow, 
Keepest  up  a  constant  rattle 
Joyous  as  my  children's  prattle, 
Welcome  to  the  north  again! 
Welcome  to  mine  ear  thy  strain. 
Welcome  to  mine  eye  the  sight 
Of  thy  buff,  thy  black  and  white. 


1532  Poems  of  Nature 

Brighter  plumes  may  greet  the  sun     'Un^  s  woxii  X 
By  the  banks  of  Amazon;  il  gniddoH 

Sweeter  tones  may  weave  the  spell 
Of  enchanting  Philomel; 
But  the  tropic  bird  would  fail, 
And  the  Enghsh  nightingale, 
If  we  should  compare  their  worth 
•  n  With  thine  endless,  gushing  mirth. 

When  the  ides  of  May  are  past, 

June  and  Summer  ncaring  fast. 

While  from  depths  of  blue  above 

Comes  the  mighty  breath  of  love, 

Calling  out  each  bud  and  flower 

With  resistless,  secret  power, 

Waking  hope  and  fond  desire, 

Kindling  the  erotic  fire, 

Filling  youths'  and  maidens'  dreams 
-biff         With  mysterious,  pleasing  themes; 

Then,  amid  the  sunhght  clear  ^^  ^^ 

-odo.-      Floating  in  the  fragrant  air,  ,    ^^j-; 

'  Thou  dost  fill  each  heart  with  pleasure 

By  thy  glad  ecstatic  measure.  , 

A  single  note,  so  sweet  and  low, 
Like  a  full  heart's  overflow. 
Forms  the  prelude;  but  the  strain 
Gives  no  such  tone  again, 
'*•  For  the  wild  and  saucy  song 

Leaps  and  skips  the  notes  among, 
With  such  quick  and  sportive  play, 
Ne'er  was  madder,  merrier  lay. 

Gayest  songster  of  the  Spring! 
Thy  melodies  before  me  bring 
Visions  of  some  dream-built  land, 
Where,  by  constant  zephyrs  fanned, 
I  might  walk  the  livelong  day. 
Embosomed  in  perpetual  May. 
Nor  care  nor  fear  thy  bosom  knows; 
For  thee  a  tempest  never  blows; 


My   Catbird  1533 

But  when  our  northern  Summer's  o'er, 
By  Delaware's  or  Schuylkill's  shore  -'- 

The  wild  rice  hfts  its  airy  head, 
And  royal  feasts  for  thee  are  spread. 
And  when  the  Winter  threatens  there/  luiJ''- 
Thy  tireless  wings  yet  own  no  fear.     •       '  ■'^ 
But  bear  thee  to  more  southern  coasts, 
Far  beyond  the  reach  of  frosts. 

Bobolink!  still  may  thy  gladness 

Take  from  me  all  taint  of  sadness; 

Fill  my  soul  with  trust  unshaken 

In  that  Being  who  has  taken 

Care  for  every  hving  thing, 

In  Summer,  Winter,  Fall,  and  Spring. 

Thomas  Hill  [i8i8-i8gi] 

MY   CATBIRD 

A  CAPRICCIO 

Nightingale  I  never  heard, 

Nor  skylark,  poet's  bird; 

But  there  is  an  aether-winger 

So  surpasses  every  singer, 

(Though  unknown  to  lyric  fame,) 

That  at  morning,  or  at  nooning, 

When  I  hear  his  pipe  a-tuning, 

Down  I  fling  Keats,  Shelley,  Wordsworth, — 

What  are  all  their  songs  of  birds  worth? 

All  their  soaring 

Souls'  outpouring? 

When  my  Mimus  Carolincnsis, 

(That's  his  Latin  name,) 

When  my  warbler  wild  commences  . 

Song's  hilarious  rhapsody. 

Just  to  please  himself  and  me! 

Primo  Cantantc! 

Scherzo!  Andante i 

Piano,  pianissimo! 

Presto,  prestissimo! 


1534  Poems  of  Nature 

Hark!  are  there  nine  birds  or  ninety  and  nine? 

And  now  a  miraculous  gurgling  gushes      ,  ■{ 

Like  nectar  from  Hebe's  Olympian  bottle,  ' 

The  laughter  of  tune  from  a  rapturous  throttle! 

Such  melody  must  be  a  hermit-thrush's!  .ay 

But  that  otlier  caroler,  nearer, 

Outrivaling  rivalry  with  clearer 

Sweetness  incredibly  fine! 

Is  it  oriole,  redbird,  or  bluebird, 

Or  some  strange,  un-Auduboned  new  bird? 

All  one,  sir,  both  this  bird  and  that  bird, 

The  whole  flight  are  all  the  same  catbird! 

The  whole  visible  and  invisible  choir  you  see 

On  one  lithe  twig  of  yon  green  tree. 

Flitting,  feathery  Blondel! 

Listen  to  his  rondel! 

To  his  lay  romantical ! 

To  his  sacred  canticle! 

Hear  him  lilting, 

See  him  tilting 

His  saucy  head  and  tail,  and  fluttering 

While  uttering 

All  the  diificult  operas  under  the  sun 

Just  for  fun; 

Or  in  tipsy  revelry, 

Or  at  love  devilry, 

Or,  disdaining  his  divine  gift  and  art, 

Like  an  inimitable  poet 

Who  captivates  the  world's  heart 

And  don't  know  it. 

Hear  him  lilt ! 

See  him  tilt! 

Then  suddenly  he  stops. 

Peers  about,  flirts,  hops, 

As  if  looking  where  he  might  gather  up 

The  wasted  ecstasy  just  spilt 

From  the  quivering  cup 

Of  his  bliss  overrun. 

Then,  as  in  mockery  of  all 

The  tuneful  spells  that  e'er  did  fall 


The  Herald  Crane  ^53S 

From  vocal  pipe,  or  evermore  shall  rise, 
He  snarls,  and  mews,  and  flies. 

William  Henry  V enable  [1836- 


THE  HERALD   CRANE 

Oh!  say  you  so,  bold  sailor 

In  the  sun-lit  deeps  of  sky! 
Dost  thou  so  soon  the  seed-time  tell 

In  thy  imperial  cry, 
As  circling  in  yon  shoreless  sea 

Thine  unseen  form  goes  drifting  by? 

I  cannot  trace  in  the  noon-day  glare 

Thy  regal  flight,  O  crane! 
From  the  leaping  might  of  the  fiery  light 

Mine  eyes  recoil  in  pain, 
But  on  mine  ear,  thine  echoing  cry 

Falls  like  a  bugle  strain. 

The  mellow  soil  glows  beneath  my  feet. 

Where  lies  the  buried  grain; 
The  warm  light  floods  the  length  and  breadth 

Of  the  vast,  dim,  shimmering  plain. 
Throbbing  with  heat  and  the  nameless  thrill 

Of  the  birth-time's  restless  pain. 

On  weary  wing,  plebeian  geese 

Push  on  their  arrowy  line 
Straight  into  the  north,  or  snowy  brant 

In  dazzling  sunshine,  gloom  and  shine; 
But  thou,  O  crane,  save  for  thy  sovereign  cry, 

At  thy  majestic  height 
On  proud,  extended  wings  sweep'st  on 

In  lonely,  easeful  flight. 

Then  cry,  thou  martial-throated  herald!  rr 

Cry  to  the  sun,  and  sweep 
And  swing  along  thy  mateless,  tireless  course 

Above  the  clouds  that  sleep 


1536  Poems  of  Nature 

Afloat  on  lazy  air — cry  on!    Send  down 
Thy  trumpet  note — it  seems      ■  'uiiiia  aH 

The  voice  of  hope  and  dauntless  will, 
And  breaks  the  spell  of  dreams. 

Hamlin  Garland  [1860- 


THE   CROW 

With  rakish  eye  and  plenished  crop, 

Oblivious  of  the  farmer's  gun, 
Upon  the  naked  ash-tree  top 

The  Crow  sits  basking  in  the  sun. 

An  old  ungodly  rogue,  I  wot ! 

For,  perched  in  black  against  the  blue, 
His  feathers,  torn  with  beak  and  shot. 

Let  woeful  glints  of  April  through. 

The  year's  new  grass,  and,  golden-eyed, 
The  daisies  sparkle  underneath, 

And  chestnut-trees  on  either  side 
Have  opened  every  ruddy  sheath. 

But  doubtful  still  of  frost  and  snow. 
The  ash  alone  stands  stark  and  bare, 

And  on  its  topmost  twig  the  Crow 
Takes  the  glad  morning's  sun  and  air. 

William  Canton  [1845- 


TO  THE   CUCKOO 

Hail,  beauteous  stranger  of  the  grove! 

Thou  messenger  of  Spring! 
Now  Heaven  repairs  thy  rural  seat. 

And  woods  thy  welcome  ring. 

What  time  the  daisy  decks  the  green, 

Thy  certain  voice  we  hear: 
Hast  thou  a  star  to  guide  thy  path. 

Or  mark  the  rolling  year?        '  svodA 


!ttO 


The  Cuckoo  ^53  7 

Delightful  visitant!  with  thee  ;,  ( ; 

I  hail  the  time  of  flowers, 
And  hear  the  sound  of  music  sweet 

From  birds  among  the  bowers. 

The  school-boy,  wandering  througl;i  tj^e  wood 

To  pull  the  primrose  gay,         j,,,/v 
Starts,  the  new  voice  of  Spring  to  hear, 

And  imitates  thy  lay. 

What  time  the  pea  puts  on  the  bloom, 

Thou  fli'st  thy  vocal  vale, 
An  annual  guest  in  other  lands. 

Another  Spring  to  hail. 

Sweet  bird!  thy  bower  is  ever  green, 

Thy  sky  is  ever  clear; 
Thou  hast  no  sorrow  in  thy  song, 

No  Winter  in  thy  year! 

O  could  I  fly,  I'd  fly  with  thee! 

We'd  make,  with  joyful  wing, 
Our  annual  visit  o'er  the  globe, 

Companions  of  the  Spring. 

John  Logan  [1748-1788] 

THE  CUCKOO 

We  heard  it  calling,  clear  and  low. 
That  tender  April  morn;  we  stood 
And  listened  in  the  quiet  wood. 

We  heard  it,  ay,  long  years  ago. 

It  came,  and  with  a  strange,  sweet  cry, 

A  friend,  but  from  a  far-ofif  land; 

We  stood  and  listened,  hand  in  hand, 
And  heart  to  heart,  my  Love  and  I. 

In  dreamland  then  we  found  our  joy, 
And  so  it  seemed  as  'twere  the  Bird 
That  Helen  in  old  times  had  heard 

At  noon  beneath  the  oaks  of  Troy. 


1538  Poems  of  Nature 

O  time  far  off,  and  yet  so' near!     ' 

It  came  to  her  in  that  hushed  grove, 
It  warbled  while  the  wooing  throve, 

It  sang  the  song  she  loved  to  hear. 

'■      And  now  I  hear  its  voice  again, 

And  still  its  message  is  of  peace. 
It  sings  of  love  that  will  not  cease — 
For  me  it  never  sings  in  vain. 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  [i 821-1895] 


TO  THE   CUCKOO 

O  BLITHE  New-comer!    I  have  heard, 

I  hear  thee  and  rejoice. 
O  Cuckoo !  shall  I  call  thee  Bird, 

Or  but  a  wandering  Voice? 

While  I  am  lying  on  the  grass 

Thy  twofold  shout  I  hear; 
From  hill  to  hill  it  seems  to  pass. 

At  once  far  off,  and  near. 

Though  babbling  only  to  the  Vale 

Of  sunshine  and  of  flowers, 
Thou  bringest  unto  me  a  tale 

Of  visionary  hours. 

Thrice  welcome,  darling  of  the  Spring! 

Even  yet  thou  art  to  me 
No  bird,  but  an  invisible  thing, 

A  voice,  a  mystery; 

The  same  whom  in  my  school-boy  days 

I  Hstened  to;  that  Cry 
Which  made  me  look  a  thousand  ways, 

In  bush,  and  tree,  and  sky. 

To  seek  thee  did  I  often  rove 

Through  woods  and  on  the  green; 

And  thou  wert  still  a  hope,  a  love; 
Still  longed  for,  never  seen. 


The   Hawkbit  ^539 

And  I  can  listen  to  thee  yet;  / 

Can  lie  upon  the  plain      •"/ 
And  listen,  till  I  do  beget 

That  golden  time  again. 

O  blessed  Bird!  the  earth  we  pace 

Again  appears  to  be 
An  unsubstantial,  faery  place; 

That  is  fit  home  for  Thee! 

William  Wordsworth  [i 770-1850] 


THE  EAGLE 

A  FRAGMENT 


He  clasps  the  crag  with  crooked  hands; 
Close  to  the  sun  in  lonely  lands. 
Ringed  with  the  azure  world,  he  stands. 


'H/. 


The  wrinkled  sea  beneath  him  crawls; 
He  watches  from  his  mountain  walls. 
And  like  a  thunderbolt  he  falls. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [i 809-1 89 2] 


THE  HAWKBIT 

How  sweetly  on  the  autumn  scene, 
When  haws  are  red  amid  the  green, 
The  hawkbit  shines  with  face  of  cheer, 
The  favorite  of  the  faltering  year! 

When  days  grow  short  and  nights  grow  cold, 
How  fairly  gleams  its  eye  of  gold 
On  pastured  field  and  grassy  hill, 
Along  the  roadside  and  the  rill! 


It  seems  the  spirit  of  a  fiower. 
This  offspring  of  the  autumn  hour, 
Wandering  back  to  earth  to  bring 
Some  kindly  afterthought  of  spring. 


!T 


1 540  Poems  of  Nature 

A  dandelion's  ghost  might  so 
Amid  Elysian  meadows  blow, 
Become  more  fragile  and  more  fine 
Breathing  the  atmosphere  divine. 

Charles  G.  D.  Roberts  [1860- 


THE  HERON 

O  MELANCHOLY  Bird,  a  winter's  day 
Thou  standest  by  the  margin  of  the  pool. 
And,  taught  by  God,  dost  thy  whole  being  school 
To  Patience,  which  all  evil  can  allay. 
God  has  appointed  thee  the  Fish  thy  prey; 
And  given  thyself  a  lesson  to  the  Fool 
Unthrifty,  to  submit  to  moral  rule, 
And  his  unthinking  course  by  thee  to  weigh. 
There  need  not  schools,  nor  the  Professor's  chair, 
Though  these  be  good,  true  wisdom  to  impart; 
He,  who  has  not  enough  for  these  to  spare  p 
Of  time,  or  gold,  may  yet  amend  his  heart,  •  ■ 
And  teach  his  soul,  by  brooks  and  rivers  fair: 
Nature  is  always  wise  in  every  part. 

Edward  IIovell-Thurlow  [i78i-i82g] 


THE  JACKDAW 

There  is  a  bird,  who  by  his  coat, 
And  by  the  hoarseness  of  his  note, 

Might  be  supposed  a  crow; 
A  great  frequenter  of  the  church, 
Where  bishop-like  he  finds  a  perch.      \' 

And  dormitory  too. 

Above  the  steeple  shines  a  plate. 
That  turns  and  turns,  to  indicate 

From  what  point  blows  the  weather; 
Look  up — your  brains  begin  to  swim,  • 
'Tis  in  the  clouds — that  pleases  him,  /.' 

He  chooses  it  the  rather.  >'d 


The  Green   Linnet  1541 

Fond  of  the  speculative  height. 
Thither  he  wings  his  airy  flight, 

And  thence  securely  sees 
The  bustle  and  the  raree-show, 
That  occupy  mankind  below, 

Secure  and  at  his  ease. 

You  think,  no  doubt,  he  sits  and  muses 
On  future  broken  bones  and  bruises, 

If  he  should  chance  to  fall. 
No:  not  a  single  thought  like  that 
Employs  his  philosophic  pate. 

Or  troubles  it  at  all. 

He  sees  that  this  great  roundabout. 
The  world,  with  all  its  medley  rout, 

Church,  army,  physic,  law, 
Its  customs,  and  its  businesses 
Is  no  concern  at  all  of  his, 

And  says— what  says  he?—"  Caw." 

Thrice  happy  bird!    I  too  have  seen 
Much  of  the  vanities  of  men; 

And,  sick  of  having  seen  'em. 
Would  cheerfully  these  limbs  resign 
For  such  a  pair  of  wings  as  thine. 
And  such  a  head  between  'em. 

From  the  Latin  of  Vincent  Bourne, 

by  William  Cowper  [1731-1800] 


THE  GREEN  LINNET 

Beneath  these  fruit-tree  boughs  that  shed 
Their  snow-white  blossoms  on  my  head, 
With  brightest  sunshine  round  me  spread 

Of  Spring's  unclouded  weather, 
In  this  sequestered  nook  how  sweet 
To  sit  upon  my  orchard-seat ! 
And  flowers  and  birds  once  more  to  greet. 

My  last  year's  friends  together. 


1542  Poems  of  Nature 

One  have  I  marked,  the  happiest  guest 
In  all  this  covert  of  the  blest: 
Hail  to  Thee,  far  above  the  rest 

In  joy  of  voice  and  pinion ! 
Thou,  Linnet!  in  thy  green  array 
Presiding  Spirit  here  to-day 
Dost  lead  the  revels  of  the  May, 

And  this  is  thy  dominion. 

While  birds,  and  butterflies,  and  flowers 
Make  all  one  band  of  param.ours. 
Thou,  ranging  up  and  down  the  bowers, 

Art  sole  in  thy  employment; 
A  Life,  a  Presence  like  the  air. 
Scattering  thy  gladness  without  care, 
Too  blest  with  any  one  to  pair, 

Thyself  thy  own  enjoyment. 

Amid  yon  tuft  of  hazel  trees, 
That  twinkle  to  the  gusty  breeze, 
Behold  him  perched  in  ecstasies. 

Yet  seeming  still  to  hover; 
There!  where  the  flutter  of  his  wings 
Upon  his  back  and  body  flings 
Shadows  and  sunny  glimmerings. 

That  cover  him  all  over. 

My  dazzled  sight  he  oft  deceives — 
A  Brother  of  the  .dancing  leaves; 
Then  flits,  and  from  the  cottage-eaves 

Pours  forth  his  song  in  gushes, 
As  if  by  that  exulting  strain 
He  mocked  and  treated  with  disdain 
The  voiceless  Form  he  chose  to  feign 

While  fluttering  in  the  bushes. 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 


TO  THE   MAN-OF-WAR-BIRD 

Thou  who  hast  slept  all  night  upon  the  storm. 
Waking  renewed  on  thy  prodigious  pinions, 


The   Maryland    Yellow-Throat       1543 

(Burst  the  wild  storm?  above  it  thou  ascended'st, 
And  rested  on  the  sky,  thy  slave  that  cradled  thee,) 
Now  a  blue  point,  far,  far  in  heaven  floating. 
As  to  the  light  emerging  here  on  deck  I  watch  thee, 
(Myself  a  speck,  a  point  on  the  world's  floating  vast.) 

Far,  far  at  sea. 

After  the  night's  fierce  drifts  have  strewn  the  shore  with 

wrecks. 
With  re-appearing  day  as  now  so  happy  and  serene, 
The  rosy  and  elastic  dawn,  the  Hashing  sun, 
The  limpid  spread  of  air  cerulean, 
Thou  also  re-appearest. 

Thou  born  to  match  the  gale,  (thou  art  all  wings,) 

To  cope  with  heaven  and  earth  and  sea  and  hurricane. 

Thou  ship  of  air  that  never  furl'st  thy  sails, 

Days,  even  weeks  untired  and  onward,   through  spaces, 

realms  gyrating. 
At  dusk  that  look'st  on  Senegal,  at  morn  America, 
That  sport 'st  amid  the  lightning-flash  and  thunder-cloud, 
In  them,  in  thy  experiences,  hadst  thou  my  soul. 
What  joys!  what  joys  were  thine! 

Wall  Whitman  [1810-1892] 

THE  MARYLAND  YELLOW-THROAT 

When  May  bedecks  the  naked  trees 
With  tassels  and  embroideries, 
And  many  blue-eyed  violets  beam 
Along  the  edges  of  the  stream,. 
I  hear  a  voice  that  seems  to  say, 
Now  near  at  hand,  now  far  away, 
"Witchery — witchery — witchery." 

An  incantation  so  serene. 
So  innocent,  befits  the  scene: 
There's  magic  in  that  small  bird's  "Ote—       p 
See,  there  he  flits — the  Yellow-throat; 
A  living  sunbeam,  tipped  with  wings, 
A  spark  of  light  that  shines  and  sings 
' '  Witchery — witchery— witchery. ' ' 


1544  Poems  of  Nature 

You  prophet  with  a  pleasant  name, 
If  out  of  Mary-land  you  came, 
You  know  the  way  that  thither  goes 
Where  Mary's  lovely  garden  grows: 
Fly  swiftly  back  to  her,  I  pray. 
And  try,  to  call  her  down  this  way, 

"  Witchery — witchery — witchery  !  "  ' ''  '^ 

Tell  her  to  leave  her  cockle-shells, 
And  all  her  httle  silver  bells 
That  blossom  into  melody, 
And  all  her  maids  less  fair  than  she. 
She  does  not  need  these  pretty  things, 
For  everywhere  she  comes,  she  brings 
"  Witchery — witchery — witchery  !  " 

The  woods  are  greening  overhead. 
And  flowers  adorn  each  mossy  bed; 
The  waters  babble  as  they  run^ 
One  thing  is  lacking,  only  one: 
If  Mary  were  but  here  to-day, 
I  would  believe  your  charming  lay, 
"  Witchery — witchery — witchery  /" 

Along  the  shady  road  I  look — 
Who's  coming  now  across  the  brook? 
A  woodland  maid,  all  robed  in  white — 
The  leaves  dance  round  her  with  delight, 
The  stream  laughs  out  beneath  her  feet — 
Sing,  merry  bird,  the  charm's  complete, 
"  Witchery — witchery — witchery  ! " 

Henry  Van  Dyke  [1852- 


LAMENT  OF  A  MOCKING-BIRD 

Silence  instead  of  thy  sweet  song,  my  bird, 
Which  through  the  darkness  of  my  winter  days 

Warbling  of  summer  sunshine  still  was  heard; 
Mute  is  thy  song,  and  vacant  is  thy  place. 


"O   Nightingale!   Thou   Surely   Art"     1545 

The  spring  comes  back  again,  the  fields  rejoice, 

Carols  of  gladness  ring  from  every  tree; 
But  I  shall  hear  thy  wild  triumphant  voice 

No  more:  my  summer  song  has  died  with  thee. 

What  didst  thou  sing  of,  O  my  summer  bird? 

The  broad,  bright,  brimming  river,  whose  swift  sweep 
And  whirling  eddies  by  the  home  are  heard, 

Rushing,  resistless,  to  the  calling  deep. 

What  didst  thou  sing  of,  thou  melodious  sprite? 

Pine  forests,  with  smooth  russet  carpets  spread, 
Where  e'en  at  noonday  dimly  falls  the  light, 

Through  gloomy  blue-green  branches  overhead. 

What  didst  thou  sing  of,  O  thou  jubilant  soul? 

Ever-fresh  flowers  and  never-leafless  trees. 
Bending  great  ivory  cups  to  the  control 

Of  the  soft  swaying,  orange  scented  breeze. 

What  didst  thou  sing  of,  thou  embodied  glee? 

The  wide  wild  marshes  with  their  clashing  reeds 
And  topaz-tinted  channels,  where  the  sea 

Daily  its  tides  of  briny  freshness  leads. 

What  didst  thou  sing  of,  O  thou  winged  voice? 

Dark,  bronze-leaved  oaks,  with  silver  mosses  crowned, 
Where  thy  free  kindred  live,  love,  and  rejoice. 

With  wreaths  of  golden  jasmine  curtained  round. 

These  didst  thou  sing  of,  spirit  of  delight! 

From  thy  own  radiant  sky,  thou  quivering  spark! 
These  thy  sweet  southern  dreams  of  warmth  and  light, 

Through  the  grim  northern  winter  drear  and  dark. 

Frances  Aniic  Kcniblc  [1809-1893] 


"O  NIGHTINGALE!  THOU  SURELY  ART" 

O  nightingale!  thou  surely  art 

A  creature  of  a  "fiery  heart":  — 

These  notes  of  thine— they  pierce  and  pierce; 

Tumultuous  harmony  and  fierce! 


}  1546  Poems   of  Nature 

Thou  sing'st  as  if  the  God  of  wine 
Had  helped  thee  to  a  Valentine; 
A  song  in  mockery  and  despite 
Of  shades,  and  dews,  and  silent  night; 
And  steady  bhss,  and  all  the  loves 
Now  sleeping  in  these  peaceful  groves. 

I  heard  a  Stock-dove  sing  or  say 

His  homely  tale,  this  very  day; 

Plis  voice  was  buried  among  trees, 

Yet  to  be  come  at  by  the  breeze: 

He  did  not  cease,  but  cooed — and  cooed; 

And  somewhat  pensively  he  wooed: 

He  sang  of  love,  with  quiet  blending. 

Slow  to  begin,  and  never  ending; 

Of  serious  faith,  and  inward  glee; 

That  was  the  Song — the  Song  for  mc! 

William  Wordsiuoyth  [1770-1850] 


PHILOMEL 

As  it  fell  upon  a  day 
In  the  merry  month  of  May, 
Sitting  in  a  pleasant  shade 
Which  a  grove  of  myrtles  made, 
Beasts  did  leap  and  birds  did  sing, 
Trees  did  grow  and  plants  did  spring; 
Everything  did  banish  moan 
Save  the  Nightingale  alone: 
She,  poor  bird,  as  all  forlorn 
Leaned  her  breast  up-till  a  thorn, 
And  there  sung  the  doleful'st  ditt}--, 
That  to  hear  it  was  great  pity. 
Fie,  fie,  fie  !  now  would  she  cry; 
Tereu,  Tereii  !  by  and  by; 
That  to  hear  her  so  complain 
Scarce  I  could  from  tears  refrain; 
For  her  griefs  so  lively  shown 
Made  me  think  upon  mine  own. 


Philomela  ^547 

Ah!  thought  I,  thou  mourn 'st  in  vain, 

None  takes  pity  on  thy  pain: 

Senseless  trees  they  cannot  hear  thee, 

Ruthless  beasts  they  will  not.  cheer  thee:  i 

King  Pandion  he  is  dead, 

All  thy  friends  are  lapped  in  lead; 

All  thy  fellow  birds  do  sing 

Careless  of  thy  sorrowing: 

Even  so,  poor  bird,  like  thee, 

None  alive  will  pity  me. 

Richard  Barnjicld  [157 4- 1627] 


PHILOMELA 

Hark!  ah,  the  nightingale — 

The  tawny-throated! 

PLirk,  from  that  moonlit  cedar  what  a  burst! 

What  triumph!  hark! — what  pain! 

O  wanderer  from  a  Grecian  shore. 
Still,  after  many  years,  in  distant  lands, 
Still  nourishing  in  thy  bewildered  brain 
That  wild,  unquenched,  deep-sunken,  old-world  pain- 
Say,  will  it  never  heal? 
And  can  this  fragrant  lawn 
With  its  cool  trees,  and  night, 
And  the  sweet,  tranquil  Thames, 
And  moonshine,  and  the  dew, 
To  thy  racked  heart  and  brain 
Afford  no  balm? 

Dost  thou  to-night  behold. 

Here,  through  the  moonlight  on  this  English  grass. 

The  unfriendly  palace  in  the  Thracian  wild? 

Dost  thou  again  peruse 

With  hot  cheeks  and  seared  eyes 

The  too  clear  web,  and  thy  dumb  sister's  shame? 

Dost  thou  once  more  assay 

Thy  flight,  and  feel  come  over  thee, 


154^  Poems   of  Nature 

Poor  fugitive,  the  feathery  change 

Once  more,  and  once  more  seem  to  make  resound 

With  love  and  hate,  triumph  and  agony, 

Lone  Daulis,  and  the  high  Cephissian  vale? 

Listen,  Eugenia — 

How  thick  the  bursts  come  crowding  through  the  leaves! 

Again — thou  hearest? 

Eternal  passion! 

Eternal  pain! 

Matthew  Arnold  [1822-1888] 


ON  A  NIGHTINGALE  IN  APRIL 

The  yellow  moon  is  a  dancing  phantom 

Down  secret  ways  of  the  flowing  shade; 
And  the  waveless  stream  has  a  murmuring  whisper 
Where  the  alders  wave. 

Not  a  breath,  not  a  sigh,  save  the  slow  stream's  whisper: 

Only  the  moon  is  a  dancing  blade 
That  leads  a  host  of  the  Crescent  warriors 
To  a  phantom  raid. 

Out  of  the  Lands  of  P^aerie  a  summons, 

A  long,  strange  cry  that  thrills  through  the  glade: — 
The  gray-green  glooms  of  the  elm  are  stirring, 
Newly  afraid. 

Last  heard,  white  music,  under  the  olives 

Where  once  Theocritus  sang  and  played — 
Thy  Thracian  song  is  the  old  new  wonder, 
O  moon-white  maid ! 

William  Sharp  [1855-1905] 


TO  THE  NIGHTINGALE 

Dear  chorister,  who  from  those  shadows  sends, 
Ere  that  the  blushing  morn  dare  show  her  light, 
Such  sad  lamenting  strains,  that  night  attends, 
Become  all  ear,  stars  stay  to  hear  thy  plight:  ■  ' 


The   Nightingale  i549 

If  one  wliosc  grief  even  reach  of  thought  transcends, 
Who  nie'er,  not  in  a  dream,  did  taste  dehght, 
May  thee  importune  who  hke  care  pretends. 
And  seems  to  joy  in  woe,  in  woe's  despite; 
Tell  me  (so  may  thou  fortune  milder  try, 
And  long,  long  sing)  for  what  thou  thus  complains, 
Since,  winter  gone,  the  sun  in  dappled  sky 
Now  smiles  on  meadows,  mountains,  woods,  and  plains? 
The  bird,  as  if  my  questions  did  her  move, 
With  trembling  wings  sobbed  forth,  "I  love!     I  love!" 
William  Driimmond  [1585-1649] 

THE  NIGHTINGALE 

To-night  retired,  the  queen  of  heaven 

With  young  Endymion  stays; 
And  now  to  Hespcr  it  is  given 
Awhile  to  rule  the  vacant  sky. 
Till  she  shall  to  her  lamp  supply 

A  stream  of  brighter  rays.   .   .  . 

Propitious  send  thy  golden  ray, 

Thou  purest  light  above: 
Let  no  false  llame  seduce  to  stray 
Where  gulf  or  steep  lie  hid  for  harm; 
But  lead  where  music's  healing  charm 

May  soothe  afflicted  love. 

To  them,  by  many  a  grateful  song 

In  happier  seasons  vo\\cd, 
These  lawns,  Olympia's  haunt,  belong: 
Oft  by  yon  silver  stream  we  walked, 
Or  fixed,  while  Philomela  talked. 

Beneath  yon  copses  stood. 

Nor  seldom,  where  the  beechen  boughs;- 

That  roofless  tower  invade. 
We  came,  while  her  enchanting  Muse 
The  radiant  moon  above  us  held : 
Till,  by  a  clamorous  owl  compelled, 

She  fled  the  solemn  shade. 


1550  Poems  of  Nature 

But  hark!     I  hear  her  liquid  tone! 

Now,  Hesper,  guide  my  feet 
Down  the  red  marl  with  moss  o'ergrown, 
Through  yon  wild  thicket  next  the  plain, 
Whose  hawthorns  choke  the  winding  lane 

Which  leads  to  her  retreat. 

See  the  green  space:  on  either  hand 

Enlarged  it  spreads  around: 
See,  in  the  midst  she  takes  her  stand, 
Where  one  old  oak  his  awful  shade 
Extends  o'er  half  the  level  mead. 

Enclosed  in  woods  profound. 

Hark!  how  through  many  a  melting  note 

She  now  prolongs  her  lays : 
How  sweetly  down  the  void  they  float ! 
The  breeze  their  magic  path  attends; 
The  stars  shine  out;  the  forest  bends; 

The  wakeful  heifers  gaze. 

Whoe'er  thou  art  whom  chance  may  bring 

To  this  sequestered  spot. 
If  then  the  plaintive  Siren  sing, 
O  softly  tread  beneath  her  bower 
And  think  of  Heaven's  disposing  power, 

Of  man's  uncertain  lot. 

O  think,  o'er  all  this  mortal  stage 

What  mournful  scenes  arise: 
What  ruin  waits  on  kingly  rage; 
How  often  virtue  dwells  with  woe; 
How  many  griefs  from  knowledge  flow; 

How  swiftly  pleasure  flies! 

O  sacred  bird!  let  me  at  eve, 

Thus  wandering  all  alone, 
Thy  tender  counsel  oft  receive, 
Bear  witness  to  thy  pensive  airs. 
And  pity  Nature's  common  cares. 

Till  I  forget  my  own. 

Mark  Akenside  [1721-1770] 


Philomela  1551 


TO  THE  NIGHTINGALE 

O  NIGHTINGALE  that  on  yon  bloomy  spray 
Warblest  at  eve,  when  all  the  woods  are  still, 
Thou  with  fresh  hope  the  lover's  heart  dost  fill, 

While  the  jolly  hours  lead  on  propitious  May. 

Thy  liquid  notes  that  close  the  eye  of  day. 
First  heard  before  the  shallow  cuckoo's  bill, 
Portend  success  in  love.     0,  if  Jove's  will 

Have  linked  that  amorous  power  to  thy  soft  lay. 
Now  timely  sing,  ere  the  rude  bird  of  hate 

Foretell  my  hopeless  doom,  in  some  grove  nigh; 
As  thou  from  year  to  year  hast  sung  too  late 

For  my  relief,  yet  hadst  no  reason  why. 

Whether  the  Muse  or  Love  call  thee  his  mate, 

Both  them  I  serve,  and  of  their  train  am  I. 

John  MiUon  [i 608-1 674] 


PHILOMELA 

The  Nightingale,  as  soon  as  April  bringeth 

Unto  her  rested  sense  a  perfect  waking, 
While  late-bare  Earth,  proud  of  new  clothing,  springeth, 
Sings  out  her  woes,  a  thorn  her  song-book  making; 
And  mournfully  bewailing, 
Her  throat  in  tunes  expresseth 
What  grief  her  breast  oppresseth. 
For  Tereus'  force  on  her  chaste  will  prevailing. 

O  Philomela  fair,  O  lake  some  gladness 

That  here  is  juster  cause  of  plaintful  sadness  I 

Thine  earth  now  springs,  mine  fadeth; 
Thy  thorn  without,  my  thorn  my  heart  invadeth. 

Alas!  she  hath  no  other  cause  of  anguish 

But  Tereus'  love,  on  her  by  strong  hand  wroken; 

Wherein  she  suffering,  all  her  spirits  languish. 
Full  womanlike,  complains  her  wUl  was  broken, 


155^  Poems   of  Nature 

But  I,  who,  daily  craving, 
Cannot  have  to  content  me. 
Have  more  cause  to  lament  me. 
Since  wanting  is  more  woe  than  too  much  having. 

:'  ',rfr  -XT: 
O  Philomela  fair,  O  take  some  gladness 

Thai  here  is  juster  cause  of  plaintful  sadness  ! 

Thine  earth  now  springs,  mine  fadeth; 

Thy  thorn  ivitJiout,  viy  thorn  my  heart  invadeth. 

Philip  Sidney  (1554-1586] 


ODE  TO  A  NIGHTINGALE 

My  heart  aches,  and  a  drowsy  numbness  pains 
My  sense,  as  though  of  hemlock  I  had  drunk, 
Or  emptied  some  dull  opiate  to  the  drains 

One  minute  past,  and  Lethe-wards  had  sunk: 
'Tis  not  through  envy  of  thy  happy  lot, 
But  being  too  happy  in  thy  happiness, — 
That  thou,  light-winged  Dryad  of  the  trees. 
In  some  melodious  plot 
Of  becchen  green,  and  shadows  num.berless, 
Singest  of  summer  in  full-throated  ease. 

O  for  a  draught  of  vintage,  that  hath  been 

Cooled  a  long  age  in  the  deep-delved  earth, 
Tasting  of  Flora  and  the  country  green. 

Dance,  and  Provencal  song,  and  sunburnt  mirth! 
O  for  a  beaker  full  of  the  warm  South, 
Full  of  the  true,  the  blushful  Hippocrene, 
With  beaded  bubbles  winking  at  the  brim. 
And  purple-stained  mouth; 
That  I  might  drink,  and  leave  the  world  unseen, 
And  with  thee  fade  away  into  the  forest  dim: 

Fade  far  away,  dissolve,  and  quite  forget 

What  thou  among  the  leaves  hast  never  known, 

The  weariness,  the  fever,  and  the  fret, 
Here,  where  men  sit  and  hear  each  other  groan; 


Ode  to  a   Nightingale  1553 

Where  palsy  shakes  a  few,  sad,  last  gray  hairs, 

Where  youth  grows  pale,  and  specter-thin,  and  dies; 
Where  but  to  think  is  to  be  full  of  sorrow 
And  leaden-eyed  despairs; 
Where  Beauty  cannot  keep  her  lustrous  eyes, 
Or  new  Love  pine  at  them  beyond  to-morrow. 

Away!  away!  for  I  will  fly  to  thee, 

Not  charioted  by  Bacchus  and  his  pards, 
But  on  the  viewless  wings  of  Poesy, 

Though  the  dull  brain  perplexes  and  retards: 
Already  with  thee!  tender  is  the  night. 

And  haply  the  Queen-Moon  is  on  her  throne, 
Clustered  around  by  all  her  starry  Fays; 
But  here  there  is  no  light, 
Save  what  from  heaven  is  with  the  breezes  blown 

Through  verdurous  glooms  and  winding  mossy  ways. 

I  cannot  see  what  flowers  are  at  my  feet, 

Nor  what  soft  incense  hangs  upon  the  boughs, 
BuL,  in  embalmed  darkness,  guess  each  sweet 

Wherewith  the  seasonable  month  endows 

The  grass,  the  thicket,  and  the  fruit-tree  wild; 

White  hawthorn,  and  the  pastoral  eglantine; 

Fast-fading  violets  covered  up  in  leaves; 

And  mid-May's  eldest  child. 

The  coming  musk-rosc,  full  of  dewy  wine. 

The  murmurous  haunt  of  flics  on  summer  eves. 

Darkling  I  listen;  and,  for  many  a  time 

I  have  been  half  in  love  with  easeful  Death, 
Called  him  soft  names  in  many  a  mused  rhyme. 

To  take  into  the  air  my  quiet  breath; 
Now  more  than  ever  seems  it  rich  to  die, 
To  cease  upon  the  midnight  with  no  pain. 
While  thou  art  pouring  forth  thy  soul  abroad 
In  such  an  ecstasy! 
Still  wouldst  thou  sing,  and  T  have  ears  in  vain — 
To  thy  high  rec}uiern  become  a  sod. 


1554  "  '    Poems  of  Nature 

Thou  wast  not  born  for  death,  immortal  Bird! 
•,r  No  hungry  generations  tread  thee  down; 
The  voice  I  hear  this  passing  night  was  heard 

In  ancient  days  by  emperor  and  clown: 
Perhaps  the  self-same  song  that  found  a  path 

Through  the  sad  heart  of  Ruth,  when,  sick  for  home, 
She  stood  in  tears  amid  the  alien  corn; 
The  same  that  oft-times  hath 
Charmed  magic  casements,  opening  on  the  foam 
Of  perilous  seas,  in  faery  lands  forlorn. 

Forlorn !  the  very  word  is  like  a  bell 

To  toll  me  back  from  thee  to  my  sole  self! 
Adieu  1  the  fancy  cannot  cheat  so  well 
As  she  is  famed  to  do,  deceiving  elf. 
Adieu!  adieu!  thy  plaintive  anthem  fades 

Past  the  near  meadows,  over  the  still  stream, 
Up  the  hill-side;  and  now  'tis  buried  deep 
In  the  next  valley-glades: 
Was  it  a  vision,  or  a  waking  dream? 

Pled  is  that  music: — Do  I  wake  or  sleep? 

John  Keats  [1795-1821] 

SONG 

'Tis  sweet  to  hear  the  merry  lark, 

That  bids  a  blithe  good-morrow; 
But  sweeter  to  hark,  in  the  twinkling  dark, 

To  the  soothing  song  of  sorrow. 
Oh  nightingale!     What  doth  she  ail? 

And  is  she  sad  or  jolly? 
For  ne'er  on  earth  was  sound  of  mirth 

So  like  to  melancholy. 

The  merry  lark,  he  soars  on  high. 

No  worldly  thought  o'ertakes  him; 
He  sings  aloud  to  the  clear  blue  sky, 

And  the  daylight  that  awakes  him. 
As  sweet  a  lay,  as  loud,  as  gay. 

The  nightingale  is  trilling; 
With  feeling  bliss,  no  less  than  his, 

Her  little  heart  is  thrilling. 


Bird  Song  1555 

Yet  ever  and  anon,  a  sigh 

Peers  through  her  lavish  mirth; 
For  the  lark's  bold  song  is  of  the  sky, 

And  hers  is  of  the  earth. 
By  night  and  day,  she  tunes  her  lay, 

To  drive  away  all  sorrow; 
For  bliss,  alas!  to-night  must  pass. 

And  woe  may  come  to-morrow. 

Hartley  CoJoidge  [1796-1840] 


BIRD   SONG 

The  robin  sings  of  willow-buds, 

Of  snowflakes  on  the  green; 
The  bluebird  sings  of  Mayflowers, 

The  crackling  leaves  between; 
The  veery  has  a  thousand  tales 

To  tell  to  girl  and  boy; 
But  the  oriole,  the  oriole, 

vSings,  "Joy!  joy!  joy!" 

The  pewee  calls  his  little  mate, 

Sweet  Phoebe,  gone  astray, 
The  warbler  sings,  "What  fun,  what  fun, 

To  tilt  upon  the  spray!" 
The  cuckoo  has  no  song,  but  clucks, 

Like  any  wooden  toy; 
But  the  oriole,  the  oriole. 

Sings,  "Joy!  joy!  joy!" 

The  grosbeak  sings  the  rose's  birth, 

And  paints  her  on  his  breast; 
The  sparrow  sings  of  speckled  eggs, 

Soft  brooded  in  the  nest. 
The  wood-thrush  sings  of  peace,  "Sweet  peace, 

Sweet  peace,"  without  alloy; 
But  the  oriole,  the  oriole, 

Sings  "Joy!  joy!  joy!" 

Laura  E.  Richards  [1850- 


1556  Poems  of  Nature 


THE  SONG  THE  ORIOLE   SINGS 

There  is  a  bird  that  comes  and  sings 

In  a  professor's  garden-trees; 
Upon  the  English  oak  he  swings, 

And  tilts  and  tosses  in  the  breeze. 

I  know  his  name,  I  know  his  note, 
That  so  with  rapture  takes  my  soul; 

Like  flame  the  gold  beneath  his  throat, 
His  glossy  cope  is  black  as  coal. 

O  oriole,  it  is  the  song 

You  sang  me  from  the  Cottonwood, 
Too  young  to  feel  that  I  was  j'oung. 

Too  glad  to  guess  if  life  were  good. 

And  while  I  hark,  before  my  door, 
Adown  the  dusty  Concord  Road, 

The  blue  Miami  flows  once  more 
As  by  the  cottonwood  it  flowed. 

And  on  the  bank  that  rises  steep. 
And  pours  a  thousand  tiny  rills. 

From  death  and  absence  laugh  and  leap 
My  school-mates  to  their  flutter-mills. 

The  blackbirds  jangle  in  the  tops 

Of  hoary-an tiered  sycamores; 
The  timorous  killdee  starts  and  stops 

Among  the  drift-wood  on  the  shores. 

Below,  the  bridge — a  noonday  fear 
Of  dust  and  shadow  shot  with  sun — 

Stretches  its  gloom  from  pier  to  pier. 
Far  unto  alien  coasts  unknown. 

And  on  these  ahen  coasts,  above. 

Where  silver  ripples  break  the  stream's 

Long  blue,  from  some  roof-sheltering  grove 
A  hidden  parrot  scolds  and  screams. 


Song:   The   Owl  ^557 

Ahj  nothing,  nothing!     Commonest  things: 
A  touch,  a  glimpse,  a  sound,  a  breath — 

It  is  a  song  the  oriole  sings — 
And  all  the  rest  belongs  to  death. 

But  oriole,  my  oriole, 

'Were  some  bright  seraph  sent  from  bliss 
With  songs  of  heaven  to  win  my  soul 
From  simple  memories  such  as  this. 

What  could  he  tell  to  tempt  my  ear 

From  3'ou?     What  high  thing  could  there  be, 

So  tenderly  and  sweetly  dear 
As  my  lost  boyhood  is  to  me? 

William  Dean  Howclls  [1837- 


TO  AN  ORIOLE 

How  falls  it,  oriole,  thou  hast  come  to  fly 
In  tropic  splendor  through  our  Northern  sky? 

At  some  glad  moment  was  it  nature's  choice 
To  dower  a  scrap  of  sunset  with  a  voice? 

Or  did  some  orange  tulip,  flaked  with  black, 
In  some  forgotten  garden,  ages  back. 

Yearning  toward  Heaven  until  its  wish  was  heard. 
Desire  unspeakably  to  be  a  bird? 

Edgar  FairccU  [184  7- 1904] 


SONG:  THE  OWL 

When  cats  run  home  and  light  is  come, 
And  dew  is  cold  upon  the  ground. 

And  the  far-ofif  stream  is  dumb. 

And  the  whirring  sail  goes  round. 
And  the  whirring  sail  goes  round; 


1558  Poems  of  Nature 

Alone  and  warming  his  five  wits, 
The  white  owl  in  the  belfry  sits. 

When  merry  milkmaids  cKck  the  latch, 
And  rarely  smells  the  new-mown  hay, 

And  the  cock  hath  sung  beneath  the  thatch 
Twice  or  thrice  his  roundelay, 
Twice  or  thrice  his  roundelay; 

Alone  and  warming  his  five  wits, 

The  white  owl  in  the  belfry  sits. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [i 809-1 


SWEET  SUFFOLK  OWL 

Sweet  Suffolk  owl,  so  trimly  dight 
With  feathers,  like  a  lady  bright; 
Thou  sing'st  alone,  sitting  by  night, 
"Te  whit!    Tewhoo!" 

Thy  note  that  forth  so  freely  rolls 
With  shrill  command  the  mouse  controls; 
And  sings  a  dirge  for  dying  souls. 
"Te  whit!     Tewhoo!" 

Thomas  Vautor  [fl.  i6i6j 

THE  PEWEE 

The  listening  Dryads  hushed  the  woods; 

The  boughs  were  thick,  and  thin  and  few 

The  golden  ribbons  fluttering  through; 
Their  sun-embroidered,  leafy  hoods 

The  lindens  lifted  to  the  blue: 
Only  a  little  forest-brook 
The  farthest  hem  of  silence  shook: 
When  in  the  hollow  shades  I  heard, — 
Was  it  a  spirit,  or  a  bird? 
Or,  strayed  from  Eden,  desolate. 
Some  Peri  calling  to  her  mate. 

Whom  nevermore  her  mate  would  cheer? 
"Pe-ri!  pe-ri!  peer!" 


The  Pewee 

Through  rocky  clefts  the  brooklet  fell 

With  plashy  pour,  that  scarce  was  sound, 

But  only  quiet  less  profound, 
A  stillness  fresh  and  audible: 

A  vellow  leaflet  to  the  ground 
Whirled  noiselessly:  with  wing  of  gloss 
A  hovering  sunbeam  brushed  the  moss, 
And,  wavering  brightly  over  it, 
Sat  like  a  butterfly  alit: 
The  owlet  in  his  open  door 
Stared  roundly:  while  the  breezes  bore 

The  plaint  to  far-off  places  drear, — 
"Pe-ree!  pe-ree!  peer!" 

To  trace  it  in  its  green  retreat 

I  sought  among  the  boughs  in  vain; 

And  followed  still  the  wandering  strain, 
So  melancholy  and  so  sweet 

The  dim-eyed  violets  yearned  with  pain. 
'Twas  now  a  sorrow  in  the  air. 
Some  nymph's  immortalized  despair 
Haunting  the  woods  and  waterfalls; 
And  now,  at  long,  sad  intervals, 
Sitting  unseen  in  dusky  shade, 
His  plaintive  pipe  some  fairy  played, 

With  long-drawn  cadence  thin  and  clear, — ■ 
"Pe-wee!  pe-wee!  peer!" 

Long-drawn  and  clear  its  closes  were, — 
As  if  the  hand  of  Music  through 
The  somber  robe  of  Silence  drew 

A  thread  of  golden  gossamer: 
So  pure  a  flute  the  fairy  blew. 

Like  beggared  princes  of  the  wood, 

In  silver  rags  the  birches  stood; 

The  hemlocks,  lordly  counselors, 

Were  dumb;  the  sturdy  servitors. 

In  beechen  jackets  patched  and  gray, 

Seemed  waiting  spellbound  all  the  day 
That  low,  entrancing  note  to  hear, — 
"Pe-wee!  pe-wee!  peer!" 


^ss^ 


1560  Poems  of  Nature 

I  quit  the  search,  and  sat  me  down 

Beside  the  brook,  irresolute, 

And  watched  a  httle  bird  in  suit 
Of  sober  ohve,  soft  and  brown. 

Perched  in  the  maple-branches,  mute: 
With  greenish  gold  its  vest  was  fringed, 
Its  tiny  cap  was  ebon-tinged. 
With  ivory  pale  its  wings  Vv'ere  barred, 
And  its  dark  eyes  were  tender-starred. 
"Dear  bird,"  I  said,  "what  is  thy  name?" 
And  thrice  the  mournful  answer  came. 

So  faint  and  far,  and  yet  so  near, — 
"Pe-wee!  pe-wee!  peer!" 

For  so  I  found  my  forest  bird, — 

The  pewee  of  the  loneliest  woods. 

Sole  singer  in  these  solitudes. 
Which  never  robin's  whistle  stirred, 

Where  never  bluebird's  plume  intrudes. 
Quick  darting  through  the  dewy  morn, 
The  redstart  trilled  his  twittering  horn. 
And  vanished  in  thick  boughs:  at  even. 
Like  liquid  pearls  fresh  showered  from  heaven, 
The  high  notes  of  the  lone  wood-thrush 
Fall  on  the  forest's  holy  hush: 

But  thou  all  day  complainest  here, — 
"Pe-wee!  pe-wee!  peer!" 

Hast  thou,  too,  in  thy  little  breast. 
Strange  longings  for  a  happier  lot, — 
For  love,  for  life,  thou  know'st  not  what, — 

A  yearning,  and  a  vague  unrest. 

For  something  still  which  thou  hast  not? — 

Thou  soul  of  some  benighted  child 

That  perished,  crying  in  the  wild! 

Or  lost,  forlorn,  and  wandering  maid. 

By  love  allured,  by  love  betrayed. 

Whose  spirit  with  her  latest  sigh 

Arose,  a  little  winged  cry. 

Above  her  chill  and  mossy  bier! 

"Dear  me!  dear  me!  dear!" 


Robin   Redbreast  1561 

Ah,  Ro  such  piercing  sorrow  mars 

The  pewee's  life  of  cheerful  ease! 

He  sings,  or  leaves  his  song  to  seize 
An  insect  sporting  in  the  bars 

Of  mild  bright  light  that  gild  the  trees. 

A  very  poet  he!     For  him 
All  pleasant  places  still  and  dim: 
His  heart,  a  spark  of  heavenly  fire, 
Burns  with  undying,  sweet  desire: 
And  so  he  sings;  and  so  his  song. 
Though  heard  not  by  the  hurrying  throng. 

Is  solace  to  the  pensive  ear: 
"Pewee!  pewee!  peer!" 

John  Towiiscnd  Trowbridge  tiS27-igi6] 

ROBIN  REDBREAST 

Sweet  Robin,  I  have  heard  them  say 
That  thou  wert  there  upon  the  day 
The  Christ  was  crowned  in  cruel  scorn 
And  bore  away  one  bleeding  thorn, — 
That  so  the  bjush  upon  thy  breast. 
In  shameful  sorrow,  was  impressed; 
And  thence  thy  genial  sympathy 
With  our  redeemed  humanity. 

Sweet  Robin,  would  that  I  might  be 
Bathed  in  my  Saviour's  blood,  like  thee; 
Bear  in  my  breast,  whate'er  the  loss, 
The  bleeding  blazon  of  the  cross; 
Live  ever,  with  thy  loving  mind, 
In  fellowship  with  human-kind; 
And  take  my  pattern  still  from  thee. 
In  gentleness  and  constancy. 

George  Washington  Doane  [1790-1859) 

ROBIN   REDBREAST 

GooD-BY,  good-by  to  Summer! 

For  Summer's  nearly  done; 
The  garden  smiling  faintly. 

Cool  breezes  in  the  sun; 


1562  Poems  of  Nature 


Our  thrushes  now  are  silent, 

Our  swallows  flown  av/ay, — 
But  Robin's  here  in  coat  of  brown, 
And  scarlet  breast-knot  gay. 
Robin,  Robin  Redbreast, 

O  Robin  dear! 
Robin  sings  so  sweetly 
In  the  falling  of  the  year. 

Bright  yellow,  red,  and  orange, 

The  leaves  come  down  in  hosts; 
The  trees  are  Indian  princes. 

But  soon  they'll  turn  to  ghosts; 
The  scanty  pears  and  apples 
*Hang  russet  on  the  bough; 
It's  Autumn,  Autumn,  Autumn  late, 
'Twill  soon  be  Winter  now. 
Robin,  Robin  Redbreast, 

O  Robin  dear! 
And  what  will  this  poor  Robin  do? 
For  pinching  days  are  near. 

The  fireside  for  the  cricket, 

The  wheat-stack  for  the  mouse, 
When  trembling  night-winds  whistle 

And  moan  all  round  the  house. 
The  frosty  ways  like  iron. 

The  branches  plumed  with  snow, — 
Alas!  in  Winter  dead  and  dark. 
Where  can  poor  Robin  go? 
Robin,  Robin  Redbreast, 

O  Robin  dear! 
And  a  crumb  of  bread  for  Robin, 
His  little  heart  to  cheer! 

William  Allingham  [18 24-1  i 

THE   SANDPIPER 

Across  the  narrow  beach  we  flit, 

One  little  sandpiper  and  I, 
And  fast  I  gather,  bit  by  bit. 

The  scattered  driftwood  bleached  and  dry. 


The  Sea-Mew  1563 

The  wild  waves  reach  their  hands  for  it, 
The  wild  wind  raves,  the  tide  runs  high, 

As  up  and  down  the  beach  we  flit,— 
One  little  sandpiper  and  I. 

Above  our  heads  the  sullen  clouds 

Scud  black  and  swift  across  the  sky; 
Like  silent  ghosts  in  misty  shrouds 

Stand  out  the  white  lighthouses  high. 
Almost  as  far  as  eye  can  reach 

I  see  the  close-reefed  vessels  fly, 
As  fast  we  flit  along  the  beach, — 

One  little  sandpiper  and  I. 

I  watch  him  as  he  skims  along. 

Uttering  his  sweet  and  mournful  cry. 
He  starts  not  at  my  fitful  song. 

Or  flash  of  fluttering  drapery. 
He  has  no  thought  of  any  wrong; 

He  scans  me  with  a  fearless  eye: 
Staunch  friends  are  we,  well  tried  and  strong, 

The  little  sandpiper  and  I. 

Comrade,  where  wilt  thou  be  to-night 

When  the  loosed  storm  breaks  furiously? 
My  driftwood  fire  will  burn  so  bright! 

To  what  warm  shelter  canst  thou  fly? 
I  do  not  fear  for  thee,  though  wroth 

The  tempest  rushes  through  the  sky: 
For  are  we  not  God's  children  both. 

Thou,  little  sandpiper,  and  I? 

Celia  Thaxter  [1835-1894] 


THE   SEA-MEW 

How  joyously  the  young  sea-mew  ^rf  C 
Lay  dreaming  on  the  waters  blue, 
Whereon  our  little  bark  had  thrown 
A  little  shade,  the  only  one, — 
But  shadows  ever  man  pursue. 


1564  Poems  of  Nature 

Familiar  with  the  waves  and  free 
As  if  their  own  white  foam  were  he, 
His  heart  upon  the  heart  of  ocean 
Lay  learning  all  its  mystic  motion, 
And  throbbing  to  the  throbbing  sea. 

And  such  a  brightness  in  his  eye, 
As  if  the  ocean  and  the  sky 
Within  him  had  lit  up  and  nursed 
A  soul  God  gave  him  not  at  first 
To  comprehend  their  majesty. 

We  were  not  cruel,  yet  did  sunder 

His  white  wing  from  the  blue  waves  under, 

And  bound  it,  while  his  fearless  eyes 

Shone  up  to  ours  in  calm  surprise, 

As  deeming  us  some  ocean  wonder! 

We  bore  our  ocean  bird  unto 
"    A  grassy  place,  where  he  might  view 
The  flowers  that  curtsey  to  the  bees, 
The  waving  of  the  tall  green  trees. 
The  falling  of  the  silver  dew. 

But  flowers  of  earth  were  pale  to  him 
Who  had  seen  the  rainbow  fishes  swim; 
And  when  earth's  dew  around  him  lay 
He  thought  of  ocean's  winged  spray. 
And  his  eye  waxed  sad  and  dim. 

The  green  trees  round  him  only  made 
A  prison  with  their  darksome  shade; 
And  dropped  his  wing,  and  mourned  he 
For  his  own  boundless  glittering  sea — 
Albeit  he  knew  not  they  could  fade. 

Then  One  her  gladsome  face  did  bring, 
Her  gentle  voice's  murmuring. 
In  ocean's  stead  his  heart  to  move 
And  teach  him  what  was  human  love: 
He  thought  it  a  strange,  mournful  thing. 


3 'To  a  Skylark  1565 

He  lay  down  in  his  grief  to  die 
(First  looking  to  the  sea-like  sky 
That  hath  no  waves!),  because,  alas! 
Our  human  touch  did  on  him  pass, 
And,  with  our  touch,  our  agony. 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [1S06-1861] 


TO  A   SKYLARK 

Up  with  me!  up  with  me  into  the  clouds! 

For  thy  song,  Lark,  is  strong; 
Up  with  me,  up  with  me  into  the  clouds! 

Singing,  singing. 
With  clouds  and  sky  about  thee  ringing, 

Lift  me,  guide  me  till  I  find 
That  spot  which  seems  so  to  thy  mindf 

I  have  walked  through  wildernesses  dreary 

And  to-day  my  heart  is  weary; 

Had  I  now  the  wings  of  a  Fairy, 

Up  to  thee  would  I  ily. 

There  is  madness  about  thee,  and  joy  divine 

In  that  song  of  thine; 

Lift  me,  guide  me  high  and  high 

To  thy  banqueting-place  in  the  sky. 

Joyous  as  morning 
Thou  art  laughing  and  scorning; 
Thou  hast  a  nest  for  thy  love  and  thy  rest. 
And,  though  little  troubled  with  sloth. 
Drunken  Lark!  thou  would'st  be  loth 
To  be  such  a  traveler  as  I. 
Happy,  happy  Liver, 
With  a  soul  as  strong  as  a  mountain  river 
Pouring  out  praise  to  the  Almighty  Giver, 
Joy  and  jollity  be  with  us  both! 

Alas!  my  journey,  rugged  and  uneven. 
Through  prickly  moors  or  (kisty  ways  must  wind; 
But  hearing  thee,  or  others  of  ihy  kind. 
As  full  of  gladness  and  as  free  of  heaven, 


1566  Poems   of  Nature 

I,  with  my  fate  contented,  will  plod  on, 
And  hope  for  higher  raptures,  when  life's  day  is  done. 
William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 


TO   A  SKYLARK 

Ethereal  minstrel!  pilgrim  of  the  sky! 
Dost  thou  despise  the  earth  where  cares  abound? 
Or,  while  the  wings  aspire,  are  heart  and  eye 
Both  with  thy  nest  upon  the  dewy  ground? 
Thy  nest  which  thou  canst  drop  into  at  will, 
Those  quivering  wings  composed,  that  music  still! 

To  the  last  point  of  vision,  and  beyond, 

Mount,  daring  warbler! — that  love-prompted  strain 

— 'Twixt  thee  and  thine  a  never-failing  bond — 

Thrills  not  the  less  the  bosom  of  the  plain: 

Yet  might'st  thou  seem,  proud  privilege!  to  sing 

All  independent  of  the  leafy  spring. 

Leave  to  the  nightingale  her  shady  wood; 

A  privacy  of  glorious  light  is  thine, 

Whence  thou  dost  pour  upon  the  world  a  flood 

Of  harmony,  with  instinct  more  divine: 

Type  of  the  wise,  who  soar,  but  never  roam — 

True  to  the  kindred  points  of  Heaven  and  Home! 

William  Wordsivorlh  [177 0-1850] 


THE  SKYLARK 

Bird  of  the  wilderness. 

Blithesome  and  cumberless. 
Sweet  be  thy  matin  o'er  moorland  and  leal 

Emblem  of  happiness. 

Blest  is  thy  dwelling-place — 
O  to  abide  in  the  desert  with  thee! 

Wild  is  thy  lay  and  loud, 
Far  in  the  downy  cloud, 


The  Skylark.  1567 


Love  gives  it  energy,  love  gave  it  birth. 

Where,  on  thy  dewy  wing, 

Where  art  thou  journeying? 
Thy  lay  is  in  heaven,  thy  love  is  on  earth. 

O'er  fell  and  fountain  sheen. 

O'er  moor  and  mountain  green, 
O'er  the  red  streamer  that  heralds  the  day, 

Over  the  cloudlet  dim, 

Over  the  rainbow's  rim. 
Musical  cherub,  soar,  singing,  away! 

Then,  when  the  gloaming  comes, 

Low  in  the  heather  blooms 
Sweet  will  thy  welcome  and  bed  of  love  be! 

Emblem  of  happiness. 

Blest  is  thy  dwelling-place — 
O  to  abide  in  the  desert  with  thee! 

James  Hogg  [1770-1835] 


THE  SKYI.ARK 

How  the  blithe  Lark  runs  up  the  golden  stair 

That  leans  through  cloudy  gates  from  Heaven  to  Earth 
And  all  alone  in  the  empyreal  air 

Fills  it  with  jubilant  sweet  songs  of  mirth; 
How  far  he  seems,  how  far 

With  the  light  upon  his  wings, 
Is  it  a  bird,  or  star 

That  sliines,  and  sings? 

What  matter  if  the  days  be  dark  and  frore, 

That  sunbeam  tells  of  other  days  to  be, 
And  singing  in  the  light  that  floods  him  o'er 
In  joy  he  overtakes  Futurity; 
Under  cloud-arches  vast 

He  peeps,  and  sees  behind 
Great  Summer  coming  fast 
Adowji  the  wind! 


1568  Poems  of  Nature 

And  now  he  dives  into  a  rainbow's  rivers, 

In  streams  of  gold  and  purple  he  is  drowned, 
Shrilly  the  arrows  of  his  song  he  shivers, 
As  though  the  stormy  drops  were  turned  to  sound; 
And  now  he  issues  through, 
He  scales  a  cloudy  tower. 
Faintly,  like  faUing  dew, 
His  fast  notes  shower. 

Let  every  wind  be  hushed,  that  I  may  hear 

The  wondrous  things  he  tells  the  World  below. 
Things  that  we  dream  of  he  is  watching  near, 
Hopes  that  we  never  dreamed  he  would  bestow; 
Alas!  the  storm  hath  rolled 

Back  the  gold  gates  again, 
Or  surely  he  had  told 
All  Heaven  to  men! 

So  the  victorious  Poet  sings  alone. 

And  fills  with  light  his  solitary  home. 
And  through  that  glory  sees  new  worlds  foreshown. 
And  hears  high  songs,  and  triumphs  yet  to  come; 
He  waves  the  air  of  Time 

With  thrills  of  golden  chords. 
And  makes  the  world  to  climb 
On  linked  words. 

What  if  his  hair  be  gray,  his  eyes  be  dim, 

If  wealth  forsake  him,  and  if  friends  be  cold, 
Wonder  unbars  her  thousand  gates  to  him. 
Truth  never  fails,  nor  Beauty  waxes  old; 
More  than  he  tells  his  eyes 

Behold,  his  spirit  hears, 
Of  grief,  and  joy,  and  sighs 
'Twixt  joy  and  tears. 

Blest  is  the  man  who  with  the  sound  of  song 
Can  charm  away  the  heartache,  and  forget 

The  frost  of  Penury,  and  the  stings  of  Wrong, 
And  drown  the  fatal  whisper  of  Regret ! 


,To  a  Skylark  1569 

Darker  are  the  abodes 

Of  Kings,  though  his  be  poor, 
Wliilc  Fancies,  Uke  the  Gods, 

Pass,  through  his  door. 

Singing  thou  scalest  Heaven  upon  thy  wings. 

Thou  liftest  a  glad  heart  into  the  skies; 
He  maketh  his  own  sunrise,  while  he  sings, 
And  turns  the  dusty  Earth  to  Paradise; 
I  see  thee  sail  along 

Far  up  the  sunny  streams,  u  • 

Unseen,  I  hear  his  song, 
I  see  his  dreams. 

Frederick  Tennyson  [1807-189S] 


TO  A  SKYLARK 

Hail  to  thee,  blithe  spirit! 

Bird  thou  never  wert. 
That  from  heaven,  or  near  it, 

Pourest  thy  full  heart 
In  profuse  strains  of  unpremeditated  art. 

Fligher  still  and  higher, 

From  the  earth  thou  springest 
Like  a  cloud  of  fire; 

The  blue  deep  thou  wingest. 
And  singing  still  dost  soar,  and  soaring  ever  singest. 

Li  the  golden  hghtning 

Of  the  sunken  sun. 
O'er  which  clouds  are  bright'ning, 

Thou  dost  float  and  run;  , 

Like  an  unbodied  joy  whose  race  is  just  begun. 

The  pale  purple  even 

Melts  around  thy  flight; 
Like  a  star  of  heaven 

In  the  broad  daylight 
Thou  art  unseen,  but  yet  I  hear  thy  shrill  delight. 


1570  Poems  of  Nature 

Keen  as  are  the  arrows 

Of  that  silver  sphere, 
Whose  intense  lamp  narrows 

In  the  white  dawn  clear, 
Until  wc  hardly  see,  we  feel  that  it  is  there. 

All  the  earth  and  air 

With  thy  voice  is  loud, 
As,  when  night  is  bare. 

From  one  lonely  cloud 
The  moon  rains  out  her  beams,  and  heaven  is  overflowed. 

What  thou  art  we  know  not; 

What  is  most  like  thee? 
From  rainbow  clouds  there  flow  not 

Drops  so  bright  to  see 
As  from  thy  presence  showers  a  rain  of  melody. 

Like  a  poet  hidden 

In  the  lighf  of  thought, 
Singing  hymns  unbidden 

Till  the  world  is  wrought 
To  sympathy  with  hopes  and  fears  it  heeded  not: 

Like  a  high-born  maiden 

In  a  palace  tower, 
Soothing  her  love-laden 

Soul  in  secret  hour 
With  music  sweet  as  love,  which  overflows  her  bower: 

Like  a  glow-worm  golden 

In  a  dell  of  dew, 
Scattering  unbeholden 

Its  aerial  hue 
Among  the  flowers  and  grass,  which  screen  it  from  the  view: 

Like  a  rose  embowered 

In  its  own  green  leaves. 
By  warm  winds  deflowered, 
TiU  the  scent  it  gives 
Makes  faint  with  too  much   sweet   these  heavy-winged 
thieves: 


To  a  Skylark  1571 

Sound  of  vernal  showers 

On  the  twinkling  grass, 
Rain-awakened  i3owers, 

All  that  ever  was 
Joyous,  and  clear,  and  fresh,  thy  music  doth  surpass. 

Teach  us,  sprite  or  bird. 

What  sweet  thoughts  are  thine: 
I  have  never  heard 

Praise  of  love  or  wine 
That  panted  forth  a  flood  of  rapture  so  divine. 

Chorus  hymeneal. 

Or  triumphal  chaunt, 
Matched  with  thine  would  be  all 

But  an  empty  vaunt — 
A  thing  wherein  we  feel  there  is  some  hidden  want. 

What  objects  are  the  fountains 

Of  thy  happy  strain? 
What  fields,  or  waves,  or  mountains? 

What  shapes  of  sky  or  plain? 
What  love  of  thine  own  kind?  what  ignorance  of  pain? 

With  thy  clear  keen  joyance 

Languor  cannot  be: 
Shadow  of  annoyance 
Never  came  near  thee: 
Thou  lovest;  but  ne'er  knew  love's  sad  satiety. 

Waking  or  asleep, 

Thou  of  death  must  deem 
Things  more  true  and  deep 

Than  we  mortals  dream, 
Or  how  could  thy  notes  flov/  in  such  a  crystal  stream? 

We  look  before  and  after, 

And  pine  for  what  is  not: 
Our  sincerest  laughter 

With  some  pain  is  fraught; 
Our  sweetest  songs  are  those  that  tell  of  saddest  thought. 


1572 


Poems  of  Nature 


Yet  if  we  could  scorn 

Hate,  and  pride,  and  fear; 
If  we  were  things  born 

Not  to  shed  a  tear, 
I  know  not  how  thy  joy  we  ever  should  come  near. 

Better  than  all  measures 

Of  delightful  sound, 
Better  than  all  treasures 

That  in  books  are  found. 
Thy  skill  to  poet  were,  thou  scorner  of  the  ground! 

Teach  me  half  the  gladness 

That  thy  brain  must  know, 
Such  harmonious  madness 
From  my  lips  would  flow, 
The  world  should  Hsten  then,  as  I  am  hstening  now. 
Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [179 2-1 82 2] 


THE  STORMY  PETREL 

A  THOUSAND  miles  from  land  are  we, 

Tossing  about  on  the  roaring  sea, — 

From  billow  to  bounding  billow  cast, 

Like  fleecy  snow  on  the  stormy  blast. 

The  sails  are  scattered  abroad  like  weeds; 

The  strong  masts  shake  like  quivering  reeds; 

The  mighty  cables  and  iron  chains. 

The  hull,  which  all  earthly  strength  disdains, — 

They  strain  and  they  crack;  and  hearts  like  stone 

Their  natural,  hard,  proud  strength  disown. 

Up  and  down ! — up  and  down ! 

From  the  base  of  the  wave  to  the  billow's  crown, 

And  amidst  the  flashing  and  feathery  foam 

The  stormy  petrel  finds  a  home, — 

A  home,  if  such  a  place  may  be 

For  her  who  lives  on  the  v/ide,  wide  sea, 

On  the  craggy  ice,  in  the  frozen  air. 

And  only  seeketh  her  rocky  lair 


3-iiTo  a  Swallow  IS73 

To  warm  her  young,  and  to  teach  them  to  spring 
At  once  o'er  the  waves  on  their  stormy  wing! 

O'er  the  deep! — o'er  the  deep! 

Where  the  whale  and  the  shark  and  the  swordfish  sleep, — 

Outflying  the  blast  and  the  driving  rain, 

The  petrel  telleth  her  tale — in  vain; 

For  the  mariner  curseth  the  warning  bird 

Which  bringeth  him  news  of  the  storm  unheard! 

Ah!  thus  does  the  prophet,  of  good  or  ill, 

Aleet  hate  from  the  creatures  he  serveth  still; 

Yet  he  ne'er  falters, — so,  petrel,  spring 

Once  more  o'er  the  waves  on  thy  stormy  wing! 

Bryan  Waller  Procter  [17S7-1S74] 


THE  FIRST  SWALLOW^ 

The  gorse  is  yellow  on  the  heath, 

The  banks  with  speedwell  flowers  are  gay, 
The  oaks  are  budding,  and,  beneath, 
The  hawthorn  soon  will  bear  the  wreath, 
The  silver  wreath,  of  May. 

The  welcome  guest  of  settled  Spring, 
The  swallow,  too,  has  come  at  last; 
Just  at  sunset,  when  thrushes  sing, 
I  saw  her  dash  with  rapid  wing. 

And  hailed  her  as  she  passed. 

Come,  summer  visitant,  attach 

To  my  reed  roof  your  nest  of  clay. 
And  let  my  ear  your  music  catch. 
Low  twittering  underneath  the  thatch 
At  the  gray  dawn  of  day. 

Charlotte  Smith  [1740-1806] 


TO  A  SW^\LLOW  BUILDING  UNDER  OUR  EA\'ES 

Thou  too  hast  traveled,  little  fluttering  thing, — 
Hast  seen  the  world,  and  now  thy  weary  wing 


1574  Poems  of  Nature 

Thou  too  must  rest. 
But  much,  my  Httle  bird,  could'st  thou  but  tell, 
I'd  give  to  know  why  here  thou  lik'st  so  well 

To  build  thy  nest. 

For  thou  hast  passed  fair  places  in  thy  flight; 
A  world  lay  all  beneath  thee  where  to  light ; 

And,  strange  thy  taste, 
Of  all  the  varied  scenes  that  met  thine  eye, 
Of  all  the  spots  for  building  'ncath  the  sky, 

To  choose  this  waste! 

Did  fortune  try  thee? — was  thy  Httle  purse 
Perchance  run  low,  and  thou,  afraid  of  worse. 

Felt  here  secure? 
Ah,  no!  thou  need'st  not  gold,  thou  happy  one! 
Thou  know'st  it  not.     Of  all  God's  creatures,  man 

Alone  is  poor. 

What  was  it,  then? — some  mystic  turn  of  thought, 
Caught  under  German  eaves,  and  hither  brought. 

Marring  thine  eye 
For  the  world's  loveliness,  till  thou  art  grown 
A  sober  thing  that  dost  but  mope  and  moan, 

Not  knowing  why? 

Nay,  if  thy  mind  be  sound,  I  need  not  ask, 
Since  here  I  see  thee  working  at  thy  task 

With  wing  and  beak. 
A  well-laid  scheme  doth  that  small  head  contain. 
At  which  thou  work'st,  brave  bird,  with  might  and  main, 

Nor  more  need'st  seek. 

In  truth,  I  rather  take  it  thou  hast  got 
By  instinct  wise  much  sense  about  thy  lot. 

And  hast  small  care 
Whether  an  Eden  or  a  desert  be 
Thy  home,  so  thou  remain'st  alive,  and  free 

To  skim  the  air. 

God  speed  thee,  pretty  bird!     May  thy  small  nest 
With  little  ones  all  in  good  time  be  blest. 


Chimney  Swallows  '575 

I  love  thee  much; 
For  well  thou  managest  that  life  of  thine, 
While  I — oh,  ask  not  what  I  do  with  mine! 

Would  I  were  such! 

Jane  Welsh  Carlyle  [i  801-1866] 

CHIMNEY  SWALLOWS 

I  SLEPT  in  an  old  homestead  by  the  sea: 

And  in  their  chimney  nest, 
At  night  the  swallows  told  home-lore  to  me. 

As  to  a  friendly  guest. 

A  liquid  twitter,  low,  confiding,  glad. 

From  many  glossy  throats, 
Was  all  the  voice;  and  yet  its  accents  had 

A  poem's  golden  notes. 

Quaint  legends  of  the  fireside  and  the  shore. 

And  sounds  of  festal  cheer. 
And  tones  of  those  whose  tasks  of  love  are  o'er, 

Were  breathed  into  mine  ear; 

And  wondrous  lyrics,  felt  but  never  sung, 

The  heart's  melodious  bloom; 
And  histories,  whose  perfumes  long  have  clung 

About  each  hallowed  room. 

I  heard  the  dream  of  lovers,  as  they  found 

At  last  their  hour  of  bliss. 
And  fear  and  pain  and  long  suspense  were  drowned 

In  one  heart-healing  kiss. 

I  heard  the  lullaby  of  babes,  that  grew 

To  sons  and  daughters  fair; 
And  childhood's  angels,  singing  as  they  flew, 

And  sobs  of  secret  prayer. 

I  heard  the  voyagers  who  seemed  to  sail 

Into  the  sapphire  sky, 
And  sad,  weird  voices  in  the  autumn  gale, 

As  the  swift  ships  went  by; 


1576  Poems  of  Nature 

And  sighs  suppressed  and  converse  soft  and  low 

About  the  sufferer's  bed, 
And  what  is  uttered  when  the  stricken  know 

That  the  dear  one  is  dead; 

And  steps  of  those  who,  in  the  Sabbath  light, 

Muse  with  transfigured  face; 
And  hot  hps  pressing,  through  the  long,  dark  night, 

The  pillow's  empty  place; 

And  fervent  greetings  of  old  friends,  whose  path 

In  youth  had  gone  apart. 
But  to  each  other  brought  life's  aftermath, 

With  uncorroded  heart. 

The  music  of  the  seasons  touched  the  strain, 

Bird-joy  and  laugh  of  flowers, 
The  orchard's  bounty  and  the  yellow  grain, 

Snow  storm  and  sunny  showers; 

And  secrets  of  the  soul  that  doubts  and  yearns 

And  gropes  in  regions  dim. 
Till,  meeting  Christ  with  raptured  eye,  discerns 

Its  perfect  life  in  Him. 

So,  thinking  of  the  Master  and  his  tears, 

And  how  the  birds  are  kept, 
I  sank  in  arms  that  folded  me  from  fears. 

And  like  an  infant,  slept. 

Horatio  Nelson  Powers  [1826-1890] 


ITYLUS 

Swallow,  my  sister,  O  sister  swallow. 

How  can  thine  heart  be  full  of  the  spring? 
A  thousand  summers  are  over  and  dead. 
What  hast  thou  found  in  the  spring  to  follow? 
What  hast  thou  found  in  thine  heart  to  sing? 
What  wilt  thou  do  when  the  summer  is  shed? 


Itylus  1577 


0  swallow,  sister,  O  fair  swift  swallow. 

Why  wilt  thou  fly  after  spring  to  the  south, 
The  soft  south  whither  thine  heart  is  set? 
Shall  not  the  grief  of  the  old  time  follow? 

Shall  not  the  song  thereof  cleave  to  thy  mouth? 
Hast  thou  forgotten  ere  I  forget? 

Sisler,  my  sister,  O  tlcet  sweet  swallow, 
Thy  way  is  long  to  the  sun  and  the  south; 
But  I,  fulfilled  of  my  heart's  desire, 
Shedding  my  song  upon  height,  upon  hollow, 
From  tawny  body  and  sweet  small  mouth 
Feed  the  heart  of  the  night  with  lire. 

1  the  nightingale  all  spring  through, 

0  swallow,  sister,  O  changing  swallow, 

All  spring  through  till  the  spring  be  done. 
Clothed  with  the  light  of  the  night  on  the  dew. 
Sing,  while  the  hours  and  the  wild  birds  follow. 
Take  flight  and  follow  and  find  the  sun. 

Sister,  my  sister,  O  soft  light  swallow, 
Though  all  things  feast  in  the  spring's  guest-chamber, 
How  hast  thou  heart  to  be  glad  thereof  yet? 
For  where  thou  fliest  I  shall  not  follow, 
Till  life  forget  and  death  remember. 
Till  thou  remember  and  I  forget. 

Swallow,  my  sister,  O  singing  swallow, 

1  know  not  how  thou  hast  heart  to  sing. 

Hast  thou  the  heart?  is  it  all  passed  over? 
Thy  lord  the  summer  is  good  to  follow. 
And  fair  the  feet  of  thy  lover  the  spring: 

But  what  wilt  thou  say  to  the  spring  thy  lover? 

O  swallow,  sister,  O  fleeting  swallow. 
My  heart  in  me  is  a  molten  ember 
And  over  my  head  the  waves  have  met. 
But  thou  wouldst  tarry  or  I  would  follow 
Could  I  forget  or  thou  remember, 
Couldst  thou  remember  and  I  forget. 


iryg  Poems  of  Nature 

O  sweet  stray  sister,  O  shifting  swallow, 
The  heart's  division  divideth  us. 

Thy  heart  is  light  as  a  leaf  of  a  tree; 
But  mine  goes  forth  among  sea-gulfs  hollow         '' 
To  the  place  of  the  slaying  of  Itylus, 
The  feast  of  Dauhs,  the  Thracian  sea. 

O  swallow,  sister,  O  rapid  swallow, 
I  pray  thee  sing  not  a  little  space. 
Are  not  the  roofs  and  the  lintels  wet? 
The  woven  web  that  was  plain  to  follow. 
The  small  slain  body,  the  flower-like  face, 
Can  I  remember  if  thou  forget? 

O  sister,  sister,  thy  iirst-begotten! 

The  hands  that  cling  and  the  feet  that  follow. 
The  voice  of  the  child's  blood  crying  yet. 
Who  hath  remembered  me  ?    who  hath  forgotten  ? 
Thou  hast  forgotten,  O  summer  swallow, 
But  the  world  shall  end  when  I  forget. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [183 7-1 909] 


THE   THROSTLE 

"  Summer  is  coming,  summer  is  coming, 

I  know  it,  I  know  it,  I  know  it. 
Light  again,  leaf  again,  life  again,  love  again," 

Yes,  my  v/ild  little  Poet. 

Sing  the  new  year  in  under  the  blue. 

Last  year  you  sang  it  as  gladly. 
"New,  new,  new,  new!"    Is  it  then  so  new 

That  you  should  carol  so  madly? 

"Love  again,  song  again,  nest  again,  young  again. 

Never  a  prophet  so  crazy! 
And  hardly  a  daisy  as  yet,  little  friend, 

See,  there  is  hardly  a  daisy. 


Joy-Month  ^579 


"Here  again,  here,  here,  here,  happy  year!" 

O  warble  unchidden,  unbidden! 
Summer  is  coming,  is  coming,  my  dear, 

And  all  the  winters  are  hidden. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


OVERFLOW 
Hush! 

With  sudden  gush 
As  from  a  fountain,  sings  in  yonder  bush 
The  Hermit  Thrush. 

Hark! 
Did  ever  Lark 
With  swifter  scintillations  fling  the  spark 
That  fires  the  dark? 

Again, 
Like  April  rain 
Of  mist  and  sunshine  mingled,  moves  the  strain 
O'er  hill  and  plain. 

Strong 
As  love,  O  Song, 
In  flame  or  torrent  sweep  through  Life  along, 
O'er  grief  and  wrong. 

John  Banislcr  Tahh  [1845-1909] 


JOY-MONTH 

Oh,  hark  to  the  brown  thrush!  hear  how  he  sings! 

How  he  pours  the  dear  pain  of  his  gladness! 
What  a  gush!  and  from  out  what  golden  springs! 

What  a  rage  of  how  sweet  madness! 

And  golden  the  buttercup  blooms  by  the  way, 

A  song  of  the  joyous  ground ; 
While  the  melody  rained  from  yonder  spray 

Is  a  blossom  in  fields  of  sound. 


1580  Poems  of  Nature 

How  glisten  the  eyes  of  the  happy  leaves! 

How  whispers  each  blade,  "I  am  blest!" 
Rosy  Heaven  his  lips  to  flowered  earth  gives, 

With  the  costliest  bliss  of  his  breast. 

Pour,  pour  of  the  wine  of  thy  heart,  O  Nature! 

By  cups  of  field  and  of  sky, 
By  the  brimming  soul  of  every  creature! — 

Joy-mad,  dear  Mother,  am  I. 

Tongues,  tongues  for  my  joy,  for  my  joy!  more  tongues! — 

Oh,  thanks  to  the  thrush  on  the  tree. 
To  the  sky,  and  to  all  earth's  blooms  and  songs! 

They  utter  the  heart  in  me. 

David  Atwood  Wasson  [1823-1887] 


MY  THRUSH 

All  through  the  sultry  hours  of  June, 
From  morning  blithe  to  go'ldcn  noon. 

And  till  the, star  of  evening  climbs 
The  graj'-blue  East,  a  world  too  soon, 

There  sings  a  Thrush  amid  the  limes. 

God's  poet,  hid  in  foliage  green. 
Sings  endless  songs,  himself  unseen; 

Right  seldom  come  his  silent  times. 
Linger,  ye  summer  hours  serene! 

Sing  on,  dear  Thrush,  amid  the  Hmes! 

Nor  from  these  confines  wander  out. 
Where  the  old  gun,  bucolic  lout. 

Commits  all  day  his  murderous  crimes:' 
Though  cherries  ripe  are  sweet,  no  doubt, 

Sweeter  thy  song  amid  the  limes. 

May  I  not  dream  God  sends  thee  there, 
Thou  mellow  angel  of  the  air. 

Even  to  rebuke  my  earthlier  rhymes 
With  music's  soul,  all  praise  and  prayer? 

Is  that  thy  lesson  in  the  limes? 


The   Black  Vulture  1581 

Closer  to  God  art  thou  than  I: 

His  minstrel  thou,  whose  brown  wings  fly 

Through  silent  ether's  summer  climes,  i 
Ah,  never  may  thy  music  die! 

Sing  on,  dear  Thrush,  amid  the  limes! 

Mortimer  Collins  [1827-1876] 

"BLOW  SOFTLY,  THRUSH" 

Blow  softly,  thrush,  upon  the  hush 

That  makes  the  least  leaf  loud. 

Blow,  wild  of  heart,  remote,  apart 

From  all  the  vocal  crowd, 

Apart,  remote,  a  spirit  note 

That  dances  meltingly  afloat, 

Blow  faintly,  thrush! 

And  build  the  green-hid  waterfall 

I  hated  for  its  beauty,  and  all 

The  unloved  vernal  rapture  and  flush,     ■ 

The  old  forgotten  lonely  time, 

Delicate  thrush! 

Spring's  at  the  prime,  the  world's  in  chime, 

And  my  love  is  listening  nearly; 

O  lightly  blow  the  ancient  woe, 

Flute  of  the  wood,  blow  clearly! 

Blow,  she  is  here,  and  the  world  all  dear, 

Melting  flute  of  the  hush. 

Old  sorrow  estranged,  enriched,  sea-changed. 

Breathe  it,  veery  thrush! 

Joseph  Russell  Taylor  [1S68- 

THE  BLACK  VULTURE 

Aloof  upon  the  day's  immeasured  dome, 
He  holds  unshared  the  silence  of  the  sky. 
Far  down  his  bleak,  relentless  eyes  descry 
The  eagle's  empire  and  the  falcon's  home — 
Far  down,  the  galleons  of  sunset  roam; 
His  hazards  on  the  sea  of  morning  lie; 
Serene,  he  hears  the  broken  tempest  sigh 
Where  cold  sierras  gleam  like  scattered  foam. 
And  least  of  all  he  holds  the  human  swarm  — 
Unwitting  now  that  envious  men  prepare 
To  make  their  dream  and  its  fulfillment  one 


1582  Poems  of  Nature 

When,  poised  above  the  caldrons  of  the  storm, 
Their  hearts,  contemptuous  of  death,  shall  dare 
His  roads  between  the  thunder  and  the  sun. 

George  Sterling  [1869- 

WILD  GEESE 
How  oft  against  the  sunset  sky  or  moon 

I  watched  that  moving  zigzag  of  spread  wings 
In  unforgotten  Autumns  gone  too  soon, 

In  unforgotten  Springs! 
Creatures  of  desolation,  far  they  fly 

Above  all  lands  bound  by  the  curling  foam; 
In  misty  fens,  wild  moors  and  trackless  sky 

These  wild  things  have  their  home. 
They  know  the  tundra  of  Siberian  coasts. 

And  tropic  marshes  by  the  Indian  seas; 
They  know  the  clouds  and  night  and  starry  hosts 

From  Crux  to  Pleiades. 
Dark  flying  rune  against  the  western  glow — 

It  tells  the  sweep  and  loneliness  of  things, 
Symbol  of  Autumns  vanished  long  ago. 

Symbol  of  coming  Springs! 

Frederick  Peterson  [1859- 

TO  A  WATERFOWL 

Whither,  midst  falling  dew. 
While  glow  the  heavens  with  the  last  steps  of  day, 
Far,  through  their  rosy  depths,  dost  thou  pursue 

Thy  solitary  way? 

Vainly  the  fowler's  eye 
Might  mark  thy  distant  flight  to  do  thee  wrong, 
As,  darkly  painted  on  the  crimson  sky, 

Thy  figure  floats  along. 

Seek'st  thou  the  plashy  brink 
Of  weedy  lake,  or  marge  of  river  wide. 
Or  where  the  rocking  billows  rise  and  sink 

On  the  chafed  ocean-side? 

There  is  a  Power  whose  care 
Teaches  thy  way  along  that  pathless  coast, — 
The  desert  and  illimitable  air,— 

Lone  wandering,  but  not  lost. 


The  Wood-Dove's   Note  1583 

All  day  thy  wings  have  fanned 
At  that  far  height,  the  cold,  thin  atmosphere, 
Yet  stoop  not,  weary,  to  the  welcome  land, 

Though  the  dark  night  is  near. 

And  soon  that  toil  shall  end; 
Soon  shall  thou  find  a  summer  home,  and  rest, 
And  scream  among  thy  fellows;  reeds  shall  bend, 

Soon,  o'er  thy  sheltered  nest. 

Thou'rt  gone,  the  abyss  of  heaven 
Hath  swallowed  up  thy  form ;  yet,  on  my  heart 
Deeply  hath  sunk  the  lesson  thou  hast  given, 

And  shall  not  soon  depart. 

He  who,  from  zone  to  zone, 
Guides  through  the  boundless  sky  thy  certain  flight, 
In  the  long  way  that  I  must  tread  alone. 

Will  lead  my  steps  aright. 

William  Cullcn  Bryant  [i 794-1878] 


THE  WOOD-DOVE'S  NOTE 

^Meadows  with  yellow  cowslips  all  aglow, 
Glory  of  sunshine  on  the  uplands  bare. 

And  faint  and  far,  with  sweet  elusive  flow. 
The  Wood-dove's  plaintive  call, 

"O  'Lfhcrc  1  where  1  where  I" 

Straight  with  old  Omar  in  the  almond  grove 

From  whitening  boughs  I  breathe  the  odors  rare 

And  hear  the  princess  mourning  for  her  love 
With  sad  unwearied  plaint, 

"0  where  !  where!  where  /" 

New  madrigals  in  each  soft  pulsing  throat — 

New  life  upleaping  to  the  brooding  air- 
Still  the  heart  answers  to  that  questing  note, 
"Soul  of  the  vanished  years, 

O  where  !  where  !  where  I" 
Emily  Uunlington  Miller  [1833-1913] 


THE  SEA 

SONG   FOR  ALL   SEAS,   ALL  SHIPS 


To-day  a  rude  brief  recitative, 

Of  ships  sailing  the  seas,  each  with  its  special  flag  or  ship- 
signal, 

Of  unnamed  heroes  in  the  ships — of  waves  spreading  and 
spreading  far  as  the  eye  can  reach, 

Of  dashing  spray,  and  the  winds  piping  and  blowing, 

And  out  of  these  a  chant  for  the  sailors  of  all  nations. 

Fitful,  like  a  surge. 

Of  sea-captains  young  or  old,  and  the  mates,  and  of  all  in- 
trepid sailors. 

Of  the  few,  very  choice,  taciturn,  whom  fate  can  never 
surprise  nor  death  dismay. 

Picked  sparingly  without  noise  by  thee,  old  ocean,  chosen  by 
thee. 

Thou  sea  that  pickest  and  cullest  the  race  in  time,  and  unit- 
est  nations. 

Suckled  by  thee,  old  husky  nurse,  embodying  thee. 

Indomitable,  untamed  as  thee. 

(Ever  the  heroes  on  water  or  on  land,  by  ones  or  twos  appear- 
ing, 

Ever  the  stock  preserved  and  never  lost,  though  rare,  enough 
for  seed  preserved.) 

II 

Flaunt  out,  O  sea,  your  separate  flags  of  nations! 

Flaunt  out  visible  as  ever  the  various  ship-signals! 

But  do  you  reserve  especially  for  yourself  and  for  the  soul  of 

man  one  flag  above  all  the  rest, 
A  spiritual  woven  signal  for  all  nations,  emblem  of  man  elate 

above  death, 

1584 


Stanzas  1585 

Token  of  all  brave  captains  and  all  intrepid  sailors  and  mates, 

And  all  that  went  down  doing  their  duty, 

Reminiscent  of  them,   twined  from  all  intrepid  captains 

young  or  old, 
A  pennant  universal,  subtly  waving  all  time,  o'er  all  brave 

sailors, 
All  seas,  all  ships. 

Walt  Whitman  [i 819-1802] 


STANZAS 

From  "  The  Triumph  of  Time  " 

I  WILL  go  back  to  the  great  sweet  mother, — 

JVIother  and  lover  of  men,  the  Sea. 
I  will  go  down  to  her,  I  and  none  other. 

Close  with  her,  kiss  her,  and  mix  her  with  me; 
Cling  to  her,  strive  with  her,  hold  her  fast;  ' 

O  fair  white  mother,  in  days  long  past 
Born  without  sister,  born  without  brother, 

Set  free  my  soul  as  thy  soul  is  free. 

0  fair  green-girdled  mother  of  mine, 

Sea,  that  art  clothed  with  the  sun  and  the  rain, 
Thy  sweet  hard  kisses  are  strong  like  wine, 

Thy  large  embraces  are  keen  like  pain. 
Save  me  and  hide  me  with  all  thy  waves. 
Find  me  one  grave  of  thy  thousand  graves. 
Those  pure  cold  populous  graves  of  thine. 

Wrought  without  hand  in  a  world  without  stain. 

1  shall  sleep,  and  move  with  the  moving  ships, 

Change  as  the  winds  change,  veer  in  the  tide; 
My  lips  will  feast  on  the  foam  of  thy  lips, 

I  shall  rise  with  thy  rising,  with  thee  subside; 
Sleep,  and  not  know  if  she  be,  if  she  were, 
Filled  full  with  life  to  the  eyes  and  hair. 
As  a  rose  is  fulfilled  to  the  rose-leaf  tips 

With  splendid  summer  and  perfume  and  pride. 


1586  Poems  of  Nature 

This  woven  raiment  of  nights  and  days, 

Were  it  once  cast  off  and  unwound  from  me, 
Naked  and  glad  would  I  walk  in  thy  ways, 
Alive  and  aware  of  thy  waves  and  thee; 
Clear  of  the  whole  v/orld,  hidden  at  home, 
Clothed  with  the  green,  and  crowned  with  the  foam, 
A  pulse  of  the  life  of  thy  straits  and  bays, 

A  vein  in  the  heart  of  the  streams  of  the  Sea. 

Fair  mother,  fed  with  the  lives  of  men, 
Thou  art  subtle  and  cruel  of  heart,  men  say; 

Thou  hast  taken,  and  shalt  not  render  again; 
Thou  art  full  of  thy  dead,  and  cold  as  they. 

But  death  is  the  worst  that  comes  of  thee; 

Thou  art  fed  with  our  dead,  O  Mother,  O  Sea, 

But  when  hast  thou  fed  on  our  hearts?  or  when 
Having  given  us  love,  hast  thou  taken  away? 

0  tender-hearted,  O  perfect  lover, 

Thy  lips  are  bitter,  and  svy^eet  thine  heart. 
The  hopes  that  hurt  and  the  dreams  that  hover,   . 

Shall  they  not  vanish  awa}^  and  apart? 
But  thou,  thou  art  sure,  thou  art  older  than  earth; 
Thou  art  strong  for  death  and  fruitful  of  birth; 
Thy  depths  conceal  and  thy  gulfs  discover; 

From  the  first  thou  wert;  in  the  end  thou  art. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [i837-i9og] 

THE   SEA 

From  "  Childe  Harold's  Pilgrimage" 

There  is  a  pleasure  in  the  pathless  woods, 
There  is  a  rapture  on  the  lonely  shore. 
There  is  society  where  none  intrudes 
By  the  deep  Sea,  and  music  in  its  roar: 

1  love  not  Man  the  less,  but  Nature  more. 
From  these  our  interviews,  in  which  I  steal 
From  all  I  may  be,  or  have  been  before, 
To  mingle  with  the  Universe,  and  feel 

What  I  can  ne'er  express,  yet  can  not  all  conceal. 


The  Sea 


1587 


Roll  on,  thou  deep  and  dark  blue  Ocean,  roll! 
Ten  thousand  fleets  sweep  over  thee  in  vain; 
Man  marks  the  earth  with  ruin,  his  control 
Stops  with  the  shore;  upon  the  watery  plain 
The  wrecks  are  aU  thy  deed,  nor  doth  remain 
A  shadow  of  man's  ravage,  save  his  own. 
When,  for  a  moment,  like  a  drop  of  rain. 
He  sinks  into  tliy  depths  with  bubbling  groan, 
Without  a  grave,  unknelled,  uncoffined,  and  uriknown. , 

His  steps  are  not  upon  thy  paths,  thy  fields 
Are  not  a  spoil  for  him, — thou  dost  arise 
And  shake  him  from  thee;  the  vile  strength  he  wields 
For  earth's  destruction  thou  dost  all  despise, 
Spurning  him  from  thy  bosom  to  the  skies, 
And  send'st  him,  shivering  in  thy  playful  spray 
And  howling,  to  his  Gods,  where  haply  lies 
His  petty  hope  in  some  near  port  or  bay. 
And  dashest  him  again  to  earth: — there  let  him  lay. 

The  armaments  which  thunderstrike  the  walls 
Of  rock-built  cities,  bidding  nations  quake 
And  monarchs  tremble  in  their  capitals, 
The  oak  leviathans,  whose  huge  ribs  make 
Their  clay  creator  the  vain  title  take 
Of  lord  of  thee  and  arbiter  of  war, — 
These  are  thy  toys,  and,  as  the  snowy  flake, 
They  melt  into  thy  yeast  of  waves,  which  mar 
Alike  the  Armada's  pride  or  spoils  of  Trafalgar. 

Thy  shores  are  empires,  changed  in  all  save  thee; — 
Assyria,  Greece,  Rome,  Carthage,  what  are  they? 
Thy  waters  washed  them  power  while  they  were  free, 
And  many  a  tyrant  since;  their  shores  obey 
The  stranger,  slave,  or  savage;  their  decay 
Has  dried  up  realms  to  deserts: — not  so  thou; 
Unchangeable  save  to  thy  wild  waves'  play, 
Time  writes  no  wrinkle  on  thine  azure  brow; 
Such  as  creation's  dawn  beheld,  thou  roUest  now. 


1^88  Poems  of  Nature 

Thou  glorious  mirror,  where  the  Almighty's  form 
Glasses  itself  in  tempests;  in  all  time, 
Calm  or  convulsed, — in  breeze,  or  gale,  or  storm, 
Icing  the  pole,  or  in  the  torrid  clime 
Dark-heaving; — boundless,  endless,  and  sublime, — 
The  image  of  Eternity, — the  throne 
Of  the  Invisible;  even  from  out  thy  slime 
The  monsters  of  the  deep  are  made;  each  zone 
Obeys  thee;  thou  goest  forth,  dread,  fathomless,  alone. 

And  I  have  loved  thee,  Oceani  and  my  joy 
Of  youthful  sports  was  on  thy  breast  to  be 
Borne,  like  thy  bubbles,  onward.    From  a  boy 
I  wantoned  with  thy  breakers, — they  to  me 
Were  a  delight;  and  if  the  freshening  sea 
Made  them  a  terror,  'twas  a  pleasing  fear; 
For  I  was  as  it  were  a  child  of  thee, 
And  trusted  to  thy  billows  far  and  near. 
And  laid  my  hand  upon  thy  mane, — as  I  do  here. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [i 788-1824] 


ON  THE   SEA 

It  keeps  eternal  whisperings  around 

Desolate  shores,  and  with  its  mighty  swell 
Gluts  twice  ten  thousand  caverns,  till  the  spell 

Of  Hecate  leaves  them  their  old  shadowy  sound. 

Often  'tis  in  such  gentle  temper  found, 

That  scarcely  will  the  very  smallest  shell 

Be  moved  for  days  from  whence  it  sometime  fell, 

When  last  the  winds  of  heaven  were  unbound. 

Oh  ye!  who  have  your  eye-balls  vexed  and  tired. 
Feast  them  upon  the  wideness  of  the  Sea; 

Oh  ye!  whose  ears  are  dinned  with  uproar  rude. 
Or  fed  too  much  with  cloying  melody, — 

Sit  ye  near  some  old  cavern's  mouth,  and  brood 

Until  ye  start,  as  if  the  sea-nymphs  quired! 

John  Keats  [1795-1821] 


A  Song  of  Desire  1589 


"WITH   SHIPS  THE   SEA  WAS   SPRINKLED" 

With  ships  the  sea  was  sprinkled  far  and  nigh, 

Like  stars  in  heaven,  and  joyously  it  showed; 

Some  lying  fast  at  anchor  in  the  road, 

Some  veering  up  and  down,  one  knew  not  why. 

A  goodly  vessel  did  I  then  espy 

Come  like  a  giant  from  a  haven  broad;  ^  -  ^^ 

And  lustily  along  the  bay  she  strode,  '-^<^' 

Her  tackling  rich,  and  of  apparel  high. 

This  ship  was  naught  to  me,  nor  I  to  her, 

Yet  I  pursued  her  with  a  lover's  look; 

This  ship  to  all  the  rest  did  I  prefer: 

When  will  she  turn,  and  whither?    She  will  brook 

No  tarrying;  where  she  comes  the  winds  must  stir: 

On  went  she, — and  due  north  her  journey  took. 

William  M'ordsivorth  [1770-1850] 


A   SONG  OF  DESIRE 

Thou  dreamer  with  the  million  moods, 

Of  restless  heart  like  me, 
Lay  thy  white  hands  against  my  breast 

And  cool  its  pain,  O  Sea! 

O  wanderer  of  the  unseen  paths. 

Restless  of  heart  as  I, 
Blow  hither,  from  thy  caves  of  blue, 

Wind  of  the  healing  sky! 

O  treader  of  the  fiery  way, 

With  passionate  heart  like  mine, 

Hold  to  my  lips  thy  healthful  cup 
Brimmed  with  its  blood-red  wine! 


)  n-n  t>(.'rh  T 


O  countless  watchers  of  the  night. 
Of  sleepless  heart  like  me, 

Pour  your  white  beauty  in  my  soul, 
Till  I  grow  calm  as  ye! 


1 590  Poems  of  Nature 

O  sea,  O  sun,  O  wind  and  stars, 

(0  hungry  heart  that  longs!) 
Feed  my  starved  hps  with  Hfe,  with  love, 

And  touch  my  tongue  with  songs! 

Frederic  Lawrence  Knoivles  [1860-1905] 

THE  PINES  AND  THE  SEA 

Beyond  the  low  marsh-meadows  and  the  beach, 

Seen  through  the  hoary  trunks  of  windy  pines, 

The  long  blue  level  of  the  ocean  shines. 

The  distant  surf,  with  hoarse,  complaining  speech, 

Out  from  its  sandy  barrier  seems  to  reach;  ,     r 

And  while  the  sun  behind  the  woods  declines,        r ,. 

The  moaning  sea  with  sighing  boughs  combines,  .wi- 

And  waves  and  pines  make  answer,  each  to  each.^  y 

O  melancholy  soul,  whom  far  and  near,  ^, > 

In  life,  faith,  hope,  the  same  sad  undertone 

Pursues  from  thought  to  thought!  thou  needs  must  hear 

An  old  refrain,  too  much,  too  long  thine  own: 

'Tis  thy  mortality  infects  thine  ear; 

The  mournful  strain  was  in  thyself  alone. 

Christopher  Pearse  Cranch  [1813-1892] 


SEA  FEVER 

I  MUST  go  down  to  the  seas  again,  to  the  lonely  sea  and  the 
sky, 

And  all  I  ask  is  a  tall  ship  and  a  star  to  steer  her  by; 

And  the  wheel's  kick  and  the  wind's  song  and  the  white 
sail's  shaking, 

And  a  gray  mist  on  the  sea's  face,  and  a  gray  dawn  break- 
ing. 

I  must  go  down  to  the  seas  again,  for  the  call  of  the  running 
tide 

Is  a  wild  call  and  a  clear  call  that  may  not  be  denied; 

And  all  I  ask  is  a  windy  day  with  the  white  clouds  flying. 

And  the  flung  spray  and  the  blown  spume,  and  the  sea- 
gulls crying. 


Hastings    Mill  ^591 

I  must  go  down  to  the  seas  again,  to  the  vagrant  gipsy  Ufe, 
To  the  gull's  Avay  and  the  whale's  way  where  the  wind's 

Hke  a  whetted  knife; 
And  all  I  ask  is  a  merry  yarn  from  a  laughing  fellow-rover, 
And  quiet  sleep  and  a  sweet  dream  when  the  long  trick's 

over. 

John  Mascficld  [1874- 


HASTINGS  MILL 

As  I  went  down  by  Hastings  ISIill  I  lingered  in  my  going 
To  smell  the  smell  of  piled-up  deals  and  feel  the  salt  wind 

blowing, 
To  hear  the  cables  fret  and  creak  and  the  ropes  stir  and  sigh 
(Shipmate,  my  shipmate!)  as  in  days  gone  by. 

As  I  went  down  by  Hastings  Mill  I  saw  a  ship  there  lying, 
About  her  tawny  yards  the  little  clouds  of  sunset  flying; 
And  half  I  took  her  for  the  ghost  of  one  I  used  to  know 
(Shipmate,  my  shipmate!)  many  years  ago. 

As  I  went  down  by  Hastings  Mill  I  saw  while  I  stood  dream- 
ing 

The  flicker  of  her  riding  light  along  the  ripples  streaming, 

The  bollards  where  we  made  her  fast  and  the  berth  where 
she  did  lie 

(Shipmate,  my  shipmate!)  in  the  days  gone  by. 

As  I  went  down  by  Hastings  Mill  I  heard  a  fellow  singing, 
Chipping  off  the  deep  sea  rust  above  the  tide  a-swinging. 
And  well  I  knew  the  queer  old  tune  and  well  the  song  he  sung 
(Shipmate,  my  shipmate!)  when  the  world  was  young. 

And  past  the  rowdy  Union  Wharf,  and  by  the  still  tide 

sleeping, 
To  a  randy  dandy  deep  sea  tune  my  heart  in  time  was  keep- 
ing. 
To  the  thin  far  sound  of  a  shadowy  watch  a-hauling, 
And  the  voice  of  one  I  knew  across  the  high  tide  calling 
(Shipmate,  my  shipmate!)  and  the  late  dusk  falling! 

Cecily  Fox-Smith  [1882- 


1592 


Poems  of  Nature 


"A  WET  SHEET  AND  A   FLOWING  SEA".,t 

A  WET  sheet  and  a  flowing  sea, 

A  wind  that  follows  fast,  =""- 

And  fills  the  white  and  rustling  sail,  -''"^^ 

And  bends  the  gallant  mast;  '  ■'- 

And  bends  the  gallant  mast,  my  boys, 

While,  like  the  eagle  free. 
Away  the  good  ship  flies,  and  leaves 

Old  England  on  the  lee. 

0  for  a  soft  and  gentle  wind! 

I  heard  a  fair  one  cry; 
But  give  to  me  the  snoring  breeze  ,    r^ 

And  white  waves  heaving  high;  ,  ,v 

And  white  waves  heaving  high,  my  boys, 

The  good  ship  tight  and  free— 
The  world  of  waters  is  our  home. 

And  merry  men  are  we.  .:.  ,:  ]  n/. 

There's  tempest  in  yon  horned  moon,      ^      ^ 

And  lightning  in  yon  cloud;  ,.  .^p  ^^^.,^  y  -A 

And  hark  the  music,  mariners! 

The  wind  is  piping  loud; 
The  wind  is  piping  loud,  my  boys,  [|^^j  ^^ 

The  lightning  flashes  free — 
While  the  hollow  oak  our  palace  is,  -  > 

Our  heritage  the  sea. 

Allan  Cunningham  [i 784-1842] 


THE   SEA 

The  sea!  the  sea!  the  open  sea! 

The  blue,  the  fresh,  the  ever  free!  ^'^'^  -'^ 

Without  a  mark,  without  a  bound, 

It  runneth  the  earth's  wide  regions  round; 

It  plays  with  the  clouds;  it  mocks  the  skies; 

Or  like  a  cradled  creature  lies. 

I'm  on  the  sea!     I'm  on  the  sea!  uiraqiiid) 

Jfaniyy^liere  I  WQuld  ever  be; 


Sailor's  Song  ^  S93 

With  the  blue  above,  and  the  blue  below, 
And  silence  wheresoe'er  I  go; 
If  a  storm  should  come  and  awake  the  dieep, 
What  matter?    /  shall  ride  and  sleep. 

I  love,  O,  how  I  love  to  ride 
On  the  fierce,  foaming,  bursting  tide, 
When  every  mad  wave  drowns  the  moon 
Or  whistles  aloft  his  tempest  tune, 
And  tells  how  goeth  the  world  below, 
And  why  the  sou'west  blasts  do  blow. 

I  never  was  on  the  dull,  tame  shore. 
But  I  loved  the  great  sea  more  and  more. 
And  backwards  flew  to  her  billowy  breast, 
Like  a  bird  that  seeketh  its  mother's  nest; 
And  a  mother  she  was,  and  is,  to  me; 
For  I  was  born  on  the  open  sea! 

The  waves  were  white,  and  red  the  morn. 
In  the  noisy  hour  when  I  was  born; 
And  the  whale  it  whistled,  the  porpoise  rolled, 
And  the  dolphins  bared  their  backs  of  gold ; 
And  never  was  heard  such  an  outcry  wild 
As  welcomed  to  life  the  ocean-child! 

I've  lived  since  then,  in  calm  and  strife, 
Full  fifty  summers,  a  sailor's  life. 
With  wealth  to  spend  and  a  power  to  range, 
But  never  have  sought  nor  sighed  for  change; 
And  Death,  whenever  he  comes  to  me, 
Shall  come  on  the  wild,  unbounded  sea! 

Bryan  Waller  Procter  [1787-1874] 


SAILOR'S  SONG 

From  "Death's  Jest-Book  " 

To  sea,  to  sea!     The  calm  is  o'er; 

The  wanton  water  leaps  in  sport, 
And  rattles  down  the  pebbly  shore; 

The  dolphin  wheels,  the  sea-cows  snort, 


1594  Poems  of  Nature 

And  unseen  mermaids'  pearly  song 
Comes  bubbling  up,  the  weeds  among. 

Fling  broad  the  sail,  dip  deep  the  oar; 

To  sea,,  to  sea!  the  calm  is  o'er. 

To  sea,  to  sea!  our  wide-winged  bark 

Shall  billowy  cleave  its  sunny  way,  ' 

And  with  its  shadow,  fleet  and  dark, 
Break  the  caved  Tritons'  azure  day, 

Like  mighty  eagle  soaring  light 

O'er  antelopes  on  Alpine  height. 

The  anchor  heaves,  the  ship  swings  free, 
The  sails  swell  full.     To  sea,  to  sea! 

Thomas  Love!!  Beddoes  [1803- 1849] 


"A  LIFE  ON  THE  OCEAN  WAVE" 

A  LIFE  on  the  ocean  wave, 

A  home  on  the  rolling  deep. 
Where  the  scattered  waters  rave. 

And  the  winds  their  revels  keepi 
Like  an  eagle  caged,  I  pine 

On  this  dull,  unchanging  shore: 
Oh!  give  me  the  flashing  brine, 

The  spray  and  the  tempest's  roar! 

Once  more  on  the  deck  I  stand 

Of  my  own  swift -gliding  craft : 
Set  sail!  farewell  to  the  land! 

The  gale  follows  fair  abaft. 
We  shoot  through  the  sparkling  foam 

Like  an  ocean-bird  set  free; — 
Like  the  ocean-bird,  our  home 

We'll  find  far  out  on  the  sea. 

The  land  is  no  longer  in  view. 
The  clouds  have  begun  to  frown; 

But  with  a  stout  vessel  and  crew, 
We'll  say,  Let  the  storm  come  down! 


Tacking  Ship  off  Shore  ^59S 

And  the  song  of  our  hearts  shall  be,        .;; ' 
While  the  winds  and  the  waters  rave, 

A  home  on  the  roUing  sea! 
A  life  on  the  ocean  wave! 

Epes  Sargent  [1813-1880] 


TACKING  SHIP  OFF  SHORE 

The  weather-leech  of  the  topsail  shivers, 

The  bowlines  strain,  and  the  lee-shrouds  slacken, 

The  braces  are  taut,  the  lithe  boom  quivers, 

And  the  waves  with  the  coming  squall-cloud  blacken. 

Open  one  point  on  the  weather-bow. 

Is  the  lighthouse  tall  on  Fire  Island  Head. 

There's  a  shade  of  doubt  on  the  captain's  brow, 
And  the  pilot  watches  the  heaving  lead. 

I  stand  at  the  wheel,  and  with  eager  eye 

To  sea  and  to  sky  and  to  shore  I  gaze. 
Till  the  muttered  order  of  "Full  and  by!" 

Is  suddenly  changed  for  "Full  for  stays!" 

The  ship  bends  lower  before  the  breeze. 
As  her  broadside  fair  to  the  blast  she  lays; 

And  she  swifter  springs  to  the  rising  seas. 
As  the  pilot  calls,  "Stand  by  for  stays!" 

It  is  silence  all,  as  each  in  his  place. 

With  the  gathered  coil  in  his  hardened  hands, 

By  tack  and  bowline,  by  sheet  and  brace, 
W^ailing  the  watchword  impatient  stands. 

And  the  light  on  Fire  Island  Head  draws  near, 
As,  trumpet-winged,  the  pilot's  shout  IT 

From  his  post  on  the  bowsprit's  heel  I  hear, 
With  the  welcome  call  of  "Ready!  About!" 

No  time  to  spare!     It  is  touch  and  go; 

And  the  captain  growls,  "Down  helm!  hard  down!" 
As  my  weight  on  the  whirling  spokes  I  throw. 

While  heaven  grows  black  with  the  storm-cloud's  frown. 


r 


>i^^6  Si'    Poems  of  Nature 

High  o'er  the  knight-heads  flies  the  spray, 
As  we  meet  the  shock  of  the  plunging  sea; 

And  m}'  shoulder  stiff  to  the  wheel  I  lay, 
As  I  answer,  "Ay,  ay,  sir!    Ha-a-rd  a-lee!" 

i 

V/ith  the  swerving  leap  of  a  startled  steed 
The  ship  flies  fast  in  the  eye  of  the  wind, 

The  dangerous  shoals  on  the  lee  recede, 

And  the  headland  white  we  have  left  behind. 

The  topsails  flutter,  the  jibs  collapse, 
.  •  ^   And  belly  and  tug  at  the  groaning  cleats; 
The  spanker  slats,  and  the  mainsail  flaps; 

And  thunders  the  order,  "Tacks  and  sheets!"    " 

Mid  the  rattle  of  blocks  and  the  tramp  of  the  crew, 
Hisses  the  rain  of  the  rushing  squall: 

The  sails  are  aback  from  clew  to  clew, 

And  now  is  the  moment  for  "Mainsail,  haul!" 

And  the  heavy  yards,  hke  a  baby's  toy, 
By  fifty  strong  arms  are  swiftly  swung: 

She  holds  her  way,  and  I  look  with  joy 

For  the  first  white  spray  o'er  the  bulwarks  flung. 

"Let  go,  and  haul!"     'Tis  the  last  command, 
And  the  head-sails  fill  to  the  blast  once  more: 

Astern  and  to  leeward  lies  the  land. 

With  its  breakers  white  on  the  shingly  shore. 

What  matters  the  reef,  or  the  rain,  or  the  squall? 

I  steady  the  helm  for  the  open  sea; 
The  first  mate  clamors,  "Belay,  there,  all!" 

And  the  captain's  breath  once  more  comes  free..  , 

i  xfjiW 
And  so  off  shore  let  the  good  ship  fly; 

Little  care  I  how  the  gusts  may  blow, 
In  my  fo'castlc  bunk,  in  a  jacket  dry. 

Eight  bells  have  struck,  and  my  watch  is  below. 
.nv/rn't  .:inu  Walter  Mitchell  [1826-1908] 


Poor  Jack  o4  1597 


IN  OUR  BOAT 

Stars  trembling  o'er  us  and  sunset  before  us, 

Mountains  in  shadow  and  forests  asleep; 
Down  the  dim  river  we  float  on  forever, 

Speak  not,  ah,  breathe  not — there's  peace  on  the  deep. 

Come  not,  pale  sorrow,  flee  till  to-morrow; 

Rest  softl}'  falling  o'er  eycHds  that  weep; 
While  down  the  river  we  float  on  forever,  :  , 

Speak  not,  ah,  breathe  not — there's  peace  on  the  deep. 

As  the  waves  cover  the  depths  we  glide  over,  t 

So  let  the  past  in  forgetfulness  sleep, 
While  down  the  river  we  float  on  forever. 

Speak  not,  ah,  breathe  not — there's  peace  on  the  deep. 

Heaven  shine  above  us,  bless  all  that  love  us; 

All  whom  we  love  in  thy  tenderness  keep! 
While  down  the  river  we  float  on  forever. 

Speak  not,  ah,  breathe  not — there's  peace  on  the  deep. 
Dinah  Maria  Mulock  Craik  [1826-1887] 


POOR  JACK 

Go,  patter  to  lubbers  and  swabs,  do  ye  see, 

'Bout  danger,  and  fear,  and  the  like; 
A  water-tight  boat  and  good  sea-room  for  me, 

And  it  ain't  to  a  little  I'll  strike. 
Though  the  tempest  topgallant-masts  smack  smooth  should 
smite. 

And  shiver  each  splinter  of  wood, — 
Clear  the  deck,  stow  the  yards,  and  house  everything  tight. 

And  under  reefed  foresail  we'll  scud:   * 
Avast!  nor  don't  think  me  a  milksop  so  soft 

To  be  taken  for  trifles  aback; 
For  they  say  there's  a  Providence  sits  up  aloft", 

To  keep  watch  for  the  life  of  poor  Jack ! 


1598  Poems  of  Nature 

I  heard  our  good  chaplain  palaver  one  day 

About  souls,  heaven,  mercy,  and  such; 
And,  my  timbers!  what  hngo  he'd  coil  and  belay; 

Why,  'twas  just  all  as  one  as  High  Dutch; 
For  he  said  how  a  sparrow  can't  founder,  d'ye  see, 

Without  orders  that  come  down  below;  *^ 

And  a  many  fine  things  that  proved  clearly  to  me  '^'i*^ 

That  Providence  takes  us  in  tow: 
"For,"  says  he,  "do  you  mind  me,  let  storms  e'er  so  oft 

Take  the  topsails  of  sailors  aback, 
There's  a  sweet  little  cherub  that  sits  up  aloft,  ' 

To  keep  watch  for  the  life  of  poor  Jack!" 

I  said  to  our  Poll, — for,  d'ye  see,  she  would  cry,     '^^  ??A 

When  last  we  weighed  anchor  for  sea, — 
"What  argufies  sniveling  and  piping  your  eye? 

Why,  what  a  blamed  fool  you  must  be! 
Can't  you  see,  the  world's  wide,  and  there's  room  for  us 
all. 

Both  for  seamen  and  lubbers  ashore? 
And  if  to  old  Davy  I  should  go,  friend  Poll, 

You  never  will  hear  of  me  more. 
What  then?    All's  a  hazard:  come,  don't  be  so  soft: 

Perhaps  I  may  laughing  come  back; 
For,  d'ye  see,  there's  a  cherub  sits  smiling  aloft, 

To  keep  watch  for  the  life  of  poor  Jack!" 

D'ye  mind  me,  a  sailor  should  be  every  inch 

All  as  one  as  a  piece  of  the  ship, 
And  with  her  brave  the  world,  without  offering  to  flinch 

From  the  moment  the  anchor's  a-trip. 
'As  for  me,  in  all  weathers,  all  times,  sides,  and  ends, 

Naught's  a  trouble  from  duty  that  springs. 
For  my  heart  is  my  Poll's,  and  my  rhino's  my  friend's. 

And  as  for  my  will,  'tis  the  king's. 
Even  when  my  tifne  comes,  ne'er  believe  me  so  soft  1  ;iy. 

As  for  grief  to  be  taken  aback;  1  !  JaxjvA 

For  the  same  little  cherub  that  sits  up  aloft  xl  oT 

Will  look'out  a  good  berth  for  poor  Jack!  ^  -. .  f 

looq  lo       Charles  Dibdin  [1745-1814] 


Outward  ^599 

"ROCKED  IN  THE  CRADLE  OF  THE  DEEP" 

Rocked  in  the  cradle  of  the  deep 
I  lay  me  down  in  peace  to  sleep; 
Secure  I  rest  upon  the  wave, 
For  Thou,  O  Lord!  hast  power  to  save. 
I  know  Thou  wilt  not  slight  my  call. 
For  Thou  dost  mark  the  sparrow's  fall; 
And  calm  and  peaceful  shall  I  sleep, 
Rocked  in  the  cradle  of  the  deep. 

When  in  the  dead  of  night  I  lie 
And  gaze  upon  the  trackless  sky, 
The  star-bespangled  heavenly  scroll, 
The  boundless  waters  as  they  roll, — 
I  feel  Thy  wondrous  power  to  save 
From  perils  of  the  stormy  wave: 
Rocked  in  the  cradle  of  the  deep, 
I  calmly  rest  and  soundly  sleep. 

And  such  the  trust  that  still  were  mine, 
Though  stormy  winds  swept  o'er  the  brine, 
Or  though  the  tempest's  fiery  breath 
Roused  me  from  sleep  to  wreck  and  death. 
In  ocean  cave,  still  safe  with  Thee 
The  germ  of  immortality! 
And  calm  and  peaceful  shall  I  sleep, 
Rocked  in  the  cradle  of  the  deep. 

Emma  H art  Willard  [1787-1870] 


OUTWARD 

Whither  away,  O  Sailor!  say? 
Under  the  night,  under  the  day. 
Yearning  sail  and  flying  spray 
Out  of  the  black  into  the  blue, 
Where  are  the  great  Winds  bearing  you? 

Never  port  shall  lift  for  me 
Into  the  sky,  out  of  the  sea! 


jSoo  Poems  of  Nature 

Into  the  blue  or  into  the  black, 
Onward,  outward,  never  back! 
Something  mighty  and  weird  and  dim 
Calls  me  under  the  ocean  rim! 

Sailor  under  sun  and  moon, 
'Tis  the  ocean's  fatal  rune. 
Under  yon  far  rim  of  sky 
Twice  ten  thousand  others  lie. 
Love  is  sweet  and  home  is  fair. 
And  your  mother  calls  you  there. 

Onward,  outward  I  must  go 
Where  the  mighty  currents  flow. 
Home  is  anywhere  for  me 
On  this  purple-tented  sea. 
Star  and  Wind  and  Sun  my  brothers. 
Ocean  one  of  many  mothers. 
Onward  under  sun  and  star 
Where  the  weird  adventures  are! 
Never  port  shall  lift  for  me — 
I  am  Wind  and  Sky  and  Sea! 

John  G.  Neihardl  fi8i 


A  PASSER-BY 

Whither,  O  splendid  ship,  thy  white  sails  crowding. 

Leaning  across  the  bosom  of  the  urgent  West, 
That  fearest  nor  sea  rising,  nor  sky  clouding, 

Whither  away,  fair  rover,  and  what  thy  quest? 

Ah!  soon,  when  Winter  has  all  our  vales  oppressed, 
When  skies  are  cold  and  misty,  and  hail  is  hurling. 

Wilt  thou  glide  on  the  blue  Pacific,  or  rest 
In  a  summer  haven  asleep,  thy  white  sails  furling. 

I  there  before  thee,  in  the  country  that  well  thou  knowest. 
Already  arrived,  am  inhaling  the  odorous  air: 

I  watch  thee  enter  unerringly  where  thou  goest. 
And  anchor  queen  of  the  strange  shipping  there, 


Off  Riviere  du    Loup  1601 

Thy  sails  for  awnings  spread,  thy  masts  bare: 
Nor  is  aught  from  the  foaming  reef  to  the  snow-capped 
grandest 

Peak,  that  is  over  the  feathery  pahiis,  more  fair 
Than  thou,  so  upright,  so  stately  and  still  thou  standest. 

And  yet,  O  splendid  ship,  unhailed  and  nameless, 

I  know  not  if,  aiming  a  fancy,  I  rightly  divine 
That  thou  hast  a  purpose  joyful,  a  courage  blameless, 

Thy  port  assured  in  a  happier  land  than  mine. 

But  for  all  I  have  given  thee,  beauty  enough  is  thine, 
As  thou,  aslant  with  trim  tackle  and  shrouding, 

From  the  proud  nostril  curve  of  a  prow's  line 
In  the  offing  scatterest  foam,  thy  white  sails  crowding. 

Robert  Bridges  [1844- 


OFF  RIVlfiRE  DU  LOUP 

O  SHIP  incoming  from  the  sea 
With  all  your  cloudy  tower  of  sail. 
Dashing  the  water  to  the  lee, 
And  leaning  grandly  to  the  gale, 


The  sunset  pageant  in  the  west 
Has  filled  your  canvas  curves  with  rose, 
And  jeweled  every  toppling  crest 
That  crashes  into  silver  snows! 

You  know  the  joy  of  coming  home,  ||y, 

After  long  leagues  to  France  or  Spain 
You  feel  the  clear  Canadian  foam 
And  the  gulf  water  heave  again. 

Between  these  somber  purple  hills 
That  cool  the  sunset's  molten  bars, 
You  will  go  on  as  the  wind  wills, 
Beneath  the  river's  roof  of  stars. 

You  will  toss  onward  toward  the  lights 
That  spangle  over  the  lonely  pier. 
By  hamlets  glimmering  on  the  heights, 
By  level  islands  black  and  clear. 


M-M 


i6o2  Poems  of  Nature 

You  will  go  on  beyond  the  tide,  '•■     '^'  ' 

''■  Through  brimming  plains  of  olive  sedge, 

Through  paler  shadows  light  and  wide. 
The  rapids  piled  along  the  ledge. 
-  ''^"  '  Ai  n&dT 

At  evening  off  some  reedy  bay 
You  will  swing  slowly  on  your  chain. 


And  catch  the  scent  of  dewy  hay, 
Soft  blowing  from  the  pleasant  plain. 

Duncan  Campbell  Scoll  [1862- 


r 


ioriJ  2A 

.^■;  CHRISTMAS   AT   SEA  ■  orlj  nl 

The  sheets  were  frozen  hard,  and  they  cut  the  naked  hand; 
The  decks  were  like  a  slide,  where  a  seaman  scarce  could 

stand ; 
The  wind  was  a  nor'-wester,  blowing  squally  off  the  sea; 
And  cliffs  and  spouting  breakers  were  the  only  things  a-lee. 

/  i^n  ftji 

They  heard  the  surf  a-roaring  before  th6  break  of  day; 
•But  'twas  only  with  the  peep  of  light  we  saw  how  ill  we  lay. 
We  tumbled  every  hand  on  deck  instanter,  with  a  shout. 
And  we  gave  her  the  maintops '1,  and  stood  by  to  go  about. 

All  day  we  tacked  and  tacked  between  the  South  Head  and 

the  North; 
All  day  we  hauled  the  frozen  sheets,  and  got  no  further 

forth ; 
All  day  as  cold  as  charity,  in  bitter  pain  and  dread. 
For  very  life  and  nature  we  tacked  from  head  to  head. 

We  gave  the  South  a  wider  berth,  for  there  the  tide-race 

roared ; 
But  every  tack  we  made  brought  the  North  Head  close 

aboard ; 
So's  we  saw  the  cliffs  and  houses,  and  the  breakers  running 

high. 
And  the  coastguard  in  his  garden,  with  his  glass  against 

his  eye- 


Christmas  at  Sea  1603 

The  frost  was  on  the  village  roofs  as  white  as  ocean  foam; 
The  good  red  fires  were  burning  bright  in  every  'longshore 

home; 
The  windows  sparkled  dear,  and  the  chimneys  volleyed  out; 
And  I  vow  we  sniffed  the  victuals  as  the  vessel  went  about. 

The  bells  upon  the  church  were  rung  with  a  mighty  jovial 

cheer; 
For  it's  just  that  I  sliould  tell  you  how  (of  all  days  in  the 

y^^r)  !    'n  'r'AOT   '-fTri 

This  day  of  our  adversity  was  blessed  Christmas  morn, 

And  the  house  above  the  coastguard's  was  the  house  where 

I  was  born. 

O  well  I  saw  the  pleasant  room,  the  pleasant  faces  there, 
My  mother's  silver  spectacles,  my  father's  silver  hair; 
And  well  I  saw  the  firelight,  hke  a  flight  of  homely  elves, 
Go  dancing  round   the   china-plates  that  stand  upon  the 
shelves. 

And  well  I  knew  the  talk  they  had,  the  talk  that  was  of  me, 
Of  the  shadow  on  the  household  and  the  son  that  went  to 

sea;  "moni  iljiv/  h 

And  O  the  wicked  fool  I  seemed,  m'-eVery  kind  of  way, 
To  be  here  and  hauling  frozen  ropes  on  blessed  Christmas 

Day. 

They  ht  the  high  sea-light,  and  the  dark  began  to  fall. 
"All  hands  to  loose  topgallant  sails,"  I  heard  the  captain 

call. 
"By  the  Lord,  she'll  never  stand  it,"  our  first  mate,  Jack- 
'       son,  cried. 
"It's  the  one  way  or  the  other,  Mr.  Jackson,"  he  replied. 

She  staggered  to  her  bearings,  but  the  sails  were  new  and 

good, 
And  the  ship  smelt  up  to  windward,  just  as  though  she 
on     understood.  i;^  u\uh  Kn  f;t,r|j 

As  the  winter's  day  was  ending,  in  the  entry  of  the  night. 
We  cleared  the  weary  headland,  and  passed  below  the  light. 


i6o4  Poems  of  Nature 

And  they  heaved  a  mighty  breath,  every  soul  on  board  but 
me, 

As  they  saw  her  nose  again  pointing  handsome  out  to  sea; 

But  all  that  I  could  think  of,  in  the  darkness  and  the  cold, 

Was  just  that  I  was  leaving  home  and  my  folks  were  grow- 
ing old. 

1'  Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1894] 

THE   PORT   O'   HEART'S   DESIRE 

Down  around  the  quay  they  lie,  the  ships  that  sail  to 

sea. 
On  shore  the  brown-cheeked  sailormen  they  pass  the  jest 

with  me. 
But  soon  their  ships  will  sail  away  with  winds  that  never 

tire. 
And  there's  one  that  will  be  sailing  to  the  Port  o'  Heart's 

Desire. 

The  Port  o'  Heart's  Desire,  and  it's,  oh,  that  port  for  me, 
And  that's  the  ship  that  I  love  best  of  all  that  sail  the  sea; 
Its  hold  is  filled  with  memories,  its  prow  it  points  away 
To  the  Port  o'  Heart's  Desire,  where  I  roained.a,  bpy,4t 
play.  :  l,ar;  -jiarf  ad  oT 

Ships  that  sail  for  gold  there  be,  and  ships  that  sail  for 

fame, 
And  some  were  filled  with  jewels  bright  when  from  Cathay 

they  came. 
But  give  me  still  yon  white  sail  in  the  sunset's  mystic  fire, 
That  the  running  tides  will  carry  to  the  Port  o'  Heart's 

Desire.  ;" 

It's  you  may  have  the  gold  and  fame,  and  all  the  jewels, 

too, 
And  all  the  ships,  if  they  were  mine,  I'd  gladly  give  to  you, 
I'd  give  them  all  right  gladly,  with  their  gold  and  fame 

entire, 
If  you  would  set  me  down  within  the  Port  o'  Heart's  Desire. 


On  the  Quay  1605 

Oh,  speed  you,  wliite-wingcd  sliip  of  mine,  oh,  speed  you  to 

the  sea, 
Some  other  day,  some  other  tide,  come  back  again  for  me; 
Come  back  with  all  the  memories,  the  joys  and  e'en  the 

pain, 
And  take  me  to  the  golden  hills  of  boyhood  once  again. 

Jolin  S.  McGroartv  [1862- 


ON  THE  QUAY 

I've  never  traveled  for  more'n  a  day, 
I  never  was  one  to  roam, 

But  I  likes  to  sit  on  the  busy  quay, 
Watchin'  the  ships  that  says  to  me — 
"Always  somebody  goin'  away. 
Somebody  gettin'  home." 

I  likes  to  think  that  the  world's  so  wide — 
'Tis  grand  to  be  livin'  there, 
Takin'  a  part  in  its  goin's  on.  .  .  . 
Ah,  now  ye're  laughin'  at  poor  old  John, 
Talkin'  o'  works  o'  the  world  wi'  pride 
As  if  he  was  doin'  his  share! 

But  laugh  if  ye  will!     When  yc're  old  as  me 
Ye'll  find  'tis  a  rare  good  plan 

To  look  at  the  world — an'  love  it  tool- 
Though  never  a  job  are  ye  fit  to  do.  .  .  . 
Oh!  'lisn't  all  sorrow  an'  pain  to  see 
The  work  o'  another  man. 

'Tis  good  when  the  heart  grows  big  at  last, 
Too  big  for  trouble  to  fill — 

Wi'  room  for  the  things  that  was  only  stuff 
When  workin'  an'  winnin'  seemed  more'n  enough — ^^1 
Room  for  the  world,  the  world  so  vast, 
Wi'  its  peoples  an'  all  their  skill. 

biThat's  what  I'm  thinkin'  on  all  the  days 
I'm  loafin'  an'  smokin'  here, 


i6o6  Poems  of  Nature 

An'  the  ships  do  make  me  think  the  most 
(Of  readin'  in  books  'tis  httle  I'd  boast), — 
But  the  ships,  they  carries  me  long,  long  ways, 
An'  draws  far  places  near. 

I  sees  the  things  that  a  sailor  brings, 
I  hears  the  stories  he  tells.  .  .  . 

'Tis  surely  a  wonderful  world,  indeed! 
'Tis  more'n  the  peoples  can  ever  need! 
An'  I  praises  the  Lord — to  myself  I  sings — 
For  the  world  in  which  I  dwells. 

An'  I  loves  the  ships  more  every  day 
Though  I  never  was  one  to  roam. 

Oh!  the  ships  is  comfortin'  sights  to  see, 
An'  they  means  a  lot  when  they  says  to  me- 
"  Always  somebody  goin'  awaj'^, 
Somebody  gettin'  home." 

John  Joy  Bell  [1871- 


THE   FORGING  OF  THE  ANCHOR 

Come,  see  the  Dolphin's  anchor  forged!  'tis  at  a  white  heat 

now — 
The  bellows  ceased,  the  flames  decreased;  though,  on  the 

forge's  brow. 
The  little  flames  still  fitfully  play  through  the  sable  mound, 
And  fitfully  you  still  may  see  the  grim  smiths  ranking  round; 
All  clad  in  leathern  panoply,  their  broad  hands  only  bare, 
Some  rest  upon  their  sledges  here,  some  work  the  windlass 

there. 

The  windlass   strains   the    tackle-chains — the    black  mold 

heaves  below; 
And  red  and  deep,  a  hundred  veins  burst  out  at  every  throe. 
It  rises,  roars,  rends  all  outright — 0  Vulcan,  what  a  glow! 
'Tis  blinding  white,  'tis  blasting  bright — the  high  sun  shines 

not  so! 
The  high  sun  sees  not,  on  the  earth,  such  fiery  fearful  show! 
The  roof-ribs  swarth,  the  candent  hearth,  the  ruddy  lurid 

row 


The   Forging  of  the   Anchor        1607 

Of  smiths  that  stand,  an  ardent  band,  Hke  men  before  the 

foe! 
As,  quivering  through  his  fleece  of  flame,  the  sailing  monster 

slow 
Sinks  on  the  anvil — all  about,  the  faces  fiery  grow: 
"Hurrah!"  they  shout,  "leap  out,  leap  out!"  bang,  bang! 

the  sledges  go; 
Hurrah!  the  jetted  lightnings  are  hissing  high  and  low; 
A  hailing  fount  of  fire  is  struck  at  every  squashing  blow; 
The  leathern  mail  rebounds  the  hail;  the  rattling  cinders 

strow 
The  ground  around;  at  every  bound  the  sweltering  fountains 

flow; 
And,  thick  and  loud,  the  swinking  crowd  at  every  stroke 

pant  "ho!" 

Leap  out,  leap  out,  my  masters!  leap  out,  and  lay  on  load! 
Let's  forge  a  goodly  anchor — a  bower  thick  and  broad; 
For  a  heart  of  oak  is  hanging  on  every  blow,  I  bode; 
And  I  see  the  good  ship  riding,  all  in  a  perilous  road,— 
The  low  reef  roaring  on  her  lee;  the  roll  of  ocean  poured 
From  stem  to  stern,  sea  after  sea;  the  mainmast  by  the 

board ; 
The  bulwarks  down;  the  rudder  gone;  the  boats  stove  at  the 

chains; 
But  courage  still,  brave  mariners— the  bower  yet  remains! 
And  not  an  inch  to  flinch  he  deigns — save  when  ye  pitch  sky 

high ; 
Then  moves  his  head,  as  though  he  said,  "Fear  nothing — 

here  am  I!" 

Swing  in  your  strokes  in  order;  let  foot  and  hand  keep  time; 
Your  blows  make  music  sweeter  far  than  any  steeple's  chime. 
But  while  ye  swing  your  sledges,  sing,  and  let  the  burthen. 

be—  jn^JlrT 

The  anchor  is  the  anvil  king,  and  royal  craftsmen  we! 
Strike  in,  strike  in! — the  sparks  begin  to  dull  their  rustling 

red; 
Our  hammers  ring  with  sharper  din — our  work  will  soon  be 

sped; 


i6o8        "■      Poems  of  Nature  ■ 

Our  anchor  soon  must  change  his  bed  of  fiery  rich  array 

For  a  hammock  at  the  roaring  bows,  or  an  oozy  couch  of 
clay; 

Our  anchor  soon  must  change  the  lay  of  merry  craftsmen 
here 

For  the  yeo-heave-o,  and  the  heave-away,  and  the  sighing 
seamen's  cheer — 

When,  weighing  slow,  at  eve  they  go.  far,  far  from  love  and 
home; 

And  sobbing  sweethearts,  in  a  row,  wail  o'er  the  ocean- 
foam. 

In  livid  and  obdurate  gloom,  he  darkens  down  at  last; 
A  shapely  one  he  is,  and  strong,  as  e'er  from  cat  was  cast. 
O  trusted  and  trustworthy  guard!  if  thou  hadst  life  like  me, 
What  pleasure  would  thy  toils  reward  beneath  the  deep- 
green  sea!  i.T 
O  deep  sea-diver,  who  might  then  behold  such  sights  as 

thou?— 
The  hoary  monster's  palaces! — Methinks  what  joy  'twere 

now 
To  go  plumb-plunging  down,   amid   the  assembly  of  the 

whales. 
And  feel  the  churned  sea  round  me  boil  beneath  their  scourg- 
ing tails! 
Then  deep  in  tangle-woods  to  fight  tlie  fierce  sea-unicorn. 
And  send  him  foiled  and  bellowing  back,  for  all  his  ivory 

horn; 
To  leave  the  subtle  sworder-fish  of  bony  blade  forlorn ; 
And  for  the  ghastly-grinning  shark,  to  laugh  his  jaws  to 

scorn : 
To  leap  down  on  the  kraken's  back,  where  'mid  Norwegian 

isles 
He  lies,  a  lubber  anchorage  for  sudden  shallowed  miles — 
Till,  snorting  like  an  under-sea  volcano,  off  he  rolls; 
Meanwhile  to  swing,  a-buffeting  the  far  astonished  shoals 
Of  his  back-browsing  ocean-calves;  or,  haply,  in  a  cove 
Shell-strown,  and  consecrate  of  old  to  some  Undine's  love, 
To  find  the  long-haired  mermaidens;  or,  hard  by  icy  lands, 
To  wrestle  with  the  sea-serpent,  upon  cerulean  sands. 


Drifting  1609 

O  broad-armed  fisher  of  the  deep!  whose  sports  can  equal 

thine? 
The  Dolphin  weighs  a  thousand  tons,  that  tugs  thy  cable- 
line; 
And  night  by  night  'tis  thy  delight,  th}-  glory  day  by  day, 
Through  sable  sea  and  breaker  white  the  giant  game  to  play. ' 
But,  shamer  of  our  little  sports!  forgive  the  name  I  gave: 
A  fisher's  joy  is  to  destroy — thine  office  is  to  save. 
O  lodger  in  the  sea-kings'  halls!  couldst  thou  but  understand 
Whose  be  the  white  bones  by  thy  side — or  who  that  dripping 

band, 
Slow  swaying  in  the  heaving  wave,  that  round  about  thee 

bend, 
With  sounds  like  breakers  in  a  dream  blessing  their  ancient 

friend — 
Oh,  couldst  thou  know  what  heroes  glide  with  larger  steps 

round  thee, 
Thine  iron  side  would  swell  with  pride — thou'dst  leap  within 

the  sea! 

Give  honor  to  their  memories  who  left  the  pleasant  strand 
To  shed  their  blood  so  freely  for  the  love  of  fatherland — 
Who  left  their  chance  of  quiet  age  and  grassy  churchyard 

grave 
So  freely,  for  a  restless  bed  amid  the  tossing  wave! 
Oh,  though  our  anchor  may  not  be  all  I  have  fondly  sung. 
Honor  him  for  their  memory  whose  bones  he  goes  among! 

Samuel  Ferguson  [18 10-1880] 


DRIFTING 

My  soul  to-day 

Is  far  away, 
Sailing  the  Vesuvian  Bay; 

My  winged  boat, 

A  bird  afloat. 
Swings  round  the  purple  peaks  remote: 

Round  purple  peaks 
It  sails,  and  seeks 


i6io  Poems  of  Nature 

Blue  inlets  and  their  crystal  creeks, 
Where  liigh  rocks  throw, 
Through  deeps  below, 

A  duplicated  golden  glow. 

Far,  vague,  and  dim, 

The  mountains  swim; 
While  on  Vesuvius'  misty  brim, 

With  outstretched  hands, 

The  gray  smoke  stands 
O'erlooking  the  volcanic  lands. 

Here  Ischia  smiles 

O'er  liquid  miles; 
And  yonder,  bluest  of  the  isles, 

Calm  Capri  waits, 

Her  sapphire  gates 
Beguiling  to  her  bright  estates. 

I  heed  not,  if 

My  rippling  skiff 
Float  swift  or  slow  from  cliff  to  cliff; 

With  dreamful  eyes 

My  spirit  lies 
Under  the  walls  of  Paradise. 

Under  the  walls 

Where  swells  and  falls 
The  Bay's  deep  breast  at  intervals, 
-     At  peace  I  lie. 

Blown  softly  by, 
A  cloud  upon  this  liquid  sky. 

The  day,  so  mild, 

Is  Heaven's  own  child,  • 
With  Earth  and  Ocean  reconciled; 

The  airs  I  feel 

Around  me  steal 
Are  murmuring  to  the  murmuring  keeL 


I 


Drifting  1611 


Over  the  rail 

My  hand  I  trail 
Within  the  shadow  of  the  sail, 

A  joy  intense, 

The  cooling  sense 
Glides  down  my  drowsy  indolence. 

With  dreamful  eyes 

My  spirit  lies 
Where  Summer  sings  and  never  dies, — ■ 

O'erveilcd  with  vines 

She  glows  and  shines 
Among  her  future  oU  and  wines. 

Her  children,  hid 

The  cliffs  amid, 
Are  gamboling  with  the  gamboling  kid; 

Or  down  the  walls, 

With  tipsy  calls. 
Laugh  on  the  rocks  like  waterfalls. 

The  fisher's  child. 

With  tresses  wild, 
Unto  the  smooth,  bright  sand  beguiled, 

With  glowing  lips 

Sings  as  she  skips, 
Or  gazes  at  the  far-off  ships. 

Yon  deep  bark  goes 

Where  traffic  blows, 
From  lands  of  sun  to  lands  of  snows;— = 

This  happier  one, 

Its  course  is  run 
From  lands  of  snow  to  lands  of  sun. 

O  happy  ship. 

To  rise  and  dip, 
With  the  blue  crystal  at  your  lip! 

O  happy  crew, 

My  heart  with  you 
Sails,  and  sails,  and  sings  anew! 


i6i'2  Poems  of  Nature 

No  more,  no  more 

The  worldly  shore 
Upbraids  me  with  its  loud  uproar! 

With  dreamful  eyes 

My  spirit  lies 
Under  the  walls  of  Paradise! 

Thomas  Buchanan  Read  [1822-1872] 


"HOW'S  MY  BOY?" 

"Ho,  sailor  of  the  sea! 
How's  my  boy — my  boy?" 
"W^hat's  your  boy's  name,  good  wife, 
And  in  what  good  ship  sailed  he?" 

"My  boy  John- 
He  that  went  to  sea — 
What  care  I  for  the  ship,  sailor? 
My  boy's  my  boy  to  me. 

"You  come  back  from  sea 

And  not  know  my  John?^ 

I  might  as  well  have  asked  some  landsman 

Yonder  down  in  the  town. 

There's  not  an  ass  in  all  the  parish 

But  he  knows  my  John. 

"How's  my  boy — my  boy? 

And  unless  you  let  me  know, 

I'll  swear  you  are  no  sailor. 

Blue  jacket  or  no. 

Brass  button  or  no.  sailor, 

Anchor  and  crown  or  no! 

Sure  his  ship  was  the  Jolly  Briton." — 

"Speak  low.  woman,  speak  low.'" 

"And  why  should  I  speak  low,  sailor, 
About  my  own  boy  John? 
If  I  was  loud  as  I  am  proud 
I'd  sing  him  o'er  the  town! 


The    Long   White   Seam  1613 

Why  should  I  speak  low,  sailor?" 
"That  good  ship  went  down." 

"How's  my  boy — my  boy? 

What  care  I  for  the  ship,  sailor, 

I  never  was  aboard  her. 

Be  she  afloat,  or  be  she  aground, 

Sinking  or  swimming,  I'll  be  bound, 

Her  owners  can  afford  her! 

I  say,  how's  my  John?" 

"Every  man  on  board  went  down, 

Every  man  aboard  her." 

"How's  my  boy — my  boy? 
What  care  I  for  the  men,  sailor? 
I'm  not  their  mother — 
How's  my  boy — my  boy? 
Tell  me  of  him  and  no  other! 
How's  my  boy — my  boy?" 

Sydney  DobcU  [1824-1874] 


THE  LONG   WHITE   SEAM 

As  I  came  round  the  harbor  buoy. 

The  lights  began  to  gleam, 
No  wave  the  land-locked  water  stirred, 

The  crags  were  white  as  cream; 
And  I  marked  my  love  by  candlelight 
Sewing  her  long  white  seam. 

It's  aye  sewing  ashore,  mj'  dear, 

Watch  and  steer  at  sea, 
It's  reef  and  furl,  and  haul  the  line, 
Set  sail  and  think  of  thee. 

I  climbed  to  reach  her  cottage  door; 

O  sweetly  my  love  sings! 
Like  a  shaft  of  light  her  voice  breaks  forth, 

My  soul  to  meet  it  springs 
As  the  shining  water  leaped  of  old, 

When  stirred  by  angel  wings. 


i6t4 


Poems  of  Nature  '  ' 

Aye  longing  to  list  anew, 

Awake  and  in  my  dream, 
But  never  a  song  she  sang  lik'e  this, 

Sewing  her  long  white  seam. 

Fair  fall  the  lights,  the  harbor  lights. 

That  brought  me  in  to  thee, 
And  peace  drop  down  on  that  low  roof 

For  the  sight  that  I  did  see, 
And  the  voice,  my  dear,  that  rang  so  clear 
All  for  the  love  of  me. 

For  O,  for  O,  with  brows  bent  low 
By  the  candle's  flickering  gleam, 
Her  wedding-gown  it  was  she  wrought, 
Sewing  the  long  white  seam. 

Jean  Ingelow  [1820-1897] 


STORM   SONG 

The  clouds  are  scudding  across  the  moon; 

A  misty  light  is  on  the  sea; 
The  wind  in  the  shrouds  has  a  wintry  tune, 

And  the  foam  is  flying  free. 

Brothers,  a  night  of  terror  and  gloom 
Speaks  in  the  cloud  and  gathering  roar; 

Thank  God,  He  has  given  us  broad  sea-room, 
A  thousand  miles  from  shore. 

Down  with  the  hatches  on  those  who  sleep! 

The  wild  and  whisthng  deck  have  we; 
Good  watch,  my  brothers,  to-night  we'll  keep, 

While  the  tempest  is  on  the  sea! 

Though  the  rigging  shriek  in  his  terrible  grip, 
And  the  naked  spars  be  snapped  away, 

Lashed  to  the  helm,  we'll  drive  our  ship 
In  the  teeth  of  the  whelming  spray!  '  •■ 


i6i5 


The    Mariner's    Dream 

Hark!  how  the  surges  o'erlcap  the  deck! 

Hark!  how  the  pitiless  tempest  raves! 
Ah,  dajdight  will  look  upon  many  a  wreck 

Drifting  over  the  desert  waves. 

Yet,  courage,  brothers!  we  trust  the  wave, 
With  God  above  us,  our  guiding  chart. 

So,  whether  to  harbor  or  ocean-grave, 
Be  it  still  with  a  cheery  heart ! 

Bayard  Taylor  [1825-1878] 

THE   MARINER'S  DREAM 

In  slumbers  of  midnight  the  sailor-boy  lay; 

His  hammock  swung  loose  at  the  sport  of  the  wind; 
But  watch-worn  and  weary,  his  cares  flew  away. 

And  visions  of  happiness  danced  o'er  his  mind. 

He  dreamed  of  his  home,  of  his  dear  native  bowers, 
And  pleasures  that  waited  on  life's  merry  morn; 

While  Memory  stood  sideways,  half  covered  with  flowers, 
And  restored  every  rose,  but  secreted  its  thorn. 

Then  Fancy  her  magical  pinions  spread  wide, 
And  bade  the  young  dreamer  in  ecstasy  rise; 

Now  far,  far  behind  him  the  green  waters  glide. 
And  the  cot  of  his  forefathers  blesses  his  eyes. 

The  jessamine  clambers  in  flowers  o'er  the  thatch, 

And  the  swallow  sings  sweet  from  her  nest  in  the  wall; 

All  trernbling  with  transport  he  raises  the  latch. 
And  the  voices  of  loved  ones  reply  to  his  call. 

A  father  bends  o'er  him  with  looks  of  delight; 

His  cheek  is  impearled  with  a  mother's  warm  tear; 
And  the  lips  of  the  boy  in  a  love-kiss  unite 

With  the  lips  of  the  maid  whom  his  bosom  holds  dear. 

The  heart  of  the  sleeper  beats  high  in  his  breast; 

Joy  quickens  his  pulses,  his  hardships  seem  o'er; 
And  a  murmur  of  happiness  steals  through  his  rest, — 

"O  God!  thou  hast  blessed  me, — I  ask  for  no  more." 


j6i6  Poems  of  Nature 

Ah!  whence  is  that  flame  which  now  bursts  on  his  eye? 

Ah!  what  is  that  sound  which  now  larums  his  ear? 
'Tis  the  lightning's  red  glare,  painting  hell  on  the  sky! 

'Tis  the  crash  of  the  thunder,  the  groan  of  the  sphere! 

He  springs  from  his  hammock,  he  flies  to  the  deck; 

x\mazemcnt  confronts  him  with  images  dire; 
Wild  winds  and  mad  waves  drive  the  vessel  a  wreck; 

The  masts  fly  in  splinters;  the  shrouds  are  on  fire. 

Like  mountains  the  billows  tremendously  swell; 

In  vain  the  lost  wretch  calls  on  mercy  to  save; 
Unseen  hands  of  spirits  are  ringing  his  knell,  ^^^^^^    j 

And  the  death-angel  flaps  his  broad  wing  o'er  the  wave! 

O  sailor-boy,  woe  to  thy  dream  of  delight! 

In  darkness  dissolves  the  gay  frost-work  of  bliss. 
Where  now  is  the  picture  that  Fancy  touched  bright, — 

Thy  parents'  fond  pressure,  and  love's  honeyed  kiss? 

O  sailor-boy!  sailor-boy!  never  again 

Shall  home,  love,  or  kindred  thy  wishes  repay; 

Unblessed  and  unhonored,  down  deep  in  the  main, 
Full  many  a  fathom,  thy  frame  shall  decay. 

No  tomb  shall  e'er  plead  to  remembrance  for  thee, 
Or  redeem  form  or  fame  from  the  merciless  surge; 

But  the  white  foam  of  waves  shall  thy  winding-sheet  be, 
And  winds,  in  the  midnight  of  winter,  thy  dirge! 

On  a  bed  of  green  sea-flowers  thy  limbs  shall  be  laid, — 
Around  thy  white  bones  the  red  coral  shall  grow; 

Of  thy  fair  yellow  locks  threads  of  amber  be  made. 
And  every  part  suit  to  thy  mansion  below. 

Days,  months,  years,  and  ages  shall  circle  away. 

And  stiU  the  vast  waters  above  thee  shall  roll;     "f  ''^^^ 

Earth  loses  thy  pattern  forever  and  aye, — 
O  sailor-boy!  sailor-boy!  peace  to  thy  soul! 

WiUiani  Dlmond  [1780?- 183 7?] 


The   Inchcape   Rock  1617 


THE   INCHCAPE  ROCK 

No  stir  in  the  air,  no  stir  in  the  sea, 
The  ship  was  still  as  she  could  be; 
Her  sails  from  Heaven  received  no  motion, 
Her  keel  was  steady  in  the  ocean. 

Without  cither  sign  or  sound  of  their  shock, 
The  waves  flowed  over  the  Inchcape  Rock; 
So  little  they  rose,  so  little  they  fell, 
They  did  not  move  the  Inchcape  Bell. 

The  holy  Abbot  of  Aberbrothok 
Had  placed  that  bell  on  the  Inchcape  Rock; 
On  a  buo}'  in  the  storm  it  floated  and  swung, 
And  over  the  waves  its  warning  rung. 

When  the  rock  was  hid  by  the  surges'  sweU, 
The  mariners  heard  the  warning  bell; 
And  then  they  knew  the  perilous  Rock, 
And  blessed  the  Abbot  of  Aberbrothok. 

The  Sun  in  heaven  was  shining  gay. 

All  things  were  joyful  on  that  day; 

The  sea-birds  screamed  as  they  wheeled  around, 

And  there  was  joyance  in  their  sound. 

The  buoy  of  the  Inchcape  Bell  was  seen, 
A  darker  speck  on  the  ocean  green ; 
Sir  Ralph,  the  Rover,  walked  his  deck. 
And  he  fixed  his  C3-e  on  the  darker  speck. 

He  felt  the  cheering  power  of  spring, 
It  made  him  whistle,  it  made  him  sing; 
His  heart  was  mirthful  to  excess; 
But  the  Rover's  mirth  was  wickedness. 

His  eye  was  on  the  Inchcape  float; 
Quoth  he,  "My  men,  put  out  the  boat; 
And  row  me  to  the  Inchcape  Rock, 
And  I'll  plague  the  Abbot  of  Aberbrothok." 


i6i8  Poems  of  Nature 

The  boat  is  lowered,  the  boatmen  row, 
And  to  the  Inchcape  Rock  they  go; 
Sir  Ralph  bent  over  from  the  boat, 
And  cut  the  Bell  from  the  Inchcape  float. 

Down  sank  the  Bell  with  a  gurgling  sound; 

The  bubbles  rose,  and  burst  around. 

Quoth  Sir  Ralph,  "The  next  who  comes  to  the  Rock 

Will  not  bless  the  Abbot  of  Aberbrothok." 

Sir  Ralph,  the  Rover,  sailed  away, 
He  scoured  the  seas  for  many  a  day; 
And  now,  grown  rich  with  plundered  store, 
He  steers  his  course  for  Scotland's  shore. 

So  thick  a  haze  o'erspreads  the  sky 
They  cannot  see  the  Sun  on  high; 
The  wind  hath  blown  a  gale  all  day; 
At  evening  it  hath  died  away. 

On  the  deck  the  Rover  takes  his  stand; 
So  dark  it  is  they  see  no  land. 
Quoth  Sir  Ralph,  "It  will  be  lighter  soon, 
For  there  is  the  dawn  of  the  rising  Moon." 

"Canst  hear,"  said  one,  "the  breakers  roar? 
For  yonder,  methinks,  should  be  the  shore." 
"Now  where  we  are  I  cannot  tell, 
But  I  wish  we  could  hear  the  Inchcape  Bell." 

They  hear  no  sound;  the  sweU  is  strong; 
Though  the  wind  hath  fallen,  they  drift  along. 
Till  the  vessel  strikes  with  a  shivering  shock, — 
"O  Christ!  it  is  the  Inchcape  Rock." 

Sir  Ralph,  the  Rover,  tore  his  hair; 
He  cursed  himself  in  his  despair. 
The  waves  rush  in  on  every  side; 
The  ship  is  sinking  beneath  the  tide. 


The   Sands  of  Dee  1619 

But,  even  in  his  dying  fear, 
One  dreadful  sound  he  seemed  to  hear, — 
A  sound  as  if,  with  the  Inchcape  Bell, 
The  Devil  below  was  ringing  his  knell. 

Robert  Soul  lie  y  [i  774-1843] 


THE   SEA 

Through  the  night,  through  the  night, 

In  the  saddest  unrest, 
Wrapped  in  white,  all  in  white. 

With  her  babe  on  her  breast, 
\\'alks  the  mother  so  pale. 
Staring  out  on  the  gale, 
Through  the  night! 

Through  the  night,  through  the  night, 

Where  the  sea  lifts  the  wreck. 
Land  in  sight,  close  in  sight, 
On  the  surf -flooded  deck, 
Stands  the  father  so  brave, 
Driving  on  to  his  grave 
Through  the  night ! 

Richard  Henry  Stoddard  [18^5-1903] 

THE   SANDS   OF  DEE 

"O  Mary,  go  and  call  the  cattle  home. 
And  call  the  cattle  home. 
And  call  the  cattle  home 
Across  the  sands  of  Dee!" 
The  western  wind  was  wild  and  dank  with  foam, 
And  all  alone  went  she. 

The  western  tide  crept  up  along  the  sand, 
And  o'er  and  o'er  the  sand. 
And  round  and  round  the  sand. 
As  far  as  eye  could  see. 
The  rolling  mist  came  down  and  hid  the  land: 
And  never  home  came  she. 


i62o  Poems  of  Nature 

"Oh!  is  it  weed,  or  fish,  or  floating  hair — 
A  tress  of  golden  hair, 
A  drowned  maiden's  hair 
Above  the  nets  at  sea? 
Was  never  salmon  yet  that  shone  so  fair 
Among  the  stakes  on  Dee." 

They  rowed  her  in  across  the  rolling  foam, 
The  cruel  crawling  foam, 
The  cruel  hungry  foam, 
To  her  grave  beside  the  sea: 
But  still  the  boatmen  hear  her  call  the  cattle  home 
Across  the  sands  of  Dee! 

Charles  Kingsley  [1819-1875] 

THE   THREE  FISHERS 

Three  fishers  went  sailing  away  to  the  West, 

Away  to  the  West  as  the  sun  went  down; 
Each  thought  on  the  woman  who  loved  him  the  best, 

And  the  children  stood  watching  them  out  of  the  town; 
For  men  must  work,  and  women  must  weep, 
And  there's  little  to  earn,  and  many  to  keep, 
Though  the  harbor  bar  be  moaning. 

Three  wives  sat  up  in  the  lighthouse  tower 

And  they  trimmed  the  lamps  as  the  sun  went  down; 

They  looked  at  the  squall,  and  they  looked  at  the  shower. 
And  the  night-rack  came  rolling  up  ragged  and  brown. 

But  men  must  work,  and  women  must  weep. 

Though  storms  be  sudden,  and  waters  deep. 
And  the  harbor  bar  be  moaning. 

Three  corpses  lay  out  on  the  shining  sands 

In  the  morning  gleam  as  the  tide  went  down. 
And  the  women  are  weeping  and  wringing  their  hands 

For  those  who  will  never  come  home  to  the  town; 
For  men  must  work,  and  women  must  weep. 
And  the  sooner  it's  over,  the  sooner  to  sleep; 
And  good-by  to  the  bar  and  its  moaning. 

Charles  Kingsley  [18 19-187 5] 


The   Northern   Star  1621 


BALLAD 

In  the  summer  even, 

While  yet  the  dew  was  hoar, 
I  went  plucking  purple  pansics, 

Till  my  love  should  come  to  shore. 
The  fishing-lights  their  dances 

Were  keeping  out  at  sea, 
And  come,  I  sung,  my  true  love! 

Come  hasten  home  to  me! 

But  the  sea,  it  fell  a-moaning, 

And  the  white  gulls  rocked  thereon; 
And  the  young  moon  dropped  from  heaven, 

And  the  lights  hid  one  by  one. 
All  silently  their  glances 

Slipped  down  the  cruel  sea. 
And  wait!  cried  the  night  and  wind  and  storm,- 

Wait,  till  I  come  to  thee! 

Harriet  Prcscoll  SpoJJord  [1835- 

THE  NORTHERN   STAR 

A  TYNEMOUTH  SHIP 

The  Northern  Star 

Sailed  over  th^  bar 
Bound  to  the  Baltic  Sea; 

In  the  morning  gray 

She  stretched  away:— 
'Twas  a  weary  day  to  me! 

For  many  an  hour 

In  sleet  and  shower 
By  the  hghthouse  rock  I  stray; 

And  watch  till  dark 

For  the  winged  bark 
Of  him  that  is  far  away. 

The  castle's  bound 
I  wander  round, 


1 622  Poems  of  Nature 

Amidst  the  grassy  graves: 
But  all  I  hear 
Is  the  north  wind  drear, 

And  all  I  see  are  the  waves. 

The  Northern  Star 

Is  set  afar! 
Set  in  the  Baltic  Sea: 

And  the  waves  have  spread 

The  sandy  bed 
That  holds  my  Love  from  me. 


THE   FISHER'S  WIDOW 


Unknown 


The  boats  go  out  and  the  boats  come  in 
Under  the  wintry  sky; 

And  the  rain  and  foam  are  white  in  the  wind, 
And  the  white  gulls  cry. 

She  sees  the  sea  when  the  wind  is  wild 
Swept  by  a  windy  rain; 
And  her  heart's  a-weary  of  sea  and  land 
As  the  long  days  wane. 

She  sees  the  torn  sails  fly  in  the  foam, 
Broad  on  the  sky-Hne  gray; 
And  the  boats  go  out  and  the  boats  come  in. 
But  there's  one  away. 

Arthur  Symons  [1865- 


CALLER  HERRIN' 

Wha'll  buy  my  caller  herrin'? 

Thcy^re  bonny  fish  and  halesomc  farin'; 
Wha'll  buy  my  caller  herrin', 
New  drawn  frae  Ihc  Forth  ? 

When  ye  were  sleepin'  on  your  pillows. 
Dreamed  ye  aught  o'  our  puir  fellows. 


Caller   Herrin'  1623 

Darkling  as  they  faced  ihe  billows, 
A'  to  fill  the  woven  willows? 

Buy  my  caller  herrin', 

New  drawn  frae  the  Forth  ! 

Wha'll  buy  my  caller  herrin'? 

They're  no  brought  here  without  brave  darin'; 

Buy  my  caller  herrin', 

Hauled  through  wind  and  rain. 

Wha'll  buy  my  caller  herrin', 

New  drawn  frae  the  Forth  ? 

Wha'll  buy  my  caller  herrin'? 
Oh,  ye  may  ca'  them  vulgar  farin'; 
Wives  and  mithers,  maist  despairin', 
Ca'  them  lives  o'  men. 

Wha'll  buy  my  caller  herrin', 

New  drawn  frae  the  Forth  ? 

When  the  creel  o'  herrin'  passes, 
Ladies,  clad  in  silks  and  laces, 
Gather  in  their  braw  pchsses, 
Cast  their  heads,  and  screw  their  faces. 

Wha'll  buy  my  caller  herrin'. 

New  drawn  frae  the  Forth  ? 

Caller  herrin's  no  got  lightly:^ 
Ye  can  trip  the  spring  fu'  tightlie; 
Spite  o'  tauntin',  fiauntin',  flingin', 
Gow  has  set  you  a'  a-singin' 

"Wha'll  buy  my  caller  herrin', 

New  drawn  frae  the  Forth  ?  " 

Neebor  wives!  now  tent  my  tellin': 
When  the  bonny  fish  ye're  selhn', 
At  ae  word  be,  in  ye're  dealin'! 
Truth  will  stand,  when  a'  thing's  failin'! 

Wha'll  buy  my  caller  herrin', 

New  drawn  frae  the  Forth  ? 

Carolina  N airne  [1766-1845] 


1 524  Poems  of  Nature 

HANNAH  BINDING   SHOES 

Poor  lone  Hannah, 
Sitting  at  the  window,  binding  shoes: 

Faded,  wrinkled, 
Sitting,  stitching,  in  a  mournful  muse. 
Bright-eyed  beauty  once  was  she, 
When  the  bloom  was  on  the  tree; — 
Spring  and  winter, 
Hannah's  at  the  window,  binding  shoes. 

Not  a  neighbor 
Passing,  nod  or  answer  will  refuse 

To  her  whisper, 
"Is  there  from  the  fishers  any  news?" 
Oh,  her  heart's  adrift  with  one 
On  an  endless  voyage  gone; — 
Night  and  morning, 
Hannah's  at  the  window,  binding  shoes. 

Fair  young  Hannah, 
Ben,  the  sunburnt  fisher,  gaily  wooes; 

Hale  and  clever. 
For  a  willing  heart  and  hand  he  sues. 
May-day  skies  are  all  aglow, 
And  the  waves  are  laughing  so ! 
For  her  wedding 
Hannah  leaves  her  window  and  her  shoes. 

May  is  passing; 
'Mid  the  apple-boughs  a  pigeon  cooes: 

Hannah  shudders, 
For  the  mild  south-wester  mischief  brews. 
Round  the  rocks  of  Marblehead, 
Outward  bound,  a  schooner  sped; 
Silent,  lonesome, 
Hannah's  at  the  window,  binding  shoes. 

f'r,;i;  'Tis  November: 

Now  no  tear  her  wasted  cheek  bedews, 

From  Newfoundland 
Not  a  sail  returning  will  she  lose, 


The   Sailor  162c 


Whispering  hoarsely:  "Fishermen, 
Have  you,  have  you  heard  of  Ben?" 
Old  with  watching, 
Hannah's  at  the  window,  binding  shoes. 

Twenty  winters 
Bleak  and  drear  the  ragged  shore  she  views. 

Twenty  seasons: — 
Never  one  has  brought  her  any  news. 
Still  her  dim  eyes  silently 
Chase  the  white  sails  o'er  the  sea; — 
Hopeless,  faithful, 
Hannah's  at  the  window,  binding  shoes. 

Lucy  Larcom  [1824-1893] 


THE  SAILOR 

A    ROMAIC    BALLAD 

Thou  that  hast  a  daughter 

For  one  to  woo  and  wed, 
Give  her  to  a  husband 

With  snow  upon  his  head; 
Oh,  give  her  to  an  old  man. 

Though  little  joy  it  be. 
Before  the  best  young  sailor 

That  sails  upon  the  sea ! 

How  luckless  is  the  sailor 

When  sick  and  like  to  die; 
He  sees  no  tender  mother, 

No  sweetheart  standing  by. 
Only  the  captain  speaks  to  him, — 

Stand  up,  stand  up,  young  man 
And  steer  the  ship  to  haven, 

As  none  beside  thee  can. 

Thou  says't  to  me,  "Stand,  stand  up' 

I  say  to  thee,  take  hold, 
Lift  me  a  little  from  the  deck. 

My  hands  and  feet  are  cold. 


1626  Poems  of  Nature 

And  let  my  head,  I  pray  thee, 
With  handkerchiefs  be  bound; 

There,  take  my  love's  gold  handkerchief, 
And  tie  it  tightly  round. 

Now  bring  the  chart,  the  doleful  chart; 

See,  where  these  mountains  meet — 
The  clouds  are  thick  around  their  head, 

The  mists  around  their  feet : 
Cast  anchor  here;  'tis  deep  and  safe 

Within  the  rocky  cleft; 
The  little  anchor  on  the  right, 

The  great  one  on  the  left. 

And  now  to  thee,  0  captain, 

Most  earnestly  I  pray, 
That  they  may  never  bury  me 

In  church  or  cloister  gray; — 
But  on  the  windy  sea-beach, 

At  the  ending  of  the  land, 
All  on  the  surfy  sea-beach, 

Deep  down  into  the  sand. 

For  there  will  come  the  sailors, 

Their  voices  I  shall  hear, 
And  at  casting  of  the  anchor 

The  yo-ho  loud  and  clear; 
And  at  hauling  of  the  anchor 

The  yo-ho  and  the  cheer, — 
Farewell,  my  love,  for  to  thy  bay 

I  never  more  may  steer! 

Williatn  Allingham  [1824- 


THE  BURIAL  OF  THE  DANE 

Blue  gulf  all  around  us, 
Blue  sky  overhead — 

Muster  all  on  the  quarter. 
We  must  bury  the  dead! 


The   Burial  of  the   Dane  1627 

It  is  but  a  Danish  sailor, 

Rugged  of  front  and  form; 
A  common  son  of  the  forecastle, 

Grizzled  with  sun  and  storm. 

His  name,  and  the  strand  he  hailed  from 
We  know,  and  there's  nothing  more! 

But  perhaps  his  mother  is  waiting 
In  the  lonely  Island  of  Fohr. 

Still,  as  he  lay  there  dying. 

Reason  drifting  awreck, 
"  'Tis  my  watch,"  he  would  mutter, 

"I  must  go  upon  deck!" 

Aye,  on  deck,  by  the  foremast! 

But  watch  and  lookout  are  done; 
The  Union  Jack  laid  o'er  him. 

How  quiet  he  lies  in  the  sun ! 

Slow  the  ponderous  engine, 

Stay  the  hurrying  shaft ; 
Let  the  roll  of  the  ocean 

Cradle  our  giant  craft; 
Gather  around  the  grating, 

Carry  your  messmate  aft! 

Stand  in  order,  and  listen 

To  the  holiest  page  of  prayer! 
Let  every  foot  be  quiet, 

Every  head  be  bare — 
The  soft  trade-wind  is  lifting 

A  hundred  locks  of  hair. 

Our  captain  reads  the  service, 

(A  little  spray  on  his  cheeks) 
The  grand  old  words  of  burial. 

And  the  trust  a  true  heart  seeks: — ■ 
"We  therefore  commit  his  body  i" 

To  the  deep" — and,  as  he  speaks, 


1628  Poems  of  Nature 

Launched  from  the  weather  railing, 

Swift  as  the  eye  can  mark, 
The  ghastly,  shotted  hammock 

Plunges,  away  from  the  shark, 
Down,  a  thousand  fathoms, 

Down  into  the  dark! 

A  thousand  summers  and  winters 

The  stormy  Gulf  shall  roll 
High  o'er  his  canvas  coffin; 

But,  silence  to  doubt  and  dole: — 
There's  a  quiet  harbor  somewhere 

For  the  poor  aweary  soul. 

Free  the  fettered  engine, 

Speed  the  tireless  shaft, 
Loose  to 'gallant  and  topsail, 

The  breeze  is  fair  abaft! 

Blue  sea  all  around  us. 

Blue  sky  bright  o'erhead — 

Every  man  to  his  duty. 
We  have  buried  our  dead! 

Henry  Howard  Brownell  [1820-187: 


TOM  BOWLING 

Here,  a  sheer  hulk,  lies  poor  Tom  Bowling, 

The  darling  of  our  crew; 
No  more  he'll  hear  the  tempest  howling. 

For  death  has  broached  him  to. 
His  form  was  of  the  manliest  beauty. 

His  heart  was  kind  and  soft; 
Faithful,  below,  he  did  his  duty; 

But  now  he's  gone  aloft. 

Tom  never  from  his  word  departed. 

His  virtues  were  so  rare; 
His  friends  were  many  and  true-hearted, 

His  Poll  was  kind  and  fair: 


Messmates  1629 

And  then  he'd  sing,  so  blithe  and  jolly, 

Ah,  many's  the  time  and  oft! 
But  mirth  is  turned  to  melancholy, 

For  Tom  is  gone  aloft. 

Yet  shall  poor  Tom  find  pleasant  weather, 

When  He,  who  all  commands, 
Shall  give,  to  call  Life's  crew  together, 

The  word  to  "pipe  all  hands." 
Thus  Death,  who  Kings  and  Tars  despatches, 

In  vain  Tom's  life  has  doffed; 
For,  though  his  body's  under  hatches, 

His  soul  is  gone  aloft. 

Charles  Dibdin  [1745-1814] 


MESSMATES 

He  gave  us  all  a  good-by  cheerily 

At  the  first  dawn  of  day; 
We  dropped  him  down  the  side  full  drearily 

When  the  light  died  away. 
It's  a  dead  dark  watch  that  he's  a-keeping  there, 
And  a  long,  long  night  that  lags  a-creeping  there, 
Where  the  Trades  and  the  tides  roll  over  him 

And  the  great  ships  go  by. 

He's  there  alone  with  green  seas  rocking  him 

For  a  thousand  miles  around ; 
He's  there  alone  with  dumb  things  mocking  him, 

And  we're  homeward  bound. 
It's  a  long,  lone  watch  that  he's  a-keeping  there, 
And  a  dead  cold  night  that  lags  a-creeping  there, 
While  the  months  and  the  years  roll  over  him 

And  the  great  ships  go  by. 

I  wonder  if  the  tramps  come  near  enough, 

As  they  thrash  to  and  fro, 
And  the  battleships'  bells  ring  clear  enough 

To  be  heard  down  below; 


1630  Poems  of  Nature 

If  through  all  the  lone  watch  that  he's  a-keeping  there, 
And  the  long,  cold  night  that  lags  a-creeping  there, 
The  voices  of  the  sailor-men  shall  comfort  him 
When  the  great  ships  go  by. 

Henry  NewhoU  [1862- 


THE  LAST  BUCCANEER 

Oh,  England  is  a  pleasant  place  for  them  that's  rich  and  high, 
But  England  is  a  cruel  place  for  such  poor  folks  as  I; 
And  such  a  port  for  mariners  I  ne'cf  shall  see  again 
As  the  pleasant  Isle  of  Aves,  beside  the  Spanish  main. 

There  were  forty  craft  in  Aves  that  were  both  swift  and  stout, 
All  furnished  well  with  smaU  arms  and  cannons  round  about; 
And  a  thousand  men  in  Aves  made  laws  so  fair  and  free 
To  choose  their  valiant  captains  and  obey  them  loyally. 

Thence  we  sailed  against  the  Spaniard  with  his  hoards  of 

plate  and  gold, 
Which  he  wrung  with  cruel  tortures  from  Indian  folk  of  old; 
Likewise  the  merchant  captains,  with  hearts  as  hard  as  stone. 
Who  flog  men  and  keelhaul  them,  and  starve  them  to  the 

bone. 

Oh,  the  palms  grew  high  in  Aves,  and  fruits  that  shone  like 

gold. 
And  the  colibris  and  parrots  they  were  gorgeous  to  behold; 
And  the  negro  maids  to  Aves  from  bondage  fast  did  flee. 
To  welcome  gaUant  sailors,  a-sweeping  in  from  sea. 

Oh,  sweet  it  was  in  Aves  to  hear  the  landward  breeze, 
A-swing  with  good  tobacco  in  a  net  between  the  trees,  | 

With  a  negro  lass  to  fan  you,  while  you  listened  to  the  roar 
Of  the  breakers  on  the  reef  outside,  that  never  touched  the 
shore. 

But  Scripture  saith,  an  ending  to  all  fine  things  must  be; 
So  the  King's  ships  sailed  on  Aves,  and  quite  put  down  were 
we. 


The   Last  Buccaneer  1631 

All  day  we  fought  like  bulldogs,  but  they  burst  the  booms  at 

night; 
And  I  fled  in  a  piragua,  sore  wounded,  from  the  fight. 

Nine  days  I  floated  starving,  and  a  negro  lass  beside, 

Till  for  all  I  tried  to  cheer  her,  the  poor  young  thing  she  died ; 

But  as  I  lay  a-gasping,  a  Bristol  sail  came  by. 

And  brought  me  home  to  England  here,  to  beg  until  I  die. 

And  now  I'm  old  and  going — I'm  sure  I  can't  tell  where; 
One  comfort  is,  this  world's  so  hard,  I  ^an't  be  worse  off 

there: 
If  I  might  but  be  a  sea-dove,  I'd  fly  across  the  main, 
To  the  pleasant  Isle  of  Aves,  to  look  at  it  once  again. 

Charles  Kingsley  [1819-1S75] 


THE  LAST  BUCCANEER 

The  winds  were  yelling,  the  waves  were  swelling, 

The  sky  was  black  and  drear. 
When  the  crew  with  eyes  of  flame  brought  the  ship  without  a 
name 

Alongside  the  last  Buccaneer. 

"Whence  flics  your  sloop  full  sail  before  so  fierce  a  gale, 

When  all  others  drive  bare  on  the  seas? 
Say,  come  ye  from  the  shore  of  the  holy  Salvador, 

Or  the  gulf  of  the  rich  Caribbees?" 

"From  a  shore  no  search  hath  found,  from  a  gulf  no  line  can 
sound, 

Without  rudder  or  needle  we  steer; 
Above,  below  our  bark  dies  the  sea-fowl  and  the  shark. 

As  we  fly  by  the  last  Buccaneer. 

"To-night  there  shall  be  heard  on  the  rocks  of  Cape  de  Verde 

A  loud  crash  and  a  louder  roar; 
And  to-morrow  shall  the  deep  with  a  heavy  moaning  sweep 

The  corpses  and  wreck  to  the  shore." 


1632  Poems  of  Nature 

The  stately  ship  of  Clyde  securely  now  may  ride 

In  the  breath  of  the  citron  shades; 
And  Severn's  towering  mast  securely  now  hies  fast, 

Through  the  seas  of  the  balmy  Trades. 

From  St.  Jago's  wealthy  port,  from  Havannah's  royal  fort, 
The  seaman  goes  forth  without  fear;  -       , 

For  since  that  stormy  night  not  a  mortal  hath  had  sight 
Of  the  flag  of  the  last  Buccaneer. 

Thomas  Babington  Macaiilay  [i8oo-i8sg] 

THE  LEADSMAN'S  SONG 

For  England,  when  with  favoring  gale. 
Our  gallant  ship  up  Channel  steered. 
And  scudding,  under  easy  sail. 
The  high  blue  western  lands  appeared, 
To  heave  the  lead  the  seaman  sprang. 
And  to  the  pilot  cheerly  sang, 
"By  the  deep — Nine." 

And  bearing  up  to  gain  the  port. 
Some  well-known  object  kept  in  view, 
An  abbey  tower,  a  ruined  fort, 
A  beacon  to  the  vessel  true; 
While  oft  the  lead  the  seaman  flung. 
And  to  the  pilot  cheerly  sung, 
"By  the  mark — Seven." 

And  as  the  much-loved  shore  we  near, 
With  transport  we  behold  the  roof 
Where  dwelt  a  friend  or  partner  dear. 
Of  faith  and  love  and  matchless  proof. 
The  lead  once  more  the  seaman  flung,  ] 

And  to  the  watchful  pilot  sung, 
"Quarter  less — Five." 

Now  to  her  berth  the  ship  draws  nigh. 
With  slackened  sail  she  feels  the  tide. 
Stand  clear  the  cable  is  the  cry. 
The  anchor's  gone,  we  safely  ride. 


Homeward   Bound  ^^33 

The  watch  is  set,  and  through  the  night, 
We  hear  the  seaman  with  dehght 
Proclaim— "All's  well." 

Charles  Dibdin  [1745-1814] 

HOMEWARD  BOUND 

Head  the  ship  for  England! 

Shake  out  every  sail! 
Blithe  leap  the  billows. 

Merry  sings  the  gale. 
Captain,  work  the  reckoning; 

How  many  knots  a  day? — 
Round  the  world  and  home  again, 

That's  the  sailor's  way! 

We've  traded  with  the  Yankees, 

BraziUans  and  Chinese; 
We've  laughed  with  dusky  beauties 

In  shade  of  tall  palm-trees; 
Across  the  line  and  Gulf-Stream — 

Round  by  Table  Bay — 
Everywhere  and  home  again, 

That's  the  sailor's  way! 

Nightly  stands  the  North  Star 

Higher  on  our  bow; 
Straight  we  run  for  England ; 

Our  thoughts  are  in  it  now. 
Jolly  times  with  friends  ashore, 

When  we've  drawn  our  pay! — 
All  about  and  home  again. 

That's  the  sailor's  way! 

Tom  will  to  his  parents. 

Jack  will  to  his  dear, 
Joe  to  wife  and  chDdren, 

Bob  to  pipes  and  beer; 
Dicky  to  the  dancing-room, 

To  hear  the  fiddles  play; — 
Round  the  world  and  home  again. 

That's  the  sailor's  way! 

William  Allingham  [1824-1889] 


THE  SIMPLE  LIFE 

THE  LAKE  ISLE  OF  INNISFREE 

I  WILL  arise  and  go  now,  and  go  to  Innisfree, 

And  a  small  cabin  build  there,  of  clay  and  wattles  made; 

Nine  bean  rows  will  I  have  there,  a  hive  for  the  honey  bee, 
And  live  alone  in  the  bee-loud  glade. 

And  I  shall  have  some  peace  there,  for  peace  comes  dropping 
slow, 
Dropping  from  the  veils  of  the  morning  to  where  the 
cricket  sings; 
There  midnight's  all  a  glimmer,  and  noon  a  purple  glow, 
And  evening  full  of  the  linnet's  wings. 

I  will  arise  and  go  now,  for  always,  night  and  day, 

I  hear  lake-water  lapping  with  low  sounds  by  the  shore; 

While  I  stand  on  the  roadway,  or  on  the  pavements  gray, 
I  hear  it  in  the  deep  heart's  core. 

William  Butler  Yeals  [1865- 

A  WISH 

Mine  be  a  cot  beside  the  hill; 
A  bee-hive's  hum  shall  soothe  my  ear; 
A  willowy  brook  that  turns  a  mill, 
With  many  a  fall  shall  linger  near. 

The  swallow,  oft,  beneath  my  thatch 
Shall  twitter  from  her  clay-built  nest; 
Oft  shall  the  pilgrim  lift  the  latch, 
And  share  my  meal,  a  welcome  guest. 

Around  my  ivied  porch  shall  spring 
Each  fragrant  flower  that  drinks  the  dew; 
And  Lucy,  at  her  wheel,  shall  sing 
In  russet-gown  and  apron  blue. 

1634 


"  I'hrice   Happy   He"  1635 

The  village-church  among  the  trees, 
Where  first  our  marriage-vows  were  given, 
With  merry  peals  shall  swell  the  breeze 
And  point  with  taper  spire  to  Heaven. 

Samuel  Rogers  [1763-1855] 


ODE   ON  SOLITUDE 

Happy  the  man,  whose  wish  and  care 
A  few  paternal  acres  bound, 
Content  to  breathe  his  native  air 

In  his  own  ground. 

Whose  herds  with  milk,  whose  fields  with  bread, 
Whose  fiocks  supply  him  with  attire; 
Whose  trees  in  summer  yield  him  shade, 
In  winter,  fire. 

Blest,  who  can  unconcernedly  find 
Hours,  days,  and  years,  slide  soft  away 
In  health  of  body,  peace  of  mind, 

Quiet  by  day; 

Sound  sleep  by  night;  study  and  ease 
Together  mixed,  sweet  recreation, 
And  innocence,  which  most  does  please, 
With  meditation. 

Thus  let  me  live,  unseen,  unknown; 
Thus  unlamented  let  me  die; 
Steal  from  the  world,  and  not  a  stone 
Tell  where  I  lie. 

Alexander  Pope  [i 688-1 744] 


"THRICE  HAPPY  HE" 

Thrice  happy  he,  who  by  some  shady  grove. 
Far  from  the  clamorous  world,  doth  Hve  his  own; 
Though  solitary,  who  is  not  alone, 
But  doth  converse  with  that  eternal  love. 


1636  Poems  of  Nature 

O  how  more  sweet  is  birds'  harmonious  moan, 
Or  the  soft  sobbings  of  the  widowed  dove, 
Than  those  smooth  whisperings  near  a  prince's  throne, 
Which  good  make  doubtful,  do  the  evil  approve! 
Or  how  more  sweet  is  Zephyr's  wholesome  breath, 
And  sighs  perfumed  which  do  the  flowers  unfold. 
Than  that  applause  vain  honor  doth  bequeath! 
How  sweet  are  streams  to  poison  drunk  in  gold! 
The  world  is  full  of  horrors,  falsehoods,  slights; 
Woods'  silent  shades  have  only  true  delights. 

William  Drummond  [1585-1649] 

"UNDER  THE   GREENWOOD  TREE" 

From  "  As  You  Like  It  " 

Under  the  greenwood  tree, 
Who  loves  to  lie  with  me. 
And  turn  his  merry  note 
Unto  the  sweet  bird's  throat, 
Come  hither,  come  hither,  come  hither: 
Here  shall  he  see 
No  enemy 
But  winter  and  rough  weather. 

Who  doth  ambition  shun, 
And  loves  to  live  i'  the  sun, 
Seeking  the  food  he  cats, 
And  pleased  with  what  he  gets, 
Come  hither,  come  hither,  come  hither: 
Here  shall  he  sec 
No  enemy 
But  winter  and  rough  weather. 

William  Shakespeare  [i 564-1 61 6] 

CORIDON'S   SONG 

In  "The  Complete  Angler" 

Oh,  the  sweet  contentment 
The  countryman  doth  find. 

High  trolollie  lollie  loe, 

High  trolollie  lee. 


Coridon's   Song  16'?  7 


That  quiet  contemplation 
Possesseth  all  my  mind: 

Then  care  away, 

And  wend  along  with  me. 

For  courts  are  full  of  ilattery, 
As  hath  too  oft  been  tried; 

High  trolollie  lollie  loe, 

High  trolollie  lee, 
The  city  full  of  wantonness, 
And  both  are  full  of  pride: 

But  oh,  the  honest  countryman 
Speaks  truly  from  his  heart, 

High  trolollie  lollie  loe. 

High  trololhe  lee. 
His  pride  is  in  his  tillage, 
His  horses  and  his  cart : 

Our  clothing  is  good  sheepskins, 
Gray  russet  for  our  wives. 

High  trolollie  lollie  loe, 

High  trolollie  lee, 
'Tis  warmth  and  not  gay  clothing 
That  doth  prolong  our  lives: 

The  plowman,  though  he  labor  hard 
Yet  on  the  holiday, 

High  trolollie  lollie  loe, 

High  trollolie  lee. 
No  emperor  so  merrily 
Does  pass  his  time  away: 

To  recompense  our  tillage 
The  heavens  afford  us  showers; 

High  trolollie  lollie  loe. 

High  trolollie  lee^ 
And  for  our  sweet  refreshments 
The  earth  affords  us  bowers:    - 


i6j8  Poems  of  Nature 

The  cuckoo  and  the  nightingale 
Full  merrily  do  sing, 

High  trolollie  lollie  loe, 

High  trolollie  lee, 
And  with  their  pleasant  roundelays 
Bid  welcome  to  the  spring: 

This  is  not  half  the  happiness 
The  countryman  enjoys; 

High  trolollie  lolHe  loe, 

High  trolollie  lee, 
Though  others  think  they  have  as  much 
Yet  he  that  says  so  lies: 

Then  come  away,  turn 

Countryman  with  me. 

John  Chalkhill  [fl.  1648J 

THE   OLD   SQUIRE 

I  LIKE  the  hunting  of  the  hare 

Better  than  that  of  the  fox; 
I  like  the  joyous  morning  air, 

And  the  crowing  of  the  cocks. 

I  like  the  calm  of  the  early  fields. 

The  ducks  asleep  by  the  lake. 
The  quiet  hour  which  nature  yields 

Before  mankind  is  awake. 

I  Hke  the  pheasants  and  feeding  things 

Of  the  unsuspicious  morn ; 
I  like  the  flap  of  the  wood-pigeon's  wings 

As  she  rises  from  the  corn. 

I  like  the  blackbird's  shriek,  and  his  rush 

From  the  turnips  as  I  pass  by. 
And  the  partridge  hiding  her  head  in  a  bush. 

For  her  young  ones  cannot  fly. 

I  like  these  things,  and  I  Hke  to  ride. 

When  all  the  world  is  in  bed, 
To  the  top  of  the  hill  where  the  sky  grows  wide, 

And  where  the  sun  grows  red. 


\ 


The  Old  Squire  1639 

The  beagles  at  my  horse-heels  trot 

In  silence  after  me; 
There's  Ruby,  Roger,  Diamond,  Dot, 

Old  Slut  and  Margery, — 

A  score  of  names  well  used,  and  dear, 

The  names  my  childhood  knew; 
The  horn  with  which  I  rouse  their  cheer, 

Is  the  horn  my  father  blew. 

I  like  the  hunting  of  the  hare 

Better  than  that  of  the  fox; 
The  new  world  still  is  all  less  fair 

Than  the  old  world  it  mocks. 

I  covet  not  a  wider  range 

Than  these  dear  manors  give ; 
I  take  my  pleasures  without  change, 

And  as  I  lived  I  live. 

I  leave  my  neighbors  to  their  thought; 

My  choice  it  is,  and  pride, 
On  my  own  lands  to  find  my  sport, 

In  my  own  fields  to  ride. 

The  hare  herself  no  better  loves 

The  field  where  she  was  bred. 
Than  I  the  habit  of  these  groves, 

My  own  inherited. 

I  know  my  quarries  every  one, 

The  meuse  where  she  sits  low; 
The  road  she  chose  to-day  was  run 

A  hundred  years  ago. 

The  lags,  the  gills,  the  forest  ways, 

The  hedgerows  one  and  all, 
These  are  the  kingdoms  of  my  chase, 

And  bounded  by  mv  wall; 


1640  Poems  of  Nature 

Nor  has  the  world  a  better  thing, 
Though  one  should  search  it  round, 

Than  thus  to  hve  one's  own  sole  king. 
Upon  one's  own  sole  ground. 

I  like  the  hunting  of  the  hare; 

It  brings  me,  day  by  day, 
The  memory  of  old  days  as  fair, 

With  dead  men  passed  away. 

To  these,  as  homeward  still  I  ply 
And  pass  the  churchyard  gate, 

Where  all  are  laid  as  I  must  lie 
I  stop  and  raise  my  hat. 

I  hke  the  hunting  of  the  hare; 

New  sports  I  hold  in  scorn. 
I  like  to  be  as  my  fathers  were, 

In  the  days  ere  I  was  born. 

Wilfrid  Scawen  Blunt  [1840- 


INSCRIPTION  IN  A  HERMITAGE 

Beneath  this  stony  roof  reclined, 
I  soothe  to  peace  my  pensive  mind ; 
And  while,  to  shade  my  lowly  cave, 
Embowering  elms  their  umbrage  wave; 
And  while  the  maple  dish  is  mine — 
The  beechen  cup,  unstained  with  wine — 
I  scorn  the  gay  licentious  crowd, 
Nor  heed  the  toys  that  deck  the  proud. 

Within  my  limits,  lone  and  still, 
The  blackbird  pipes  in  artless  trill; 
Fast  by  my  couch,  congenial  guest, 
The  wren  has  wove  her  mossy  nest ; 
From  busy  scenes  and  brighter  skies, 
To  lurk  with  innocence,  she  flies, 
Here  hopes  in  safe  repose  to  dwell, 
Nor  aught  suspects  the  sylvan  cell. 


1641 


The    Retirement 

At  morn  I  take  my  customed  round, 
To  mark  how  buds  yon  shrubby  mound, 
And  every  opening  primrose  count. 
That  trimly  paints  my  blooming  mount; 
Or  o'er  the  sculptures,  quaint  and  rude, 
That  grace  my  gloomy  solitude, 
I  teach  in  winding  wreaths  to  stray 
Fantastic  ivy's  gadding  spray. 

At  eve,  within  yon  studious  nook, 

I  ope  my  brass-embossed  book, 

Portrayed  with  many  a  holy  deed 

Of  martyrs,  crowned  with  heavenly  meed; 

Then,  as  my  taper  waxes  dim, 

Chant,  ere  I  sleep,  my  measured  hymn, 

And  at  the  close,  the  gleams  behold 

Of  parting  wings,  be-dropt  with  gold. 

While  such  pure  joys  my  bliss  create, 
Who  but  would  smile  at  guilty  state? 
Who  but  would  wish  his  holy  lot 
In  calm  oblivion's  humble  grot? 
Who  but  would  cast  his  pomp  away, 
To  take  my  staff,  and  amice  gray; 
And  to  the  world's  tumultuous  stage 
Prefer  the  blameless  hermitage? 

Thomas  Wartoii  [i7j8-i7go] 


THE  RETIREMENT 

Farewell,  thou  busy  world,  and  may 

We  never  meet  again; 
Here  I  can  eat  and  sleep  and  pray, 
And  do  more  good  in  one  short  day 

Than  he  who  his  whole  age  outwears 
Upon  the  most  conspicuous  theaters, 
Where  naught  but  vanity  and  vice  appears. 

Good  God!  how  sweet  are  all  things  here! 
How  beautiful  the  fields  appear! 


1642  Poems  of  Nature 

How  cleanly  do  we  feed  and  lie! 
Lord!  what  good  hours  do  we  keep! 
How  quietly  we  sleep! 

What  peace,  what  unanimity! 
How  innocent  from  the  lewd  fashion 
Is  all  our  business,  all  our  recreation! 

O,  how  happy  here's  our  leisure! 

O,  how  innocent  our  pleasure! 

O  ye  valleys!    O  ye  mountains! 

O  ye  groves,  and  crystal  fountains! 

How  I  love,  at  liberty. 

By  turns  to  come  and  visit  ye! 

Dear  solitude,  the  soul's  best  friend. 

That  man  acquainted  with  himself  dost  make, 

And  all  his  Maker's  wonders  to  attend. 
With  thee  I  here  converse  at  will. 
And  would  be  glad  to  do  so  still, 

For  it  is  thou  alone  that  keep'st  the  soul  awake. 

How  calm  and  quiet  a  delight 

Is  it,  alone, 
To  read  and  meditate  and  write. 

By  none  offended,  and  offending  none! 
To  walk,  ride,  sit,  or  sleep  at  one's  own  ease; 
And,  pleasing  a  man's  self,  none  other  to  displease. 

O  my  beloved  nymph,  fair  Dove, 
Princess  of  rivers,  how  I  love 

Upon  thy  flowery  banks  to  lie, 
And  view  thy  silver  stream, 
When  gilded  by  a  Summer's  beam! 

And  in  it  all  thy  wanton  fry 

Playing  at  liberty. 
And,  with  my  angle,  upon  them 

The  all  of  treachery 

I  ever  learned  industriously  to  try! 

Such  streams  Rome's  yellow  Tiber  cannot  show, 
The  Iberian  Tagus,  or  Ligurian  Po; 


The   Retirement  1643 

The  Maesc,  the  Danube,  and  the  Rhine, 
Are  puddle-water,  all,  compared  with  thine; 
And  Loire's  pure  streams  yet  too  polluted  are 
With  thine,  much  purer,  to  compare; 
The  rapid  Garonne  and  the  winding  Seine 
Arc  both  too  mean, 

Beloved  Dove,  with  thee 

To  vie  priority; 
Nay,  Tame  and  Isis,  when  conjoined,  submit, 
And  lay  their  trophies  at  thy  silver  feet. 

O  my  beloved  rocks,  that  rise 

To  awe  the  earth  and  brave  the  skies! 

From  some  aspiring  mountain's  crown 

How  dearly  do  I  love, 
Giddy  with  pleasure  to  look  down; 

And  from  the  vales  to  view  the  noble  heights  above; 
O  my  beloved  caves!  from  dog-star's  heat. 
And  all  anxieties,  my  safe  retreat; 
What  safety,  privacy,  what  true  delight, ' 
In  the  artificial  light 

Your  gloomy  entrails  make, 

Have  I  taken,  do  I  take! 
How  oft,  when  grief  has  made  me  fly, 
To  hide  me  from  society 
E'en  of  my  dearest  friends,  have  I, 

In  your  recesses'  friendly  shade, 

All  my  sorrows  open  laid. 
And  my  most  secret  woes  intrusted  to  your  privacy! 

Lord!  would  men  let  me  alone, 
What  an  over-happy  one 

Should  I  think  myself  to  be — 
Might  I  in  this  desert  place, 
(Which  most  men  in  discourse  disgrace) 

Live  but  undisturbed  and  free! 
Here,  in  this  despised  recess, 

Would  I,  maugre  Winter's  cold, 
And  the  Summer's  worst  excess,  '' 

Try  to  live  out  to  sixty  full  years  old; 


1644  Poems  of  Nature 

And,  all  the  while, 

Without  an  envious  eye 
On  any  thriving  under  Fortune's  smile, 

Contented  live,  and  then  contented  die. 

Charles  Cotton  [1630-1687] 

THE  COUNTRY  FAITH 

Here  in  the  country's  heart, 
Where  the  grass  is  green, 
Life  is  the  same  sweet  life 
As  it  e'er  hath  been. 

Trust  in  a  God  still  lives, 
And  the  bell  at  morn 
Floats  with  a  thought  of  God 
O'er  the  rising  corn. 

God  comes  down  in  the  rain, 
And  the  crop  grows  tall — 
This  is  the  country  faith 

And  best  of  all! 

Norman  Gale  [1862- 

TRULY  GREAT 

My  walls  outside  must  have  some  flowers, 
My  walls  within  must  have  some  books; 

A  house  that's  small;  a  garden  large. 
And  in  it  leafy  nooks: 

A  little  gold  that's  sure  each  week; 

That  comes  not  from  my  living  kind, 
But  from  a  dead  man  in  his  grave, 

Who  cannot  change  his  mind : 

A  lovely  wife,  and  gentle  too; 

Contented  that  no  eyes  but  mine 
Can  see  her  many  charms,  nor  voice 

To  call  her  beauty  fine: 

Where  she  would  in  that  stone  cage  live, 
A  self-made  prisoner,  with  me; 


The  Cup  1645 

While  many  a  wild  bird  sang  around, 
On  gate,  on  bush,  on  tree. 

And  she  sometimes  to  answer  them, 

In  her  far  sweeter  voice  than  all; 
Till  birds,  that  loved  to  look  on  leaves, 

Will  doat  on  a  stone  wall. 

With  this  small  house,  this  garden  large. 

This  little  gold,  this  lovely  mate. 
With  health  in  body,  peace  at  heart — 

Show  me  a  man  more  great. 

William  II.  Davies  [1S70- 

EARLY  MORNING  AT  BARGIS 

Clear  air  and  grassy  lea, 

Stream-song  and  cattle-bell — 
Dear  man,  what  fools  are  we 

In  prison-walls  to  dwell! 

To  live  our  days  apart 

From  green  things  and  wide  skies, 
And  let  the  wistful  heart 

Be  cut  and  crushed  with  lies! 

Bright  peaks! — And  suddenly 

Light  floods  the  placid  dell, 
The  grass- tops  brush  my  knee: 
A  good  crop  it  will  be. 

So  all  is  well! 
O  man,  what  fools  are  we 

In  prison-walls  to  dwell! 

Hermann  Ilagcdorn  [1882- 

THE'  CUP 

The  cup  I  sing  is  a  cup  of  gold 
Many  and  many  a  century  old. 
Sculptured  fair,  and  over-filled 
With  wine  of  a  generous  vintage,  spilled 


1646  Poems  of  Nature 

In  crystal  currents  and  foaming  tides 

All  round  its  luminous,  pictured  sides. 

Old  Time  enameled  and  embossed 

This  ancient  cup  at  an  infinite  cost. 

Its  frame  he  wrought  of  metal  that  run 

Red  from  the  furnace  of  the  sun. 

Ages  on  ages  slowly  rolled 

Before  the  glowing  mass  was  cold, 

And  still  he  toiled  at  the  antique  mold, — 

Turning  it  fast  in  his  fashioning  hand, 

Tracing  circle,  layer,  and  band, 

Carving  figures  quaint  and  strange. 

Pursuing,  through  many  a  wondrous  change, 

The  symmetry  of  a  plan  divine. 

At  last  he  poured  the  lustrous  wine, 

Crowned  high  the  radiant  wave  with  light, 

And  held  aloft  the  goblet  bright, 

Half  in  shadow,  and  wreathed  in  mist 

Of  purple,  amber,  and  amethyst. 

This  is  the  goblet  from  whose  brink 

All  creatures  that  have  life  must  drink: 

Foemen  and  lovers,  haughty  lord, 

And  sallow  beggar  with  lips  abhorred. 

The  new-born  infant,  ere  it  gain 

The  mother's  breast,  this  wine  must  drain. 

The  oak  with  its  subtle  juice  is  fed, 

The  rose  drinks  tiU  her  cheeks  are  red, 

And  the  dimpled,  dainty  violet  sips 

The  limpid  stream  with  loving  lips. 

It  holds  the  blood  of  sun  and  star, 

And  aU  pure  essences  that  are: 

No  fruit  so  high  on  the  heavenly  vine, 

Whose  golden  hanging  clusters  shine 

On  the  far-off  shadowy  midnight  hUls, 

But  some  sweet  influence  it  distUs 

That  slideth  down  the  silvery  rills. 

Here  Wisdom  drowned  her  dangerous  thought. 

The  early  gods  their  secrets  brought; 


A  Strip  of  Blue  1647 

Beauty,  in  quivering  lines  of  light, 
Ripples  before  the  ravished  sight; 
And  the  unseen  mystic  spheres  combine 
To  charm  the  cup  and  drug  the  wine. 

All  day  I  drink  of  the  wine,  and  deep 

In  its  stainless  waves  my  senses  steep; 

All  night  my  peaceful  soul  lies  drowned 

In  hollows  of  the  cup  profound; 

Again  each  morn  I  clamber  up 

The  emerald  crater  of  the  cup, 

On  massive  knobs  of  jasper  stand 

And  view  the  azure  ring  expand : 

I  watch  the  foam-wreaths  toss  and  smm 

In  the  wine  that  o'erruns  the  jeweled  rim: — 

Edges  of  chrysolite  emerge, 

Dawn-tinted,  from  the  misty  surge: 

My  thrilled,  uncovered  front  I  lave. 

My  eager  senses  kiss  the  wave, 

And  drain,  with  its  viewless  draught,  the  lore 

That  kindles  the  bosom's  secret  core. 

And  the  fire  that  maddens  the  poet's  brain 

With  wild  sweet  ardor  and  heavenly  pain. 

John  Townsend  JWowbridge  [1827-1916] 


A   STRIP  OF  BLUE 

I  DO  not  own  an  inch  of  land, 

But  all  I  see  is  mine, — 
The  orchards  and  the  mowing-fields, 

The  lawns  and  gardens  fine. 
The  winds  my  tax-collectors  are. 

They  bring  me  tithes  divine, — 
Wild  scents  and  subtle  essences, 

A  tribute  rare  and  free; 
And,  more  magnificent  than  all, 

My  window  keeps  for  me 
A  glimpse  of  blue  immensity, — 

A  Uttle  strip  of  sea.      ^ 


1648  Poems  of  Nature 

Richer  am  I  than  he  who  owns 

Great  fleets  and  argosies; 
I  have  a  share  in  every  ship 

Won  by  the  inland  breeze 
To  loiter  on  yon  airy  road 

Above  the  apple-trees. 
I  freight  them  with  my  untold  dreams; 

Each  bears  my  own  picked  crew; 
And  nobler  cargoes  wait  for  them 

Than  ever  India  knew, — 
My  ships  that  sail  into  the  East 

Across  that  outlet  blue. 

Sometimes  they  seem  like  living  shapes,- 

The  people  of  the  sky, — 
Guests  in  white  raiment  coming  down 

Erom  Heaven,  which  is  close  by; 
I  call  them  by  familiar  names, 

As  one  by  one  draws  nigh, 
So  white,  so  light,  so  spirit-like, 

Erom  violet  mists  they  bloom! 
The  aching  wastes  of  the  unknown 

Are  half  reclaimed  from  gloom, 
Since  on  life's  hospitable  sea 

All  souls  find  sailing-room. 

The  ocean  grows  a  weariness 

With  nothing  else  in  sight; 
Its  east  and  west,  its  north  and  south, 

Spread  out  from  morn  to  night; 
We  miss  the  warm,  caressing  shore, 

Its  brooding  shade  and  light. 
A  part  is  greater  than  the  whole; 

By  hints  are  mysteries  told. 
The  fringes  of  eternity, — 

God's  sweeping  garment-fold, 
In  that  bright  shred  of  glittering  sea, 

I  reach  out  for,  and  hold. 

The  sails,  like  flakes  of  roseate  pearl, 
Eloat  in  upon  the  mist; 


An   Ode  to    Master  Anthony  Stafford     1649 

The  waves  are  broken  precious  stones, — 

Sapphire  and  amethyst, 
Washed  from  celestial  basement  walls 

By  suns  unsetting  kissed. 
Out  through  the  utmost  gates  of  space, 

Past  where  the  gray  stars  drift, 
To  the  widening  Infinite,  my  soul 

Glides  on,  a  vessel  swift; 
Yet  loses  not  her  anchorage 

In  yonder  azure  rift. 

Here  sit  I,  as  a  little  child: 

The  threshold  of  God's  door 
Is  that  clear  band  of  chrysoprase; 

Now  the  vast  temple  floor. 
The  blinding  glory  of  the  dome 

I  bow  my  head  before: 
Thy  universe,  O  God,  is  home, 

In  height  or  depth,  to  me; 
Yet  here  upon  thy  footstool  green 

Content  am  I  to  be; 
Glad,  when  is  opened  unto  my  need 

Some  sea-like  glimpse  of  thee. 

Lucy  Larrom  [1824-1893] 

AN  ODE  TO   MASTER  ANTHONY  STAFFORD 

TO  HASTEN  HIM  INTO  THE  COUNTRY 

Come,  spur  away, 
I  have  no  patience  for  a  longer  stay, 

But  must  go  down 
And  leave  the  chargeable  noise  of  this  great  town : 
I  will  the  country  see, 
Where  old  simplicity, 
Though  hid  in  gray, 
Doth  look  more  gay 
Than  foppery  in  plush  and  scarlet  clad. 

Farewell,  you  city  wits,  that  are  ^ 

Almost  at  civil  war — 
'Tis  time  that  I  grow  wise,  when  all  the  world  grows  mad. 


1650  Poems  of  Nature 

More  of  my  days 
I  will  not  spend  to  gain  an  idiot's  praise; 

Or  to  make  sport 
For  some  slight  Puisne  of  the  Inns  of  Court. 
Then,  worthy  Stafford,  say, 
How  shall  we  spend  the  day? 
With  what  delights 
Shorten  the  nights? 
When  from  this  tumult  we  are  got  secure, 
Where  mirth  with  all  her  freedom  goes, 
Yet  shall  no  finger  lose; 
Where  every  word  is  thought,  and  every  thought  is  pure? 

There  from  the  tree 
We'll  cherries  pluck,  and  pick  the  strawberry; 

And  every  day 
Go  see  the  wholesome  country  girls  make  hay, 
Whose  brown  hath  lovelier  grace 
Than  any  painted  face 
That  I  do  know 
Hyde  Park  can  show: 
Where  I  had  rather  gain  a  kiss  than  meet 
(Though  some  of  them  in  greater  state 
Might  court  my  love  with  plate) 
The  beauties  of  the  Cheap,  and  wives  of  Lombard  Street. 

But  think  upon 
Some  other  pleasures:  these  to  me  are  none. 

Why  do  I  prate 
Of  women,  that  are  things  against  my  fate! 
I  never  mean  to  wed 
That  torture  to  my  bed: 
My  Muse  is  she 
My  love  shall  be. 
Let  clowns  get  wealth  and  heirs:  when  I  am  gone 
And  that  great  bugbear,  grisly  Death, 
Shall  take  this  idle  breath. 
If  I  a  poem  leave,  that  poem  is  my  son. 

Of  this  no  more! 
We'll  rather  taste  the  bright  Pomona's  store,  'f^-^  ^iT 


An   Ode  to   Master  Anthony   Stafford      1651 

No  fruit  shall  'scape 
Our  palates,  from  the  damson  to  the  grape. 
Then,  full,  we'll  seek  a  shade, 
And  hear  what  music's  made; 
How  Philomel 
Her  tale  doth  tell, 
And  how  the  other  birds  do  fill  the  choir; 
The  thrush  and  blackbird  lend  their  throats, 
Warbling  melodious  notes; 
We  will  all  sports  enjoy  which  others  but  desire. 

Ours  is  the  sky. 
Where  at  what  fowl  we  please  our  hawk  shall  fly: 

Nor  will  we  spare 
To  hunt  the  crafty  fox  or  timorous  hare; 
But  let  our  hounds  run  loose 
In  any  ground  they'll  choose; 
The  buck  shall  fall, 
The  stag,  and  all. 
Our  pleasures  must  from  their  own  warrants  be, 
For  to  my  Muse,  if  not  to  me, 
I'm  sure  all  game  is  free: 
Heaven,  earth,  are  all  but  parts  of  her  great  royalty. 

And  when  we  mean 
To  taste  of  Bacchus'  blessings  now  and  then, 

And  drink  by  stealth 
A  cup  or  two  to  noble  Barkley's  health, 
I'll  take  my  pipe  and  try 
The  Phrygian  melody; 
Which  he  that  hears, 
Lets  through  his  ears 
A  madness  to  distemper  all  the  brain: 
Then  I  another  pipe  will  take 
And  Doric  music  make, 
To  civilize  with  graver  notes  our  wits  again. 

Thomas  Randolph  [1605-1635] 


1652  Poems  of  Nature 


"THE  MIDGES  DANCE  ABOON  THE   BURN" 

The  midges  dance  aboon  the  burn; 

The  dews  begin  to  fa' ; 
The  paitricks  doun  the  rushy  holm 

Set  up  their  e'ening  ca'. 
Now  loud  and  clear  the  blackbird's  sang 

Rings  through  the  briery  shaw, 
While,  flitting  gay,  the  swallows  play 

Around  the  castle  wa'. 

Beneath  the  golden  gloamin'  sky 
;.    .    I    The  mavis  mends  her  lay; 

The  redbreast  pours  his  sweetest  strains 

To  charm  the  lingering  day; 
While  weary  yeldrins  seem  to  wail 

Their  little  nestlings  torn, 
The  merry  wren,  frae  den  to  den, 

Gaes  jinking  through  the  thorn. 

The  roses  fauld  their  silken  leaves, 

The  foxglove  shuts  its  bell; 
The  honeysuckle  and  the  birk 

Spread  fragrance  through  the  dell. — 
Let  others  crowd  the  giddy  court 

Of  mirth  and  revelry, 
The  simple  joys  that  Nature  yields 

Are  dearer  far  to  me. 

Robert  TannahiU  [1774-1810] 


THE   PLOW 

Above  yon  somber  swell  of  land 

Thou  seest  the  dawn's  grave  orange  hue, 
With  one  pale  streak  like  yellow  sand. 

And  over  that  a  vein  of  blue. 

The  air  is  cold  above  the  woods; 

All  silent  is  the  earth  and  sky, 
Except  with  his  own  lonely  moods 

The  blackbird  holds  a  colloquy. 


"To   One   Long  in   City    Pent"     1653 

Over  the  broad  hill  creeps  a  beam, 

Like  hope  that  gilds  a  good  man's  brow; 

And  now  ascends  the  nostril-steam 
Of  stalwart  horses  come  to  plow. 

Ye  rigid  plowmen,  bear  in  mind  ' 

Your  labor  is  for  future  hours! 
Advance — spare  not — nor  look  behind — 

Plow  deep  and  straight  with  all  your  powers. 

Richard  Heiigisl  Home  [1803-1884] 

THE   USEFUL  PLOW 

A  COUNTRY  life  is  sweet ! 

In  moderate  cold  and  heat,    ' 

To  walk  in  the  air  how  pleasant  and  fair! 
In  every  field  of  wheat, 

The  fairest  of  flowers  adorning  the  bowers, 
And  every  meadow's  brow; 

So  that  I  say,  no  courtier  may 

Compare  with  them  who  clothe  in  gray, 
And  follow  the  useful  plow. 

They  rise  with  the  morning  lark, 
And  labor  till  almost  dark. 

Then,  folding  their  sheep,  they  hasten  to  sleep 
While  every  pleasant  park 

Next  morning  is  ringing  with  birds  that  arc  singing 
On  each  green,  tender  bough. 

With  what  content  and  merriment 

Their  days  are  spent,  whose  minds  are  bent 
To  follow  the  useful  plow. 

Unknown 


"TO  ONE   WHO  HAS   BEEN  LONG   IN   CITY 
PENT" 

To  one  who  has  been  long  in  city  pent, 
'Tis  very  sweet  to  look  into  the  fair 
And  open  face  of  heaven, — to  breathe  a  prayer 
Full  in  the  smile  of  the  blue  firmament. 


1654  Poems  of  Nature 

Who  is  more  happy,  when,  with  heart's  content, 
Fatigued  he  sinks  into  some  pleasant  lair 
Of  wavy  grass,  and  reads  a  debonair 
And  gentle  tale  of  love  and  languishment? 
Returning  home  at  evening,  with  an  car 
Catching  the  notes  of  Philomel,— and  eye 
Watching  the  sailing  cloudlet's  bright  career. 
He  mourns  that  day  so  soon  has  glided  by,^ 
E'en  like  the  passage  of  an  angel's  tear 
That  falls  through  the  clear  ether  silently. 

John  Kcals  [i  795-1 821] 


THE^QUIET  LIFE 

What  pleasure  have  great  princes 
More  dainty  to  their  choice 
Than  herdsmen  wild,  who  careless 
In  quiet  life  rejoice. 
And  fortune's  fate  not  fearing 
Sing  sweet  in  summer  morning? 

Their  dealings  plain  and  rightful, 

Are  void  of  all  deceit ; 

They  never  know  how  spiteful 

It  is  to  kneel  and  wait 

On  favorite,  presumptuous, 

Whose  pride  is  vain  and  sumptuous. 

All  day  their  flocks  each  tendeth; 
At  night,  they  take  their  rest; 
More  quiet  than  who  sendeth 
His  ship  unto  the  East, 
Where  gold  and  pearl  are  plenty; 
But  getting,  very  dainty. 

For  lawyers  and  their  pleading. 
They  'steem  it  not  a  straw; 
They  think  that  honest  meaning 
Is  of  itself  a  law: 

Whence  conscience  judgeth  plainly,  

They  spend  no  money  vainly.        "'  II"  'I 


The   Wish  1655 

O  happy  who  thus  liveth! 
Not  caring  much  for  gold ; 
With  clothing  which  sufficeth 
To  keep  him  from  the  cold. 
Though  poor  and  plain  his  diet 
Yet  merry  it  is,  and  quiet. 

William  Byrd  [i538?-i623] 

THE  WISH 

Well  then,  I  now  do  plainly  see 
This  busy  world  and  I  shall  ne'er  agree; 
The  very  honey  of  all  earthly  joy 
Does,  of  all  meats,  the  soonest  cloy; 

And  they,  methinks,  deserve  my  pity 
Who  for  it  can  endure  the  stings, 
The  crowd,  and  buzz,  and  murmurings 

Of  this  great  hive,  the  city! 

Ah,  yet,  ere  I  descend  to  the  grave, 
May  I  a  small  house  and  large  garden  have; 
And  a  few  friends,  and  many  books,  both  true, 
Both  wise,  and  both  delightful  too! 

And  since  Love  ne'er  will  from  me  flee, — ■ 
A  mistress  moderately  fair. 
And  good  as  guardian-angels  are, 

Only  beloved,  and  loving  me! 

O  fountains!  when  in  you  shall  I 

Myself  eased  of  unpeaceful  thoughts  espy? 

O  fields!    O  woods!  when,  when  shall  I  be  made 

The  happy  tenant  of  your  shade? 

Here's  the  spring-head  of  pleasure's  flood! 
Here's  wealthy  Nature's  treasury. 
Where  all  the  riches  lie,  that  she 

Has  coined  and  stamped  for  good. 

Pride  and  ambition  here 

Only  in  far-fetched  metaphors  appear; 

Here  naught  but  winds  can  hurtful  murmurs  scatter, 

And  naught  but  echo  flatter. 


1656  Poems  of  Nature 

The  gods,  when  they  descended,  hither 
From  heaven  did  always  choose  their  way; 
And  therefore  we  may  boldly  say 

That  'tis  the  way  too  thither. 

How  happy  here  should  I 
And  one  dear  She  live,  and  embracing  die! 
She  who  is  all  the  world,  and  can  exclude 
In  deserts  solitude. 

I  should  have  then  this  only  fear: 
Lest  men,  when  they  my  pleasures  see, 
Should  hither  throng  to  live  like  me, 

And  so  make  a  city  here. 

Abraham  Cowley  [1618-1667] 

EXPOSTULATION  AND  REPLY 

"Why,  William,  on  that  old  gray  stone, 
Thus  for  the  length  of  half  a  day, 
Why,  William,  sit  you  thus  alone. 
And  dream  your  time  away? 

"Where  are  your  books? — that  light  bequeathed 
To  beings  else  forlorn  and  blind! 
Up!  up!  and  drink  the  spirit  breathed 
From  dead  men  to  their  kind, 

"You  look  round  on  your  Mother  Earth, 

As  if  she  for  no  purpose  bore  you; 

As  if  you  were  her  first-born  birtli. 

And  none  had  lived  before  you!"  '  ' 

One  morning  thus,  by  Esthwaite  lake, 
When  life  was  sweet,  I  knew  not  why, 
To  me  my  good  friend  Matthew  spake 
And  thus  I  made  reply: 

"The  eye — it  cannot  choose  but  see;  1 

We  cannot  bid  the  ear  be  still;  ;  -(InO 

Our  bodies  feel,  where'er  they  be,  •  ^f 
Against  or  with  our  will. 


The  Tables  Turned  1657 

"Nor  less  I  dream  that  there  are  Powers 
Wliich  of  themselves  our  minds  impress; 
That  we  can  feed  this  mind  of  ours 
In  a  wise  passiveness. 

''Think  you,  'mid  all  this  mighty  sum 
Of  things  forever  speaking, 
That  nothing  of  itself  will  come, 
But  we  must  still  be  seeking? 

" — Then  ask  not  wherefore,  here,  alone, 
Conversing  as  I  ma3^  j'j 

I  sit  upon  this  old  gray  stone. 
And  dream  my  time  away." 

William  Wordsworth  [i 770-1850] 


THE  TABLES  TURNED 

AN   EVENING    SCENE    ON   THE    SAME    SUBJECT 

Up!  up!  my  friend,  and  quit  your  books; 
Or  surely  you'll  grow  double: 
Up!  up!  my  friend,  and  clear  your  looks; 
Why  all  this  toil  and  trouble? 

The  sun,  above  the  mountain's  head, 

A  freshening  luster  mellow 

Through  all  the  long  green  fields  has  spread,: 

His  first  sweet  evening  yellow. 

Bocks!  'tis  a  dull  and  endless  strife: 
Come,  hear  the  woodland  linnet, 
How  sweet  his  music!  on  my  life 
There's  more  of  wisdom  in  it. 

And  hark!  how  blithe  the  throstle  sings! 
He,  too,  is  no  mean  preacher: 
Come  forth  into  the  light  of  things, 
Let  Nature  be  your  teacher. 


1658  Poems  of  Nature 

She  has  a  world  of  ready  wealth, 
Our  minds  and  hearts  to  bless — 
Spontaneous  wisdom  breathed  by  health, 
Truth  breathed  by  cheerfulness. 

One  impulse  from  a  vernal  wood 
May  teach  you  more  of  man, 
Of  moral  evil  and  of  good, 
Than  all  the  sages  can. 

Sweet  is  the  lore  which  Nature  brings; 
Our  meddhng  intellect 
Misshapes  the  beauteous  forms  of  things: — 
We  murder  to  dissect. 

Enough  of  Science  and  of  Art; 
Close  up  those  barren  leaves; 
Come  forth,  and  bring  with  you  a  heart 
That  watches  and  receives. 

William  Wordsworth  [i 770-1850] 


SIMPLE  NATURE 

Bi.  it  not  mine  to  steal  the  cultured  flower 

From  any  garden  of  the  rich  and  great, 
Nor  seek  with  care,  through  many  a  weary  hour. 

Some  novel  form  of  wonder  to  create. 
Enough  for  me  the  leafy  woods  to  rove. 

And  gather  simple  cups  of  morning  dew, 
Or,  in  the  fields  and  meadows  that  I  love, 

Find  beauty  in  their  bells  of  every  hue. 
Thus  round  my  cottage  i^oats  a  fragrant  air, 

And  though  the  rustic  plot  be  humbly  laid, 
Yet,  like  the  lilies  gladly  growing  there, 

I  have  not  toiled,  but  take  what  God  has  made. 
My  Lord  Ambition  passed,  and  smiled  in  srorn; 
I  plucked  a  rose,  and,  lo!  it  had  no  thorn. 

George  John  Romanes  [1848-1804 


A  Runnable  Stag  1659 


'I  FEAR  NO  POWER  A  WOMAN  WIELDS" 

I  FEAR  no  power  a  woman  wields 
While  I  can  have  the  woods  and  fields, 
With  comradeship  alone  of  gun, 
Gray  marsh-wastes  and  the  burning  sun. 

For  aye  the  heart's  most  poignant  pain 
Will  wear  away  'neath  hail  and  rain, 
And  rush  of  winds  through  branches  bare 
With  something  still  to  do  and  dare, — 

The  lonely  watch  beside  the  shore, 
The  wild-fowl's  cry,  the  sweep  of  oar, 
The  paths  of  virgin  sky  to  scan 
Untrod,  and  so  uncursed  by  man. 

Gramercy,  for  thy  haunting  face, 
Thy  charm  of  voice  and  lissome  grace, 
I  fear  no  power  a  woman  wields 
While  I  can  have  the  woods  and  fields. 

Ernest  McGafey  [1861- 


A  RUNNABLE  STAG 

When  the  pods  went  pop  on  the  broom,  green  broom, 

And  apples  began  to  be  golden-skinned, 
We  harbored  a  stag  in  the  Priory  coomb, 
And  we  feathered  his  trail  up-wind,  up-wind, 
We  feathered  his  trail  up-wind — 
A  stag  of  warrant,  a  stag,  a  stag, 
A  runnable  stag,  a  kingly  crop, 
Brow,  bay  and  tray  and  three  on  top, 
A  stag,  a  runnable  stag. 

Then  the  huntsman's  horn  rang  yap,  yap,  yap,        ,,f  £ 
And  "Forwards"  we  heard  the  harborer  shout; 

But  'twas  only  a  brocket  that  broke  a  gap 
In  the  beechen  underwood,  driven  out, 
From  the  underwood  antlered  out 


i66o  Poems  of  Nature 

By  warrant  and  might  of  the  stag,  the  stag, 
The  runnable  stag,  whose  lordly  mind 
Was  bent  on  sleep,  though  beamed  and  tined 
He  stood,  a  runnable  stag. 

So  we  tufted  the  covert  till  afternoon 

With  Tinkerman's  Pup  and  Bell-of-the-North; 
And  hunters  were  sulky  and  hounds  out  of  tune 
Before  we  tufted  the  right  stag  forth,     '.•''^10 4 
Before  we  tufted  him  forth,  '     '  '■ 

The  stag  of  warrant,  the  wily  stag, 
The  runnable  stag  with  his  kingly  crop. 
Brow,  bay  and  tray  and  three  on  top, 
The  royal  and  runnable  stag. 

It  was  Bell-of-the-North  and  Tinkerman's  Pup 

That  stuck  to  the  scent  till  the  copse  was  drawn. 
"Tally  ho!  tally  ho!"  and  the  hunt  was  up. 
The  tufters  whipped  and  the  pack  laid  on, 
The  resolute  pack  laid  on. 

And  the  stag  of  warrant  away  at  last, 
The  runnable  stag,  the  same,  the  same. 
His  hoofs  on  fire,  his  horns  like  flame, 
A  stag,  a  runnable  stag. 

"Let  your  gelding  be:  if  you  check  or  chide 

He  stumbles  at  once  and  you're  out  of  the  hunt; 
For  three  hundred  gentlemen,  able  to  ride, 
On  hunters  accustomed  to  bear  the  brunt, 
Accustomed  to  bear  the  brunt. 

Are  after  the  runnable  stag,  the  stag. 
The  runnable  stag  with  his  kingly  crop 
Brow,  bay  and  tray  and  three  on  top, 
The  right,  the  runnable  stag." 

By  perilous  paths  in  coomb  and  dell. 

The  heather,  the  rocks,  and  the  river-bed, 
The  pace  grew  hot,  for  the  scent  lay  well,  ■  f 

And  a  runnable  stag  goes  right  ahead. 
The  quarry  went  right  ahead—  ;<^t 

Ahead,  ahead,  and  fast  and  far; 
His  antlered  crest,  his  cloven  hoof, 


X 


A   Runnable  Stag  1661 

Brow,  bay  and  tray  and  three  aloof, 
The  stag,  the  runnable  stag. 

For  a  matter  of  twenty  miles  and  more, 

By  the  densest  hedge  and  the  highest  wall, 
Through  herds  of  bullocks  he  baffled  the  lore 
Of  harborer,  huntsman,  hounds  and  all, 
Of  harborer,  hounds  and  all — 

The  stag  of  warrant,  the  wily  stag, 
For  twenty  miles,  and  five  and  five. 
He  ran,  and  he  never  was  caught  alive, 
•        This  stag,  this  runnable  stag. 

When  he  turned  at  bay  in  the  leafy  gloom, 

In  the  emerald  gloom  where  the  brook  ran  deep. 
He  heard  in  the  distance  the  rollers  boom, 

And  he  saw  in  a  vision  of  peaceful  sleep,  " ; 

In  a  wonderful  vision  of  sleep, 
A  stag  of  warrant,  a  stag,  a  stag, 
A  runnable  stag  in  a  jewelled  bed, 
Under  the  sheltering  ocean  dead, 
A  stag,  a  runnable  stag. 

So  a  fateful  hope  lit  up  his  eye. 

And  he  opened  his  nostrils  wide  again. 
And  he  tossed  his  branching  antlers  high 

As  he  headed  the  hunt  down  the  Charloch  glen, 
As  he  raced  down  the  echoing  glen — 
For  five  miles  more,  the  stag,  the  stag, 
For  twenty  miles,  and  five  and  five, 
Not  to  be  caught  now,  dead  or  ahve. 
The  stag,  the  runnable  stag. 

Three  hundred  gentlemen,  able  to  ride, 

Three  hundred  horses  as  gallant  and  free. 
Beheld  him  escape  on  the  evening  tide. 
Far  out  till  he  sank  in  the  Severn  Sea, 
Till  he  sank  in  the  depths  of  the  sea — 
The  stag,  the  buoyant  stag,  the  stag 
That  slept  at  last  in  a  jewelled  bed 
Under  the  sheltering  ocean  spread, 
The  stag,  the  runnable  stag. 

John  Davidson  [1857-1909] 


1 662  Poems  of  Nature 


HUNTING-SONG 

From  "  King  Arthur  " 

Oh,  who  would  stay  indoor,  indoor. 
When  the  horn  is  on  the  hill?    {Bugle:  Tarantara! 
With  the  crisp  air  stinging,  and  the  huntsmen  singing, 
And  a  ten-tined  buck  to  kill! 

Before  the  sun  goes  down,  goes  down, 

We  shall  slay  the  buck  of  ten;  {Bugle:  Tarantara! 

And  the  priest  shall  say  benison,  and  we  shall  ha'e  venison, 

When  we  come  home  again. 

Let  him  that  loves  his  ease,  his  ease,  jii 

Keep  close  and  house  him  fair;  {Bugle:  Tarantara!  ' 
He'll  still  be  a  stranger  to  the  merry  thrill  of  danger 
And  the  joy  of  the  open  air. 

But  he  that  loves  the  hills,  the  hills. 

Let  him  come  out  to-day!  {Bugle:  Tarantara! 

For  the  horses  are  neighing,  and  the  hounds  are  baying, 

And  the  hunt's  up,  and  away! 

Richard  Hovey  [1864- 1900] 


"A-HUNTING  WE  WILL   GO" 

From  "  Don  Quixote  in  England  " 

T'HE  dusky  night  rides  down  the  sky, 

And  ushers  in  the  morn; 
The  hounds  all  join  in  glorious  cry. 

The  huntsman  winds  his  horn. 

And  a-hunting  we  will  go. 

The  wife  around  her  husband  throws 

Her  arms  to  make  him  stay; 
"My  dear,  it  rains,  it  hails,  it  blows; 

You  cannot  hunt  to-day." 

Yet  a-hunting  we  will  go. 


The  Angler's   Invitation  1663 

Away  they  fly  to  'scape  the  rout, 

Their  steeds  they  soundly  switch; 
Some  are  thrown  in,  and  some  thrown  out, 

And  some  thrown  in  the  ditch. 

Yet  a-hunting  we  will  go. 

Sly  Reynard  now  like  lightning  flies. 

And  sweeps  across  the  vale; 
And  when  the  hounds  too  near  he  spies. 

He  drops  his  bushy  tail. 

Then  a-hunting  we  will  go. 

Fond  Echo  seems  to  like  the  sport, 

And  join  the  jovial  cry; 
The  woods,  the  hills,  the  sound  retort, 

And  music  fills  the  sky,  ^ 

When  a-hunting  we  do  go. 

At  last  his  strength  to  faintness  worn. 

Poor  Reynard  ceases  flight; 
Then  hungry,  homeward  we  return. 

To  feast  away  the  night. 

And  a-drinking  we  do  go. 

Ye  jovial  hunters,  in  the  morn 

Prepare  then  for  the  chase; 
Rise  at  the  sounding  of  the  horn 
And  health  with  sport  embrace, 

When  a-hunting  we  do  go. 

Uenry  Fielding  [1707-1754] 

THE  ANGLER'S  INVITATION 

Come  when  the  leaf  comes,  angle  with  me, 
Come  when  the  bee  hums  over  the  lea. 

Come  with  the  wild  flowers — 

Come  with  tlie  wild  showers — 
Come  when  the  singing  bird  calleth  for  thee! 

Then  to  the  stream  side,  gladly  we'll  hie. 
Where  the  gray  trout  glide  silently  by, 

Or  in  some  still  place 

Over  the  hill  face 
Hurrying  onward,  drop  the  light  fly. 


1664  Poems  of  Nature 

Then,  when  the  dew  falls,  homeward  we'll  speed 
To  our  own  loved  walls  down  on  the  mead. 

There,  by  the  bright  hearth. 

Holding  our  night  mirth. 
We'll  drink  to  sweet  friendship  in  need  and  in  deed. 
Thomas  Tod  Stoddart  [1810-1880] 

.  ■..[.-</; 

THE   ANGLER'S  WISH 

From  "The  Complete  Angler  " 

I  IN  these  flowery  meads  would  be. 
These  crystal  streams  should  solace  me; 
To  whose  harmonious  bubbling  noise 
,  I,  with  my  angle,  v/ould  rejoice, 

Sit  here,  and  see  the  turtle-dove 
Court  his  chaste  mate  to  acts  of  love; 

Or,  on  that  bank,  feel  the  west-wind 
Breathe  health  and  plenty;  please  my  mind, 
To  see  sweet  dewdrops  kiss  these  flowers. 
And  then  washed  oft'  by  April  showers; 
Here,  hear  my  Kenna  sing  a  song: 
There,  see  a  blackbird  feed  her  young, 

Or  a  laverock  build  her  nest; 

Here,  give  my  weary  spirits  rest, 
U?'     And  raise  my  low-pitched  thoughts  above 

Earth,  or  what  poor  mortals  love: 

Thus,  free  from  lawsuits,  and  the  noise 
Of  princes'  courts,  I  would  rejoice; 

Or,  with  my  Bryan  and  a  book, 

Loiter  long  days  near  Shawford  brook; 

There  sit  by  him,  and  eat  my  meat; 

There  see  the  sun  both  rise  and  set ; 

There  bid  good  morning  to  next  day ; 

There  meditate  my  time  away; 

And  angle  on;  and  beg  to  have 

A  quiet  passage  to  a  welcome  grave. 

Izaac  Walton  [1593-1683] 


The  Angler  1665 


THE  ANGLER 

In  "The  Complete  Angler" 

O  THE  gallant  fisher's  life, 

It  is  the  best  of  any! 
'Tis  full  of  pleasure,  void  of  strife^ 
And  'tis  beloved  by  many; 

Other  joys 

Are  but  toys; 

Only  this 

Lawful  is; 

For  our  skill 

Breeds  no  ill, 
But  content  and  pleasure. 

In  a  morning,  up  we  rise, 

Ere  Aurora's  peeping; 
Drink  a  cup  to  wash  our  eyes, 
Leave  the  sluggard  sleeping; 

Then  we  go 

To  and  fro, 

With  our  knacks 

At  our  backs, 

To  such  streams 

As  the  Thames, 
If  we  have  the  leisure. 

When  we  please  to  walk  abroad 

For  our  recreation, 
In  the  fields  is  our  abode, 
Full  of  delectation, 

Where,  in  a  Ijrook, 

With  a  hook, — 

Or  a  lake, — - 

Fish  we  take; 

There  we  sit. 

For  a  bit. 
Till  we  fish  entangle. 


1 666  Poems  of  Nature 

We  have  gentles  in  a  horn, 

We  have  paste  and  worms  too; 
We  can  watch  both  night  and  morn, 
Suffer  rain  and  storms  too; 

None  do  here 

Use  to  swear: 

Oaths  do  fray 

Fish  away; 

We  sit  still, 

Watch  our  quill: 
Fishers  must  not  wrangle^ 

If  the  sun's  excessive  heat 

Make  our  bodies  swelter, 
To  an  osier  hedge  we  get, 
For  a  friendly  shelter; 
Where,  in  a  dike, 
Perch  or  pike, 
Roach  or  dace, 
We  do  chase, 
Bleak  or  gudgeon, 
Without  grudging; 
We  are  still  contented. 

Or  we  sometimes  pass  an  hour 

Under  a  green  willow. 
That  defends  us  from  a  shower, 
Making  earth  our  pillow; 
Where  we  may 
Think  and  pray. 
Before  death 
Stops  our  breath; 
Other  joys 
Are  but  toys. 
And  to  be  lamented. 

John  Chalkhill  [fl.  1648] 


WANDERLUST 

TO  JANE:  THE  INVITATION 

Best  and  Brightest,  come  away! 
Fairer  far  than  this  fair  day, 
Which,  hke  thee,  to  those  in  sorrow, 
Comes  to  bid  a  sweet  good-morrow 
To  the  rough  year  just  awake 
In  its  cradle  on  the  brake. 
The  brightest  hour  of  unborn  Spring 
Through  the  winter  wandering. 
Found,  it  seems,  the  halcyon  morn 
To  hoar  February  born; 
Bending  from  Heaven,  in  azure  mirth, 
It  kissed  the  forehead  of  the  earth, 
And  smiled  upon  the  silent  sea, 
And  bade  the  frozen  streams  be  free, 
And  waked  to  music  all  their  fountains, 
And  breathed  upon  the  frozen  mountains, 
And  Hke  a  prophetess  of  May 
Strewed  flowers  upon  the  barren  way, 
Making  the  wintry  world  appear 
Like  one  on  whom  thou  smilest.  Dear. 

Away,  away,  from  men  and  towns, 
To  the  wild  wood  and  the  downs — 
To  the  silent  wilderness 
Where  the  soul  need  not  repress 
Its  music,  lest  it  should  not  find 
An  echo  in  another's  mind, 
While  the  touch  of  Nature's  art 
Harmonizes  heart  to  heart. 

I  leave  this  notice  on  my  door 
For  each  accustomed  visitor: — - 
1667 


1 668  Poems  of  Nature 

"  I  am  gone  into  the  fields 
To  take  what  this  sweet  hour  yields; — 
Reflection,  you  may  come  to-morrow, 
Sit  by  the  fireside  with  Sorrow. — 
You  with  the  unpaid  bill,  Despair, — 
You  tiresome  verse-reciter,  Care, — 
I  will  pay  you  in  the  grave, — 
Death  will  hsten  to  your  stave. 
Expectation  too,  be  off! 
To-day  is  for  itself  enough; 
Hope,  in  pity  mock  not  Woe 
With  smiles,  nor  follow  where  I  go; 
Long  having  lived  on  thy  sweet  food. 
At  length  I  find  one  moment's  good 
After  long  pain — with  all  your  love,    ri 
This  you  never  told  me  of." 

Radiant  Sister  of  the  Day 

Awake!  arise!  and  come  away! 

To  the  wild  woods  and  the  plains,  ■  j.  ,i 

To  the  pools  where  winter  rains 

Image  all  their  roof  of  leaves. 

Where  the  pine  its  garland  weaves 

Of  sapless  green,  and  ivy  dun. 

Round  stems  that  never  kiss  the  sun, 

Where  the  lav;ns  and  pastures  be, 

And  the  sandhills  of  the  sea; — 

Where  the  melting  hoar-frost  wets  ,  i.  ■ 

The  daisy-star  that  never  sets. 

And  wind-flowers,  and  violets, 

Which  yet  join  not  scent  to  hue,    , ;  .  ^ ; 

Crown  the  pale  year  weak  and  new;     r 

When  the  night  is  left  behind 

In  the  deep  east,  dun  and  bhnd. 

And  the  blue  noon  is  over  us,  ,  r,  / 

And  the  multitudinous 

Billows  murmur  at  our  feet. 

Where  the  earth  and  ocean  meet. 

And  all  things  seem  only  one 

In  the  universal  sun. 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [179 2-1 82 2] 


"Afar  in   the   Desert"  1669 


"MY  HEART'S  IN  THE  HIGHLANDS" 

My  heart's  in  the  Highlands,  my  heart  is  not  here; 
My  heart's  in  the  Highlands  a-chasing  the  deer; 
A-chasing  the  wild  deer,  and  following  the  roe, — 
My  heart's  in  the  Highlands  wherever  I  go. 

Farewell  to  the  Highlands,  farewell  to  the  North, 
The  birthplace  of  valor,  the  country  of  worth; 
Wherever  I  wander,  wherever  I  rove. 
The  hills  of  the  Highlands  for  ever  I  love. 

Farewell  to  the  mountains  high  covered  witli  snow; 
Farewell  to  the  straths  and  green  valleys  below; 
Farewell  to  the  forests  and  wild-hanging  woods; 
Farewell  to  the  torrents  and  loud-pouring  floods. 

My  heart's  in  the  Highlands,  my  heart  is  not  here; 
My  heart's  in  the  Highlands  a-chasing  the  deer, 
A-chasing  the  wild  deer,  and  following  the  roe, — 
IVIy  heart's  in  the  Highlands  wherever  I  go. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


"AFAR  IN  THE   DESERT" 

Afar  in  the  desert  I  love  to  ride, 
With  the  silent  Bush-boy  alone  by  my  side. 
When  the  sorrows  of  life  the  soul  o'ercast. 
And,  sick  of  the  present,  I  cling  to  the  past; 
When  the  eye  is  suffused  with  regretful  tears. 
From  the  fond  recollections  of  former  years; 
And  shadows  of  things  that  have  long  since  fled 
Flit  over  the  brain,  like  the  ghosts  of  the  dead: 
Bright  visions  of  glory  that  vanished  too  soon; 
Day-dreams  that  departed  ere  manhood's  noon; 
Attachments  by  fate  or  falsehood  reft; 
Companions  of  early  days  lost  or  left — 
And  my  native  land — whose  magical  name 
Thrills  to  the  heart  like  electric  flame; 


1670  Poems  of  Nature 

The  home  of  my  childhood;  the  haunts  of  my  prime; 

All  the  passions  and  scenes  of  that  rapturous  time 

When  the  feehngs  were  young,  and  the  world  was  new, 

Like  the  fresh  bowers  of  Eden  unfolding  to  view; 

All — all  now  forsaken — forgotten— foregone! 

And  I— a  lone  exile  remembered  of  none — 

My  liigh  aims  abandoned, — my  good  acts  undone — 

Aweary  of  all  that  is  under  the  sun — 

With  that  sadness  of  heart  which  no  stranger  may  scan, 

I  tly  to  the  desert  afar  from  man. 

Afar  in  the  desert  I  love  to  ride, 

Wiih  the  silent  Bush-boy  alone  by  my  side. 

When  the  wild  turmoil  of  this  wearisome  life, 

With  its  scenes  of  oppression,  corruption,  and  strife — 

The  proud  man's  frown,  and  the  base  man's  fear — 

The  scorner's  laugh,  and  the  sufferer's  tear — 

And  malice,  and  meanness,  and  falsehood,  and  folly, 

Dispose  me  to  musing  and  dark  melancholy; 

When  my  bosom  is  full,  and  my  thoughts  are  high. 

And  my  soul  is  sick  with  the  bondman's  sigh — 

Oh!  then  there  is  freedom,  and  joy,  and  pride, 

Afar  in  the  desert  alone  to  ride ! 

There  is  rapture  to  vault  on  the  champing  steed, 

And  to  bound  away  with  the  eagle's  speed. 

With  the  death-fraught  firelock  in  my  hand— 

The  only  law  of  the  Desert  Land! 

Afar  in  the  desert  I  love  to  ride. 

With  the  silent  Bush-boy  alone  by  my  side. 

Away — away  from  the  dweUings  of  men, 

By  the  wild  deer's  haunt,  by  the  buffalo's  glen; 

By  valleys  remote  where  the  oribi  plays, 

WTiere  the  gnu,  the  gazelle,  and  the  hartebeest  graze, 

And  the  kudu  and  eland  unhimted  recline 

By  the  skirts  of  gray  forest  o'erhung  with  wild  \'ine: 

Where  the  elephant  browses  at  peace  in  his  wood. 

And  the  river-horse  gambols  unscared  in  the  flood. 

And  the  mighty  rhinoceros  wallows  at  will 

In  the  fen  where  the  wild  ass  is  drinking  his  fill. 


"Afar  in  the   Desert"  1671 

Afar  in  the  desert  I  love  to  ride, 
With  the  silent  Bush-boy  alone  by  my  side. 
O'er  the  brown  karroo,  where  the  bleating  cry 
Of  the  springbok's  fawn  sounds  plaintively: 
And  the  timorous  quagga's  shrill  whisthng  neigh 
Is  heard  by  the  foimtain  at  twilight  gray; 
\\Tiere  the  zebra  wantonly  tosses  his  man^, 
With  wild  hoof  scouring  the  desolate  plain; 
And  the  ileet-footed  ostrich  over  the  waste 
Speeds  Hke  a  horseman  who  travels  in  haste, 
Hieing  away  to  the  home  of  her  rest, 
Where  she  and  her  mate  have  scooped  their  nest, 
Far  hid  from  the  pitiless  plunderer's  \aew 
In  the  pathless  depths  of  the  parched  karroo. 

Afar  in  the  desert  I  love  to  ride. 

With  the  silent  Bush -boy  alone  by  my  side. 

Away — away — in  the  wilderness  vast 

WTiere  the  white  man's  foot  hath  nev'er  passed, 

-\nd  the  quivered  Coranna  or  Bechuan 

Hath  rarely  crossed  with  his  roving  clan: 

A  region  of  emptiness,  howling  and  drear, 

Which  man  hath  abandoned  from  famine  and  fear; 

Which  the  snake  and  the  lizard  inhabit  -alone, 

With  the  twUight  bat  from  the  yawning  stone; 

Where  grass,  nor  herb,  nor  shrub  takes  root. 

Save  poisonous  thorns  that  pierce  the, foot; 

And  the  bitter  melon,  for  food  and  drink. 

Is  the  pilgrim's  fare  by  the  salt-lake's  brink; 

A  region  of  drought,  where  no  river  glides, 

Nor  rippUng  brook  with  osiered  sides; 

^\llere  sedgy  pool,  nor  bubbling  fount. 

Nor  tree,  nor  cloud,  nor  misty  mount, 

Appears,  to  refresh  the  aching  eye; 

But  the  barren  earth  and  the  burning  sky, 

And  the  blank  horizon,  rovmd  and  round. 

Spread — void  of  li\'ing  sight  or  sound. 

And  here,  while  the  night-winds  round  me  sigh, 

And  the  stars  burn  bright  in  the  midnight  sky, 


1672  Poems  of  Nature 

As  I  sit  apart  by  the  desert  stone, 

Like  Elijah  at  Horeb's  cave,  alone, 

"A  still  small  voice"  comes  through  the  wild, 

Like  a  father  consoling  his  fretful  child, 

Which  banishes  bitterness,  wrath,  and  fear. 

Saying — Man  is  distant,  but  God  is  near! 

•  Thomas  Pringle  [i 789-1 834] 

SPRING   SONG   IN   THE   CITY 

Who  remains  in  London, 

In  the  streets  with  me. 
Now  that  Spring  is  blowing 

Warm  winds  from  the  sea; 
Now  that  trees  grow  green  and  tall, 

Now  the  sun  shines  mellow. 
And  with  moist  primroses  all 

English  lanes  are  yellow? 

Little  barefoot  maiden. 

Selling  violets  blue. 
Hast  thou  ever  pictured 

Where  the  sweetlings  grew? 
Oh,  the  warm  wild  woodland  ways, 
■  Deep  in  dewy  grasses, 
Where  the  wind-blown  shadow  strays, 

Scented  as  it  passes! 

Peddler  breathing  deeply. 

Toiling  into  town, 
With  the  dusty  highway 

You  are  dusky  brown; 
Hast  thou  seen  by  daisied  leas. 

And  by  rivers  flowing. 
Lilac-ringlets  which  the  breeze 

Loosens  lightly  blowing? 

Out  of  yonder  wagon 

Pleasant  hay-scents  float, 
He  who  drives  it  carries 

A  daisy  in  his  coat: 


Spring  Song  in  the  City  1673 

Oh,  the  Enghsh  meadows,  fair 

Far  beyond  all  praises! 
Freckled  orchids  everywhere 

Mid  the  snow  of  daisies! 

Now  in  busy  silence 

Broods  the  nightingale, 
Choosing  his  love's  dwelling 

In  a  dimpled  dale; 
Round  the  leafy  bower  they  raise 

Rose-trees  wild  are  springing; 
Underneath,  through  the  green  haze, 

Bounds  the  brooklet  singing. 

And  his  love  is  silent 

As  a  bird  can  be, 
For  the  red  buds  only 

Fill  the  red  rose-tree; 
Just  as  buds  and  blossoms  blow 

He'll  begin  his  tune, 
When  all  is  green  and  roses  glow 

Underneath  the  moon. 

Nowhere  in  the  valleys 

Will  the  wind  be  still, 
Everything  is  waving. 

Wagging  at  his  will: 
Blows  the  milkmaid's  kirtle  clean 

With  her  hand  pressed  on  it; 
Lightly  o'er  the  hedge  so  green 

Blows  the  plowboy's  bonnet. 

Oh,  to  be  a-roaming 

In  an  EngUsh  dell! 
Every  nook  is  wealthy, 

All  the  world  looks  well, 
Tinted  soft  the  Heavens  glow, 

Over  Earth  and  Ocean, 
Waters  flow,  breezes, blow, 

All  is  light  and  motion! 

Robert  Buchanan  [1841-1001] 


1674  Poems  of  Nature 


IN  CITY  STREETS 

Yonder  in  the  heather  there's  a  bed  for  sleeping, 
Drink  for  one  athirst,  ripe  blackberries  to  eat; 

Yonder  in  the  sun-  the  merry  hares  go  leaping, 
And  the  pool  is  clear  for  travel-wearied  feet. 

Sorely  throb  my  feet,  a-tramping  London  highways, 
(Ah!  the  springy  moss  upon  a  northern  moor!) 

Through  the  endless  streets,  the  gloomy  squares  and  by- 
ways, 
Homeless  in  the  City,  poor  among  the  poor! 

London  streets  are  gold — ah,  give  me  leaves  a-glinting 
'Midst  gray  dykes  and  hedges  in  the  autumn  sun! 

London  water's  wine,  poured  out  for  all  unstinting — 
God!    For  the  httle  brooks  that  tumble  as  they  run! 

Oh,  my  heart  is  fain  to  hear  the  soft  wind  blowing. 
Soughing  through  the  fir-tops  up  on  northern  fells! 

Oh.  my  eye's  an  ache  to  see  the  brown  burns  flowing 
Through  the  peaty  soil  and  tinkling  heather-bells. 

Ada  Stnith  [18    - 


THE  VAGABOND 

(To  an  Air  of  Schubert) 

Give  to  me  the  hfe  I  love, 

Let  the  lave  go  by  me. 
Give  the  jolly  heaven  above 

And  the  byway  nigh  me. 
Bed  in  the  bush  with  stars  to  see, 

Bread  I  dip  in  the  river — 
There's  the  life  for  a  man  like  me, 

There's  the  life  for  ever. 

Let  the  blow  fall  soon  or  late, 
Let  what  will  be  o'er  me; 

Give  the  face  of  earth  around 
And  the  road  before  me. 


In  the   Highlands  1675 

Wealth  I  seek  not,  hope  nor  love, 

Nor  a  friend  to  know  me; 
All  I  seek,  the  heaven  above 

And  the  road  below  me. 

Or  let  autumn  fall  on  me 

Where  afield  I  hnger, 
Silencing  the  bird  on  tree, 

Biting  the  blue  finger. 
White  as  meal  the  frosty  field — 

Warm  the  fireside  haven — 
Not  to  autumn  will  I  yield, 

Not  to  winter  even! 

Let  the  blow  fall  soon  or  late, 

Let  what  will  be  o'er  me; 
Give  the  face  of  earth  around. 

And  the  road  before  mc. 
Wealth  I  ask  not,  hope  nor  love. 

Nor  a  friend  to  know  me; 
All  I  ask,  the  heaven  above 

And  the  road  below  me. 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [i  850-1 8g4] 


IN  THE  HIGHLANDS 

In  the  highlands,  in  the  country  places. 

Where  the  old  plain  men  have  rosy  faces. 

And  the  young  fair  maidens 

Quiet  eyes; 

Where  essential  silence  cheers  and  blesse.' 

And  for  ever  in  the  hill -recesses 

Her  more  lovely  music 

Broods  and  dies. — 

O  to  mount  again  where  erst  I  haunted; 
Where  the  old  red  hills  are  bird-enchanted, 
And  the  low  green  meadows 
Bright  with  sward; 


1676  Poems   of  Nature 

And  when  even  dies,  the  miUion-tinted, 
And  the  night  has  come,  and  planets  glinted, 
Lo,  the  valley  hollow 
Lamp-bestarred! 

O  to  dream,  O  to  awake  and  wander 

There,  and  with  dehght  to  take  and  render, 

Through  the  trance  of  silence. 

Quiet  breath! 

Lo!  for  there,  among  the  flowers  and  grasses, 

Only  the  mightier  movement  sounds  and  passes; 

Only  winds  and  rivers. 

Life  and  Death. 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1894] 


THE   SONG  MY  PADDLE   SINGS 

West  wind,  blow  from  your  prairie  nest. 
Blow  from  the  mountains,  blow  from  the  west. 
The  sail  is  idle,  the  sailor  too ; 

0  wind  of  the  west,  we  wait  for  you! 
Blow,  blow! 

1  have  wooed  you  so. 

But  never  a  favor  you  bestow. 

You  rock  your  cradle  the  hills  between, 

But  scorn  to  notice  my  white  lateen. 

I  stow  the  sail  and  unship  the  mast: 

I  wooed  you  long,  but  my  wooing's  past; 

My  paddle  will  lull  you  into  rest : 

O  drowsy  wind  of  the  drowsy  west, 

Sleep,  sleep! 

By  your  mountains  steep, 

Or  down  where  the  prairie  grasses  sweep, 

Now  fold  in  slumber  your  laggard  wings. 

For  soft  is  the  song  my  paddle  sings. 

Be  strong,  O  paddle!  be  brave,  canoe! 
The  reckless  waves  you  must  plunge  into. 


The  Gipsy  Trail  1677 

Reel,  reel, 

On  your  trembling  keel. 

But  never  a  fear  my  craft  will  feel. 

We've  raced  the  rapids;  we're  far  ahead: 

The  river  slips  through  its  silent  bed. 

Sway,  sway. 

As  the  bubbles  spray 

And  fall  in  tinkling  tunes  away. 

And  up  on  the  hills  against  the  sky, 

A  fir  tree  rocking  its  lullaby 

Swings,  swings, 

Its  emerald  wings. 

Swelling  the  song  that  my  paddle  sings. 

E.  Pauline  Johnson  [1862-1913] 


THE   GIPSY  TRAIL 

The  white  moth  to  the  closing  vine. 

The  bee  to  the  open  clover, 
And  the  gipsy  blood  to  the  gipsy  blood 

Ever  the  wide  world  over. 

Ever  the  wide  world  over,  lass. 

Ever  the  trail  held  true, 
Over  the  world  and  under  the  world. 

And  back  at  the  last  to  you. 

Out  of  the  dark  of  the  gorgio  camp. 
Out  of  the  grime  and  the  gray 

(Morning  waits  at  the  end  of  the  world), 
Gipsy,  come  away! 

The  wild  boar  to  the  sun-dried  swamp, 

The  red  crane  to  her  reed. 
And  the  Romany  lass  to  the  Romany  lad 

By  the  tie  of  a  roving  breed. 


1678  Poems  of  Nature 

Morning  waits  at  the  end  of  the  world 

Where  winds  unhaltered  play, 
Nipping  the  flanks  of  their  plunging  ranks, 

Till  the  white  sea-horses  neigh. 

The  pied  snake  to  the  rifted  rock, 

The  buck  to  the  stony  plain, 
And  the  Romany  lass  to  the  Romany  lad, 

And  both  to  the  road  again. 

Both  to  the  road  again,  again! 

Out  of  a  clean  sea-track — 
Follow  the  cross  of  the  gipsy  trail 

Over  the  world  and  back! 

Follow  the  Romany  patteran 

North  where  the  blue  bergs  sail, 
And  the  bows  are  gray  with  the  frozen  spray. 

And  the  masts  are  shod  with  mail. 

Follow  the  Romany  patteran 

Sheer  to  the  Austral  Light, 
Where  the  besom  of  God  is  the  wild  west  wind, 

Sweeping  the  sea-floors  white. 

Follow  the  Romany  patteran 

West  to  the  sinking  sun, 
Till  the  junk-sails  lift  through  the  houseless  drift, 

And  the  east  and  the  west  are  one. 

Follow  the  Romany  patteran 

East  where  the  silence  broods 
By  a  purple  wave  on  an  opal  beach 

In  the  hush  of  the  Mahim  woods. 

The  wild  hawk  to  the  wind-swept  sky, 

The  deer  to  the  wholesome  wold, 
And  the  heart  of  a  man  to  the  heart  of  a  maid, 

As  it  was  in  the  days  of  old. 


The  Footpath  Way  1679 

The  heart  of  a  man  to  the  heart  of  a  maid — 

Light  of  my  tents,  be  fleet! 
Morning  waits  at  the  end  of  the  world, 

And  the  world  is  all  at  our  feet ! 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 


WANDERLUST 

Beyond  the  East  the  sunrise,  beyond  the  West  the  sea, 
And  East  and  West  the  wanderlust  that  will  not  let  me  be; 
It  works  in  me  like  madness,  dear,  to  bid  me  say  good-by! 
For  the  seas  call  and  the  stars  call,  and  oh,  the  call  of  the  sky! 

I  know  not  where  the  white  road  runs,  nor  what  the  blue 

hills  are, 
But  man  can  have  the  sun  for  friend,  and  for  his  guide  a  star; 
And  there's  no  end  of  voyaging  when  once  the  voice  is  heard, 
For  the  river  calls  and  the  road  calls,  and  oh,  the  call  of  a 

bird! 

Yonder  the  long  horizon  lies,  and  there  by  night  and  day 
The  old  ships  draw  to  home  again,  the  young  ships  sail  away; 
And  come  I  may,  but  go  I  must,  and  if  men  ask  you  why. 
You  may  put  the  blame  on  the  stars  and  the  sun  and  the 
white  road  and  the  sky! 

Gerald  Gould  [1885-1916] 


THE  FOOTPATH  WAY 

The  winding  road  lies  white  and  bare. 
Heavy  in  dust  that  takes  the  glare; 
The  thirsty  hedgerows  and  parched  grass 
Dream  of  a  time  when  no  road  was. 

Beyond,  the  fields  are  full  in  view, 
Heavy  in  herbage  and  in  dew; 
The  great-eyed  kine  browse  thankfully; 
Come,  take  the  footpath  way  with  me! 


T..T 


i68o  Poems  of  Nature 

This  stile,  where  country  lovers  tryst, 
Where  many  a  man  and  maid  have  kissed; 
Invites  us  sweetly,  and  the  wood 
Beckons  us  to  her  solitude. 

Leave  men  and  lumbering  wains  behind, 
And  dusty  roads,  all  blank  and  blind; 
Come  tread  on  velvet  and  on  silk. 
Damasked  with  daisies,  white  as  milk. 

Those  dryads  of  the  wood,  that  some 

Call  the  wild  hyacinths,  now  are  come,  "-"'  _ 

And  hold  their  revels  in  a  night 

Of  emerald  flecked  with  candle-light. 

The  fountains  of  the  meadows  play, 
This  is  the  wild  bee's  holiday;  ''^  '^'"^^"^  "'^^  ^'^^"^ 
When  summer-snows  have  sweetly  dressed '  "  ' 
The  pasture  like  a  wedding-guest, 

By  fields  of  beans  that  shall  eclipse 
The  honey  on  the  rose's  lips, 
'(.  With  woodruff  and  the  new  hay's  breath, 

And  wild  thyme  sweetest  in  her  death, 

Skirting  the  rich  man's  lawn  and  hall, 
The  footpath  way  is  free  to  all; 
For  us  his  pinks  and  roses  blow: 
Fhng  him  thanksgiving  ere  we  go! 


By  orchards  yet  in  rosy  veils, 
By  hidden  nests  of  nightingales, 
Through  lonesome  valleys  where  all  day 
The  rabbit  people  scurry  and  play. 


The  footpath  sets  her  tender  lure. 
This  is  the  country  for  the  poor; 
The  high-road  seeks  the  crowded  sea; 
Come,  take  the  footpath  way  with  me! 

Katherine  Tynan  [1861- 


A   Maine  Trail  1681 


A  MAINE  TRAIL 

Come  follow,  heart  upon  your  sleeve, 

The  trail,  a-teasing  by, 
Past  tasseled  corn  and  fresh-mown  hay, 

Trim  barns  and  farm-house  shy, 
Past  hollyhocks  and  white  well-sweep, 

Through  pastures  bare  and  wild. 
Oh  come,  let's  fare  to  the  heart-o'-the-wood 

With  the  faith  of  a  little  child. 

Strike  in  by  the  gnarled  way  through  the  swamp 

Where  late  the  laurel  shone, 
An  intimate  close  where  you  meet  yourself 

And  come  unto  your  own, 
By  bouldered  brook  to  the  hidden  spring 

Where  breath  of  ferns  blows  sweet 
And  swift  birds  break  the  silence  as 

Their  shadows  cross  your  feet. 

Stout-hearted  thrust  through  gold-green  copse 

To  garner  the  woodland  glee, 
To  weave  a  garment  of  warm  delight, 

Of  sunspun  ecstasy ; 
'Twill  shield  you  all  winter  from  frosty  eyes, 

'Twill  shield  your  heart  from  cold; 
Such  greens! — how  the  Lord  Himself  loves  green! 

Such  sun! — how  He  loves  the  gold! 

Then  on  till  flaming  fireweed 

Is  quenched  in  forest  deep; 
Tread  soft!    The  sumptuous  paven  moss 

Is  spread  for  Dryads'  sleep; 
And  list  ten  thousand  thousand  spruce 

Lift  up  their  voice  to  God^ 
We  can  a  little  understand, 

Born  of  the  self-same  sod. 

Oh  come,  the  welcoming  trees  lead  on, 

Their  guests  are-we  to-day; 
Shy  violets  smile,  proud  branches  bow, 

Gay  mushrooms  mark  the  way; 


1 682  Poems  of  Nature 

The  silence  is  a  courtesy, 
The  well-bred  calm  of  kings; 

Come  haste!  the  hour  sets  its  face 
Unto  great  Happenings. 

Gertrude  Huntington  McGiJJert  [i8    - 

AFOOT 

Comes  the  lure  of  green  things  growing, 
Comes  the  call  of  waters  flowing — 

And  the  wayfarer  desire 
Moves  and  wakes  and  would  be  going. 

Hark  the  migrant  hosts  of  June 
Marching  nearer  noon  by  noon! 
Hark  the  gossip  of  the  grasses 
Bivouacked  beneath  the  moon! 

Long  the  quest  and  far  the  ending 
When  my  wayfarer  is  wending — • 

When  desire  is  once  afoot, 
Doom  behind  and  dream  attending! 

In  his  ears  the  phantom  chime 
Of  incommunicable  rhyme. 

He  shall  chase  the  fleeting  camp-fires 
Of  the  Bedouins  of  Time. 

Farer  by  uncharted  ways, 

Dumb  as  death  to  plaint  or  praise, 

Unreturning  he  shall  journey, 
FeUow  to  the  nights  and  days; 

TiU  upon  the  outer  bar 

StUled  the  moaning  currents  are. 

Till  the  flame  achieves  the  zenith, 
TiU  the  moth  attains  the  star. 

Till  through  laughter  and  through  tears 
Fair  the  final  peace  appears. 

And  about  the  watered  pastures 
Sink  to  sleep  the  nomad  years! 

Charles  G.  D.  Roberts  [i860- 


From   Romany  to   Rome  1683 

FROM  ROMANY  TO  ROME 

Upon  the  road  to  Romany 

It's  stay,  friend,  stay! 
There's  lots  0'  love  and  lots  o'  time 

To  linger  on  the  way; 
Poppies  for  the  twilight, 

Roses  for  the  noon, 
It's  happy  goes  as  lucky  goes 

To  Romany  in  June. 

But  on  the  road  to  Rome— oh, 

It's  march,  man,  march! 
The  dust  is  on  the  chariot  wheels, 

The  sere  is  on  the  larch, 
Helmets  and  javelins 

And  bridles  flecked  with  foam — 
The  flowers  are  dead,  the  world's  ahead 

Upon  the  road  to  Rome. 

But  on  the  road  to  Rome — ah, 

It's  fight,  man,  fight! 
Footman  and  horseman 

Treading  left  and  right. 
Camp-fires  and  watch-fires 

Ruddying  the  gloam — 
The  fields  are  gray  and  worn  away 

Along  the  road  to  Rome. 

Upon  the  road  to  Romany 

It's  sing,  boys,  sing! 
Though  rag  and  pack  be  on  our  back 

We'll  whistle  to  the  King. 
Wine  is  in  the  sunshine. 

Madness  in  the  moon. 
And  de'il  may  care  the  road  we  fare 

To  Romany  in  June. 

Along  the  road  to  Rome,  alas! 

The  glorious  dust  is  whirled. 
Strong  hearts  are  fierce  to  see 

The  City  of  the  World, 


1684  Poems  of  Nature 

Yet  footfall  or  bugle-call 
Or  thunder  as  ye  will, 

Upon  the  road  to  Romany 
The  birds  are  calling  still! 

Wallace  Irwin  [1875- 


THE  TOIL  OF  THE  TRAIL 

What  have  I  gained  by  the  toil  of  the  trail? 
I  know  and  know  well. 
I  have  found  once  again  the  lore  I  had  lost 
In  the  loud  city's  hell. 

I  have  broadened  my  hand  to  the  cinch  and  the  axe, 

I  have  laid  my  flesh  to  the  rain ; 

I  was  hunter  and  trailer  and  guide; 

I  have  touched  the  most  primitive  wildness  again. 

I  have  threaded  the  wild  with  the  stealth  of  the  deer. 
No  eagle  is  freer  than  I; 

No  mountain  can  thwart  me,  no  torrent  appall, 
I  defy  the  stern  sky. 
So  long  as  I  live  these  joys  will  remain, 
I  have  touched  the  most  primitive  wildness  again. 
Hamlin  Garland  [1860- 


DO  YOU  FEAR  THE  WIND? 

Do  you  fear  the  force  of  the  wind, 

The  slash  of  the  rain? 

Go  face  them  and  fight  them. 

Be  savage  again. 

Go  hungry  and  cold  like  the  wolf, 

Go  wade  like  the  crane: 
The  palms  of  your  hands  will  thicken, 
The  skin  of  your  cheek  wiU  tan, 
You'll  grow  ragged  and  weary  and  swarthy, 

But  you'll  walk  like  a  man! 

Hamlin  Garland  [i860- 


The   King's   Highway  1685 

jlkioj  ^jjj,   KING'S  HIGHWAY 

"  El  Camino  Real  " 

All  in  the  golden  weather,  forth  let  us  ride  to-day, 
You  and  I  together,  on  the  King's  Highway, 
The  blue  skies  above  us,  and  below  the  shining  sea; 
There's  many  a  road  to  travel,  but  it's  this  road  for  me. 

It's  a  long  road  and  sunny,  and  the  fairest  in  the  world — 

There  are  peaks  that  rise  above  it  in  their  snowy  mantles 
curled, 

And  it  leads  from  the  mountains  through  a  hedge  of  chap- 
arral, 

Down  to  the  waters  where  the  sea  gulls  call. 

It's  a  long  road  and  sunny,  it's  a  long  road  and  old. 
And  the  brown  padres  made  it  for  the  flocks  of  the  fold ; 
They  made  it  for  the  sandals  of  the  sinner- folk  that  trod 
From  the  fields  in  the  open  to  the  shelter-house  of  God. 

They  made  it  for  the  sandals  of  the  sinner-folk  of  old ; 
Now  the  flocks  they  are  scattered  and  death  keeps  the  fold; 
But  you  and  I  together  we  will  take  the  road  to-day, 
With  the  breath  in  our  nostrils,  on  the  King's  Highway. 

We  will  take  the  road  together  through  the  morning's  golden 

glow, 
And  we'll  dream  of  those  who  trod  it  in  the  mellowed  long 

ago; 
We  wiU  stop  at  the  Missions  where  the  sleeping  padres  lay, 
And  we'll  bend  a  knee  above  them  for  their  souls'  sake  to 

pray. 

We'll  ride  through  the  valleys  where  the  blossom's  on  the 

tree, 
Through  the  orchards  and  the  meadows  with  the  bird  and 

the  bee, 
And  we'll  take  the  rising  hills  where  the  manzanitas  grow, 
Past  the  gray  tails  of  waterfalls  where  blue  violets  blow. 


1 586  Poems  of  Nature 

Old  Conquistadores,  O  brown  priests  and  all, 
Give  us  your  ghosts  for  company  when  night  begins  to  fall ; 
There's  many  a  road  to  travel,  but  it's  this  road  to-day. 
With  the  breath  of  God  about  us  on  the  King's  Highway. 
John  S.  McGroarty  [1862- 

THE  FORBIDDEN  LURE 

"Leave  all  and  follow — follow!" 

Lure  of  the  sun  at  dawn, 
Lure  of  a  wind-paced  hollow, 

Lure  of  the  stars  withdrawn; 
Lure  of  the  brave  old  singing 

Brave  perished  minstrels  knew; 
Of  dreams  like  sea-fog  clinging 

To  boughs  the  night  sifts  through: 

"Leave  all  and  follow — follow!" 

The  sun  goes  up  the  day;  ,^, ,-, 

Flickering  wing  of  swallow,  ,.  ; 

Blossoms  that  blow  away, — 
What  would  you,  luring,  luring. 

When  I  must  bide  at  home? 
My  heart  will  break  her  mooring 

And  die  in  reef-flung  foam! 

Oh,  I  must  never  listen. 

Call  not  outside  my  door. 
Green  leaves,  you  must  not  ghsten 

Like  water,  any  more. 
Oh,  Beauty,  wandering  Beauty, 

Pass  by;  speak  not.    For  see, 
By  bed  and  board  stands  Duty 

To  snatch  my  dreams  from  me! 

Fannie  Stearns  Davis  [1884- 

THE  WANDER-LOVERS 

Down  the  world  with  Marna! 
That's  the  life  for  me! 
Wandering  with  the  wandering  wind, 
Vagabond  and  unconfined! 


The  Wander- Lovers  1687 


Roving  with  the  roving  rain 
Its  unboundaried  domain! 
Kith  and  kin  of  wander-kind, 
Children  of  the  sea! 

Petrels  of  the  sea-drift! 
Swallows  of  the  lea! 
Arabs  of  the  whole  wide  girth 
Of  the  wind-encircled  earth! 
In  all  climes  we  pitch  our  tents, 
Cronies  of  the  elements, 
With  the  secret  lords  of  birth 
Intimate  and  free. 

All  the  seaboard  knows  us 
From  Fundy  to  the  Keys; 
Every  bend  and  every  creek 
Of  abundant  Chesapeake; 
Ardise  hills  and  Newport  coves 
And  the  far-ofif  orange  groves, 
Where  Floridian  oceans  break, 
Tropic  tiger  seas. 

Down  the  world  with  Marna, 
Tarrying  there  and  here ! 
Just  as  much  at  home  in  Spain 
As  in  Tangier  or  Touraine! 
Shakespeare's  Avon  knows  us  well, 
And  the  crags  of  Neufchatel; 
And  the  ancient  Nile  is  fain 
Of  our  coming  near. 

Down  the  world  with  Mama, 
Daughter  of  the  air! 
Marna  of  the  subtle  grace, 
And  the  vision  in  her  face! 
Moving  in  the  measures  trod 
By  the  angels  before  God ! 
With  her  sky-blue  eyes  amaze 
And  her  sea-blue  hair! 


1 688  Poems  of  Nature 

Marna  with  the  trees'  life  i' V'  'i,Sl 
In  her  veins  a-stir! 
Marna  of  the  aspen  heart 
Where  the  sudden  quivers  start! 
Quick-responsive,  subtle,  wild! 
Artless  as  an  artless  child. 
Spite  of  all  her  reach  of  art ! 
Oh,  to  roam  with  her! 

Marna  with  the  wind's  will, 
Daughter  of  the  sea! 
Marna  of  the  quick  disdain, 
Starting  at  the  dream  of  stain! 
At  a  smile  with  love  aglow, 
At  a  frown  a  statued  woe. 
Standing  pinnacled  in  pain 
Till  a  kiss  sets  free! 

Down  the  world  with  Marna, 
Daughter  of  the  fire! 
Marna  of  the  deathless  hope, 
Still  alert  to  win  new  scope 
Where  the  wings  of  life  may  spread 
For  a  flight  unhazarded ! 
Dreaming  of  the  speech  to  cope 
With  the  heart's  desire! 

Marna  of  the  far  quest 
After  the  divine! 
Striving  ever  for  some  goal 
Past  the  blunder-god's  control! 
Dreaming  of  potential  years 
When  no  day  shall  dawn  in  fears! 
That's  the  Marna  of  my  soul, 
Wander-bride  of  mine! 

Richard  Hovey  [i  864-1  goo] 

THE  SEA  GIPSY 

I  AM  fevered  with  the  sunset, 
I  am  fretful  with  the  bay, 
For  the  wander-thirst  is  on  me 
And  my  soul  is  in  Cathay. 


Spring  Song  1689 

There's  a  schooner  in  the  offing, 
With  her  topsails  shot  with  tire, 
And  my  heart  has  gone  aboard  her 
For  the  Islands  of  Desire. 

I  must  forth  again  to-morrow! 
With  the  sunset  I  must  be 
Hull  down  on  the  trail  of  rapture 
In  the  wonder  of  the  Sea. 

Richard  Hovey  [i  864-1 900] 


A  VAGABOND   SONG 

There  is  something  in  the  autumn  that  is  native  to  my 

blood — 
Touch  of  manner,  hint  of  mood; 
And  my  heart  is  like  a  rhyme, 
With  the  yellow  and  the  purple  and  the  crimson  keeping 

time. 

The  scarlet  of  the  maples  can  shake  me  like  a  cry 

Of  bugles  going  by. 

And  my  lonely  spirit  thrills 

To  see  the  frosty  asters  like  a  smoke  upon  the  hills. 

There  is  something  in  October  sets  the  gipsy  blood  astir; 
We  must  rise  and  follow  her, 
When  from  every  hill  of  flame  ' 

She  calls  and  calls  each  vagabond  by  name. 

Bliss  Carman  [1861- 


SPRING  SONG, 

Make  me  over,  Mother  April, 
When  the  sap  beings  to  stir! 
When  thy  flowery  hand  delivers 
All  the  mountain-prisoned  rivers, 
And  thy  great  heart  beats  and  quivers 
To  revive  the  days  that  were. 
Make  me  over,  Mother  April, 
When  the  sap  begins  to  stir! 


1690 


Poems  of  Nature 

Take  my  dust  and  all  my  dreaming, 
Count  my  heart-beats  one  by  one, 
Send  them  where  the  winters  perish; 
Then  some  golden  noon  recherish 
And  restore  them  in  the  sun. 
Flower  and  scent  and  dust  and  dreaming, 
With  their  heart-beats  every  one! 

Set  me  in  the  urge  and  tide-drift 

Of  the  streaming  hosts  a-wing! 

Breast  of  scarlet,  throat  of  yellow, 

Raucous  challenge,  wooings  mellow — 

Every  migrant  is  my  fellow, 

Making  northward  with  the  spring.  jj 

Set  me  in  the  urge  and  tide-drift 

Of  the  streaming  hosts  a-wing! 

ShriUing  pipe  or  fluting  whistle. 

In  the  valleys  come  again; 

Fife  of  frog  and  call  of  tree-toad. 

All  my  brothers,  five  or  three-toed,  ^jj 

With  their  revel  no  more  vetoed. 

Making  music  in  the  rain; 

Shrilling  pipe  or  fluting  whistle, 

In  the  valleys  come  again. 

Make  me  of  thy  seed  to-morrow, 
When  the  sap  begins  to  stir! 
Tawny  light-foot,  sleepy  bruin. 
Bright-eyes  in  the  orchard  ruin, 
Gnarl  the  good  life  goes  askew  in, 
Whiskey-jack,  or  tanager,— 
Make  me  anything  to-morrow, 
When  the  sap  begins  to  stir! 

Make  me  even  (How  do  I  know?) 

Like  my  friend  the  gargoyle  there; 

It  may  be  the  heart  within  him 

Swells  that  doltish  hands  should  pin  him 

Fixed  forever  in  mid-air. 

Make  me  even  sport  for  swallows, 

Like  the  soaring  gargoyle  there! 


spring  Song  1691 

Give  me  the  old  clue  to  follow, 
Through  the  labyrinth  of  night! 
Clod  of  clay  with  heart  of  fire, 
Things  that  burrow  and  aspire. 
With  the  vanishing  desire, 
For  the  perishing  delight, — 
Only  the  old  clue  to  follow. 
Through  the  labyrinth  of  night! 

Make  me  over.  Mother  April, 
When  the  sap  begins  to  stir! 
Eashion  me  from  swamp  or  meadow, 
Garden  plot  or  ferny  shadow. 
Hyacinth  or  humble  burr! 
Make  me  over,  Mother  April, 
When  the  sap  begins  to  stir! 

Let  me  hear  the  far,  low  summons, 
When  the  silver  winds  return ; 
Rills  that  run  and  streams  that  stammer, 
Goldenwing  with  his  loud  hammer, 
Icy  brooks  that  brawl  and  clamor. 
Where  the  Indian  willows  burn; 
Let  me  hearken  to  the  calling. 
When  the  silver  winds  return. 

Till  recurring  and  recurring, 
Lbng  -since  wandered  and  come  back. 
Like  a  whim  of  Grieg's  or  Gounod's, 
This  same  self,  bird,  bud,  or  Bluenose, 
Some  day  I  may  capture  (Who  knows?) 
Just  the  one  last  joy  I  lack. 
Waking  to  the  far  new  summons, 
When  the  old  spring  winds  come  back. 

For  I  have  no  choice  of  being. 
When  the  sap  begins  to  climb, — 
Strong  insistence,  sweet  intrusion,  /'' 
Vasts  and  verges  of  illusion, — 
So  I  win,  to  time's  confusion, 
The  one  perfect  pearl  of  time, 


1692  Poems  of  Nature 

Joy  and  joy  and  joy  forever, 
Till  the  sap  forgets  to  climb ! 

Make  me  over  in  the  morning 
From  the  rag-bag  of  the  world! 
Scraps  of  dream  and  duds  of  daring, 
Home-brought  stuff  from  far  sea-faring, 
Faded  colors  once  so  flaring, 
Shreds  of  banners  long  since  furled ! 
Hues  of  ash  and  glints  of  glory, 
In  the  rag-bag  of  the  world! 

Let  me  taste  the  old  immortal 
Indolence  of  Hfe  once  more; 
Not  recalling  nor  foreseeing. 
Let  the  great  slow  joys  of  being 
Well  my  heart  through  as  of  yore! 
Let  me  taste  the  old  immortal 
Indolence  of  life  once  more ! 

Give  me  the  old  drink  for  rapture, 

The  delirium  to  drain, 

All  my  fellows  drank  in  plenty 

At  the  Three  Score  Inns  and  Twenty 

From  the  mountains  to  the  main ! 

Give  me  the  old  drink  for  rapture,  , 

The  delirium  to  drain! 

Only  make  me  over,  April, 
When  the  sap  begins  to  stir! 
Make  me  man  or  make  me  woman, 
Make  me  oaf  or  ape  or  human, 
Cup  of  flower  or  cone  of  fir; 
Make  me  anything  but  neuter 
When  the  sap  begins  to  stir! 

Bliss  Carman  [1861- 

THE  MENDICANTS 

We  are  as  mendicants  who  wait 
Along  the  roadside  in  the  sun. 

Tatters  of  yesterday  and  shreds 
Of  morrow  clothe  us  every  one. 


The   Mendicants  1693 

And  some  are  dotards,  who  believe 
And  glory  in  the  days  of  old;  ;! 

While  some  are  dreamers,  harping  still 
Upon  an  unknown  age  of  gold. 

Hopeless  or  witless!    Not  one  heeds, 
As  lavish  Time  comes  down  the  way 

And  tosses  in  the  suppliant  hat 

One  great  new-minted  gold  To-day. 

Ungrateful  heart  and  grudging  thanks, 

His  beggar's  wisdom  only  sees 
Housing  and  bread  and  beer  enough; 

He  knows  no  other  things  than  these. 

O  foolish  ones,  put  by  your  care! 

Where  wants  are  many,  joys  are  few; 
And  at  the  wilding  springs  of  peace, 

God  keeps  an  open  house  for  you. 

But  that  some  Fortunatus'  gift 

Is  lying  there  within  his  hand. 
More  costly  than  a  pot  of  pearls, 

His  dullness  does  not  understand. 

And  so  his  creature  heart  is  filled; 

His  shrunken  self  goes  starved  away. 
Let  him  wear  brand-new  garments  still, 

Who  has  a  tJireadbare  soul,  I  say. 

But  there  be  others,  happier  few, 

The  vagabondish  sons  of  God, 
Who  know  the  by-ways  and  the  flowers, 

And  care  not  how  the  world  may  plod. 

They  idle  down  the  traffic  lands. 

And  loiter  through  the  woods  with  spring; 

To  them  the  glory  of  the  earth 
Is  but  to  hear  a  bluebird  sing. 


Poems  of  Nature 

They  too  receive  each  one  his  Day; 

But  their  wise  heart  knows  many  things 
Beyond  the  sating  of  desire, 

Above  the  dignity  of  kings. 

One  I  remember  kept  his  coin, 
And  laughing  flipped  it  in  the  air; 

But  when  two  strolHng  pipe-players 
Came  by,  he  tossed  it  to  the  pair. 

Spendthrift  of  joy,  his  childish  heart 
Danced  to  their  wild  outlandish  bars; 

Then  supperless  he  laid  him  down 

That  night,  and  sleipt  beneath  the  stars. 
Bliss  Carman  fi86i- 


THE  JOYS  OF  THE  ROAD 

Now  the  joys  of  the  road  are  chiefly  these: 
A  crimson  touch  on  the  hard-wood  trees; 

A  vagrant's  morning  wide  and  blue, 
In  early  fall,  when  the  wind  walks,  too; 

A  shadowy  highway  cool  and  brown 
Alluring  up  and  enticing  down 

From  rippled  water  to  dappled  swamp, 
From  purple  glory  to  scarlet  pomp; 

The  outward  eye,  the  quiet  will. 

And  the  striding  heart  from  hill  to  hill; 

The  tempter  apple  over  the  fence; 

The  cobweb  bloom  on  the  yellow  quince; 

The  palish  asters  along  the  wood, — 
A  lyric  touch  of  the  solitude; 

An  open  hand,  an  easy  shoe, 

And  a  hope  to  make  the  day  go  through, — 

Another  to  sleep  with,  and  a  third 
To  wake  me  up  at  the  voice  of  a  bird; 


The  Joys  of  the   Road  1695 

The  resonant  far-listening  morn, 
And  the  hoarse  whisper  of  the  corn; 

The  crickets  mourning  their  comrades  lost, 
In  the  night's  retreat  from  the  gathering  frost; 

(Or  is  it  their  slogan,  plaintive  and  shrill, 
As  they  beat  on  their  corselets,  valiant  still?) 

A  hunger  fit  for  the  kings  of  the  sea, 
And  a  loaf  of  bread  for  Dickon  and  me; 

A  thirst  like  that  of  the  Thirsty  Sword, 
And  a  jug  of  cider  on  the  board; 

An  idle  noon,  a  bubbling  spring, 
The  sea  in  the  pine-tops  murmuring; 

A  scrap  of  gossip  at  the  ferry; 

A  comrade  neither  glum  nor  merry, 

Asking  nothing,  revealing  naught. 

But  minting  his  words  from  a  fund  of  thought, 

A  keeper  of  silence  eloquent, 
Needy,  yet  royally  well  content. 

Of  the  mettled  breed,  yet  abhorring  strife, 
And  full  of  the  mellow  juice  of  life, 

A  taster  of  wine,  with  an  eye  for  a  maid, 
Never  too  bold,  and  never  afraid. 

Never  heart-whole,  never  heart-sick, 
(These  are  the  things  I  worship  in  Dick' 

No  fidget  and  no  reformer,  just 

A  calm  observer  of  ought  and  must, 

A  lover  of  books,  but  a  reader  of  man. 
No  cynic  and  no  charlatan. 

Who  never  defers  and  never  demands, 

But,  smiling,  takes  the  world  in  his  hands, — 


1696  Poems  of   Nature 

Seeing  it  good  as  when  God  first  saw  ->•?  ^rfT 

And  gave  it  the  weight  of  his  will  for  law. 

And  O  the  joy  that  is  never  won, 

But  follows  and  follows  the  journeying  sun, 

By  marsh  and  tide,  by  meadow  and  stream, 
A  vvill-o'-thewind,  a  light-o'-dream, 

Delusion  afar,  delight  anear, 

From  morrow  to  morrow,  from  year  to  year, 

A  jack-o'-lantern,  a  fairy  fire, 
A  dare,  a  bliss,  and  a  desire! 

The  racy  smell  of  the  forest  loam. 

When  the  stealthy,  sad-heart  leaves  go  home; 

(O  leaves,  O  leaves,  I  am  one  with  you, 

Of  the  mould  and  the  sun  and  the  wind  and  the  dew!) 

The  broad  gold  wake  of  the  afternoon; 
The  silent  fleck  of  the  cold  new  moon; 

The  sound  of  the  hollow  sea's  release 
From  stormy  tumult  to  starry  peace; 

With  only  another  league  to  wend; 

And  two  brown  arms  at  the  journey's  end! 

These  are  the  joys  of  the  open  road— 
For  him  who  travels  without  a  load. 

Bliss  Carman  [1861- 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  FOREST  RANGER 

Oh,  to  feel  the  fresh  breeze  blowing 
From  lone  ridges  yet  untrod! 

Oh,  to  see  the  far  peak  growing 
Whiter  as  it  climbs  to  God! 


The  Song  of  the   Forest   Ranger     1697 

Where  the  silver  streamlet  rushes 

I  would  follow — follow  on 
Till  I  heard  the  happy  thrushes 

Piping  lyrics  to  the  dawn. 

I  would  hear  the  wild  rejoicing 

Of  the  wind-blown  cedar  tree, 
Hear  the  sturdy  hemlock  voicing 

Ancient  epics  of  the  sea. 

Forest  aisles  would  I  be  winding, 

Out  beyond  the  gates  of  Care; 
And,  in  dim  cathedrals,  finding 

Silence  at  the  shrine  of  Prayer. 

When  the  mystic  night  comes  stealing 
Through  my  vast,  green  room  afar, 

Never  king  had  richer  ceiling — 
Bended  bough  and  yellow  star! 

Ah,  to  list  the  sacred  preaching 

Of  the  forest's  faithful  fir. 
With  his  strong  arms  upward  reaching — 

Mighty,  trustful  worshipper! 

Come  and  learn  the  joy  of  living! 

Come  and  you  will  understand 
How  the  sun  his  gold  is  giving 

With  a  great,  impartial  hand! 

How  the  patient  pine  is  climbing, 

Year  by  year  to  gain  the  sky; 
How  the  rill  makes  sweetest  rhyming, 

Where  the  deepest  shadows  lie. 

I  am  nearer  the  great  Giver, 

Where  His  handiwork  is  crude; 
Friend  am  I  of  peak  and  river, 

Comrade  of  old  Solitude. 


1698  Poems  of  Nature  IF 

Not  for  me  the  city's  riot! 

Not  for  me  the  towers  of  Trade! 
I  would  seek  the  house  of  Quiet, 

That  the  Master  Workman  made! 

Herbert  Basliford  [1871- 


A  DROVER 

To  ISIeath  of  the  pastures, 
From  wet  hills  by  the  sea. 
Through  Leitrim  and  Longford, 
Go  my  cattle  and  me. 

I  hear  in  the  darkness 
Their  slipping  and  breathing — 
I  name  them  the  bye-ways 
They're  to  pass  without  heeding; 

Then  the  wet,  winding  roads, 
Brown  bogs  with  black  water; 
And  my  thoughts  on  white  ships 
And  the  King  o'  Spain's  daughter. 

O!  farmer,  strong  farmer! 
You  can  spend  at  the  fair; 
But  your  face  you  must  turn 
To  your  crops  and  your  care. 

And  soldiers— red  soldiers! 
You've  seen  many  lands; 
But  you  walk  two  by  two. 
And  by  captain's  commands. 

O!  the  smell  of  the  beasts. 
The  wet  wind  in  the  morn; 
And  the  proud  and  hard  earth 
Never  broken  for  corn ; 

And  the  crowds  at  the  fair. 
The  herds  loosened  and  blind. 
Loud  words  and  dark  faces 
And  the  wild  blood  behind. ... 


Ballad  of  Low-Lie-Down  1699 

(O!  strong  men,  with  your  best 
I  would  strive  breast  to  breast, 
I  could  quiet  your  herds 
With  my  words,  with  my  words.) 

I  will  bring  you,  my  kine, 
Where  there's  grass  to  the  knee; 
But  you'll  think  of  scant  croppings 
Harsh  with  salt  of  the  sea. 

Padriac  Colum  fiSSi- 


BALLAD  OF  LOW-LIE-DOWN 

JoHN-A-DREAMS  and  Harum-Scarum 

Came  a-riding  into  town: 
At  the  Sign  o'  the  Jug-and- Jorum 

There  they  met  wdth  Low-lie-down, 

Brave  in  shoes  of  Romany  leather, 
Bodice  blue  and  gypsy  gown, 

And  a  cap  of  fur  and  feather. 
In  the  inn  sat  Low-lie-down. 

Harum-Scarum  kissed  her  lightly. 
Smiled  into  her  eyes  of  brown: 

Clasped  her  waist  and  held  her  tightly. 
Laughing,  "Love  me,  Low-lie-down!" 

Then  with  many  an  oath  and  swagger, 

As  a  man  of  great  renown. 
On  the  board  he  clapped  his  dagger, 

Called  for  sack  and  sat  him  down. 

So  a  while  they  laughed  together; 

Then  he  rose  and  with  a  frown 
Sighed,  "While  still  'tis  pleasant  weather, 

1  must  leave  thee,  Low-lie-down." 

So  away  rode  Harum-Scarum; 

With  a  song  rode  out  of  town; 
At  the  Sign  o'  the  Jug-and -Jorum 

Weeping  tarried  Low -lie-down. 


lyoo  Poems  of  Nature'fi'^l 

Then  this  John-a-dreams,  in  tatters, 

In  his  pocket  ne'er  a  crown, 
Touched  her,  saying,  "Wench,  what  matters! 

Dry  your  eyes  and,  come,  sit  down. 

"Here's  my  hand:  we'll  roam  together, 

Far  away  from  thorp  and  town. 
Here's  my  heart, — for  any  weather, — 

And  my  dreams,  too,  Low-He-down. 

"Some  men  call  me  dreamer,  poet: 
Some  men  call  me  fool  and  clown — ■ 

What  I  am  but  you  shall  know  it. 
Only  you,  sweet  Low-lie-down." 

For  a  little  while  she  pondered: 

Smiled:  then  said,  "Let  care  go  drown!" 

Up  and  kissed  him.  .  .  .    Forth  they  wandered, 
John-a-dreams  and  Low-lie-down. 

Madison  Cawciii  [1865-1914] 

THE  GOOD  INN 

From  "The  Inn  of  the  Silver  Moon." 

What  care  if  the  day 

Be  turned  to  gray. 

What  care  if  the  night  come  soon! 

We  may  choose  the  pace 

Who  bow  for  grace 

At  the  Inn  of  the  Silver  Moon. 

Ah,  hurrying  Sirs, 

Drive  deep  your  spurs. 

For  it's  far  to  the  steepled  town 

Where  the  wallet's  weight 

Shall  fix  your  state 

And  buy  for  ye  smile  or  frown. 

Through  our  tiles  of  green 

Do  the  stars  between 

Laugh  down  from  the  skies  of  June, 

And  there's  naught  to  pay 

For  a  couch  of  hay 

At  the  Inn  of  the  Silver  Moon. 


Night  for  Adventures  1701 

You  laboring  lout, 

Pull  out,  pull  out, 

With  a  hand  to  the  creaking  tire, 

For  it's  many  a  mile 

By  path  and  stile 

To  the  old  wife  crouched  by  the  fire. 

But  the  door  is  wide 

In  the  hedgerow  side, 

And  we  ask  not  bowl  nor  spoon 

Whose  draught  of  must 

Makes  soft  the  crust 

At  the  Inn  of  the  Silver  Moon. 

Then,  here's  to  the  Inn 

Of  the  empty  bin, 

To  the  Host  of  the  trackless  dune! 

And  here's  to  the  friend 

Of  the  journey's  end 

At  the  Inn  of  the  Silver  Moon. 

Herman  Knickerbocker  Vide  [i 856-1 908] 

NIGHT  FOR  ADVENTURES 

SOMETIMES   when   fragrant   summer   dusk   comes  in   with 
scent  of  rose  and  musk 
And  scatters  from  their  sable  husk  the  stars  like  yellow 
grain, 
Oh,  then  the  ancient  longing  comes  that  lures  me  like  a 
roll  of  drums 
To  follow  where  the  cricket  strums  his  banjo  in  the  lane. 

And  when  the  August  moon  comes  up  and  like  a  shallow, 
silver  cup 
Pours  out  upon  the  fields  and  roads  her  amber-colored 
beams, 
A  leafy  whisper  mounts  and  calls  from  out  the  forest's  moss- 
grown  halls 
To  leave  the  city's  somber  walls  and  take  the  road  of 
dreams. 

A  call  that  bids  me  rise  and  strip,  and,  naked  all  from  toe 
to  lip. 


1702  Poems  of  Nature 

To  wander  where  the  dewdrops  drip  from  off  the  silent 
trees, 
And  where  the  hairy  spiders  spin  their  nets  of  silver,  fragile- 
thin, 

And  out  to  where  the  fields  begin,  like  down  upon  tlie 
breeze. 

Into  a  silver  pool  to  plunge,  and  like  a  great  trout  wheel 
and  lunge 
Among  the  lily-bonnets  and  the  stars  reflected  there; 
With  face  upturned  to  lie  afloat,  with  moonbeams  rippling 
round  my  throat, 
And  from  the  slimy  grasses  plait  a  chaplet  for  my  hair. 

Then,  leaping  from  my  rustic  bath,  to  take  some  winding 
meadow-path: 
Across  the  fields  of  aftermath  to  run  with  flying  feet. 
And  feel  the  dewdrop-weighted  grass  that  bends  beneath 
me  as  I  pass, 
Where  solemn  trees  in  shadowy  mass  beyond  the  high- 
way meet. 

And,  plunging  deep  within  the  woods,  among  the  leaf-hung, 
solittides 
Where  scarce  one  timid  star  intrudes  into  the  breathless 
gloom , 
Go  leaping  down  some  fern-hid  way  to  scare  the  rabbits  in 
their  play, 
And  see  the  owl,  a  fantom  gray,  drift  by  on  silent  plume. 

To  fling  me  down  at  length  and  rest  upon  some  damp  and 

mossy  nest, 

And  hear  the  choir  of  surpliced  frogs  strike  up  a  bubbling 

tunc; 

And  watch,  above  the  dreaming  trees,  Orion  and  the  Hyades 

And  all  the  stars,  like  golden  bees,  around  the  lily-moon. 

Then- who  can  say  if  I  have  gone  a-gipsying  from  dusk  till 
dawn 
In  company  with   fay  and   faun,  where  firefly-lanterns 
gleam? 


The  Foreloper  1703 

And  have  I  danced  on  cobwebs  thin  to  Master  Locust's 
mandohn — 
Or  I  have  spent  the  night  in  bed,  and  was  it  all  a  dream? 

Victor  Slarhiick  [1887- 

SONG 

From  "  The  Way  of  Perfect  Love  "  ' 

Something  calls  and  whispers,  along  the  city  street, 
Through  shrill  cries  of  children  and  soft  stir  of  feet, 
And  makes  my  blood  to  quicken  and  makes  my  flesh  to  pine. 
The  mountains  are  calling;  the  winds  wake  the  pine. 

Past  the  quivering  poplars  that  tell  of  water  near 

The  long  road  is  sleeping,  the  white  road  is  clear. 

Yet  scent  and  touch  can  summon,  afar  from  brook  and  tree, 

The  deep  boom  of  surges,  the  gray  waste  of  sea. 

Sweet  to  dream  and  linger,  in  windless  orchard  close, 
On  bright  brows  of  ladies  to  garland  the  rose. 
But  all  the  time  are  glowing,  beyond  this  little  world. 
The  still  light  of  planets  and  the  star-swarms  whirled. 
Gcorgiana  Goddard  King  [1871- 

THE  FORELOPER 

The  gull  shall  whistle  in  his  wake,  the  blind  wave  break  in 

fire, 
He  shall  fulfill  God's  utmost  will  unknowing  His  desire; 
And  he  shall  see  old  planets  pass  and  alien  stars  arise, 
And  give  the  gale  his  reckless  sail  in  shadow  of  new  skies. 
Strong  lust  of  gear  shall  drive  him  out  and  hunger  arm  his 

hand 
To  wring  his  food  from  a  desert  nude,  his  foothold  from  the 

sand. 
His  neighbors'  smoke  shall  vex  his  eyes,  their  voices  break 

his  rest. 
He  shall  go  forth  till  South  is  North,  sullen  and  dispossessed. 

And  he  shall  desire  loneliness,  and  his  desire  shall  bring 
Hard  on  his  heels  a  thousand  wheels,  a  people,  and  a  king; 
And  he  shall  come  back  in  his  own  track,  and  by  his  scarce- 
cool  camp; 


1704  Poems  of  Nature 

There  he  shall  meet  the  roaring  street,  the  derrick,  and  the 

stamp; 
For  he  must  blaze  a  nation's  ways  with  hatchet  and  with 

brand. 
Till  on  his  last-won  wilderness  an  Empire's  bulwarks  stand. 

Riidyard  Kipling  [1865- 

THE  LONG  TRAIL 

There's  a  whisper  down  the  field  where  the  year  has  shot 
her  yield, 
And  the  ricks  stand  gray  to  the  sun, 
Singing:  "Over  then,  come  over,  for  the  bee  has  quit  the 
clover,  ,' 

And  your  English  summer's  done." 
You  have  heard  the  beat  of  the  off-shore  wind, 
And  the  thresh  of  the  deep-sea  rain; 
You  have  heard  the  song — how  long!  how  long! 
Pull  out  on  the  trail  again! 

Ha'  done  with  the  Tents  of  Shem,  dear  lass, 

We've  seen  the  seasons  through. 

And  it's  time  to  turn  on  the  old  trail,  our  own  trail,  the  out 

trail. 
Pull  out,  pull  out,  on  the  Long  Trail — the  trail  that  is  always 

new! 

It's  North  you  may  run  to  the  rime-ringed  sun, 

Or  South  to  the  blind  Horn's  hate; 
Or  East  all  the  way  into  Mississippi  Bay, 
Or  West  to  the  Golden  Gate; 

Where  the  blindest  bluffs  hold  good,  dear  lass, 

And  the  wildest  tales  are  true. 

And  the  men  bulk  big  on  the  old  trail,  our  own  trail, 

the  out  trail. 
And  life  runs  large  on  the  Long  Trail — the  trail  that  is 
always  new. 

The  days  are  sick  and  cold,  and  the  skies  are  gray  and  old, 

And  the  twice-breathed  airs  blow  damp; 
And  I'd  sell  my  tired  soul  for  the  bucking  beam-sea  roll 

Of  a  black  Bilbao  tramp; 


'The    Long  Trail  170S 

With  her  load-line  over  her  hatch,  dear  lass, 

And  a  drunken  Dago  crew. 

And  her  nose  held  down  on  the  old  trail,  our  own  trail, 

the  out  trail, 
From  Cadiz  Bar  on  the  Long  Trail — the  trail  that  is 

always  new. 

There  be  triple  ways  to  take,  of  the  eagle  or  the  snake, 

Or  the  way  of  a  man  with  a  maid; 
But  the  sweetest  way  to  me  is  a  ship's  upon  the  sea 
In  the  heel  of  the  North-East  Trade. 

Can  you  hear  the  crash  on  her  bows,  dear  lass, 

And  the  drum  of  the  racing  screw, 

As  she  ships  it  green  on  the  old  trail,  our  own  trail,  the 

out  trail, 
As  she  lifts  and  'scends  on  the  Long  Trail — the  trail 
that  is  always  new? 

See  the  shaking  funnels  roar,  with  the  Peter  at  the  fore, 

And  the  fenders  grind  and  heave, 
And  the  derricks  clack  and  grate,  as  the  tackle  hooks  the 
crate. 
And  the  fall-rope  whines  through  the  sheave; 
It's  "Gang-plank  up  and  in,"  dear  lass. 
It's  "Hawsers  warp  her  through!" 
And  it's  "All  clear  aft"  on  the  old  trail,  our  own  trail, 

the  out  trail. 
We're  backing  down  on  the  Long  Trail — the  trail  that 
is  always  new. 

O  the  mutter  overside,  when  the  port-fog  holds  us  tied, 

And  the  sirens  hoot  their  dread! 
When  foot  by  foot  we  creep  o'er  the  hueless  viewless  deep 
To  the  sob  of  the  questing  lead! 

It's  down  by  the  Lower  Hope,  dear  lass, 

With  the  Gunfleet  Sands  in  view, 

Till  the  Mouse  swings  green  on  the  old  trail,  our  own 

trail,  the  out  trail, 
And  the  Gull  Light  lifts  on  the  Long  Trail — the  trail 
that  is  always  new. 


1706  Poems  of  Nature 

O  the  blazing  tropic  night,  when  the  wake's  a  welt  of  light 

That  holds  the  hot  sky  tame, 
And  the  steady  fore-foot  snores  through  the  planet-powdered 
floors 
Where  the  scared  whale  flukes  in  flame! 

Her  plates  are  scarred  by  the  sun,  dear  lass, 

And  her  ropes  are  taut  with  the  dew. 

For  we're  booming  down  on  the  old  trail,  our  own  trail, 

the  out  trail. 
We're  sagging  south  on  the  Long  Trail — the  trail  that 
is  always  new. 

Then  home,  get  her  home,  where  the  drunken  rollers  comb. 

And  the  shouting  seas  drive  by, 
And  the  engines  stamp  and  ring,  and  the  wet  bows  reel  and 
swing, 
And  the  Southern  Cross  rides  high ! 

Yes,  the  old  lost  stars  wheel  back,  dear  lass, 

That  blaze  in  the  velvet  blue. 

They're  all  old  friends  on  the  old  trail,  our  own  trail, 

the  out  trail, 
They're   God's  own  guides  on   the  Long  Trail — the 
trail  that  is  always  new. 

Fly  forward,  O  my  heart,  from  the  Foreland  to  the  Start — 

We're  steaming  all  too  slow, 
And  it's  twenty  thousand  mile  to  our  little  lazy  isle 
Where  the  trumpet-orchids  blow! 

You  have  heard  the  call  of  the  off-shore  wind 
And  the  voice  of  the  deep-sea  rain ; 
You  have  heard  the  song — how  long — how  long? 
Pull  out  on  the  trail  again! 

The  Lord  knows  what  we  may  find,  dear  lass. 

And  the  Deuce  knows  what  we  m.ay  do — 

But  we're  back  once  more  on  the  old  trail,  our  own  trail, 

the  out  trail. 
We're  down,  hull  down,  on  the  Long  Trail — the  trail 

that  is  always  new! 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 


PART  IV 

FAMILIAR  VERSE,  AND  POEMS 
HUMOROUS  AND  SATIRIC 


BALLADE  OF  THE  PRIMITIVE  JEST 

"What  did  the  dark-haired  Iberian  laugh  at  before  the  tall  blonde  Aryan  drove 
him  into  the  corners  of  Europe?  " — Brander  Matthews 

I  AM  an  ancient  Jest! 

Palteolithic  man 

In  his  arboreal  nest 

The  sparks  of  fun  would  fan; 

My  outline  did  he  plan, 

And  laughed  like  one  possessed, 

'Twas  thus  my  course  began, 

I  am  a  Merry  Jest! 

I  am  'an  early  Jest! 

Man  delved,  and  built,  and  span; 

Then  wandered  South  and  West 

The  peoples  Aryan, 

/  journeyed  in  their  van; 

The  Semites,  too,  confessed, — 

From  Beersheba  to  Dan, — 

I  am  a  Merry  Jest! 

I  am  an  ancient  Jest! 
Through  all  the  human  clan. 
Red,  black,  white,  free,  oppressed, 
Hilarious  I  ran! 
I'm  found  in  Lucian, 
In  Poggio,  and  the  rest, 
I'm  dear  to  Moll  and  Nan! 
I  am  a  Merry  Jest ! 

ENVOY 

Prince,  you  may  storm  and  ban — 
Joe  MOlers  are  a  pest. 
Suppress  me  if  you  can! 
I  am  a  Merry  Jest! 

Andrew  Lang  [1844-1912] 


THE   KINDLY  MUSE 

TIME  TO  BE   WISE 

Yes;  I  write  verses  now  and  then, 
But  blunt  and  flaccid  is  my  pen, 
No  longer  talked  of  by  young  men 

As  rather  clever: 
In  the  last  quarter  are  my  eyes, 
You  see  it  by  their  form  and  size; 
Is  it  not  time  then  to  be  wise? 

Or  now  or  never. 

Fairest  that  ever  sprang  from  Eve! 
While  Time  allows  the  short  reprieve, 
Just  look  at  me!  would  you  believe 

'Twas  once  a  lover? 
I  cannot  clear  the  five-bar  gate; 
But,  trying  first  its  timber's  state. 
Climb  stiffly  up,  take  breath,  and  wait 

To  trundle  over. 

Through  gallopade  I  cannot  swing 

The  entangling  blooms  of  Beauty's  spring: 

I  cannot  say  the  tender  thing, 

Be't  true  or  false. 
And  am  beginning  to  opine 
Those  girls  are  only  half-divine 
Whose  waists  yon  wicked  boys  entwine 

In  giddy  waltz. 

I  fear  that  arm  above  that  shoulder; 
I  wish  them  wiser,  graver,  older, 
Sedater,  and  no  harm  if  colder, 
1709 


lyio  The   Kindly   Muse 

And  panting  less. 
Ah!  people  were  not  half  so  wild 
In  former  days,  when,  starchly  mild, 
Upon  her  liigh-heeled  Essex  smiled 

The  brave  Queen  Bess. 

Waller  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864I 


UNDER  THE  LINDENS 

Under  the  lindens  lately  sat 
A  couple,  and  no  more,  in  chat; 
I  wondered  what  they  would  be  at 
Under  the  lindens. 

I  saw  four  eyes  and  four  lips  meet, 
I  heard  the  words,  "How  sweet!  how  sweet!" 
Had  then  the  Fairies  given  a  treat 
Under  the  lindens? 

I  pondered  long  and  could  not  tell 
What  dainty  pleased  them  both  so  well: 
Bees!  bees!  was  it  your  hydromel 
Under  the  lindens? 

Waller  Savage  Laiidor  [1775-1! 


ADVICE 

To  write  as  your  sweet  mother  does 

Is  all  you  wish  to  do. 
Play,  sing,  and  smile  for  others.  Rose! 

Let  others  -write  for  you. 

Or  mount  again  your  Dartmoor  gray, 

And  I  will  walk  beside, 
Until  we  reach  that  quiet  bay 

Which  only  hears  the  tide. 

Then  wave  at  me  your  pencil,  then 

At  distance  bid  me  stand. 
Before  the  caverned  cliff,  again 

The  creature  of  your  hand. 


To    Fanny  171 1 

And  bid  me  then  go  past  the  nook 

To  sketch  me  less  in  size; 
There  are  but  few  content  to  look 

So  little  in  your  eyes. 

Delight  US  with  the  gifts  you  have, 

And  wish  for  none  beyond: 
To  some  be  gay,  to  some  be  grave, 

To  one  (blest  youth!)  be  fond. 


!'!' 


Pleasures  there  are  how  close  to  Pain 

And  better  unpossessed! 
Let  poetry's  too  throbbing  vein 

Lie  quiet  in  your  breast. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 


TO  FANNY 

Never  mind  how  the  pedagogue  proses, 
You  want  not  antiquity's  stamp; 

The  lip,  that  such  fragrance  discloses. 
Oh!  never  should  smell  of  the  lamp. 

Old  Chloe,  whose  withering  kisses 
Have  long  set  the  Loves  at  defiance. 

Now,  done  with  the  science  of  blisses. 
May  fly  to  the  blisses  of  science! 

Young  Sappho,  for  want  of  employments. 
Alone  o'er  her  Ovid  may  melt. 

Condemned  but  to  read  of  enjoyments. 
Which  wiser  Corinna  had  felt. 

But  for  yoH  to  be  buried  in  books — 
Oh,  Fanny!  they're  pitiful  sages; 

Who  could'not  in  one  of  your  looks 
Read  more  than  in  millions  of  pages! 

Astronomy  finds  in  jour  eyes 

Better  light  than  she  studies  above, 

And  Music  must  borrow  your  sighs 
As  the  melody  fittest  for  Love. 


1 71 2  The   Kindly   Muse 

In  Ethics — 'tis  you  that  can  check, 

In  a  minute,  their  doubts  and  their  q'larrels; 

Oh!  show  but  that  mole  on  your  neck, 

And  'twill  soon  put  an  end  to  their  morals. 

Your  Arithmetic  only  can  trip 

When  to  kiss  and  to  count  you  endeavor; 

But  eloquence  glows  on  your  lip 

When  you  swear  that  you'll  love  me  for  ever. 

Thus  you  see  what  a  brilliant  alliapice 

Of  arts  is  assembled  in  you, — 
A  course  of  more  exquisite  science 
■     .        Man  never  need  wish  to  pursue. 

And,  oh! — if  a  Fellow  like  me 

May  confer  a  diploma  of  hearts, 
With  my  Hp  thus  I  seal  your  degree. 

My  divine  little  Mistress  of  Arts! 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 


"I'D   BE   A   BUTTERFLY" 

I'd  be  a  Butterfly  born  in  a  bower, 

Where  roses  and  lilies  and  violets  meet; 
Roving  for  ever  from  flower  to  flower, 

And  kissing  all  buds  that  are  pretty  and  sweet! 
I'd  never  languish  for  wealth,  or  for  power, 

I'd  never  sigh  to  see  slaves  at  my  feet: 
I'd  be  a  Butterfly  born  in  a  bower, 

Kissing  all  buds  that  are  pretty  and  sweet. 

O  could  I  pilfer  the  wand  of  a  fairy, 

I'd  have  a  pair  of  those  beautiful  wings; 
Their  summer  days'  ramble  is  sportive  and  airy. 

They  sleep  in  a  rose  when  the  nightingale  sings. 
Those  who  have  wealth  must  be  watchful  and  wary; 

Power,  alas!  naught  but  misery  brings! 
I'd  be  a  Butterfly,  sportive  and  airy. 

Rocked  in  a  rose  when  the  nightingale  sings! 


.  "I'm   Not  a  Single   Man"  1713 

What,  though  you  tell  me  each  gay  little  rover 

Shrinks  from  the  breath  of  the  first  autumn  day: 
Surely  'tis  better  when  summer  is  over 

To  die  when  all  fair  things  are  fading  away. 
Some  in  life's  winter  may  toil  to  discover 

Means  of  procuring  a  weary  delay— 
I'd  be  a  butterfly;  living,  a  rover, 

Dying  when  fair  things  are  fadmg  away! 

Thomas  Hayiies  Bayly  [1707-1839) 


"  I'M  NOT  A  SINGLE  MAN  " 

LINES    WRITTEN   IN   A    YOUNG    LADY'S    ALBUM 

A  PRETTY  task,  Miss  S ,  to  ask 

A  Benedictine  pen, 
That  cannot  quite  at  freedom  write 

Like  those  of  other  men. 
No  lover's  plaint  my  Muse  must  paint 

To  fill  this  page's  span, 
But  be  correct  and  recollect 

I'm  not  a  single  man. 

Pray  only  think,  for  pen  and  ink 

How  hard  to  get  along. 
That  may  not  turn  on  words  that  burn, 

Or  Love,  the  life  of  song! 
Nme  Muses,  if  I  chooses,  I 

May  woo  aU  in  a  clan; 
But  one  Miss  S I  daren't  address — 

I'm  not  a  single  man. 

Scribblers  unwed,  with  little  head, 

May  eke  it  out  with  heart, 
And  in  their  lays  it  often  plays 

A  rare  first-fiddle  part. 
They  make  a  kiss  to  rhyme  with  bliss, 

But  if  /  so  began, 
I  have  my  fears  about  my  ears — 

I'm  not  a  single  man. 


I  714  The   Kindly   Muse 

Upon  your  cheek  I  may  not  speak, 

Nor  on  your  lip  be  warm, 
I  must  be  wise  about  your  eyes, 

And  formal  with  your  form; 
Of  all  that  sort  of  thing,  in  short. 

On  T.  H.  Bayly's  plan, 
I  must  not  twine  a  single  line — 

I'm  not  a  single  man. 

A  watchman's  part  compels  my  heart 

To  keep  you  off  its  beat. 
And  I  might  dare  as  soon  to  swear 

At  you,  as  at  your  feet. 
I  can't  expire  in  passion's  fire 

As  other  poets  can — 
My  hfe  (she's  by)  won't  let  me  die — 

I'm  not  a  single  man. 

Shut  out  from  love,  denied  a  dove, 

Forbidden  bow  and  dart; 
Without  a  groan  to  call  my  own, 

With  neither  hand  nor  heart; 
To  Hymen  vowed,  and  not  allowed 

To  flirt  e'en  with  your  fan, 
Here  end,  as  just  a  friend,  I  must — 

I'm  not  a  single  man. 

Thomas  Hood  [1709-1845] 

TO  


We  met  but  in  one  giddy  dance. 

Good-night  joined  hands  with  greeting; 
And  twenty  thousand  things  may  chance 

Before  our  second  meeting; 
For  oh!  I  have  been  often  told 

That  aU  the  world  grows  older, 
And  hearts  and  hopes  to-day  so  cold, 

To-morrow  must  be  colder. 

If  I  have  never  touched  the  string 
Beneath  your  chamber,  dear  one, 

And  never  said  one  civil  thing 

When  you  were  by  to  hear  one, — 


The   Vicar      i  V  171 5 

If  I  have  made  no  rhymes  about 

Those  looks  which  conquer  Stoics, 

And  heard  those  angel  tones,  without 
One  tit  of  fair  heroics, — 

Yet  do  not,  though  the  world's  cold  school 

Some  bitter  truths  has,  taught  me, 
Oh,  do  not  deem  me  quite  the  fool 

Wliich  wiser  friends  have  thought  me! 
There  is  one  charm  I  still  could  feel, 

If  no  one  laughed  at  feehng; 
One  dream  my  lute  could  still  reveal, — 

If  it  were  worth  revealing. 

But  Folly  little  cares  what  name 

Of  friend  or  foe  she  handles. 
When  merriment  directs  the  game. 

And  midnight  dims  the  candles; 
I  know  that  Folly's  breath  is  weak 

And  would  not  stir  a  feather; 
But  yet  I  would  not  have  her  speak 

Your  name  and  mine  together. 

Oh  no!  this  life  is  dark  and  bright, 

Half  rapture  and  half  sorrow; 
My  heart  is  very  full  to-night. 

My  cup  shall  be  to-morrow! 
But  they  shall  never  know  from  me, 

On  any  one  condition. 
Whose  health  made  bright  my  Burgundy, 

Whose  beauty  was  my  vision! 

Winthrop  Macku'orth  Praed  [1802-1839] 


THE  VICAR 

Some  years  ago,  ere  Time  and  Taste 
Had  turned  our  parish  topsy-turvy. 

When  Darnel  Park  was  Darnel  Waste, 
And  roads  as  little  known  as  scurvy, 


iyi6  The   Kindly   Muse 

The  man  who  lost  his  way  between 
St.  Mary's  Hill  and  Sandy  Thicket, 

Was  always  shown  across  the  Green, 
And  guided  to  the  Parson's  wicket. 

Back  flew  the  bolt  of  lissom  lath; 

Fair  Margaret,  in  her  tidy  kirtle, 
Led  the  lorn  traveller  up  the  path 

Through  clean-clipt  rows  of  box  and  myrtle ; 
And  Don  and  Sancho,  Tramp  and  Tray, 

Upon  the  parlor  steps  collected. 
Wagged  all  their  tails,  and  seemed  to  say, 

"Our  master  knows  you;  you're  expected!  " 

Up  rose  the  Reverend  Doctor  Brown,  .J 

Up  rose  the  Doctor's  "winsome  marrow"; 
The  lady  laid  her  knitting  down,  ricjoi  fiorl^/ 

Her  husband  clasped  his  ponderous  Barrow; 
Whate'er  the  stranger's  caste  or  creed. 

Pundit  or  papist,  saint  or  sinner, 
He  found  a  stable  for  his  steed. 

And  welcome  for  himself,  and  dinner. 

If,  when  he  reached  his  journey's  end. 

And  warmed  himself  in  court  or  college, 
He  had  not  gained  an  honest  friend, 

And  twenty  curious  scraps  of  knowledge ; — 
If  he  departed  as  he  came. 

With  no  new  light  on  love  or  liquor, — 
Good  sooth,  the  traveller  was  to  blame. 

And  not  the  Vicarage,  nor  the  Vicar.',. 

His  talk  was  like  a  stream  which  runs 

With  rapid  change  from  rocks  to  roses; 
It  slipped  from  poHtics  to  puns; 

It  passed  from  Mahomet  to  Moses; 
Beginning  with  the  laws  which  keep 

The  planets  in  their  radiant  courses, 
And  ending  with  some  precept  deep 

For  dressing  eels  or  shoeing  horses. 


The  Vicar  171 7 

He  was  a  shrewd  and  sound  divine, 

Of  loud  Dissent  the  mortal  terror; 
And  when,  by  dint  of  page  and  line, 

He  'stablished  Truth,  or  startled  Error, 
The  Baptist  found  him  far  too  deep, 

The  Deist  sighed  with  saving  sorrow. 
And  the  lean  Levite  went  to  sleep 

And  dreamed  of  tasting  pork  to-morrow. 

His  sermon  never  said  or  showed 

That  Earth  is  foul,  that  Heaven  is  gracious, 
Without  refreshment  on  the  road 

From  Jerome,  or  from  Athanasius; 
And  sure  a  righteous  zeal  inspired 

The  hand  and  head  that  penned  and  planned  them, 
For  all  who  understood,  admired. 

And  some  who  did  not  understand  them. 

He  wrote,  too,  in  a  quiet  way, 

Small  treatises,  and  smaller  verses, 
And  sage  remarks  on  chalk  and  clay. 

And  hints  to  noble  lords  and  nurses; 
True  histories  of  last  year's  ghost; 

Lines  to  a  ringlet  or  a  turban; 
And  trifles  to  the  Morning  Post, 

And  nothings  for  Sylvanus  Urban. 

He  did  not  think  all  mischief  fair. 

Although  he  had  a  knack  of  joking; 
He  did  not  make  himself  a  bear, 

Although  he  had  a  taste  for  smoking; 
And  when  religious  sects  ran  mad. 

He  held,  in  spite  of  all  his  learning. 
That  if  a  man's  belief  is  bad. 

It  will  not  be  improved  by  burning. 

And  he  was  kind,  and  loved  to  sit 

In  the  low  hut  or  garnished  cottage. 
And  praise  the  farmer's  homely  wit , 

And  share  the  widow's  homelier  pottage. 


1 71^  The   Kindly   Muse 

At  his  approach  complaint  grew  mild, 
And  when  his  hand  imbarred  the  shutter, 

The  clammy  lips  of  Fever  smiled 

The  welcome  which  they  could  not  utter. 

He  always  had  a  tale  for  me 

Of  Julius  Caesar  or  of  Venus; 
From  him  I  learned  the  rule  of  three, 

Cat's-cradle,  leap-frog,  and  Qucc  genus. 
I  used  to  singe  his  powdered  wig, 

To  steal  the  staff  he  put  such  trust  in. 
And  make  the  puppy  dance  a  jig 

When  he  began  to  quote  Augustine. 

Alack,  the  change!    In  vain  I  look 

For  haunts  in  which  my  boyhood  trifled; 
The  level  lawn,  the  trickling  brook, 

The  trees  I  climbed,  the  beds  I  rifled. 
The  church  is  larger  than  before. 

You  reach  it  by  a  carriage  entry: 
It  holds  three  hundred  people  more, 

And  pews  are  fitted  up  for  gentry. 

Sit  in  the  Vicar's  seat;  you'll  hear 

The  doctrine  of  a  gentle  Johnian, 
Whose  hand  is  white,  whose  voice  is  clear, 
'  Whose  phrase  is  very  Ciceronian. 

Where  is  the  old  m^an  laid?    Look  down. 

And  construe  on  the  slab  before  you: 
"Hie  jacet  Gulielmus  Brown, 
Vir  nulld  non  donandtis  lauru." 

Winthrop  Mackworth  Pracd  [i  80  2-1 


THE  BELLE  OF  THE  BALL-ROOM 

Years,  years  ago,  ere  yet  my  dreams 
Had  been  of  being  wise  or  witty;  ■,  , 

Ere  I  had  done  with  writing  themes. 
Or  yawned  o'er  this  infernal  Chitty; —  / 


The   Belle   of  the   Ball-Rooiii       1719 

Years,  years  ago,  while  all  my  joy 

Were  in  my  fowling-piece  and  filly; 
In  short,  while  I  was  yet  a  boy, 

I  fell  in  love  with  Laura  Lilly. 

I  saw  her  at  the  County  Ball; 

There,  when  the  sounds  of  flute  and  fiddle 
Gave  signal  sweet  in  that  old  hall 

Of  hands  across  and  down  the  middle. 
Hers  was  the  subtlest  spell  by  far 

Of  all  that  sets  young  hearts  romancing: 
She  was  our  queen,  our  rose,  our  star; 

And  then  she  danced, — oh,  heaven,  her  dancing! 

Dark  was  her  hair,  her  hand  was  white; 

Her  voice  was  exquisitely  tender; 
Her  eyes  were  full  of  liquid  light;  ■ 

I  never  saw  a  waist  so  slender; 
Her  every  look,  her  every  smile. 

Shot  right  and  left  a  score  of  arrows; 
I  thought  'twas  Venus  from  her  isle, 

And  wondered  where  she'd  left  her  sparrows. 

She  talked  of  politics  or  prayers,— 

Of  Southey's  prose,  or  Wordsworth's  sonnets. 
Of  danglers  or  of  dancing  bears. 

Of  battles,  or  the  last  new  bonnets; 
By  candle-light,  at  twelve  o'clock, 

To  me  it  mattered  not  a  tittle, 
If  those  bright  lips  had  quoted  Locke, 

I  might  have  thought  they  murmured  Little. 

Through  sunny  May,  through  sultry  June, 

I  loved  her  with  a  love  eternal; 
I  spoke  her  praises  to  the  moon, 

I  wrote  them  to  the  Sunday  Journal. 
My  mother  laughed;  I  soon  found  out 

That  ancient  ladies  have  no  feeling: 
My  father  frowned;  but  how  should  gout 

See  any  happiness  in  kneeling? 


1720  The   Kindly   Muse 

She  was  the  daughter  of  a  dean, 

Rich,  fat,  and  rather  apoplectic; 
She  had  one  brother  just  thirteen. 

Whose  color  was  extremely  hectic; 
Her  grandmother,  for  many  a  year, 

Had  fed  the  parish  with  her  bounty; 
Her  second  cousin  was  a  peer. 

And  lord-heutenant  of  the  county. 

But  titles  and  the  three-per-cents. 

And  mortgages,  and  great  relations, 
And  India  bonds,  and  tithes  and  rents, 

Oh,  what  are  they  to  love's  sensations? 
Black  eyes,  fair  forehead,  clustering  locks,^ 

Such  wealth,  such  honors,  Cupid  chooses; 
He  cares  as  little  for  the  stocks. 

As  Baron  Rothschild  for  the  Muses. 

She  sketched;  the  vale,  the  wood,  the  beach, 

Grew  loveHer  from  her  pencil's  shading; 
She  botanized;  I  envied  each 

Young  blossom  in  her  boudoir  fading: 
She  warbled  Handel;  it  was  grand, — • 

She  made  the  Catilina  jealous; 
She  touched  the  organ;  I  could  stand 

For  hours  and  hours  to  blow  the  bellows. 

She  kept  an  album,  too,  at  home. 

Well  filled  with  all  an  album's  glories; 
Paintings  of  butterflies  and  Rome, 

Patterns  for  trimmings,  Persian  stories, 
Soft  songs  to  Julia's  cockatoo, 

Fierce  odes  to  famine  and  to  slaughter, 
And  autographs  of  Prince  Leboo, 

And  recipes  for  elder-water. 

And  she  was  flattered,  worshipped,  bored; 

Her  steps  were  watched,  her  dress  was  noted; 
Her  poodle-dog  was  quite  adored; 

Her  sayings  were  extremely  quoted. 


The   Fine   Old  English   Gentleman      1721 

She  laughed,  and  every  heart  was  glad, 

As  if  the  taxes  were  aboHshed; 
She  frowned,  and  every  look  was  sad, 

As  if  the  opera  were  demolished. 

She  smiled  on  many  just  for  fun, — 

I  knew  that  there  was  nothing  in  it; 
I  was  the  first,  the  only  one 

Her  heart  had  thought  of  for  a  minute. 
I  knew  it,  for  she  told  me  so. 

In  phrase  which  was  divinely  moulded; 
She  wrote  a  charming  hand,  and  oh. 

How  sweetly  all  her  notes  were  folded! 

Our  love  was  like  most  other  loves, — 

A  little  glow,  a  little  shiver, 
A  rosebud  and  a  pair  of  gloves. 

And  "Fly  Not  Yet,"  upon  the  river; 
Some  jealousy  of  some  one's  heir. 

Some  hopes  of  dying  broken-hearted; 
A  miniature,  a  lock  of  hair, 

The  usual  vows, — and  then  we  parted. 

We  parted:  months  and  j'ears  rolled  by; 

We  met  again  four  summers  after. 
Our  parting  was  all  sob  and  sigh, — 

Our  meeting  was  all  mirth  and  laughter; 
For,  in  my  heart's  most  secret  cell. 

There  had  been  many  other  lodgers; 
And  she  was  not  the  ball-room's  belle. 

But  only  Mrs. — Something — Rogers! 

Whithrop  Mackworlli  Pracd  [1802-1839] 


THE  FINE  OLD   ENGLISH  GENTLEMAN 

I'll  sing  you  a  good  old  song. 

Made  by  a  good  old  pate. 
Of  a  fine  old  English  gentleman 

Who  had  an  old  estate, 


1722  The    Kindly   Muse 

And  who  kept  up  his  old  mansion 

At  a  bountiful  old  rate; 
With  a  good  old  porter  to  relieve 

The  old  poor  at  his  gate, 
Like  a  fine  old  English  gentleman 

All  of  the  olden  time. 

His  hall  so  old  was  hung  around 

With  pikes  and  guns  and  bows, 
And  swords,  and  good  old  bucklers, 

That  had  stood  some  tough  old  blows; 
'Twas  there  "his  worship"  held  his  state 

In  doublet  and  trunk  hose, 
And  quaffed  his  cup  of  good  old  sack, 

To  warm  his  good  old  nose, 
Like  a  fine  old  English  gentleman 

All  of  the  olden  time. 

When  winter's  cold  brought  frost  and  snow, 

He  opened  house  to  all; 
And  though  threescore  and  ten  his  years, 

He  f eatly  led  the  ball ; 
Nor  was  the  houseless  wanderer 

E'er  driven  from  his  hall; 
For  while  he  feasted  all  the  great, 

He  ne'er  forgot  the  small; 
Like  a  fine  old  English  gentleman 

All  of  the  olden  time. 

But  time,  though  old,  is  strong  in  flight, 

And  years  rolled  swiftly  by; 
And  Autumn's  falling  leaves  proclaimed 

This  good  old  man  must  die! 
He  laid  him  down  right  tranquilly. 

Gave  up  life's  latest  sigh; 
And  mournful  stillness  reigned  around, 

And  tears  bedewed  each  eye, 
For  this  fine  old  English  gentleman 

All  of  the  olden  time. 


A   Ternarie  of   Lirtles  1723- 

Now  surely  this  is  better  far 

Than  all  the  new  parade 
Of  theaters  and  fancy  balls, 

"At  home"  and  masquerade: 
And  much  more  economical, 

For  all  his  bills  were  paid, 
Then  leave  your  new  vagaries  quite, 

And  take  up  the  old  trade 
Of  a  fine  old  English  gentleman, 

All  of  the  olden  time. 

Unknown 

A  TERNARIE  OF   LITTLES,  UPON  A  PIPKIN   OF 
JELLY  SENT  TO  A  LADY 

A  LITTLE  Saint  best  fits  a  little  Shrine, 

A  little  Prop  best  fits  a  little  Vine, 

As  my  small  Cruse  best  fits  my  little  Wine. 

A  little  Seed  best  fits  a  little  Soil, 
A  little  Trade  best  fits  a  little  Toil, 
As  my  small  Jar  best  fits  my  little  Oil. 

A  little  Bin  best  fits  a  little  Bread, 

A  little  Garland  fits  a  httle  Head, 

As  my  small  Stuff  best  fits  my  little  Shed. 

A  little  Hearth  best  fits  a  little  Fire, 

A  little  Chapel  tits  a  little  Quire, 

As  my  small  Bell  best  fits  my  little  Spire. 

A  little  Stream  best  fits  a  little  Boat, 

A  little  Lead  best  fits  a  little  Float, 

As  my  small  Pipe  best  fits  my  little  Note. 

A  little  Meat  best  fits  a  little  Belly, 

As  sweetly,  lady,  give  me  leave  to  tell  ye, 

This  little  Pipkin  fits  this  little  Jelly. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


1724  Ihe   Kindly   Muse 


CHIVALRY  AT  A  DISCOUNT 

Fair  cousin  mine!  the  golden  days 

Of  old  romance  are  over; 
And  minstrels  now  care  naught  for  bays, 

Nor  damsels  for  a  lover; 
And  hearts  are  cold,  and  lips  are  mute 

That  kindled  once  with  passion, 
And  now  we've  neither  lance  nor  lute, 

And  tUting's  out  of  fashion. 

Yet  weeping  Beauty  mourns  the  time 

When  Love  found  words  in  flowers; 
When  softest  sighs  were  breathed  in  rhyme, 

And  sweetest  songs  in  bowers; 
Now  wedlock  is  a  sober  thing — 

No  more  of  chains  or  forges! — 
A  plain  young  man — a  plain  gold  ring — 

The  curate — and  St.  George's. 

Then  every  cross-bow  had  a  string, 

And  every  heart  a  fetter; 
And  making  love  was  quite  the  thing. 

And  making  verses  better; 
And  maiden-aunts  were  never  seen, 

And  gallant  beaux  were  plenty; 
And  lasses  married  at  sixteen, 

And  died  at  one-and-twenty. 

Then  hawking  was  a  noble  sport, 

And  chess  a  pretty  science; 
And  huntsmen  learned  to  blow  a  morte, 

And  heralds  a  defiance; 
And  knights  and  spearmen  showed  their  might. 

And  timid  hinds  took  warning; 
And  hypocras  was  warmed  at  night, 

And  coursers  in  the  morning. 

Then  plumes  and  pennons  were  prepared. 

And  patron-saints  were  lauded; 
And  noble  deeds  were  bravely  dared. 

And  noble  dames  applauded- 


Chivalry  at  a  Discount  1725 

And  Beauty  played  the  leech's  part, 

And  wounds  were  healed  with  syrup; 
And  warriors  sometimes  lost  a  heart, 

But  never  lost  a  stirrup. 

Then  there  was  no  such  thing  as  Fear, 

And  no  such  word  as  Reason; 
And  Faith  was  like  a  pointed  spear, 

And  Fickleness  was  treason; 
And  hearts  were  spft,  though  blows  were  hard; 

But  when  the  tight  was  over, 
A  brimming  goblet  cheered  the  board. 

His  Lady's  smile  the  lover. 

Ay,  those  were  golden  days!    The  moon 

Had  then  her  true  adorers; 
And  there  were  lyres  and  lutes  in  tune, 

And  no  such  thing  as  snorers; 
And  lovers  swam,  and  held  at  naught 

Streams  broader  than  the  Mersey; 
And  fifty  thousand  would  have  fought 

For  a  smile  from  Lady  Jersey. 

Then  people  wore  an  iron  vest, 

And  had  no  use  for'tailors; 
And  the  artizans  who  lived  the  best 

Were  armorers  and  nailers; 
And  steel  was  measured  by  the  ell, 

And  trousers  Uned  with  leather; 
And  jesters  wore  a  cap  and  bell, 

And  knights  a  cap  and  feather. 

Then  single  folks  might  live  at  ease, 

And  married  ones  might  sever; 
Uncommon  doctors  had  their  fees, 

But  Doctor's  Commons  never; 
O!  had  we  in  those  times  been  bred, 

Fair  cousin,  for  thy  glances, 
Instead  of  breaking  Priscian's  head, 

I  had  been  breaking  lances! 

Edward  Fitzgerald  [1809-1883] 


1726  The  Kindly   Muse 


THE  BALLAD  OF  BOUILLABAISSE 

A  STREET  there  is  in  Paris  famous, 

For  which  no  rhyme  our  language  yields,  ^ 
Rue  Neuve  des  Petits  Champs  its  name  is — 

The  New  Street  of  the  Little  Fields;  ' 

And  there's  an  inn,  not  rich  and  splendid. 

But  still  in  comfortable  case — 
The  which  in  youth  I  oft  attended, 

To  eat  a  bowl  of  Bouillabaisse. 

This  Bouillabaisse  a  noble  dish  is— 

A  sort  of  soup,  or  broth,  or  brew, 
Or  hotchpotch  of  all  sorts  of  fishes, 

That  Greenwich  never  could  outdo; 
Green  herbs,  red  peppers,  mussels,  saffern, 

Soles,  onions,  garlic,  roach,  and  dace: 
All  these  you  eat  at  Terre's  tavern, 

In  that  one  dish  of  Bouillabaisse. 

Indeed,  a  rich  and  savory  stew  'tis; 

And  true  philosophers,  methinks. 
Who  love  all  sorts  of  natural  beauties, 

Should  love  good  victuals  and  good  drinks. 
And  Cordelier  or  Benedictine 

Might  gladly,  sure,  his  lot  embrace, 
Nor  find  a  fast-day  too  afBicting, 

Wliich  served  him  up  a  Bouillabaisse. 

I  wonder  if  the  house  still  there  is? 

Yes,  here  the  lamp  is  as  before; 
The  smiling,  red-cheeked  ecaUlere  is 

Still  opening  oysters  at  the  door. 
Is  Terre  still  alive  and  able? 

I  recollect  his  droll  grimace; 
He'd  come  and  smile  before  your  table 

And  hope  you  liked  your  Bouillabaisse. 

We  enter;  nothing's  changed  or  older. 

"How's  Monsieur  Terre,  waiter,  pray?'* 
The  waiter  stares  and  shrugs  his  shoulder;— 

"Monsieur  is  dead  tins  many  a  day." 


The   Ballad  of  Bouillabaisse        1727 

"  It  is  the  lot  of  saint  and  sinner. 

So  honest  Terre's  run  his  race!" 
"What  will  Monsieur  require  for  dinner?" 

"Say,  do  you  still  cook  Bouillabaisse?" 

"Oh,  oui,  Monsieur," 's  the  waiter's  answer; 

"Quel  vin  Monsieur  desire-t-il?" 
"Tell  me  a  good  one."     "That  I  can.  Sir; 

The  Chambertin  with  yellow  seal." 
"So  Terre's  gone,"  I  say,  and  sink  in 

My  old  accustomed  corner-place; 
"He's  done  with  feasting  and  with  drinking, 

With  Burgundy  and  Bouillabaisse." 

My  old  accustomed  corner  here  is, — 

The  table  still  is  in  the  nook; 
Ah!  vanished  many  a  busy  year  is. 

This  well-known  chair  since  last  I  took. 
When  first  I  saw  ye,  cari  luog/ii, 

I'd  scarce  a  beard  upon  my  face, 
And  now  a  grizzled,  grim  old  fogy, 

I  sit  and  wait  for  Bouillabaisse. 

Where  are  you,  old  companions  trusty 

Of  early  days  here  met  to  dine? 
Come,  waiter!  quick,  a  flagon  crusty — 

I'll  pledge  them  in  the  good  old  wine. 
The  kind  old  voices  and  old  faces 

My  memory  can  quick  retrace; 
Around  the  board  they  take  their  places, 

And  share  the  wine  and  Bouillabaisse. 

There's  Jack  has  made  a  wondrous  marriage; 

There's  laughing  Tom  is  laughing  yet; 
There's  brave  Augustus  drives  his  carriage; 

There's  poor  old  Fred  in  the  Gazelle; 
On  James's  head  the  grass  is  growing: 

Good  Lord!  the  world  lias  wagged  apace 
Since  here  we  set  the  Claret  flowing, 

And  drank,  and  ate  the  Bouillabaisse. 


1728  The   Kindly    Muse 

Ah  me!  how  quick  the  days  are  flitting! 

I  mind  me  of  a  time  that's  gone, 
When  here  I'd  sit,  as  now  I'm  sitting. 

In  this  same  place — but  not  alone. 
A  fair  young  form  was  nestled  near  me, 

A  dear,  dear  face  looked  fondly  up, 
And  sweetly  spoke  and  smiled  to  cheer  me. 

— There's  no  one  now  to  share  my  cup.  .  .  . 

I  drink  it  as  the  Fates  ordain  it. 

Come,  fill  it,  and  have  done  with  rhymes; 
Fill  up  the  lonely  glass,  and  drain  it 

In  memory  of  dear  old  times. 
Welcome  the  wine,  whate'er  the  seal  is; 

And  sit  you  down  and  say  your  grace 
With  thankful  heart,  whate'er  the  meal  is. 
— Here  comes  the  smoking  Bouillabaisse! 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 

TO  MY   GRANDMOTHER 

SUGGESTED    BY    A    PICTURE    BY    MR.    ROMNEY 

Under  the  elm  a  rustic  seal 
Was  merriest  Susan's  pel  retreat 
To  merry-make 

This  Relative  of  mine 
.  Was  she  seven  ty-and-nine 

When  she  died? 
By  the  canvas  may  be  seen 
How  she  looked  at  seventeen, 

As  a  Bride. 

Beneath  a  summer  tree 
Her  maiden  reverie 

Has  a  charm; 
Her  ringlets  are  in  taste; 
What  an  arm!  and  what  a  waist 

For  an  arm ! 

With  her  bridal-wreath,  bouquet, 
Lace  farthingale,  and  gay 


To   My  Grandmother  17^9 

Falbala, — 
If  Romncy's  touch  be  true, 
What  a  lucky  dog  were  you, 

Grandpapa ! 

Her  lips  are  sweet  as  love; 

They  are  parting!    Do  they  move? 

Are  they  dumb? 
Her  eyes  are  blue,  and  beam 
Beseechingly,  and  seem 

To  say,  "Come!" 

What  funny  fancy  slips 

From  atween  these  cherry  lips? 

Whisper  mc, 
Fair  Sorceress  in  paint. 
What  canon  says  I  mayn't 

Marry  thee? 

That  good-for-nothing  Time 
Has  a  confidence  sublime! 

When  I  first 
Saw  this  Lady,  in  my  youth, 
Her  winters  had,  forsooth, 

Done  their  worst. 

Her  locks,  as  white  as  snow, 
Once  shamed  the  swarthy  crow; 

By-and-b}'- 
That  fowl's  avenging  sprite 
Set  his  cruel  foot  for  spite 

Near  her  eye. 

Her  rounded  form  was  lean. 
And  her  silk  was  bombazine: 

Well  I  wot 
With  her  needles  would  she  sit, 
And  for  hours  would  she  knit, — 

Would  she  not? 


1730  The   Kindly   Muse 

Ah  perishable  clay! 

Her  charms  had  dropped  away- 
One  by  one : 

But  if  she  heaved  a  sigh 

With  a  burden,  it  was,  "Thy 
Will  be  done." 

In  travail,  as  in  tears, 
With  the  fardel  of  her  years 

Overpressed, 
In  mercy  she  was  borne 
Where  the  weary  and  the  worn 

Are  at  rest. 

Oh,  if  you  now  are  there, 
And  sweet  as  once  you  were, 

Grandmamma, 
This  nether  world  agrees 
You'U  all  the  better  please 

Grandpapa. 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  [1821-1805] 

MY  MISTRESS'S  BOOTS 

She  has  dancing  eyes  and  ruby  lips, 
Delishlful  boots — atid  away  she  skips 

They  nearly  strike  me  dumb, — 
I  tremble  when  they  come 

Pit-a-pat: 
This  palpitation  means 
These  Boots  are  Geraldine's — 

Think  of  that! 

O,  where  did  hunter  win 
So  delicate  a  skin 

For  her  feet? 
You  lucky  Httle  kid. 
You  perished,  so  you  did, 

For  my  Sweet. 

The  fairy  stitching  gleams 
On  the  sides,  and  in  the  seams, 


My   Mistress's   Boots  1731 

And  reveals 
That  the  Pixies  were  the  wags 
Who  tipped  these  funny  tags, 

And  these  heels. 

What  soles  to  charm  an  elf! — 
Had  Crusoe,  sick  of  self, 

Chanced  to  view 
One  printed  near  the  tide, 
O,  how  hard  he  would  have  tried 

For  the  two! 

For  Gerry's  debonair, 
And  innocent  and  fair 

As  a  rose; 
She's  an  Angel  in  a  frock, — 
She's  an  Angel  with  a  clock 

To  her  hose! 

The  simpletons  who  squeeze 
Their  pretty  toes  to  please 

Mandarins, 
Would  positively  flinch 
From  venturing  to  pinch 

Geraldine's. 

Cinderella's  lefts  and  rights 
To  Geraldine's  were  frights: 

And  I  trow 
The  Damsel,  deftly  shod, 
Has  dutifully  trod 

Until  now. 

Come,  Gerry,  since  it  suits 
Such  a  pretty  Puss  (in  Boots) 

These  to  don, 
Set  your  dainty  hand  awhile 
On  my  shoulder.  Dear,  and  FU 

Put  them  on. 

Frederick  Lockcr-Latnpson  [1CS21-1895] 


1732  The   Kindly   Muse 


A  GARDEN  LYRIC 

GERALDINE  AND  I 

Dite,  Damasippe,  de:eque 
Verum  ob  consilium  donent  tonsore. 

We  have  loitered  and  laughed  in  the  flowery  croft, 

We  have  met  under  wintry  skies; 
Her  voice  is  the  dearest  voice,  and  soft 

Is  the  light  in  her  wistful  eyes; 
It  is  bliss  in  the  silent  woods,  among 

Gay  crowds,  or  in  any  place, 
To  mould  her  mind,  to  gaze  in  her  young 
Confiding  face. 

For  ever  may  roses  divinely  blow, 

And  wine-dark  pansies  charm 
By  that  prim  box  path  where  I  felt  the  glow 

Of  her  dimpled,  trusting  arm, 
And  the  sweep  of  her  silk  as  she  turned  and  smiled 

A  smile  as  pure  as  her  pearls; 
The  breeze  was  in  love  with  the  darling  Child, 
i\nd  coaxed  her  curls. 

She  showed  me  her  ferns  and  woodbine  sprays, 

Foxglove  and  jasmine  stars, 
A  mist  of  blue  in  the  beds,  a  blaze 

Of  red  in  the  celadon  jars: 
And  velvety  bees  in  convolvulus  bells. 

And  roses  of  bountiful  Spring. 
But  I  said — "Though  roses  and  bees  have  spells. 
They  have  thorn,  and  sting." 

She  showed  me  ripe  peaches  behind  a  net 

As  fine  as  her  veil,  and  fat 
Goldfish  a-gape,  who  lazily  met 

For  her  crumbs — I  grudged  them  that ! 
A  squirrel,  some  rabbits  with  long  lop  ears. 

And  guinea-pigs,  tortoise-shell — wee; 
And  I  told  her  that  eloquent  truth  inheres 
In  all  we  see. 


Mrs.  Smith  i733 

I  lifted  her  doe  by  its  lops,  quoth  I, 

"Even  here  deep  meaning  lies, — 
Why  have  squirrels  these  ample  tails,  and  why 

Have  rabbits  these  prominent  eyes?" 
She  smiled  and  said,  as  she  twirled  her  veil, 
"For  some  nice  little  cause,  no  doubt — 
If  you  lift  a  guinea-pig  up  by  the  tail 
His  eyes  drop  out!" 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  [1821-1895] 

MRS.   SMITH 

Eeigh-ho !  they're  wed.    The  cards  are  dealt, 

Our  frolic  games  are  o'er; 
I've  laughed,  and  fooled,  and  loved.    I've  fell — 

As  I  shall  feel  no  more  I 
Yon  little  thatch  is  where  she  lives, 

Yon  spire  is  where  she  met  me; — 
/  think  tiuil  if  she  guile  forgives, 

She  cannot  quite  forget  me. 

Last  year  I  trod  these  fields  with  Di, — 
Fields  fresh  with  clover  and  with  rye; 

They  now  seem  arid : 
Then  Di  was  fair  and  single;  how 
Unfair  it  seems  on  me,  for  now 

Di's  fair, — and  married! 

A  blissful  swain, — I  scorned  the  song 
Which  tells  us  though  young  Love  is  strong, 

The  Fates  arc  stronger: 
Then  breezes  blew  a  boon  to  men, 
Then  buttercups  were  bright,  and  then 

The  grass  was  longer.  !  1 

That  day  I  saw,  and  much  esteemed, 
Di's  ankles,  that  the  clover  seemed 

Inclined  to  smother: 
It  twitched,  and  soon  untied  (for  fun) 
The  ribbons  of  her  shoes,  first  one, 

And  then  the  other. 

I'm  told  that  virgins  augur  some 
/"   Misfortune  if  iheir  shoe-strings  come 


^734  The   Kindly   Muse 

To  grief  on  Friday :  •'■[  \ 

And  so  did  Di, — and  then  her  pride 
Decreed  that  shoe-strings  so  untied,  !V/ 

Are  "so  untidy!" 

Of  course  I  knelt ;  with  fingers  deft 
I  tied  the  right,  and  tied  the  left: 

Says  Di,  "This  stubble 
Is  very  stupid! — as  I  live 
I'm  quite  ashamed! — I'm  shocked  to  give 

You  so  mvich  trouble!" 

For  answer  I  was  fain  to  sink 

To  what  we  all  would  say  and  think 

Were  Beauty  present: 
"Don't  mention  such  a  simple  act —  ' 
A  trouble?  not  the  least !    In  fact 

It's  rather  pleasant!" 

I  trust  that  Love  will  never  tease 
Poor  little  Di,  or  prove  that  he's 

A  graceless  rover. 
She's  happy  now  as  Mrs.  Smith — 
But  less  polite  when  walking  with 

Her  chosen  lover! 

Heigh-ho!    Although  no  moral  clings 
To  Di's  blue  eyes,  and  sandal  strings, 

We  had  our  quarrels. 
I  think  that  Smith  is  thought  an  ass, — 
I  know  that  when  they  walk  in  grass 

She  wears  halmorals. 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  [1821-1895] 


THE  SKELETON  IN  THE  CUPBOARD 

The  characters  of  great  and  small 

Come  ready  made,  we  can't  bespeak  one; 

Their  sides  are  many,  too,  and  all 

(Except  ourselves)  have  got  a  weak  one. 


The   Skeleton   in   the   Cupboard     1735 

Some  sanguine  people  love  for  life,  ■^rr  -^f^ 

Some  love  their  hobby  till  it  flings  them. 

How  many  love  a  pretty  wife 

For  love  of  the  eclat  she  brings  them!  .  ,  . 

A  little  to  relieve  my  mind 

I've  thrown  off  this  disjointed  chatter, 
But  more  because  I'm  disinchned 

To  enter  on  a  painful  matter: 
Once  I  was  bashful;  I'll  allow 

I've  blushed  for  words  untimely  spoken; 
I  still  am  rather  shy,  and  now  .  .  . 

And  now  the  ice  is  fairly  broken. 

We  all  have  secrets:  you  have  one 

Which  may  n't  be  quite  your  charming  spouse's; 
We  all  lock  up  a  Skeleton 

In  some  grim  chamber  of  our  houses; 
Familiars  who  exhaust  their  days 

And  nights  in  probing  where  our  smart  is, 
And  who,  for  all  their  spiteful  ways, 

Are  "silent,  unassuming  Parties." 

We  hug  this  Phantom  we  detest. 

Rarely  wc  let  it  cross  our  portals: 
It  is  a  most  exacting  guest. 

And  we  are  much  afflicted  mortals. 
Your  neighbor  Gay,  that  jovial  wight, 

As  Dives  rich,  and  brave  as  Hector, 
Poor  Gay  steals  twenty  times  a  night. 

On  shaking  knees,  to  see  his  Specter. 

Old  Dives  fears  a  pauper  fate. 

So  hoarding  is  his  ruHng  passion: — 
Some  gloomy  souls  anticipate 

A  waistcoat,  straiter  than  the  fasliion; 
She  childless  pines,  that  lonely  wife, 

And  secret  tears  are  bitter  shedding; 
Hector  may  tremble  all  his  life, 

And  die, — but  not  of  that  he's  dreading.   .  .  . 


1-736  The   Kindly   Muse 

Ah  me,  the  World!    How  fast  it  spms!  i>^ 

The  beldams  dance,  the  caldron  bubbles^iiio^ 
They  shriek,  they  stir  it  for  our  sins,         --'n  „ (,JT 

And  we  must  drain  it  for  our  troubles. 
We  toil,  we  groan;  the  cry  for  love 

Mounts  up  from  this  poor  seething  city, 
And  yet  I  know  we  have  above 

A  Father,  infinite  in  pity. 

When  Beauty  smiles,  when  Sorrow  weeps. 

Where  sunbeams  play,  where  shadows  darken, 
One  inmate  of  our  dwelling  keeps 

Its  ghastly  carnival;  but  hearken! 
How  dry  the  rattle  of  the  bones! 

That  sound  was  not  to  make  you  start  meant: 
Stand  by!    Your  humble  servant  owns 

The  Tenant  of  this  Dark  Apartment. 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  [1821-1S95] 

A  TERRIBLE   INFANT 

I  RECOLLECT  a  nurse  called  Ann , 

Who  carried  me  about  the  grass. 
And  one  fine  day  a  fine  young  man 

Came  up,  and  kissed  the  pretty  lass: 
She  did  not  make  the  least  objection! 
Thinks  I,  "Aha! 
When  I  can  talk,  I'll  tell  Mamma." 
—And  that's  my  earliest  recollection. 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  [1821-1895] 

COMPANIONS 

A   TALE    OF  A   GRANDFATHER  -, 

I  KNOW  not  of  what  we  pondered 

Or  made  pretty  pretence  to  talk. 
As,  her  hand  within  mine,  we  wandered  ■'i^' 

Toward  the  pool  by  the  lime-tree  walk. 
While  the  dew  fell  in  showers  from  the  passion  flowers 

And  the  blush-rose  bent  on  her  stalk. 


Lompanions  1737 

I  cannot  recall  her  figure: 

Was  it  regal  as  Juno's  own? 
Or  only  a  trifle  bigger 

Than  the  elves  who  surroiuid  the  throne 
Of  the  Fairy  Queen,  and  are  seen,  I  ween, 

By  mortals  in  dreams  alone? 

What  her  eyes  were  like  I  know  not: 

Perhaps  they  were  blurred  with  tears; 
And  perhaps  in  yon  skies  there  glow  not 

(On  the  contrary)  clearer  spheres. 
No!  as  to  her  eyes  I  am  just  as  wise 

As  you  or  the  cat,  my  dears. 

Her  teeth,  I  presume,  were  "pearly": 
But  which  was  she,  brunette  or  blonde? 

Her  hair,  was  it  quaintly  curly,  ' 

Or  as  straight  as  a  beadle's  wand? 

That  I  failed  to  remark:  it  was  rather  dark 
And  shadowy  round  the  pond. 

Then  the  hand  that  reposed  so  snugly 

In  mine, — was  it  plump  or  spare? 
Was  the  countenance  fair  or  ugly? 

Nay,  children,  you  have  me  there! 
My  eyes  were  p'haps  blurred;  and  besides  I'd  heard 

That  it's  horribly  rude  to  stare.  ' 

And  I, — was  I  brusque  and  surly? 

Or  oppressively  bland  and  fond? 
Was  I  partial  to  rising  early? 

Or  why  did  we  twain  abscond. 
When  nobody  knew,  from  the  pubUc  viev/ 

To  prowl  by  a  misty  pond? 

What  passed,  what  was  felt  or  spoken, — 

Whether  anything  passed  at  all, — 
And  whether  the  heart  was  broken  r 

That  beat  under  that  sheltering  shawl, — 
(If  shawl  she  had  on,  which  I  doubt), — has  gone, 

Yes,  gone  from  me  past  recall.  i 


1 73^  ^^^   Kindly   Muse 

Was  I  haply  the  lady's  suitor?  ■  ' 

Or  her  uncle?    I  can't  make  out; 
Ask  your  governess,  dears,  or  tutor. 

For  myself,  I'm  in  hopeless  doubt 
As  to  why  we  were  there,  who  on  earth  we  were, 

And  what  this  is  all  about. 

Charles  Stuart  Calvcrlcy  [1831-1884] 


DOROTHY  Q 

A    FAMILY   PORTRAIT 

Grandmother's  mother:  her  age,  I  guess, 
Thirteen  summers,  or  something  less; 
Girlish  bust,  but  womanly  air;  ;  y,  1 

Smooth,  square  forehead  with  uprolled  hair;;  ( 
Lips  that  lover  has  never  kissed; 
Taper  fingers  and  slender  wrist ; 
Hanging  sleeves  of  stiff  brocade ; 
So  they  painted  the  little  maid. 

On  her  hand  a  parrot  green 

Sits  unmoving  and  broods  serene. 

Hold  up  the  canvas  full  in  view, — 

Lo.ok!  there's  a  rent  the  light  shines  through. 

Dark  with  a  century's  fringe  of  dust, — ■ 

That  was  a  Red-Coat's  rapier-thrust! 

Such  is  the  tale  the  lady  old, 

Dorothy's  daughter's  daughter,  told. 

Who  the  painter  was  none  may  tell,— 
One  whose  best  was  not  over  well; 
Hard  and  dry,  it  must  be  confessed,  '  '' 

Flat  as  a  rose  that  has  long  been  pressed; 
Yet  in  her  cheek  the  hues  are  bright, 
Dainty  colors  of  red  and  white,  ' 

And  in  her  slender  shape  are  seen 
Hint  and  promise  of  stately  mien. 

Look  not  on  her  with  eyes  of  scorn, — 
Dorothy  Q.  was  a  lady  born! 


Dorothy  Q  1739 

Ay!  since  the  galloping  Normans  came, 
England's  annals  have  known  her  name; 
And  still  to  the  three-hilled  rebel  town 
Dear  is  that  ancient  name's  renown, 
For  many  a  civic  wreath  they  won, 
The  youthful  sire  and  the  gray-haired  son. 

O  Damsel  Dorothy!  Dorothy  Q.l 
Strange  is  the  gift  that  I  owe  to  you; 
Such  a  gift  as  never  a  king 
Save  to  daughter  or  son  might  bring, — 
All  my  tenure  of  heart  and  hand, 
All  my  title  to  house  and  land; 
Mother  and  sister  and  child  and  wife 
And  joy  and  sorrow  and  death  and  life! 

What  if  a  hundred  years  ago 

Those  close-shut  lips  had  answered  No, 

When  forth  the  tremulous  question  came 

That  cost  the  maiden  her  Norman  name, 

And  under  the  folds  that  look  so  still 

The  bodice  swelled  with  the  bosom's  thrill? 

Should  I  be  I,  or  would  it  be 

One  tenth  another,  to  nine  tenths  me? 

Soft  is  the  breath  of  a  maiden's  Yes: 

Not  the  light  gossamer  stirs  with  less; 

But  never  a  cable  that  holds  so  fast 

Through  all  the  battles  of  wave  and  blast, 

And  never  an  echo  of  speech  or  song 

That  lives  in  the  babbling  air  so  long! 

There  were  tones  in  the  voice  that  whispered  then 

You  may  hear  to-day  in  a  hundred  men. 

O  lady  and  lover,  how  faint  and  far 
Your  images  hover, — and  here  we  are 
Solid  and  stirring  in  flesh  and  bone, — 
Edward's  and  Dorothy's— all  their  own, — 
A  goodly  record  for  Time  to  show 
Of  a  syllable  spoken  so  long  ago! — 


1740  The    Kindly   Muse 

Shall  I  bless  you,  Dorothy,  or  forgive 
For  the  tender  whisper  that  bade  me  live? 

It  shall  be  a  blessing,  my  little  maid ! 
I  will  heal  the  stab  of  the  Red-Coat's  blade, 
And  freshen  the  gold  of  the  tarnished  frame, 
And  gild  with  a  rhyme  your  household  name; 
So  you  shall  smile  on  us  brave  and  bright 
As  first  you  greeted  the  morning's  light, 
And  live  untroubled  by  woes  and  fears 
Through  a  second  youth  of  a  hundred  years. 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [i  809-1 894] 


MY  AUNT 

My  aunt!  my  dear  unmarried  aunt! 

Long  years  have  o'er  her  flown; 
Yet  still  she  strains  the  aching  clasp 

That  binds  her  virgin  zone; 
I  know  it  hurts  her, — though  she  looks 

As  cheerful  as  she  can; 
Her  waist  is  ampler  than  her  life, 

For  Hfe  is  but  a  span. 

My  aunt !  my  poor  deluded  aunt ! 

Her  hair  is  almost  gray; 
Why  will  she  train  that  winter  curl 

In  such  a  spring-like  way? 
Flow  can  she  lay  her  glasses  down. 

And  say  she  reads  as  well, 
When,  through  a  double  convex  lens, 

She  just  makes  out  to  spell? 

Her  father, — grandpapa!  forgive 

This  erring  lip  its  smiles, — 
Vowed  she  should  make  the  finest  girl 

Within  a  hundred  miles ; 
He  sent  her  to  a  stylish  school; 

'Twas  in  her  thirteenth  June; 
And  with  her,  as  the  rules  required, 

"Two  towels  and  a  spoon." 


I'he   Last   Leaf  174^ 

They  braced  my  aunt  against  a  board, 

To  make  her  straight  and  tall; 
They  laced  her  up,  they  starved  her  down. 

To  make  her  light  and  small; 
They  pinched  her  feet,  they  singed  lier  hair, 

They  screwed  it  up  with  pins; — 
Oh,  never  mortal  suffered  more 

In  penance  for  her  sins. 

So,  when  my  precious  aunt  was  done, 

My  grandsire  brought  her  back; 
(By  daylight,  lest  some  rabid  youth 

Might  follow  on  the  track;) 
"Ah!"  said  my  grandsire,  as  he  shook 

Some  powder  in  his  pan, 
"What  could  this  lovely  creature  do 

Against  a  desperate  man!" 

Alas!  nor  chariot,  nor  barouche. 

Nor  bandit  cavalcade, 
Tore  from  the  trembling  father's  arms 

His  all-accomplished  maid. 
For  her  how  happy  had  it  been! 

And  Heaven  had  spared  to  me 
To  see  one  sad,  ungathered  rose 

On  my  ancestral  tree. 

Oliver  Wendell  II o!»ics  [iSog-1894] 


THE  LAST  LEAF 

I  SAW  him  once  before, 
As  he  passed  by  the  door, 

And  again 
The  pavement  stones  resound, 
As  he  totters  o'er  the  ground 

With  his  cane. 

They  say  that  in  his  prime. 
Ere  the  pruning-knifc  of  Time 


174-  The   Kindly   Muse 

Cut  him  down, 
Not  a  better  man  was  found 
By  the  Crier  on  his  round 

Through  the  town. 

But  now  he  walks  the  streets, 
And  he  looks  at  all  he  meets 

Sad  and  wan, 
And  he  shakes  his  feeble  head, 
That  it  seems  as  if  he  said, 

"They  are  gone." 

The  mossy  marbles  rest 

On  the  lips  that  he  has  pressed 

In  their  bloom. 
And  the  names  he  loved  to  hear 
Have  been  carved  for  many  a  year 

On  the  tomb. 

My  grandmamma  has  said, — 
Poor  old  lady,  she  is  dead 

Long  ago,— 
That  he  had  a  Roman  nose, 
And  his  cheek  was  like  a  rose 

In  the  snow; 

But  now  his  nose  is  thin, 
And  it  rests  Qpon  his  chin 

Like  a  staff, 
And  a  crook  is  in  his  back. 
And  a  melancholy  crack 

In  his  laugh. 

I  know  it  is  a  sin 
For  me  to  sit  and  grin 

At  him  here; 
But  the  old  three-cornered  hat, 
And  the  breeches,  and  all  that, 

Are  so  queer! 


Contentment  1 743 

And  if  I  should  live  to  be 
The  last  leaf  upon  the  tree 

In  the  spring, 
Let  them  smile,  as  I  do  now, 
A.t  the  old  forsaken  bough 

Where  1  cling. 
Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [i  809-1 894] 


CONTENTMENT 

"  Man  wants  but  little  here  below  " 

Little  I  ask;  my  wants  are  few; 

I  only  wish  a  hut  of  stone, 
(A  very  plain-  brown  stone  will  do,) 

That  I  may  call  my  own; — 
And  close  at  hand,  is  such  a  one. 
In  yonder  street  that  fronts  the  sun. 

VlAin  food  is  quite  enough  for  mc; 

Three  courses  are  as  good  as  ten; — 
If  Nature  can  subsist  on  three, 

Thank  Heaven  for  three.  Amen! 
I  always  thought  cold  victual  nice; — 
My  choice  would  be  vanilla-ice. 

I  care  not  much  for  gold  or  land; — 

Give  me  a  mortgage  here  and  there, — 
Some  good  bank-stock,  some  note  of  hand, 

Or  trifling  railroad  share, — 
I  only  ask  that  Fortune  send 
A  little  more  than  I  shall  spend. 

Honors  are  silly  toys,  I  know. 

And  titles  are  but  empty  names; 
I  would,  perhaps,  be  Plcnipo, — 

But  only  near  St.  James; 
I'm  very  sure  I  should  not  care 
To  fill  our  Gubernator's  chair. 


1744  The  Kindly   Muse 

Jewels  are  baubles;  'tis  a  sin 

To  care  for  such  unfruitful  things; — 
One  good-sized  diamond  in  a  pin, — 

Some,  not  so  large,  in  rings, — 
A  ruby,  and  a  pearl,  or  so. 
Will  do  for  me; — I  laugh  at  show. 

My  dame  should  dress  in  cheap  attire; 
(Good  heavy  silks  are  never  dear;) — 
I  own  perhaps  I  mighi  desire 

Some  shawls  of  true  Cashmere, — 
Some  marrowy  crapes  of  China  silk, 
Like  wrinkled  skins  on  scalded  milk. 

I  would  not  have  the  horse  I  drive 

So  fast  that  folks  must  stop  and  stare; 
An  easy  gait — two  forty-five — 
Suits  me;  I  do  not  care; — 
Perhaps,  for  just  a  single  spurt, 
Some  seconds  less  would  do  no  hurt. 

Of  pictures,  I  should  like  to  own 

Titians  and  Raphaels  three  or  four, — 
I  love  so  much  their  style  and  tone, — 

One  Turner,  and  no  more, 
(A  landscape, — foreground  golden  dirt, — 
The  sunshine  painted  with  a  squirt.) 

Of  books  but  few, — some  fifty  score 

For  daily  use,  and  bound  for  wear; 
The  rest  upon  an  upper  floor; — 

Some  little  luxury  there 
Of  red  morocco's  gilded  gleam. 
And  vellum  rich  as  country  cream. 

Busts,  cameos,  gems,— such  things  as  these, 

Which  others  often  show  for  pride, 
I  value  for  their  power  to  please. 
And  selfish  churls  deride; — 
One  Stradivarius,  I  confess,     < 
Two  meerschaums,  I  would  fain  possess. 


The   Boys  1-74^ 


Wealth's  wasteful  tricks  I  will  not  learn, 
Nor  ape  the  glittering  upstart  fool; — 
Shall  not  carved  tables  serve  my  turn, 

But  all  must  be  of  buhl? 
Give  grasping  pomp  its  double  share, — 
I  ask  but  one  recumbent  chair. 

Thus  humble  let  me  live  and  die. 
Nor  long  for  Midas'  golden  touch; 

If  Heaven  more  generous  gifts  deny, 
I  shall  not  miss  them  much, — 

Too  grateful  for  the  blessing  lent 

Of  simple  tastes  and  mind  content! 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [iSog-1894] 


THE  BOYS 

Has  there  any  old  fellow  got  mixed  with  the  boys? 
If  there  has,  take  him  out,  without  making  a  noise. 
Hang  the  Almanac's  cheat  and  the  Catalogue's  spite! 
Old  Time  is  a  liar!    We're  twenty  to-night! 

We're  twenty!    We're  twenty!    Who  says  we  are  more? 
He's  tipsy, — young  jackanapes! — show  him  the  door! 
"Gray  temples  at  twenty?"— Yes!  white  if  we  please! 
Where  the  snow-flakes  fall  thickest  there's  nothing  can 
freeze ! 

Was  it  snowing  I  spoke  of?    Excuse  the  mistake! 
Look  close, — you  will  not  see  a  sign  of  a  flake! 
We  want  some  new  garlands  for  those  we  have  shed, — 
And  these  are  white  roses  in  place  of  the  red. 

We've  a  trick,  we  young  fellows,  you  may  have  been  told, 
Of  talking  (in  public)  as  if  we  were  old : — 
That  boy  we  call  "Doctor,"  and  this  we  call  "Judge;" 
It's  a  neat  httle  fiction,— of  course  it's  all  fudge. 

That  fellow's  the  "Speaker," — the  one  on  the  right; 
"Mr.  Mayor,"  my  young  one,  how  are  you  to-night? 


7- 


1746  The  Kindly   Muse 

That's  our  "Member  of  Congress,"  we  say  when  we  chaff; 
There's  the  "Reverend"  What's  his  name? — don't  make  me 
laugh. 

That  boy  with  the  grave  mathematical  look 
Made  beheve  he  had  written  a  wonderful  book, 
And  the  Royal  Society  thought  it  was  tmel 
So  they  chose  him  right  in;  a  good  joke  it  was,  tool 

There's  a  boy,  we  pretend,  with  a  three-decker  brain, 

That  could  harness  a  team  with  a  logical  chain; 

When  he  spoke  for  our  manhood  in  syllabled  fire, 

We  called  him  "The  Justice,"  but  now  he's  "The  Squire." 

And  there's  a  nice  youngster  of  excellent  pith, — 
Fate  tried  to  conceal  him  by  naming  him  Smith; 
But  he  shouted  a  song  for  the  brave  and  the  free, — 
Just  read  on  his  medal,  "My  country,"  "of  thee!" 

You  hear  that  boy  laughing? — You  think  he's  all  fun* 
But  the  angels  laugh,  too,  at  the  good  he  has  done;^""' 
The  children  laugh  loud  as  they  troop  to  his  call,      ' 
And  the  poor  man  that  knows  him  laughs  loudest  of  all! 

Yes,  we're  boys, — always  playing  with  tongue  or  with  pen,^ 
And  I  sometimes  have  asked, — Shall  we  ever  be  men?    '^ 
Shall  we  always  be  youthful,  and  laughing,  and  gay. 
Till  the  last  dear  companion  drops  smiling  away? 

Then  here's  to  our  boyhood,  its  gold  and  its  gray! 
The  stars  of  its  winter,  the  dews  of  its  May!  '  ■Sfi  // 

And  when  we  have  done  with  our  life-lasting  toys,     -ooJ 
Dear  Father,  take  care  of  thy  children.  The  Boys! 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [1800-1804] 


Pi 


THE  JOLLY  OLD  PEDAGOGUE     ^^^^  ^^ 

'■TwAS  a  jolly  old  pedagogue,  long  ago. 
Tall  and  slender,  and  sallow  and  dry; 
His  form  was  bent,  and  his  gait  was  slow, 
His  long,  thin  hair  was  as  white  as  snow. 


The  Jolly   Old   Pedagogue  1747 

But  a  wonderful  twinkle  shone  in  his  eye; 
And  he  sang  every  night  as  he  went  to  bed, 

"Let  us  be  happy  down  here  below: 
The  jiving  should  live,  though  the  dead  be  dead," 

Said  the  jolly  old  pedagogue,  long  ago. 

He  taught  his  scholars  the  rule  of  three, 

Writing,  and  reading,  and  history,  too; 
He  took  the  little  ones  up  on  his  knee. 
For  a  kind  old  heart  in  his  breast  had  he, 

And  the  wants  of  the  littlest  child  he  knew: 
"Learn  while  you're  young,"  he  often  said, 

"There  is  much  to  enjoy,  down  here  below; 
Life  for  the  living,  and  rest  for  the  dead!" 

Said  the  jolly  old  pedagogue,  long  ago. 

With  the  stupidest  boys  he  was  kind  and  cool, 

Speaking  only  in  gentlest  tones: 
The  rod  was  hardly  known  in  his  school  .  .  . 
Whipping,  to  him,  was  a  barbarous  rule, 

And  too  hard  work  for  his  poor  old  bones; 
Besides,  it  was  painful,  he  sometimes  said: 

"We  should  make  life  pleasant,  down  here  below, 
The  living  need  charity  more  than  the  dead," 

Said  the  jolly  old  pedagogue,  long  ago. 

He  lived  in  the  house  by  the  hawthorn  lane, 

With  roses  and  woodbine  over  the  door; 
His  rooms  were  quiet,  and  neat,  and  plain. 
But  a  spirit  of  comfort  there  held  reign. 

And  made  him  forget  he  was  old  and  poor; 
"I  need  so  little,"  he  often  said; 

"And  my  friends  and  relatives  here  below 
Won't  litigate  over  me  when  I  am  dead," 

Said  the  jolly  old  pedagogue,  long  ago. 

But  the  pleasantest  times  that  he  had,  of  all. 
Were  the  sociable  hours  he  used  to  pass. 

With  his  chair  tipped  back  to  a  neighbor's  wall, 

Making  an  unceremonious  call. 
Over  a  pipe  and  a  friendly  glass: 


1748  The   Kindly   Muse 

This  was  the  finest  picture,  he  said,    h.-io.v  l  j 

Of  the  many  he  tasted,  here  below; 
"Who  has  no  cronies,  had  better  be  dead!" 

Said  the  jolly  old  pedagogue,  long  ago. 

Then  the  jolly  old  pedagogue's  wrinkled  face 

Melted  all  over  in  sunshiny  smiles; 
lie  stirred  his  glass  with  an  old-school  grace, 
Chuckled,  and  sipped,  and  prattled  apace, 

Till  the  house  grew  merry,  from  cellar  to  tile^f,  ) 
"I'm  a  pretty  old  man,"  he  gently  said,    j,  p,,  t 

"I've  hngered  a  long  while,  here  l)clow; 
But  my  heart  is  fresh,  if  my  youth  is  fled!" 

Said  the  jolly  old  pedagogue,  long  ago. 

He  smoked  his  pipe  in  the  balmy  air, 

Every  night  when  the  sun  went  down, 
While  the  soft  wind  played  in  his  silvery  hair. 
Leaving  its  tenderest  kisses  there, 

On  the  jolly  old  pedagogue's  jolly  old  crown: 
And,  feehng  the  kisses,  he  smiled  and  said, 

'Twas  a  glorious  world,  down  here  below; 
"Why  wait  for  happiness  till  we  are  dead?" 

Said^the  jolly  old  pedagogue,  long  ago. 

He  sat  at  his  door,  one  midsummer  night, 

After  the  sun  had  sunk  in  the  west. 
And  the  lingering  beams  of  golden  light 
Made  his  kindly  old  face  look  warm  and  bright, 

While  the  odorous  night-wind  whispered  "Rest!" 
Gently,  gently,  he  bowed  his  head.   .   .   . 

There  were  angels  waiting  for  him,  I  know; 
He  was  sure  of  happiness,  living  or  dead, 

This  jolly  old  pedagogue,  long  ago! 

George  Arnold  [1834-1865] 

ON  AN  INTAGLIO  HEAD  OF  MINERVA 

Beneath  the  warrior's  helm,  behold 
The  flowing  tresses  of  the  woman! 

Minerva,  Pallas,  what  you  will — 
A  winsome  creature,  Greek  or  Roman. 


On  an   Intaglio    Head  of  Minerva      1749 

Minerva?     No!  'tis  some  sly  minx 

In  cousin's  helmet  masquerading; 
If  not — then  Wisdom  was  a  dame 

For  sonnets  and  for  serenading! 

I  thought  the  goddess  cold,  austere, 

Not  made  for  love's  despairs  and  blisses: 

Did  Pallas  wear  her  hair  like  that? 
Was  Wisdom's  mouth  so  shaped  for  kisses? 

The  Nightingale  should  be  her  bird, 
And  not  the  Owl,  big-eyed  and  solemn: 

How  very  fresh  she  looks,  and  yet 
She's  older  far  than  Trajan's  Column! 

The  magic  hand  that  carved  this  face, 
And  set  this  vine-work  round  it  running, 

Perhaps  ere  mighty  Phidias  wrought, 
Had  lost  its  subtle  skill  and  cunning. 

Who  was  he?     W^as  he  glad  or  sad, 
Who  knew  to  carve  in  such  a  fashion? 

Perchance  he  graved  the  dainty  head 

For  some  brown  girl  that  scorned  his  passion. 

Perchance,  in  some  still  garden-place. 
Where  neither  fount  nor  tree  to-day  is, 

He  flung  the  jewel  at  the  feet 
Of  Phryne,  or  perhaps  'twas  Lais. 

But  he  is  dust;  we  may  not  know 

His  happy  or  unhappy  story: 
Nameless,  and  dead  these  centuries, 

His  work  outlives  him, — there's  his  glory! 

Both  man  and  jewel  lay  in  earth 

Beneath  a  lava-buried  cit}'; 
The  countless  summers  came  and  went, 

With  neither  haste,  nor  hate,  nor  pity. 

'S'ears  blotted  out  the  man,  but  left 

The  jewel  fresh  as  any  blossom, 
Till  some  Visconti  dug  it  up, — 

To  rise  and  fall  on  jNIabel's  bosom! 


1750  The   Kindly    Muse 

0  nameless  brother!  see  how  Time 

Your  gracious  handiwork  has  guarded: 

See  how  your  loving,  patient  art 
Has  come,  at  last,  to  be  rewarded. 

Who  would  not  suffer  slights  of  men, 
And  pangs  of  hopeless  passion  alsqi,  ■''"'' 

To  have  his  carven  agate-stone  "      ""  ' 

On  such  a  bosom  rise  and  fall  so! 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [183 7-1907] 

THALIA 

A  MIDDLE-AGED  LYRICAL  POET  IS  SUPPOSED  TO  BE  TAKING 
FINAL  LEAVE  OF  THE  MUSE  OF  COMEDY.  SHE  HAS  BROUGHT 
HIM  HIS  HAT  AND  GLOVES,  AND  IS  ABSTRACTEDLY  PICKING 
A  THREAD  OF  GOLD  HAIR  FROM  HIS  COAT  SLEEVE  AS  HE 
BEGINS  TO  speak: 

I  SAY  it  under  the  rose — 

oh,  thanks! — ^yes,  under  the  laurel, 

We  part  lovers,  not  foes; 
we  are  not  going  to  quarrel. 

We  have  too  long  been  friends 

on  foot  and  in  gilded  coaches. 
Now  that  the  whole  thing  ends, 

to  spoil  our  kiss  with  reproaches. 

I  leave  you;  my  soul  is  wrung; 

I  pause,  look  back  from  the  portal — 
Ah,  I  no  more  am  young, 

and  you,  child,  you  are  immortal! 

Mine  is  the  glacier's  way, 

yours  is  the  blossom's  Aveather — 

When  were  December  and  INIay 
known  to  be  happ}^  together? 

Before  my  kisses  grow  tame, 
before  my  moodiness  grieve  you, 

While  yet  my  heart  is  flame, 
and  I  all  lover,  I  leave  you. 


Pan  in  Wall   Street  1751 

So,  in  the  coming  time, 

when  you  count  the  ricli  years  over, 
Think  of  me  in  my  prime, 

and  not  as  a  white-haired  lover, 

Fretful,  pierced  with  regret, 

the  wraith  of  a  dead  Desire 
Thrumming  a  cracked  spinet 

by  a  slowly  dying  fire. 

When,  at  last,  I  am  cold — 

years  hence,  if  the  gods  so  will  it — 
Say,  "He  was  true  as  gold," 

and  wear  a  rose  in  your  fillet! 

Others,  tender  as  I, 

will  come  and  sue  for  caresses, 
Woo  you,  win  you,  and  die — 
.  mind  you,  a  rose  in  your  tresses! 

Some  Melpomene  woo, 

some  hold  Clio  the  nearest; 
You,  sweet  Comedy — you 

were  ever  sw^cetest  and  dearest! 

Nay,  it  is  time  to  go. 

When  writing  your  tragic  sister ' 
Say  to  that  child  of  woe 
how  sorry  I  was  I  missed  her. 

Really,  I  cannot  stay, 

though  "parting  is  such  sweet  sorrow"  .  .  . 
Perhaps  I  will,  on  my  way 

down-town,  look  in  to-morrow! 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrlch  [1837-1907] 

PAN  IN  WALL  STREET 

A.  D.   1867 

Just  where  the  Treasury's  marble  front 
Looks  over  Wall  Street's  mingled  nations; 

Where  Jews  and  Gentiles  most  are  wont 
To  throng  for  trade  and  last  quotations; 


175^  The    Kindly    Muse 

Where,  hour  by  hour,  the  rates  of  gold 

Outrival,  in  the  ears  of  people. 
The  quarter-chimes,  serenely  tolled 

From  Trinity's  undaunted  steeple, — 

Even  there  I  heard  a  strange,  wild  strain 

Sound  high  above  the  modern  clamor, 
Above  the  cries  of  greed  and  gain, 

The  curbstone  war,  the  auction's  hammer; 
And  swift,  on  Music's  misty  ways, 

It  led,  from  all  this  strife  for  millions, 
To  ancient,  sweet-to-nothing  days 

Among  the  kirtle-robed  Sicilians. 

And  as  it  stilled  the  multitude. 

And  yet  more  joyous  rose,  and  shriller, 
I  saw  the  minstrel,  where  he  stood 

At  ease  against  a  Doric  piUar: 
One  hand  a  droning  organ  played, 

The  other  held  a  Pan's-pipe  (fashioned 
Like  those  of  old)  to  lips  that  made 

The  reeds  give  out  that  strain  impassioned. 

'Twas  Pan. himself  had  wandered  here 

A-stroUing  through  this  sordid  city. 
And  piping  to  the  civic  ear 

The  prelude  of  some  pastoral  ditty! 
The  demigod  had  crossed  the  seas, — 

From  haunts  of  shepherd,  nymph,  and  salyr, 
And  Syracusan  times, — to  these 

Far  shores  and  twenty  centuries  later. 

A  ragged  cap  was  on  his  head ; 

But — hidden  thus— there  was  no  doubting 
That,  all  with  crispy  locks  o'erspread, 

His  gnarled  horns  were  somewhere  sprouting; 
His  club-feet,  cased  in  rusty  shoes, 

Were  crossed,  as  on  some  frieze  you  see  them. 
And  trousers,  patched  of  divers  hues. 

Concealed  his  crooked  shanks  beneath  them. 


Pan  in  Wall   Street 

He  filled  the  quivering  reeds  with  sound,     ^^ 

And  o'er  his  mouth  their  changes  shifted, 
And  with  his  goat's-eyes  looked  around 

Where'er  the  passing  current  drifted;     1 
And  soon,  as  on  Trinacrian  hills 

The  nymphs  and  herdsmen  ran  to  hear  him, 
Even  now  the  tradesmen  from  their  tills, 

With  clerks  and  porters,  crowded  near  him. 

The  bulls  and  bears  together  drew 

From  Jauncey  Court  and  New  Street  Alley, 
As  erst,  if  pastorals  be  true. 

Came  beasts  from  every  wooded  valley; 
The  random  passers  stayed  to  list, — 

A  boxer  ^gon,  rough  and  merry, 
A  Broadway  Daphnis,  on  his  tryst 

With  Nais  at  the  Brooklyn  Ferry. 

A  one-eyed  Cyclops  halted  long 

In  tattered  cloak  of  army  pattern. 
And  Galatea  joined  the  throng, — 

A  blowsy,  apple- vending  slattern; 
While  old  Silenus  staggered  out 

From  some  new-fangled  lunch-house  handy, 
And  bade  the  piper,  with  a  shout. 

To  strike  up  Yankee  Doodle  Dandy! 

A  newsboy  and  a  peanut-girl 

Like  little  Fauns  began  to  caper: 
His  hair  was  all  in  tangled  curl, 

Her  tawny  legs  were  bare  and  taper; 
And  still  the  gathering  larger  grew,  ; 

And  gave  its  pence  and  crowded  nigher, 
While  aye  the  shepherd-minstrel  blew 

His  pipe,  and  struck  the  gamut  higher. 

O  heart  of  Nature,  beating  still 

With  throbs  her  vernal  passion  taught  her, — 
Even  here,  as  on  the  vine-clad  hill. 

Or  by  the  Arethusan  water! 


1753 


1754  The   Kindly   Muse 

New  forms  may  fold  the  speech,  new  lands 

Arise  within  these  ocean-portals, 
But  Music  waves  eternal  wands, — 

Enchantress  of  the  souls  of  mortals! 

So  thought  I, — but  among  us  trod 

A  man  in  blue,  with  legal  baton, 
And  scoffed  the  vagrant  demigod, 

And  pushed  him  from  the  step  I  sat  on. 
Doubting  I  mused  upon  the  cry, 

" Great  Pan  is  dead! " — and  all  the  people 
Went  on  their  ways: — and  clear  and  high 

The  quarter  sounded  from  the  steeple. 

Edmund  Clarence  Stedman  [1833-1908] 

UPON  LESBIA— ARGUING 

My  Lesbia,  I  will  not  deny. 

Bewitches  me  completely; 
She  has  the  usual  beaming  eye,  ' 

And  smiles  upon  me  sweetly: 
But  she  has  an  unseemly  way 
Of  contradicting  what  I  say. 

And,  though  I  am  her  cl  jsest  friend. 

And  find  her  fascinating, 
I  cannot  cordially  commend 

Her  method  of  debating: 
Her  logic,  though  she  is  divine. 
Is  singularly  feminine. 

Her  reasoning  is  full  of  tricks, 

And  butterfly  suggestions, 
I  know  no  point  to  which  she  sticks, 

She  begs  the  simplest  questions; 
And,  when  her  premises  are  strong. 
She  always  draws  her  inference  wi'ong. 

Broad,  liberal  views  on  men  and  things 
-   ,; .:        She  will  not  hear  a  word  of; 

To  prove  herself  correct  she  brings 
Some  instance  she  has  heard  of; 


To  Anthea  1755 

The  argument  ad  hominem 
Appears  her  favorite  strategem. 

Old  Socrates,  with  sage  repHes 

To  questions  put  to  suit  him, 
Would  not,  I  think,  have  looked  so  wise 

With  Lesbia  to  confute  him; 
He  would  more  probably  have  bade 
Xantippe  hasten  to  his  aid. 

Ah!  well,  my  fair  philosopher, 

With  clear  brown  eyes  that  glisten 
So  sweetly,  that  I  much  prefer 

To  look  at  them  than  listen. 
Preach  me  your  sermon:  have  your  way, 
The  voice  is  yours,  whate'er  you  say. 

Alfred  Cochrane  [1865- 


TO   ANTHEA,   WHO    MAY   COMMAND   HIM 
ANYTHING 

(new  style) 

Am  I  sincere?     I  say  I  dote 

On  everything  that  Browning  wrote; 

I  know  some  bits  by  heart  to  quote* 

But  then  She  reads  him. 
I  say — and  is  it  strictly  true? — 
How  I  admire  her  cockatoo; 
WeU!  in  a  way  of  course  I  do: 

But  then  She  feeds  him.  ^ 

And  I  become,  at  her  command,  ./^q-/- 

The  sternest  Tory  in  the  land; 

The  Grand  Old  Man  is  far  from  grand; 

But  then  She  states  it.  -^ 

Nay!  worse  than  that,  I  am  so  tarne.r 
I  once  admitted — to  my  shame—  -r 
That  football  was  a  brutal  game: 

Because  She  hates  it. 


1756  The   Kindly   Muse 

My  taste  in  Art  she  hailed  with  groans, 
And  I,  once  charmed  with  bolder  tones, 
Now  love  the  yellows  of  Burne- Jones: 

But  then  She  likes  them. 
My  tuneful  soul  no  longer  hoards 
Stray  jewels  from  the  Empire  boards; 
I  revel  now  in  Dvorak's  chords: 

But  then  She  strikes  them. 

Our  age  distinctly  cramps  a  knight; 
Yet,  though  debarred  from  tilt  and  fight, 
I  can  admit  that  black  is  white. 

If  She  asserts  it. 
Heroes  of  old  were  luckier  men 
Than  I — I  venture  now  and  then 
To  hint — retracting  meekly  when 

She  controverts  it. 

Alfred  Cochrane  [1865- 


THE  EIGHT-DAY  CLOCK 

The  days  of  Bute  and  Grafton's  fame, 

Of  Chatham's  waning  prime, 

First  heard  your  sounding  gong  proclaim 

Its  chronicle  of  Time; 

Old  days  when  Dodd  confessed  his  guilt, 

When  Goldsmith  drave  his  quill, 

And  genial  gossip  Horace  built 

His  house  on  Strawberry  Hill. 

Now  with  a  grave  unmeaning  face 
You  still  repeat  the  tale, 
High-towering  in  your  somber  case, 
Designed  by  Chippendale; 
Without  regret  for  what  is  gone. 
You  "bid  old  customs  change. 
As -year  by  year  you  travel  on 
To  scenes  and  voices  strange. 


The   Eight-Day   Clock  1757 

We  might  have  mingled  with  the  crowd 

Of  courtiers  in  this  hall, 

The  fans  that  swayed,  the  wigs  that  bowed, 

But  you  have  spoiled  it  all; 

We  might  have  lingered  in  the  train 

Of  nymphs  that  Reynolds  drew, 

Or  stared  spell-bound  in  Drury  Lane 

At  Garrick — but  for  3'ou. 

We  might  in  Leicester  Fields  have  swelled 

The  throng  of  beaux  and  cits. 

Or  listened  to  the  concourse  held 

Among  the  Kitcat  wits; 

Have  strolled  with  Selwyn  in  Pall  Mall, 

Arrayed  in  gorgeous  silks, 

Or  in  Great  George  Street  raised  a  yell 

For  Liberty  and  Wilkes. 

This  is  the  life  which  you  have  known, 

Which  you  have  ticked  away, 

In  one  unmoved  unfaltering  tone 

That  ceased  not  day  by  day, 

While  ever  round  your  dial  moved 

Your  hands  from  span  to  span. 

Through  drowsy  hours  and  hours  that  proved 

Big  with  the  fate  of  man. 

A  steady  tick  for  fatal  creeds. 

For  youth  on  folly  bent, 

A  steady  tick  for  worthy  deeds. 

And  moments  wisely  spent; 

No  warning  note  of  emphasis, 

No  whisper  of  advice. 

To  ruined  rake  or  flippant  miss. 

For  coquetry  or  dice. 

You  might,  I  think,  have  hammered  out 
With  meaning  doubly  clear, 
The  midnight  of  a  Vau.xhall  rout 
In  Evelina's  ear; 


1758  The   Kindly   Muse 

Or  when  the  night  was  almost  gone,      •,, 
You  might,  the  deals  between, 
Have  startled  those  who  looked  upon 
The  cloth  when  it  was  green. 

But  no,  in  all  the  vanished  years 

Down  which  your  wheels  have  run, 

Your  message  borne  to  heedless  ears 

Is  one  and  only  one — 

No  wit  of  men,  no  power  of  kings, 

Can  stem  the  overthrow 

Wrought  by  this  pendulum  that  swings 

Sedately  to  and  fro. 

Alfred  Cochrane  [1865- 


A   PORTRAIT 

In  sunny  girlhood's  vernal  life 

She  caused  no  small  sensation, 
But  now  the  modest  English  wife 

To  others  leaves  flirtation. 
She's  young  still,  lovely,  debonair, 

Although  sometimes  her  features      .  .  -  r 
Are  clouded  by  a  thought  of  care 

For  those  two  tiny  creatures. 

Each  tiny,  toddling,  mottled  mite 

Asserts  with  voice  emphatic, 
In  lisping  accents,  "  Mite  is  right,"  . 

Their  rule  is  autocratic: 
The  song  becomes,  that  charmed  mankind, 

Their  musical  narcotic. 
And  baby  lips  than  Love,  she'll  find, 

Are  even  more  despotic.  ^^^^  ^^-^ 

Soft  lullaby  when  singing  there. 

And  castles  ever  building,  ^  ^^ 

Their  destiny  she'll  carve  in  air,  ,j^- 

Bright  with  maternal  gilding:  ^^Hg^^f  „j 


Impression  I759 

Young  Guy,  a  clever  advocate, 

So  eloquent  and  able! 
A  powdered  wig  upon  his  pate, 

A  coronet  for  JMabel ! 

Joseph  Ashby-Sterry  [i83S-igi7] 

"OLD   BOOKS  ARE  BEST" 

Old  Books  are  best!     With  what  dehght 

Does  "Faithorne  fecit"  greet  our  sight 
On  frontispiece  or  tille-page 
Of  that  old  time,  when  on  the  stage 

"Sweet  Nell"  set   "Rowley's"   heart  alight! 

And  you,  O  Friend,  to  whom  I  write, 
Must  not  deny,  e'en  though  you  might. 

Through  fear  of  modern  pirates'  rage. 
Old  Books  are  best. 

What  though  the  print  be  not  so  bright, 
The  paper  dark,  the  binding  slight? 
Our  author,  be  he  dull  or  sage, 
Returning  from  that  distant  age 
So  lives  again,  we  say  of  right: 

Old  Books  are  best. 

Beverly  Chew  [1850- 

IMPRESSION 

In  these  restrained  and  careful  times 
Our  knowledge  petrifies  our  rhymes; 
Ah!  for  that  reckless  fire  men  had 
When  it  was  witty  to  be  mad; 

When  wild  conceits  were  piled  in^scpre^, , 
And  lit  b}'^  flaming  metaphors. 
When  all  was  crazed  and  out  of  tuhe,^ ' 
Yet  throbbed  with  music  of  the  moon. 

If  we  could  dare  to  write  as  ill 
As  some  whose  voices  haunt  us  still, 
Even  we,  perchance,  might  call  our  own 
Their  deep  enchanting  undertone. 


1760  The   Kindly   Muse 

We  are  too  diffident  and  nice, 
Too  learned  and  too  over-wise, 
Too  much  afraid  of  faults  to  be 
The  flutes  of  bold  sincerity. 

For,  as  this  sweet  life  passes  by, 
We  blink  and  nod  with  critic  eye; 
We've  no  words  rude  enough  to  give 
Its  charm  so  frank  and  fugitive. 

The  green  and  scarlet  of  the  Park, 
The  undulating  streets  at  dark. 
The  brown  smoke  blown  across  the  bluCj 
This  colored  city  we  walk  through;— 

The  pallid  faces  full  of  pain, 
The  field-smell  of  the  passing  wain, 
The  laughter,  longing,  perfume,  strife, 
The  daily  spectacle  of  life; — 

Ah!  how  shall  this  be  given  to  rhyme, 
By  rhymesters  of  a  knowing  time? 
Ah!  for  the  age  when  verse  was  clad. 
Being  godlike,  to  be  bad  and  mad. 

Edmund  Gosse  [1841 


"WITH  STRAWBERRIES" 

With  strawberries  we  filled  a  tray, 

And  then  we  drove  away,  away 
Along  the  links  beside  the  sea, 
Where  wave  and  wind  were  light  and  free, 

And  August  felt  as  fresh  as  May. 

And  where  the  springy  turf  was  gay 
With  thyme  and  balm  and  many  a  spray 
Of  wild  roses,  you  tempted  me 
With  strawberries! 

A  shadowy  sail,  silent  and  gray. 
Stole  like  a  ghost  across  the  bay; 


Ballade  of  Ladies'   Names  1761 

But  none  could  hear  me  ask  my  fee, 
And  none  could  know  what  came  to  be. 
Can  sweethearts  all  their  thirst  allay 
With  strawberries? 

William  Er)test  Henley  [1849-1903] 


BALLADE  OF  LADIES'   NAMES 

Brown's  for  Lalage,  Jones  for  Lelia, 

Robinson's  bosom  for  Beatrice  glows, 
Smith  is  a  Hamlet  before  Ophelia. 

The  glamor  stays  if  the  reason  goes! 

Every  lover  the  years  disclose 
Is  of  a  beautiful  name  made  free. 

One  befriends,  and  all  others  are  foes. 
Anna's  the  name  of  names  for  me. 

Sentiment  hallows  the  vowels  of  Delia; 

Sweet  simplicity  breathes  from  Rose; 
Courtly  memories  glitter  in  Celia; 

Rosalind  savors  of  quips  and  hose, 

Araminta  of  wits  and  beaux, 
Prue  of  puddings,  and  Coralie 

All  of  sawdust  and  spangled  shows; 
Anna's  the  name  of  names  for  me. 

Fie  upon  Caroline,  Madge,  Amelia — 
These  I  reckon  the  essence  of  prose! — 

Cavalier  Katherine,  cold  Cornelia, 
Portia's  masterful  Roman  nose, 
Maud's  magnificence,  Totty's  toes. 

Poll  and  Bet  with  their  twang  of  the  sea, 
Nell's  impertinence,  Pamela's  woes! 

Anna's  the  name  of  names  for  me. 

ENVOY 

Ruth  like  a  gillyflower  smells  and  blows, 

Sylvia  prattles  of  Arcadee, 
Sybil  mystifies,  Connie  crows, 

Anna's  the  name  of  names  for  me! 

William  Ernest  Henley  [1849-1903] 


1762  The   Kindly    Muse     \ 


TO  A  PATR  OF  EGYPTIAN  SLIPPERS 

Tiny  slippers  of  gold  and  green,  ,/;^  m,'j 

Tied  with  a  mouldering  golden  cord! 
What  pretty  feet  they  must  have  been 

When  Caesar  Augustus  was  Egypt's  lord! 
Somebody  graceful  and  fair  you  were! 

Not  many  girls  could  dance  in  these! 
When  did  your  shoemaker  make  you,  dear, 

Such  a  nice  pair  of  Egyptian  "threes"? 

Where  were  you  measured?    In  Sals,  or  On, 

Memphis,  or  Thebes,  or  Pelusium? 
Fitting  them  neatly  your  brown  toes  upon. 

Lacing  them  deftly  with  finger  and  thumb, 
I  seem  to  see  you! — so  long  ago. 

Twenty-one  centuries,  less  or  more! 
And  here  are  your  sandals:  yet  none  of  us  know 

What  name,  or  fortune,  or  face  you  bore. 

Your  lips  would  have  laughed,  with  a  rosy  scorn. 

If  the  merchant,  or  slave-girl,  had  mockingly  said, 
"The  feet  will  pass,  but  the  shoes  they  have  worn 

Two  thousand  years  onward  Time's  road  shall  tread, 
And  still  be  footgear  as  good  as  new!" 

To  think  that  calf-skin,  gilded  and  stitched. 
Should  Rome  and  the  Pharaohs  outlive —  and  you 

Be  gone,  like  a  dream,  from  the  world  you  bewitched! 

Not  that  we  mourn  you!    'Twere  too  absurd! 

You  have  been  such  a  very  long  while  away ! 
Your  dry  spiced  dust  would  not  value  one  word 

Of  the  soft  regrets  that  my  verse  could  say. 
Sorrow  and  Pleasure,  and  Love  and  Hate, 

If  you  ever  felt  them,  have  vaporized  hence 
To  this  odor — so  subtle  and  delicate — 

Of  myrrh,  and  cassia,  and  frankincense. 

Of  course  they  embalmed  you!    Yet  not  so  sweet 
Were  aloes  and  nard,  as  the  youthful  glow 

Which  Amenti  stole  when  the  small  dark  feet 
Wearied  of  treading  our  world  below. 


To  a   Pair  of  Egyptian   Slippers      1763 

Look!  it  was  flood-time  in  valley  of  Nile, 

Or  a  very  wet  day  in  the  Delta,  dear!  '>'  njrf// 

When  your  slippers  tripped  lightly  their  latest  mile— ^  '  ' 
The  mud  on  the  soles  renders  that  fact  clear. 

You  knew  Cleopatra,  no  doubt !    You  saw 

Antony's  galleys  from  Actium  come. 
But  there!  if  questions  could  answers  draw 

From  lips  so  many  a  long  age  dumb, 
I  would  not  tease  you  with  history, 

Nor  vex  your  heart  for  the  men  that  were; 
The  one  point  to  learn  that  would  fascinate  me 

Is,  where  and  what  are  you  to-day,  my  dear! 

You  died,  believing  in  Horus  and  Pasht, 

Isis,  Osiris,  and  priestly  lore; 
And  found,  of  course,  such  theories  smashed 

By  actual  fact  on  the  heavenly  shore. 
What  next  did  you  do?    Did  you  transmigrate? 

Have  we  seen  you  since,  all  modern  and  fresh? 
Your  charming  soul — so  I  calculate — 

Mislaid  its  mummy,  and  sought  new  flesh. 

Were  you  she  whom  I  met  at  dinner  last  week, 

With  eyes  and  hair  of  the  Ptolemy  black, 
Who  still  of  this  find  in  Fayoum  would  speak, 

And  to  Pharaohs  and  scarabs  still  carry  us  back? 
A  scent  of  lotus  about  her  hung, 

And  she  had  such  a  far-away  wistful  air 
As  of  somebody  born  when  the  Earth  was  young; 

And  she  wore  of  gilt  slippers  a  lovely  pair. 

Perchance  you  were  married?    These  might  have  been 

Part  of  your  trousseau — the  wedding  shoes; 
And  you  laid  them  aside  with  the  garments  green, 

And  painted  clay  Gods  which  a  bride  would  use; 
And,  may  be,  to-day,  by  Nile's  bright  waters 

Damsels  of  Egypt  in  gowns  of  blue — 
Great-great-great^ — very  great — grand-daughters 

Owe  their  shapely  insteps  to  you!  ,, 

But  vainly  I  beat  at  the  bars  of  the  Past, 
Little  green  slippers  with  golden  strings! 


1764  The   Kindly   Muse 

For  all  you  can  tell  is  that  leather  will  last  ,i.'/  li  '  |,„.  f 
When  loves,  and  delightings,  and  beautiful  things 

Have  vanished,  forgotten — No!  not  quite  that!  ,  ,-/ 

I  catch  some  gleam  of  the  grace  you  wore  '■' 

When  you  finished  with  Life's  daily  pit-a-pat. 
And  left  your  shoes  at  Death's  bedroom  door. 

You  were  born  in  the  Egypt  which  did  not  doubt;      ■'.} 

You  were  never  sad  with  our  new-fashioned  sorrows: 
You  were  sure,  when  your  play-days  on  Earth  ran  out, 

Of  play-times  to  come,  as  we  of  our  morrows! 
Oh,  wise  little  Maid  of  the  Delta!    I  lay 

Your  shoes  in  your  mummy-chest  back  again, 
And  wish  that  one  game  we  might  merrily  play 

At  "Hunt  the  Slippers" — to  see  it  all  plain. 

Edwin  Arnold  [1832-1904] 

WITHOUT  AND  WITHIN  ;  // 

My  coachman,  in  the  moonlight  there. 
Looks  through  the  side-light  of  the  door; 

I  hear  him  with  his  brethren  swear, 

As  I  could  do, — but  only  more.  ,7/ 

Flattening  his  nose  against  the  pane. 

He  envies  me  my  brilliant  lot. 
Breathes  on  his  aching  fists  in  vain. 

And  dooms  me  to  a  place  more  hot. 

He  sees  me  in  to  supper  go,  ,  , , 

A  silken  wonder  by  my  side,  ,,n/,^ 

Bare  arms,  bare  shoulders,  and  a  row 
Of  flounces,  for  the  door  too  wide. 


Kr[-,i->7 


He  thinks  how  happy  is  my  arm 

'Neath  its  white-gloved  and  jewelled  load; 
And  wishes  me  some  dreadful  harm. 

Hearing  the  merry  corks  explode. 

Meanwhile  I  inly  curse  the  bore 
Of  hunting  still  the  same  old  coon, 

And  envy  him,  outside  the  door. 
In  golden  quiets  of  the  moon. 


"  She  was  a   Beauty  "  i  765 

The  winter  wiiul  is  not  so  cold 

As  the  bright  smile  he  sees  me  win, 

Nor  the  host's  oldest  wine  so  old 
As  our  poor  gabble  sour  and  thin. 

I  envy  him  the  ungyved  prance 

With  which  his  freezing  feet  he  warms. 

And  drag  my  lady's-chains  and  dance 
The  galley-slave  of  dreary  forms. 

Oh,  could  he  have  my  share  of  din, 

And  I  his  quiet! — past  a  doubt 
'Twould  still  be  one  man  bored  within, 

And  just  another  bored  without. 

Nay,  when,  once  paid  my  mortal  fee, 

Some  idler  on  my  headstone  grim 
Traces  the  moss-blurred  name,  will  he 

Think  me  the  happier,  or  I  him? 

James  RnsscI!  Loii'dl  [iSig-iSgi] 

"SHE  WAS  A  BEAUTY" 

She  was  a  beauty  in  the  days 

When  Madison  was  President, 
And  quite  coquettish  in  her  ways, — 

On  conquests  of  the  heart  intent. 

Grandpapa,  on  his  right  knee  bent. 
Wooed  her  in  stiff,  old-fashioned  phrase, — 
She  was  a  beauty  in  the  days 

When  Madison  was  President. 

And  when  your  roses  where  hers  went 
Shall  go,  my  Rose,  who  dale  from  Hayes, 

I  hope  you'll  wear  her  sweet  content 
Of  whom  tradition  lightly  says: 
She  was  a  beauty  in  the  days 

When  JNIadison  was  President. 

Henry  Ciiylcr  Bunner  [1855-1896] 


1766  The   Kindly   Muse 

NELL  GWYNNE'S  LOOKING-GLASS 

Glass  antique,  'twixt  thee  and  Nell 

Draw  we  here  a  parallel. 

She,  like  thee,  was  forced  to  bear 

All  reflections,  foul  or  fair. 

Thou  art  deep  and  bright  within, 
Depths  as  bright  belonged  to  Gwynne; 
Thou  art  very  frail  as  well, 
Frail  as  flesh  is, — so  was  Nell. 

Thou,  her  glass,  art  silver-lined. 

She  too,  had  a  silver  mind: 

Thine  is  fresh  till  this  far  day. 

Hers  till  death  ne'er  wore  away: 
Thou  dost  to  thy  surface  win 
Wandering  glances,  so  did  Gwynne; 
Eyes  on  thee  love  long  to  dwell, 
So  men's  eyes  would  do  on  Nell. 

[i        Life-like  forms  in  thee  are  sought, 
Such  the  forms  the  actress  wrought; 
Truth  unfailing  rests  in  you, 
Nell,  whate'er  she  was,  was  true. 
Clear  as  virtue,  dull  as  sin, 
Thou  art  oft,  as  oft  was  Gwynne; 
Breathe  on  thee,  and  drops  will  swell: 
Bright  tears  dimmed  the  eyes  of  Nell. 

Thine's  a  frame  to  charm  the  sight. 

Framed  was  she  to  give  delight; 

Waxen  forms  here  truly  show 

Charles  above  and  Nell  below; 

But  between  them,  chin  with  chin, 
Stuart  stands  as  low  as  Gwynne, — ■ 
Paired,  yet  parted, — ^meant  to  tell 
Charles  was  opposite  to  Nell. 

Round  the  glass  wherein  her  face 
Smiled  so  soft,  her  "arms"  we  trace; 
Thou,  her  mirror,  hast  the  pair, 
[,•- .        Lion  here,  and  leopard  there. 


MImnermus  in   Church  1767 

She  had  part  in  these, — akin     ' 
To  the  Hon-heart  was  Gwynne; 
And  the  leopard's  beauty  fell 
With  its  spots  to  bounding  Nell. 

Oft  inspected,  ne'er  seen  through, 
Thou  art  firm,  if  brittle  too; 
So  her  will,  on  good  intent, 
Might  be  broken,  never  bent. 

What  the  glass  was,  when  therein 

Beamed  the  face  of  glad  Nell  Gwynne, 

Was  that  face  by  beauty's  spell 

To  the  honest  soul  of  Nell. 

Laman  Blanchard  [1804- 1845] 

MIMNERMUS  IN   CHURCH 

You  promise  heavens  free  from  strife. 
Pure  truth,  and  perfect  change  of  will; 

But  sweet,  sweet  is  this  human  life. 
So  sweet,  I  fain  would  breathe  it  still: 

Your  chilly  stars  I  can  forego, 

This  warm  kind  world  is  all  I  know. 

You  say  there  is  no  substance  here, 

One  great  reality  above: 
Back  from  that  void  I  shrink  in  fear, 

And  child-like  hide  myself  in  love: 
Show  me  what  angels  fell.     7'ill  then, 
I  cling,  a  mere  weak  man,  to  men. 

You  bid  me  lift  my  mean  desires 

From  faltering  lips  and  fitful  veins 
To  sexless  souls,  ideal  choirs. 

Unwearied  voices,  wordless  strains: 
My  mind  with  fonder  welcome  owns 
One  dear  dead  friend's  remembered  tones. 

Forsooth  the  present  we  must  give 

To  that  which  cannot  pass  away; 
All  beauteous  things  for  which  we  live 

By  laws  of  time  and  space  decay. 


1768  -f'riie   Kindly   Muse 


But  oh,  the  very  reason  why 
I  clasp  them,  is  because  they  die. 

William  Johnson-Cory  [1823-1892] 

CLAY 

"We  are  but  clay,"  the  preacher  saith; 

"The  heart  is  clay,  and  clay  the  brain, 
And  soon  or  late  there  cometh  death       [  ,- 

To  mingle  us  with  earth  again." 

Well,  let  tlic  preacher  have  it  so. 

And  clay  we  are,  and  clay  shall  be; — 

Why  iterate? — for  this  I  know. 
That  clay  does  very  well  for  me. 

When  clay  has  such  red  mouths  to  kiss, 

Firm  hands  to  grasp,  it  is  enough: 
How  can  I  take  it  aught  amiss 

We  are  not  made  of  rarer  stuff? 


And  if  one  tempt  you  to  believe 
His  choice  would  be  immortal  gold, 

Question  him,  Can  you  then  conceiv-e 
A  warmer  heart  than  clay  can  hold? 


Y 


Or  richer  joys  than  clay  can  feel? 

And  when  perforce  he  falters  nay. 
Bid  him  renounce  his  wish  and  kneel 

In  thanks  for  this  same  kindly  clay. 

Edward  V  err  all  Lucas    [1868- 

AUCASSIN  AND   NICOLETE 

What  magic  halo  rings  thy  head, 
Dream-maiden  of  a  minstrel  dead? 
What  charm  of  faerie  round  thee  hovers, 
That  all  who  listen  are  thy  lovers? 

What  power  yet  makes  our  pulses  thrill 
To  see  thee  at  thy  window-sill, 
And  by  that  dangerous  cord  down-sliding. 
And  through  the  moonlit  garden  gliding? 


Ballade  of  Summer  ^1^9 

True  maiden  art  thou  in  thy  dread ; 
True  maiden  in  thy  hardihead; 
True  maiden  when,  thy  fears  half-over, 
Thou  hngcrest  to  trj-  thy  lover. 

And  ah!  what  heart  of  stone  or  steel 
But  doth  some  stir  unwonted  feel, 
When  to  the  day  new  brightness  bringing 
Thou  standest  at  the  stair-foot  singing! 

Thy  slender  limbs  in  boyish  dress, 
Thy  tones  half  glee,  half  tenderness. 
Thou  singest,  'neath  the  light  tale's  cover, 
Of  thy  true  love  to  thy  true  lover. 

O  happy  lover,  happy  maid. 
Together  in  sweet  story  laid; 
Forgive  the  hand  that  here  is  Ijaring 
Your  old  loves  for  new  lovers'  staring! 

Yet,  Nicolete,  why  fear'st  thou  fame? 
No  slander  now  can  touch  thy  name, 
Nor  Scandal's  self  a  fault  discovers, 
Though  each  new  year  thou  hast  new  lovers. 

Nor,  Aucassin,  need'st  thou  to  fear 
These  lovers  of  too  late  a  year. 
Nor  dread  one  jealous  pang's  revival; 
No  lover  now  can  be  thy  rival. 

What  flower  considers  if  its  blooms 
Light  haunts  of  men,  or  forest  glooms? 
What  care  ye  though  the  world  discovers 
Your  flowers  of  love,  O  flower  of  lovers! 

Francis  William  Boiirdillon  [1852-    ,, 


BALLADE  OF  SUMMER  '^ 

When  strawberry  pottles  are  common  and  cheap, 
Ere  elms  be  black,  or  limes  be  sere,  / 

When  midnight  dances  are  murdering  sleep, 
Then  comes  in  the  sweet  o'  the  year! 


1770  The   Kindly   Muse 

And  far  from  Fleet  Street,  far  from  here, 
The  Summer  is  Queen  in  the  length  of  the  land, 

And  moonlit  nights  they  are  soft  and  clear. 
When  fans  for  a  penny  are  sold  in  the  Strand! 

When  clamor  that  doves  in  the  lindens  keep 

Mingles  with  musical  plash  of  the  weir, 
When  drowned  green  tresses  of  crowsfoot  creep, 

Then  comes  in  the  sweet  o'  the  year! 

And  better  a  crust  and  a  beaker  of  beer, 
With  rose-hung  hedges  on  either  hand. 

Than  a  palace  in  town,  and  a  prince's  cheer, 
When  fans  for  a  penny  are  sold  in  the  Strand! 

When  big  trout  late  in  the  twilight  leap,       j 

When  cuckoo  clamoreth  far  and  near, 
When  glittering  scythes  in  the  hayfield  reap. 

Then  comes  in  the  sweet  o'  the  year! 

And  it's  oh  to  sail,  with  the  wind  to  steer, 
While  kine  knee-deep  in  the  water  stand. 

On  a  Highland  loch,  or  a  Lowland  mere. 
When  fans  for  a  penny  are  sold  in  the  Strand! 

ENVOY 

Friend,  with  the  fops,  while  we  dawdle  here. 
Then  comes  in  the  sweet  o'  the  year! 
And  the  Summer  runs  out,  like  grains  of  sand, 
When  fans  for  a  penny  are  sold  in  the  Strand! 

Andrew  Lang  [1844-1012] 

THE  BALLAD   OF  PROSE  AND   RHYME 

When  the  ways  are  heavy  with  mire  and  rut. 

In  November  fogs,  in  December  snows. 
When  the  North  Wind  howls,  and  the  doors  are  shut, — 

There  is  place  and  enough  for  the  pains  of  prose; 

But  whenever  a  scent  from  the  whitethorn  blows, 
And  the  jasmine-stars  at  the  casement  chmb. 

And  a  Rosalind-face  at  the  lattice  shows,      .   , 
Then  hey! — ^for  the  ripple  of  laughing  rhyme!     [ 


"Good-Night,   Babette!"  1771 

When  the  brain  gets  dry  as  an  empty  nut, 

When  the  reason  stands  on  its  squarest  toes, 
When  the  mind  (hke  a  beard)  has  a  "formal  cut," — 

There  is  place  and  enough  for  the  pains  of  prose; 

But  whenever  the  May-blood  stirs  and  glows, 
And  the  young  year  draws  to  the  "golden  prime," 

And  Sir  Romeo  sticks  in  his  ear  a  rose, — 
Then  hey! — for  the  ripple  of  laughing  rhyme! 

In  a  theme  where  the  thoughts  have  a  pedant-strut, 

In  a  changing  quarrel  of  "Ayes"  and  "Noes,"  . 
In  a  starched  procession  of  "If"  and  "But,"— 

There  is  place  and  enough  for  the  pains  of  prose; 

But  whenever  a  soft  glance  softer  grows, 
And  the  light  hours  dance  to  the  trysting-time. 

And  the  secret  is  told  "  that  no  one  knows," — 
Then  hey! — for  the  ripple  of  laughing  rhyme! 

ENVOY  ,,  .,V,,,,7 

In  the  work-a-day  world, — for  its  needs  and  woes, 
There  is  place  and  enough  for  the  pains  of  prose; 
But  whenever  the  May-bells  clash  and  chime. 
Then  hey! — for  the  ripple  of  laughing  rhyme! 

Austin  Dohson  [1840- 


' GOOD-NIGHT,    BABETTE!" 

Si  vieillesse  pouvail ! — 


^ni 


\\?. 


Scene. — A  small  neat  Room.     In  a  high  Vollaire  Chair 
sits  a  ivhite-haircd  old  Gentleman. 

MONSIEUR  VIEUXBOIS  ^ABETTE 

M.  \aEUXBOis  {turning  querulously) 

Day  of  my  life!     Where  raw  she  get! 
Babette!     I  say!     Babette!— Babette! 

BABETTE  (entering  hurriedly) 
Coming,  M'sieu'!     If  M'sieu'  speaks  ''  .'Cfi'// 

So  loud,  he  won't  be  well  for  weeks! 


177^  The   Kindly    Muse 

M.    VIEUXBOIS 

Where  have  you  been? 

BABETTE 

Why  M'sieu'  knows: — 
April!  .  .  .  Villc  d'Avray!  .  .  .  Ma'am'selle  Rose! 

M.    VIEUXBOIS 

Ah!  I  am  old, — and  I  forget. 

Was  the  place  growing  green,  Babette? 

BABETTE 

But  of  a  greenness! — yes,  M'sieu'! 
And  then  the  sky  so  blue! — so  blue! 
And  when  I  dropped  my  immortelle, 
How  the  birds  sang! 

(Lifling  her  apron  to  her  eyes) 

This  poor  Ma'am'selle! 

M.    VIEUXBOIS 

You're  a  good  girl,  Babette,  but  she, — 

She  was  an  Angel,  verily. 

Sometimes  I  think  I  see  her  yet 

Stand  smiling  by  the  cabinet; 

And  once,  I  know,  she  peeped  and  laughed 

Betwixt  the  curtains  .  .  . 

Where's  the  draught? 
{She  gives  him  a  cup) 
Now  I  shall  sleep,  I  think,  Babette; — 
Sing  me  your  Norman  chansonuette. 

BABETTE  (slngs) 

"Once  at  the  Angelus, 
{Ere  I  was  dead), 
*       Angels  all  glorious  ;   !/. 

Came  to  my  bed; 
Angels  in  blue  and  white 
Crowned  on  the  Head." 

M.  VIEUXBOIS  {drowsily) 
"She  was  an  Angel"  .  .  .  "Once  she  laughed"  .  .  „ 
What,  was  I  dreaming? 

Where's  the  draught? 


A   Dialogue  from   Plato 

BABETTE  {showiug  tlic  ciiiply  cup) 
The  draught,  M'sieu'? 

M.    VIEUXBOIS 

How  I  forget! 
I  am  so  old!     But  sing,  Babette! 

BABETTE  (sihgs) 

"One  was  (lie  Friend  I  left 

Stark  in  the  Snow; 
One  was  the  Wife  that  died 

Long, — long  ago; 
One  was  the  Love  I  lost  ■   ■   ■ 

How  could  she  knoiv?" 

M.  VIEUXBOIS  (murmnring) 

Ah,  Paul!  ...  old  Paul!  .  .  .  Eulahc  too! 
And  Rose  .  .  .  And  0!  "the  sky  so  blue!" 

BABETTE  (siflgs) 

"One  had  my  Mother's  eyes, 

Wistful  and  mild; 
One  had  my  Father's  face; 

One  was  a  Child: 
All  of  them  bent  to  me, — 

Bent  down  and  smiled!" 
(He  is  asleep!) 

M.  VIEUXBOIS  (almost  inaudihly) 

"Howl  forget!" 
"I  am  so  old!"  .  .  .  "Good-night,  Babette!"     ''^ 

Austin  Dobson  [1840— 


A   DIALOGUE   FROM   TLATO 

Le  temps  le  mieux  employe  est  celui  qu'on  perd. — Claude  Tillier 

I'd  "read"  three  hours.     Both  notes  and  text 

Were  fast  a  mist  becoming; 
In  bounced  a  vagrant  bee,  perplexed. 

And  filled  the  room  with  humming, 


1773 


1774  The   Kindly   Muse 

Then  out.     The  casement's  leafage  sways, 

And,  parted  hght,  discloses 
Miss  Di.,  with  hat  and  book, — a  maze 

Of  muslin  mixed  with  roses. 

"You're  reading  Greek?"     "lam — andyou?",     ; 

"O,  mine's  a  mere  romancer!" 
"So  Plato  is."     "Then  read  him — do; 

And  I'll  read  mine  for  answer." 

I  read:  "My  Plato  (Plato,  too— 
That  wisdom  thus  should  harden!) 

Declares  'blue  eyes  look  doubly  blue 
Beneath  a  Dolly  Varden.'" 

She  smiled.     "My  book  in  turn  avers 

(No  author's  name  is  stated) 
That  sometimes  those  Philosophers 

Are  sadly  mistranslated." 

"But  hear, — the  next's  in  stronger  style: 

The  Cynic  School  asserted 
That  two  red  lips  which  part  and  smile 

May  not  be  controverted!" 

She  smiled  once  more.     "My  book,  1  find, 

Observes  some  modern  doctors 
Would  make  the  Cynics  out  a  kind 

Of  album-verse  concoctors."  '^-^  21  on, 

Then  I:  "Why  not?     'Ephesian  law, 

No  less  than  time's  tradition, 
Enjoined  fair  speech  on  all  who  saw  i  bio  02  n ; 

Diana's  apparition.'" 

She  blushed, — this  time.     "If  Plato's  page 

No  wiser  precept  teaches. 
Then  I'd  renounce  that  doubtful  sage, 

And  walk  to  Burnham  Beeches." 

"Agreed,"  I  said.     "For  Socrates 

(I  find  he  too  is  talking) 
Thinks  Learning  can't  remain  at  ease 

When  Beauty  goes  a-walking." 


The   Ladies  of  St.  James's  ^775 

She  read  no  more.    I  leapt  the  sill: 

The  sequel's  scarce  essential — 
Nay,  more  than  this,  I  hold  it  still 

Profoundly  confidential. 

Austin  Dobsoii  [1840- 

THE  LADIES  OF   ST.   JAMES'S 

A  PROPER  NEW  BALLAD  OF  THE  COUNTRY  AND  THE  TOWN 
Phyllida  onto  ante  alias. — Virgil 

The  ladies  of  St.  James's 

Go  swinging  to  the  play; 
Their  footmen  run  before  them. 

With  a ''Stand  by!    Clear  the  way!" 
But  Phyllida,  my  Phyllida! 

She  takes  her  buckled  shoon, 
When  we  go  out  a-courting 

Beneath  the  hai'vest  moon. 

The  ladies  of  St.  James's 

Wear  satin  on  their  backs; 
They  sit  all  night  at  Ombre, 

With  candles  all  of  wax: 
But  Phyllida,  my  Phyllida! 

She  dons  her  russet  gown, 
And  runs  to  gather  May  dew 

Before  the  world  is  down. 

The  ladies  of  St.  James's! 

They  are  so  fine  and  fair, 
You'd  think  a  box  of  essences 

Was  broken  in  the  air: 
But  Phylhda,  my  Phyllida! 

The  breath  of  heath  and  furze 
When  breezes  blow  at  morning. 

Is  not  so  fresh  as  hers. 

The  ladies  of  St.  James's! 

They're  painted  to  the  eyes; 
Their  white  it  stays  for  ever, 

Their  red  it  never  dies: 


1776  The   Kindly   Muse 

But  Phyllida,  my  Phyllida! 

Her  color  comes  and  goes; 
It  trembles  to  a  lily, — 

It  wavers  to  a  rose. 

The  ladies  of  St.  James's! 

You  scarce  can  understand 
The  half  of  all  their  speeches, 

Their  phrases  are  so  grand: 
But  Phyllida,  my  Phyllida! 

Her  shy  and  simple  words 
Are  clear  as  after  rain-drops 

The  music  of  the  birds. 

The  ladies  of  St.  James's! 

They  have  their  fits  and  freaks; 
They  smile  on  you — for  seconds, 

They  frown  on  you — for  weeks: 
But  Phyllida,  my  Phyllida! 

Come  either  storm  or  shine, 
From  Shrove-tide  unto  Shrove-tide, 

Is  always  true — and  mine. 

My  Phyllida!  my  Phyllida! 

I  care  not  though  they  heap 
The  hearts  of  all  St.  James's, 

And  give  me  all  to  keep; 
I  care  not  whose  the  beauties 

Of  all  the  world  may  be. 
For  Phyllida — for  Phyllida 

Is  all  the  world  to  me! 

Atisthi  Dobson  [1840- 


THE  CURE'S   PROGRESS 

Monsieur  the  Cure  down  the  street 

Comes  with  his  kind  old  face, —  J 

With  his  coat  worn  bare,  and  his  straggling  hair,  1 

And  his  green  umbrella-case. 


A  Gentleman   of  the   Old  School      1777 

You  may  see  him  pass  by  the  little  "Grande  Place  ", 
And  the  tiny  "Hotcl-de-Ville";  bil  'jH 

He  smiles,  as  he  goes,  to  the  Jleurlste  Rose,    '  '  ^^ 
And  the  pompier  Theophile.  ^T 

He  turns,  as  a  rule,  through  the  " Marehe  "  cool, 
Where  the  noisy  fish-wives  call;  '^ 

And  his  compliment  pays  to  the  "  Belle  Therise'", 
As  she  knits  in  her  dusky  stall. 

There's  a  letter  to  drop  at  the  locksmith's  shop, 

And  Toto,  the  locksmith's  niece, 
Has  jubilant  hopes,  for  the  Cure  gropes 

In  his  tails  for  a  pain  d'epice. 

There's  a  little  dispute  with  a  merchant  of  fruit. 

Who  is  said  to  be  heterodox, 
That  will  ended  be  with  a  "Ma  foi,  oui!^' 

And  a  pinch  from  the  Cure's  box. 

There  is  also  a  word  that  no  one  heard 

To  the  furrier's  daughter  Lou.; 
i\nd  a  pale  cheek  fed  with  a  flickering  red. 

And  a  "  Bou  Dieii  garde  M'sieii'!" 

But  a  grander  way  for  the  Sous-Prefet, 

And  a  bow  for  Ma'am'selle  Anne; 
And  a  mock  "off-hat"  to  the  Notary's  cat, 

And  a  nod  to  the  Sacristan: — 

For  ever  through  life  the  Cure  goes 

With  a  smile  on  his  kind  old  face — 
With  his  coat  worn  bare,  and  his  straggling  hair. 

And  his  green  umbrella-case. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


A  GENTLEMAN  OF  THE  OLD   SCHOOL 

He  lived  in  that  past  Georgian  day. 
When  men  were  less  inclined  to  say 
That  "Time  is  Gold,"  and  overlay 


1778  The   Kindly   Muse 

.'■  .  ,■  -'l  With  toil  their  pleasure; 

He  held  some  land,  and  dwelt  thereon,; — 
Where,  I  forget, — the  house  is  gone; 
His  Christian  name,  I  think,  was  John, — • 
His  surname,  Leisure. 

Reynolds  has  painted  him,  — a  face 
Filled  with  a  fine,  old-fashioned  grace. 
Fresh-colored,  frank,  with  ne'er  a  trace 

Of  trouble  shaded; 
The  eyes  are  blue,  the  hair  is  dressed 
In  plainest  way, — one  hand  is  pressed 
Deep  in  a  flapped  canary  vest. 

With  buds  brocaded. 

He  wears  a  brown  old  Brunswick  coat. 
With  silver  buttons, — round  his  throat, 
A  soft  cravat; — in  all  you  note 

An  elder  fashion, — 
A  strangeness,  whicli,  to  us  who  shine 
In  shapely  hats, — whose  coats  combine 
All  harmonies  of  hue  and  line. 

Inspires  compassion. 

He  hved  so  long  ago,  you  see! 
Men  were  untra veiled  then,  but  we. 
Like  Ariel,  post  o'er  land  and  sea 

With  careless  parting; 
He  found  it  quite  enough  for  him 
To  smoke  his  pipe  in  "garden  trim," 
And  watch,  about  the  fish  tank's  brim, 

The  swallows  darting. 

He  liked  the  well-wheel's  creaking  tongue,- 
He  liked  the  thrush  that  fed  her  young, — 
He  liked  the  drone  of  flies  among 

His  netted  peaches; 
He  liked  to  watch  the  sunlight  fall 
Athwart  his  ivied  orchard  wall; 
Or  pause  to  catch  the  cuckoo's  call 

Beyond  the  beeches. 


A  Gentleman   of  the   Old  School     1779 

His  were  the  times  of  Paint  and  Patch, 
And  yet  no  Ranelagh  could  match 
The  sober  doves  that  round  his  thatch 

Spread  tails  and  sidled; 
He  liked  their  rufifling,  puffed  content; 
For  him  their  drowsy  wheelings  meant 
More  than  a  Mall  of  Beaux  that  bent, 

Or  Belles  that  bridled. 

Not  that,  in  truth,  when  life  began 
He  shunned  the  flutter  of  the  fan; 
He  too  had  maybe  "pinked  his  man" 

In  Beauty's  quarrel; 
But  now  his  "fervent  youth"  had  flown 
Where  lost  things  go;  and  he  was  grown, ) 
As  staid  and  slow-paced  as  his  own 

Old  hunter.  Sorrel. 

Yet  still  he  loved  the  chase,  and  held 
That  no  composer's  score  excelled 
The  merry  horn,  when  Sweetlip  swelled 

Its  jovial  riot ; 
But  most  his  measured  words  of  praise 
Caressed  the  angler's  easy  ways, — 
His  idly  meditative  days, — 

His  rustic  diet. 

Not  that  his  "meditating"  rose 
Beyond  a  sunny  summer  doze; 
He  never  troubled  his  repose 

With  fruitless  prying; 
But  held,  as  law  for  high  and  low, 
What  God  withholds  no  man  can  know, 
And  smiled  away  enquiry  so, 

Without  replying. 

We  read — alas,  how  much  we  read! — 
The  jumbled  strifes  of  creed  and  creed 
-   With  endless  controversies  feed 


lySo  The   Kindly   Muse 

Our  groaning  tables; 
His  books — and  they  sufficed  him — were 
Cotton's  Montaigne,  The  Grave  of  Blair, 
A  "Walton" — much  the  worse  for  wear, 

And  Msop's  Fables. 

One  more— The  Bible.    Not  that  he 
Had  searched  its  page  as  deep  as  we; 
No  sophistries  could  make  him  see 
Its  slender  credit; 
It  may  be  that  he  could  not  count 
The  sires  and  sons  to  Jesse's  fount, — 
He  liked  the  "Sermon  on  the  Mount," — ■ 
^^.^^,  r,  I  And  more,  he  read  it. 

Once  he  had  loved,  but  failed  to  wed, 
A  red-cheeked  lass  who  long  was  dead; 
His  ways  were  far  too  slow,  he  said, 

To  quite  forget  her; 
And  still  when  time  had  turned  him  gray, 
The  earliest  hawthorn  buds  in  May 
Would  find  his  lingering  feet  astray, 

Where  first  he  met  her. 

"In  Ccelo  Qiiies^'  heads  the  stone 

On  Leisure's  grave, — now  little  known, 

A  tangle  of  wild-rose  has  grown 

So  thick  across  it; 
The  "Benefactions"  still  declare 
He  left  the  clerk  an  elbow-chair. 
And  "  1 2  Pence  Yearly  to  Prepare 

A  Christmas  Posset."    . 

Lie  softly.  Leisure!    Doubtless  you. 

With  too  serene  a  conscience  drew 

Your  easy  breath,  and  slumbered  through 

The  gravest  issue; 
But  we,  to  whom  our  age  allows 
Scarce  space  to  wipe  our  weary  brows. 
Look  down  upon  your  narrow  house, 

Old  friend,  and  miss  you! 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


On  a  Fan  1781 


ON  A  FAN 

THAT  BELONGED  TO  THE  MARQUISE  DE  POMPADOUR 

Chicken-skin,  delicate,  white. 

Painted  by  Carlo  Vanloo, 
Loves  in  a  riot  of  light, 

Roses  and  vaporous  blue; 

Hark  to  the  dainty  frou-frou! 
Picture  above,  if  you  can. 

Eyes  that  could  melt  as  the  dew, — 
This  was  the  Pompadour's  fan! 

See  how  they  rise  at  the  sight, 

Thronging  the  ffi//  dc  Bceuf  through, 
Courtiers  as  butterflies  bright. 

Beauties  that  Fragonard  drew, 

Talon-rougc,  falbala,  queue. 
Cardinal,  Duke, — to  a  man, 

Eager  to  sigh  or  to  sue, — 
This  was  the  Pompadour's  fan! 

Ah,  but  things  more  than  polite 

Hung  on  this  toy,  voycz-voiis! 
Matters  of  state  and  of  might. 

Things  that  great  ministers  do; 

Things  that,  maybe,  overthrew 
Those  in  whose  brains  they  began; 

Plere  was  the  sign  and  the  cue, — 
This  was  the  Pompadour's  fan! 

ENVOY 

Where  are  the  secrets  it  knew? 

Weavings  of  plot  and  of  plan? 
— But  where  is  the  Pompadour,  too? 

This  was  the  Pompadour's  Fan! 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


1782  The   Kindly   Muse 


'WHEN  I   SAW  YOU  LAST,   ROSE" 

When  I  saw  you  last,  Rose, 
You  were  only  so  high ; — 
How  fast  the  time  goes! 

Like  a  bud  ere  it  blows, 
You  just  peeped  at  the  sky, 
When  I  saw  you  last.  Rose! 

Now  your  petals  unclose, 
Now  your  May- time  is  nigh; — 
How  fast  the  time  goes! 

And  a  life,— how  it  grows! 
You  were  scarcely  so  shy. 
When  I  saw  you  last,  Rose! 

In  your  bosom  it  shows 
There's  a  guest  on  the  sly; 
(How  fast  the  time  goes!) 

Is  it  Cupid?    Who  knows! 
Yet  you  used  not  to  sigh. 
When  I  saw  you  last.  Rose; — 
How  fast  the  time  goes! 

Anslin  Dobson  [1840- 


URCEUS  EXIT 

I  INTENDED  an  Ode, 

And  it  turned  to  a  Sonnet. 

It  began  (/  la  mode, 

I  intended  an  Ode; 

But  Rose  crossed  the  road 
In  her  latest  new  bonnet; 

I  intended  an  Ode; 
And  it  turned  to  a  Sonnet. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


Ihe   Ballad  of  Dead   Ladies        1783 

A  CORSAGE  BOUQUET 

Myrtilla,  to-night, 

Wears  Jacqueminot  roses. 
She's  the  lovehest  sight! 
Myrtilla  to-night: — 
Correspondingly  light 

My  pocket-book  closes. 
Myrtilla,  to-night 

Wears  Jacqueminot  roses. 

Charles  Henry  LUders  [1858-1891] 

TWO  TRIOLETS 

V/iai  he  said:— 

This  kiss  upon  your  fan  I  press — 

Ah!  Sainte  Nitouche,  you  don't  refuse  it! 
And  may  it  from  its  soft  recess — 
This  kiss  upon  your  fan  I  press — 
Be  blown  to  you,  a  shy  caress, 

By  this  white  down,  whene'er  you  use  it. 
This  kiss  upon  your  fan  I  press, — ■ 

Ah,  Sainte  Nitouche,  you  don'i  refuse  it! 

'Vhai  she  thought: — 
To  kiss  a  fan! 

What  a  poky  poet! 
The  stupid  man 
To  kiss  a  fan 
When  he  knows — that— he — can — 

Or  ought  to  know  it — 
To  kiss  a  fan! 

What  a  poky  poet ! 

Harrison  Robertson  [1856- 

THE  BALLAD   OF  DEAD   LADIES* 

FROM   THE   FRENCH   OF   FRANCOIS   VILLON    1450 

Tell  me  now  in  what  hidden  way  is 

Lady  Flora  the  lovely  Roman? 
Where's  Hipparchia,  and  where  is  Thais, 

Neither  of  them  the  fairer  woman? 
*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3837. 


I 


1784  The   Kindly   Muse 

Where  is  Echo,  beheld  of  no  man, 
Only  heard  on  river  and  mere, — 

She  whose  beauty  was  more  than  human? 
But  where  are  the  snows  of  yester-year? 

Where's  Heloise,  the  learned  nun. 
For  whose  sake  Abeilard,  I  ween. 

Lost  manhood  and  put  priesthood  on? 
(From  Love  he  won  such  dule  and  teen!) 
And  where,  I  pray  you,  is  the  Queen 

Who  willed  that  Buridan  should  steer 

Sewed  in  a  sack's  mouth  down  the  Seine?  . 

But  where  are  the  snows  of  yester-year? 

White  Queen  Blanche,  like  a  queen  of  lilies, 
With  a  voice  like  any  mermaiden, — 

Bertha  Broadfoot,  Beatrice,  Alice, 

And  Ermengarde  the  lady  of  Maine, — 
And  that  good  Joan  whom  Englishmen 

At  Rouen  doomed  and  burned  her  there, — 
Mother  of  God,  where  are  they  then?  .  .  . 

But  where  are  the  snows  of  yester-year? 

Nay,  never  ask  this  week,  fair  lord, 
Where  they  are  gone,  nor  yet  this  year. 

Except  with  this  for  an  overword, — 
But  where  are  the  snows  of  yester-year? 

Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti  [1828- 


BALLADE  OF  DEAD   LADIES 

AFTER   VILLON 

Nay,  tell  me  now  in  Avhat  strange  air 
The  Roman  Flora  dwells  to-day, 
Where  Archippiada  hides,  and  where 
Beautiful  Thais  has  passed  away? 
Whence  answers  Echo,  afield,  astray, 
By  mere  or  stream, — around,  below? ; 
Lovelier  she  than  a  woman  of  clay; 
Nay,  but  where  is  the  last  year's  snow? 


A   Ballad  of  Dead   Ladies  1785 

Where  is  wise  Heloise,  that  care 
Brought  on  Abeilard,  and  dismay? 
All  for  her  love  he  found  a  snare, 
A  maimed  poor  monk  in  orders  gray; 
And  where's  the  Queen  who  willed  to  slay 
Buridan,  that  in  a  sack  must  go 
Afloat  down  Seine, — a  perilous  way — 
Nay,  but  where  is  the  last  year's  snow? 

Where's  that  White  Queen,  a  lily  rare. 
With  her  sweet  song,  the  Siren's  lay? 
Where's  Bertha  Broad-foot,  Beatrice  fair? 
Alys  and  Ermengarde,  where  are  they? 
Good  Joan,  whom  English  did  betray 
In  Rouen  town,  and  burned  her?    No, 
Maiden  and  Queen,  no  man  may  say; 
Nay,  but  where  is  the  last  year's  snow? 

ENVOY 

Prince,  all  this  week  thou  needst  not  pray, 
Nor  yet  this  year  the  thing  to  know. 
One  burden  answers,  ever  and  aye, 
"Nay,  but  where  is  the  last  year's  snow?" 

Andrew  Lang  [1844-1912] 


A  BALLAD  OF  DEAD   LADIES 

AFTER    \T:LL0N 
From  "If  I  Were  King" 

I  WONDER  in  what  Isle  of  Bliss 

Apollo's  music  fills  the  air; 
In  what  green  valley  Artemis 

For  young  Endymion  spreads  the  snare: 

Where  \^enus  lingers  debonair: 
The  Wind  has  blown  them  all  away — 

And  Pan  lies  piping  in  his  lair — 
Where  are  the  Gods  of  Yesterday? 


1786  The   Kindly   Muse 

Say  where  the  great  Semiramis 

Sleeps  in  a  rose-red  tomb ;  and  where 

The  precious  dust  of  Caesar  is, 
Or  Cleopatra's  yellov/  hair: 
Where  Alexander  Do-and-Dare; 

The  Wind  his  blown  them  all  away — • 
And  Redbeard  of  the  Iron  Chair; 

Where  are  the  Dreams  of  Yesterday? 

Where  is  the  Queen  of  Herod's  kiss, 
And  Phryne  in  her  beauty  bare; 

By  what  strange  sea  does  Tomyris 
With  Dido  and  Cassandra  share 
Divine  Proserpina's  despair; 

The  Wind  has  blown  them  all  away — 

For  what  poor  ghost  does  Helen  care? 

Where  are  the  Girls  of  Yesterday? 

ENVOY 

Alas  for  lovers!    Pair  by  pair 

The  Wind  has  blown  them  all  away: 

The  young  and  yare,  the  fond  and  fair: 
Where  are  the  Snows  of  Yesterday? 

Justin  Hiintly  McCarthy  [1860- 


IF   I   WERE   KING 

AFTER    VILLON 
From  "If  I  Were  King" 

All  French  folk,  whereso'er  ye  be, 
Who  love  your  country,  sail  and  sand, 

From  Paris  to  the  Breton  sea, 
And  back  again  to  Norman  strand. 
Forsooth  ye  seem  a  silly  band. 

Sheep  without  shepherd,  left  to  chance — 
Far  otherwise  our  Fatherland, 

Tf  Villon  were  the  King  of  France! 


A   Ballad   of  Suicide  1787 

The  figure  on  the  throne  you  see 

Is  nothing  but  a  puppet,  planned 
To  wear  the  regal  bravery 

Of  silken  coat  and  gilded  wand. 

Not  so  we  Frenchmen  understand 
The  Lord  of  lion's  heart  and  glance, 

And  such  a  one  would  take  command 
If  Villon  were  the  King  of  France! 

His  counsellors  are  rogues,  Perdie! 

While  men  of  honest  mind  are  banned 
To  creak  upon  the  Gallows  Tree, 

Or  squeal  in  prisons  over-manned; 

We  want  a  chief  to  bear  the  brand, 
And  bid  the  damned  Burgundians  dance. 

God!    Where  the  Oriflamme  should  stand 
If  Villon  were  the  King  of  France! 

ENVOY 

Louis  the  Little,  play  the  grand; 

Buffet  the  foe  with  sword  and  lance; 
'Tis  what  would  happen,  by  this  hand, 

If  Villon  were  the  King  of  France! 

Jusiin  Huntly  McCarthy  [1860- 

A  BALLADE  OF  SUICIDE 

The  gallows  in  my  garden,  people  say, 
Is  new  and  neat  and  adequately  tall. 
I  tie  the  noose  on  in  a  knowing  way 
As  one  that  knots  his  necktie  for  a  ball; 
But  just  as  all  the  neighbors — on  the  wall — 
Are  drawing  a  long  breath  to  shout  "Hurray!" 
The  strangest  whim  has  seized  me.  .  .  .    After  all 
I  think  I  will  not  hang  myself  to-day. 

To-morrow  is  the  time  I  get  my  pay — 
My  uncle's  sword  is  hanging  in  the  hall — 
t  see  a  little  cloud  all  pink  and  gray — 
Perhaps  the  rector's  mother  will  not  call— 


1788  The    Kindly    Muse 

I  fancy  that  I  heard  from  Mr.  Gall 

That  mushrooms  could  be  cooked  another  way — 

I  never  read  the  works  of  Juvenal — 

I  think  I  will  not  hang  myself  to-day. 

The  world  will  have  another  washing  day; 

The  decadents  decay;  the  pedants  pall; 

And  H.  G.  Wells  has  found  that  children  play. 

And  Bernard  Shaw  discovered  that  they  squall; 

Rationalists  are  growing  rational — 

And  through  thick  woods  one  finds  a  stream  astray, 

So  secret  that  the  very  sky  seems  small — 

I  think  I  will  not  hang  myself  to-day. 

ENVOI 

Prince,  I  can  hear  the  trumpet  of  Germinal, 
The  tumbrils  toiling  up  the  terrible  way; 
Even  to-day  your  royal  head  may  fall — 
I  think  I  will  not  hang  myself  to-day. 

Gilbert  Keith  Chesterton  (1874- 

CHIFFONS! 

Through  this  our  city  of  delight, 

This  Paris  of  our  joy  and  play. 
This  Paris  perfumed,  jeweled,  bright, 

Rouged,  powdered,  amorous, — ciinuye: 

Across  our  gilded  Quart icr, 
So  fair  to  see,  so  frail  au  fond, 

Echoes — mon  Dicu! — the  Ragman's  bray: 


iS^:: 


:=!=== 


-:t=; 


'  Afa>  -  chand  d'ha  -  hits.'         Chi/ -  fons!" 

Foul,  hunched,  a  plague  to  dainty  sight, 

He  limps  inject  by  park  and  qiiai, 
Voicing  (for  those  that  hear  aright) 

His  hunger-world,  the  dark  Marais. 

Sexton  of  all  we  waste  and  fray. 
He  bags  at  last  pour  tout  de  bon 

Our  trappings  rare,  our  braveries  gay, 


Mar  -  chand  d'ha  -  bits!        Chi/  ■  fonsf" 


The  Court   Historian  1789 

Their  lot  is  ours!    A  grislier  wight, 

The  Ragman  Time,  takes  day  by  day 
Our  beauty's  bloom,  our  manly  might, 

Our  joie  de  vivre,  our  gods  of  clay; 

Till  torn  and  worn  and  soiled  and  gray 
Hot  life  rejects  us — 11  om  de  >iom! — 

Rags!  and  our  only  requiem  lay, 


"  May  -  chand  d^ha  -  bits! 


ENVOY 

Princes  take  heed! — for  where  are  they, 

Valois,  Navarre  and  Orleans?  .  .  . 
Death  drones  the  answer,  far  away, 


William  Samuel  Johnson  [1859- 
THE  COURT  HISTORIAN 

LOWER   EMPIRE.      Circa  A.  D.  70O 

The  Monk  Arnulphus  uncorked  his  ink 

That  shone  with  a  blood- red  light 
Just  now  as  the  sun  began  to  sink; 

His  vellum  was  pumiced  a  silvery  white; 
"The  Basileus" — for  so  he  began  — 
"Is  a  royal  sagacious  Mars  of  a  man. 

Than  the  very  lion  bolder; 
He  has  married  the  stately  widow  of  Thrace — ' 

"Hush!"  cried  a  voice  at  his  shoulder. 

His  palette  gleamed  with  a  burnished  green. 

Bright  as  a  dragon-lly's  skin: 
His  gold-leaf  shone  like  the  robe  of  a  queen, 

His  azure  glowed  as  a  cloud  worn  thin. 
Deep  as  the  blue  of  the  king-whale's  lair: 
"The  Porphyrogenita  Zoe  the  fair 

Is  about  to  wed  with  a  Prince  much  older, 
Of  an  unpropitious  mien  and  look—  " 

"Hush!"  cried  a  voice  at  his  shoulder. 


1790  The   Kindly   Muse 

The  red  flowers  trellised  the  parchment  page, 

The  birds  leaped  up  on  the  spray, 
The  yellow  fruit  swayed  and  drooped  and  swung, 

It  was  Autumn  mixed  up  with  May. 
(O,  but  his  cheek  was  shrivelled  and  shrunk!) 
"The  child  of  the  Basileus,"  wrote  the  Monk, 

"Is  golden-haired — tender  the  Queen's  arms  fold  her. 
Her  step-mother  Zoe  doth  love  her  so  —  " 

"Hush!"  cried  a  voice  at  his  shoulder. 

The  Kings  and  Martyrs  and  Saints  and  Priests 

All  gathered  to  guard  the  text: 
There  was  Daniel  snug  in  the  lions'  den 

Singing  no  whit  perplexed — 
Brazen  Samson  with  spear  and  helm — 
"The  Queen,"  wrote  the  Monk,  "rules  firm  this  realm. 

For  the  King  gets  older  and  older. 
The  Norseman  Thorkill  is  brave  and  fair — " 

"Hush!"  cried  a  voice  at  his  shoulder. 

Walter  Thornhury  [1828-1876] 

MISS  LOU 

When  thin-strewn  memory  I  look  through, 

I  see  most  clearly  poor  Miss  Loo, 

Her  tabby  cat,  her  cage  of  birds, 

Her  nose,  her  hair — her  muffled  words, 

And  how  she'd  open  her  green  eyes. 

As  if  in  some  immense  surprise. 

Whenever  as  we  sat  at  tea, 

She  made  some  small  remark  to  me. 

It's  always  drowsy  summer  when 

From  out  the  past  she  comes  again; 

The  westering  sunshine  in  a  pool 

Floats  in  her  parlor  still  and  cool; 

While  the  slim  bird  its  lean  wires  shakes, 

As  into  piercing  song  it  breaks; 

Till  Peter's  pale-green  eyes  ajar  1  " 

Dream,  wake;  wake,  dream,  in  one  brief  bar; 

And  I  am  sitting,  dull  and  shy. 

And  she  with  gaze  of  vacancy, 


The    Poet  and  the  Wood- Louse      1791 

And  large  hands  folded  on  the  tray, 
Musing  the  afternoon  away; 
Her  satin  bosom  heaving  slow 
With  sighs  that  softly  ebb  and  flow, 
And  her  plain  face  in  such  dismay, 
It  seems  unkind  to  look  her  way; 
Until  all  cheerful  back  will  come 
Her  cheerful  gleaming  spirit  home: 
And  one  would  think  that  poor  Miss  Loo 
Asked  nothing  else,  if  she  had  you. 

Walter  Do  la  Mare  [1873- 

THE  POET  AND  THE  WOOD-LOUSE 
A  PORTLY  Wood-louse,  full  of  cares, 
Transacted  eminent  affairs 
Along  a  parapet  where  pears 
Unripened  fell 

And  vines  embellished  the  sweet  airs 
With  muscatel. 

Day  after  day  beheld  him  run 

His  scales  a-twinkle  in  the  sun 

About  his  business  never  done; 

Night's  slender  span  he 

Spent  in  the  home  his  wealth  had  won — 

A  red-brick  cranny. 

Thus,  as  his  Sense  of  Right  directed, 
He  lived  both  honored  and  respected, 
Cherished  his  children  and  protected 
His  duteous  wife. 
And  naught  of  diffidence  deflected 
His  useful  life. 

One  mid-day,  hastening  to  his  Club, 

He  spied  beside  a  water-tub 

The  owner  of  each  plant  and  shrub 

A  humble  Bard 

Who  turned  upon  the  conscious  grub 

A  mild  regard. 

,"Eh?"  quoth  the  Wood-louse,  "Can  it  be 
A  Higher  Power  looks  down  to  see  i  \ 


1792  The   Kindly   Muse 

My  praiseworthy  activity 

And  notes  me  plying 

My  Daily  Task? — Nor  strange,  dear  me, 

But  gratifying!" 

To  whom  the  Bard:  "I  still  divest 
My  orchard  of  the  Insect  Pest, 
That  you  are  such  is  manifest. 
Prepare  to  die. — 

And  yet,  how  sweetly  does  your  crest 
Reflect  the  sky! 

"  Go  then  forgiven,  (for  what  ails 
Your  naughty  life  this  fact  avails 
To  pardon)  mirror  in  your  scales 
Celestial  blue. 

Till  the  sun  sets  and  the  light  fails 
The  skies  and  you." 

May  all  we  proud  and  bustling  parties 

Whose  lot  in  forum,  street  and  mart  is 

Stand  in  conspectu  Deitatis 

And  save  our  face. 

Reflecting  where  our  scaly  heart  is 

Some  skyey  grace. 

Helen  Parry  Eden  [18 

STUDENTS 

John  Brown  and  Jeanne  at  Fontainebleau — 

'Twas  Toussaint,  just  a  year  ago; 
Crimson  and  copper  was  the  glow 
Of  all  the  woods  at  Fontainebleau. 
They  peered  into  that  ancient  well, 
And  watched  the  slow  torch  as  it  fell. 
John  gave  the  keeper  two  whole  sous. 
And  Jeanne  that  smile  with  which  she  woos 
John  Brown  to  folly.    So  they  lose 
The  Paris  train.    But  never  mind! — 
All-Saints  are  rustling  in  the  wind. 
And  there's  an  inn,  a  crackling  fire — 
(It's  deur,-cinquante,  but  Jeanne's  desire); 


Students  ^793 

There's  dinner,  candles,  country  wine, 
Jeanne's  lips — philosophy  divine! 
There  was  a  bosquet  at  Saint  Cloud 
Wherein  John's  picture  of  her  grew 
To  be  a  Salon  masterpiece — 
Till  the  rain  fell  that  would  not  cease. 
Through  one  long  alley  how  they  raced ! — 
'Twas  gold  and  brown,  and  all  a  waste 
Of  matted  leaves,  moss-interlaced. 
Shades  of  mad  queens  and  hunter-kings 
And  thorn-sharp  feet  of  dryad-things 
Were  company  to  their  wanderings; 
Then  rain  and  darkness  on  them  drew. 
The  rich  folks'  motors  honked  and  flew. 
They  hailed  an  old  cab,  heaven  for  two; 
The  bright  Champs-Elysces  at  last — 
Though  the  cab  crawled  it  sped  too  fast. 

Paris,  upspringing  white  and  gold: 
Flamboyant  arch  and  high-enscrolled 
War-sculpture,  big,  Napoleonic — 
Fierce  chargers,  angels  histrionic; 
The  royal  sweep  of  gardened  spaces, 
The  pomp  and  whirl  of  columned  Places; 
The  Rive  Gauche,  age-old,  gay  and  gray; 
The  impasse  and  the  loved  cafe; 
The  tempting  tidy  little  shops; 
The  convent  walls,  the  glimpsed  tree-tops; 
Book-stalls,  old  men  like  dwarfs  in  plays; 
Talk,  work,  and  Latin  Quarter  ways. 

May — Robinson's,  the  chestnut  trees — 
Were  ever  crowds  as  gay  as  these? 
The  quick  pale  waiters  on  a  run, 
The  round  green  tables,  one  by  one, 
Hidden  away  in  amorous  bowers — 
Lilac,  laburnum's  golden  showers. 
Kiss,  clink  of  glasses,  laughter  heard, 
And  nightingales  quite  undeterred. 
And  then  that  last  extravagance — 
O  Jeanne,  a  single  amber  glance     ,,.   ^  „, 


1794  The   Kindly    Muse 

Will  pay  him! — "Let's  play  millionaire 
For  just  two  hours — on  princely  fare, 
At  some  hotel  where  lovers  dine 
A  deux  and  pledge  across  the  wine!" 
They  find  a  damask  breakfast -room, 
Where  stiff  silk  roses  range  their  bloom. 
The  garfon  has  a  splendid  way 
Of  bearing  in  grand  dejeuner. 
Then  to  be  left  alone,  alone, 
High  up  above  Rue  Castiglione; 
Curtained  away  from  all  the  rude 
Rumors,  in  silken  solitude; 
And,  John,  her  head  upon  your  knees — 
Time  waits  for  moments  such  as  these. 
Florence  Wilkiitson  [i8 

A  LIKENESS 

(portrait   bust   of  an   unknown,    CAPITOL,    ROME) 

In  every  line  a  supple  beauty — ■ 

The  restless  head  a  little  bent — 
Disgust  of  pleasure,  scorn  of  duty. 

The  unseeing  eyes  of  discontent. 
I  often  come  to  sit  beside  him. 

This  youth  who  passed  and  left  no  trace 
Of  good  or  ill  that  did  betide  him. 

Save  the  disdain  upon  his  face. 

The  hope  of  all  his  House,  the  brother 

Adored,  the  golden-hearted  son. 
Whom  Fortune  pampered  like  a  mother; 

And  then — a  shadow  on  the  sun. 
Whether  he  followed  Cxsar's  trumpet. 

Or  chanced  the  riskier  game  at  home 
To  find  how  favor  played  the  strumpet 

In  fickle  politics  at  Rome; 

Whether  he  dreamed  a  dream  in  Asia 

He  never  could  forget  by  day. 
Or  gave  his  youth  to  some  Aspasia, 

Or  gamed  his  heritage  away; 
Once  lost,  across  the  Empire's  border 


The  Chaperon  ^795 

This  man  would  seek  his  peace  in  vain; 
His  look  arraigns  a  social  order 

Somehow  entrammelled  with  his  pain. 

"The  dice  of  gods  are  always  loaded"; 

One  gambler,  arrogant  as  they, 
Fierce,  and  by  fierce  injustice  goaded, 

Left  both  his  hazard  and  the  play. 
Incapable  of  compromises. 

Unable  to  forgive  or  spare, 
The  strange  awarding  of  the  prizes 

He  had  no  fortitude  to  bear. 

Tricked  by  the  forms  of  things  material — 

The  solid-seeming  arch  and  stone. 
The  noise  of  war,  the  pomp  imperial, 

The  heights  and  depths  about  a  throne — 
He  missed,  among  the  shapes  diurnal. 

The  old,  deep-travelled  road  from  pain, 
The  thoughts  of  men,  which  are  eternal. 

In  which,  eternal,  men  remain. 

Ritratto  d^ignoto;  defying 

Things  unsubstantial  as  a  dream — • 
An  Empire,  long  in  ashes  lyings 
*     His  face  still  set  against  the  stream. 
Yes,  so  he  looked,  that  gifted  brother 

I  loved,  who  passed  and  left  no  trace. 
Not  even — luckier  than  this  other — 
His  sorrow  in  a  marble  face. 

Willa  Sibcrt  Calhcr  [1875- 

THE  CHAPERON 

I  TAKE  my  chaperon  to  the  play — 

She  thinks  she's  taking  me. 
And  the  gilded  youth  who  owns  the  box, 

A  proud  young  man  is  he; 
But  how  would  his  young  heart  be  hurt 
.  If  he  could  only  know 

That  not  for  his  sweet  sake  I  go 

Nor  yet  to  see  the  trifling  show; 
But  to  see  my  chaperon  flirt. 


1796  The   Kindly    Muse 

Her  eyes  beneath  her  snowy  hair 
They  sparkle  young  as  mine; 

There's  scarce  a  wrinkle  in  her  hand 
So  delicate  and  fine. 

And  when  my  chaperon  is  seen, 
They  come  from  everywhere — 
The  dear  old  boys  with  silvery  hair, 
With  old-time  grace  and  old-time  air. 

To  greet  their  old-time  queen. 

They  bow  as  my  young  Midas  here 
Will  never  learn  to  bow 

(The  dancing-masters  do  not  teach 
That  gracious  reverence  now); 

With  voices  quavering  just  a  bit, 

They  play  their  old  parts  through, 
They  talk  of  folk  who  used  to  woo, 
Of  hearts  that  broke  in  'fifty-two — 

Now  none  the  worse  for  it. 

And  as  those  aged  crickets  chirp, 
I  watch  my  chaperon's  face, 

And  see  the  dear  old  features  take 
A  new  and  tender  grace; 

And  in  her  happy  eyes  I  see 

Her  youth  awakening  bright, 
With  all  its  hope,  desire,  delight — 
Ah,  me!    I  wish  that  I  were  quite 

As  young — as  young  as  she! 

Henry  Cuylcr  Bunncr  [1855- 

"A  PITCHER  OF  MIGNONETTE" 

A  PITCHER  of  mignonette 

In  a  tenement's  highest  casement, — 
Queer  sort  of  flower-pot — yet 
That  pitcher  of  mignonette 
Is  a  garden  in  heaven  set. 

To  the  little  sick  child  in  the  basement— 

The  pitcher  of  mignonette. 
In  the  tenement's  highest  casement. 

Henry  Cuyler  Bunner  [1855- 


Old   King  Cole  i797 


OLD  KING  COLE 

In  Tilbury  Town  did  Old  King  Cole 

A  wise  old  age  anticipate, 
Desiring,  with  his  pipe  and  bowl. 

No  Khan's  extravagant  estate. 
No  crown  annoyed  his  honest  head, 

No  fiddlers  three  were  called  or  needed; 
for  two  disastrous  heirs  insteatl 

Made  music  more  that  ever  three  did. 

Bereft  of  her  with  whom  his  life 

Was  harmony  without  a  flaw, 
He  took  no  other  for  a  wife. 

Nor  sighed  for  any  that  he  saw; 
And  if  he  doubted  his  two  sons. 

And  heirs,  Alexis  and  Evander, 
He  might  have  been  as  doubtful  once 

Of  Robert  Burns  and  Alexander. 

Alexis,  in  his  early  youth. 

Began  to  steal — from  old  and  young. 
Likewise  Evander,  and  the  truth 

Was  like  a  bad  taste  on  his  tongue. 
Born  thieves  and  liars,  their  affair 

Seemed  only  to  be  tarred  with  evil — 
The  most  insufferable  pair 

Of  scamps  that  ever  cheered  the  devil. 

The  world  went  on,  their  fame  went  on. 

And  they  went  on — from  bad  to  worse; 
Till,  goaded  hot  with  nothing  done. 

And  each  accoutered  with  a  curse, 
The  friends  of  Old  King  Cole,  by  twos, 

And  fours,  and  sevens,  and  elevens, 
Pronounced  unalterable  views 

Of  doings  that  were  not  of  Heaven's. 

And  having  learned  again  whereby 
Their  baleful  zeal  had  come  about, 

King  Cole  met  many  a  wrathful  eye 
So  kindly  that  its  wrath  went  out — 


179^  The   Kindly    Muse 

Or  partly  out.    Say  what  they  would, 

He  seemed  the  more  to  court  their  candor; 
But  never  told  what  kind  of  good 
.  Was  in  Alexis  and  Evander. 

And  Old  King  Cole,  with  many  a  puff 

That  haloed  his  urbanity, 
Would  smoke  till  he  had  smoked  chough, 

And  listen  most  attentively. 
He  beamed  as  with  an  inward  light 

That  had  the  Lord's  assurance  in  it; 
And  once  a  man  was  there  all  night,  .^ 

Expecting  something  every  minute. 

But  whether  from  too  little  thought, 

Or  too  much  fealty  to  the  bowl, 
A  dim  reward  was  all  he  got 

For  sitting  up  with  Old  King  Cole. 
"Though  mine,"  the  father  mused  aloud, 

"Are  not  the  sons  I  would  have  chosen, 
Shall  I,  less  evilly  endowed, 

By  their  infirmity  be  frozen? 

"They'll  have  a  bad  end,  I'll  agree,  li.I 

But  I  was  never  born  to  groan; 
For  I  can  see  what  I  can  see. 

And  I'm  accordingly  alone. 
With  open  heart  and  open  door, 

I  love  my  friends,  I  like  my  neighbors; 
But  if  I  try  to  tell  you  more, 

Your  doubts  will  overmatch  my  labors. 

"This  pipe  would  never  make  me  calm, 

This  bowl  my  grief  would  never  drown. 
For  grief  like  mine  there  is  no  balm  i 

In  Gilead,  or  in  Tilbury  Town. 
And  if  I  see  what  I  can  see, 

I  know  not  any  way  to  blind  it; 
Nor  more  if  any  way  may  be 

For  you  to  grope  or  fiy  to  find  it. 

"There  may  be  room  for  ruin  yet, 
And  ashes  for  a  wasted  love; 


'i"he    Master   Mariner  ^799 

Or,  like  One  whom  you  may  forget, 

I  may  have  meat  you  know  not  of. 
And  if  I'd  rather  live  than  weep 

Meanwhile,  do  you  find  that  surprising? 
Why,  bless  my  soul,  the  man's  asleep! 

That's  good.    The  sun  will  soon  be  rising." 
Edwin  Arlington  Robinson  [1869- 

THE  MASTER  MARINER 

My  grandshire  sailed  three  years  from  home, 
And  slew  unmoved  the  sounding  whale: 

Here  on  the  windless  beach  I  roam 
And  watch  far  out  the  hardy  sail. 

The  lions  of  the  surf  that  cry 

Upon  this  lion-colored  shore 
On  reefs  of  midnight  met  his  eye: 

He  knew  their  fangs  as  I  their  roar. 

My  grandsire  sailed  uncharted  seas, 

And  toll  of  all  their  leagues  he  took: 
I  scan  the  shallow  bays  at  ease. 

And  tell  their  colors  in  a  book. 

The  anchor-chains  his  music  made 

And  wind  in  shrouds  and  running-gear: 

The  thrush  at  dawn  beguiles  my  glade. 
And  once,  'tis  said,  I  woke  to  hear. 

My  grandsire  in  his  ample  fist 

The  long  harpoon  upheld  to  men : 
Behold  obedient  to  my  wrist 

A  gray  gull's- feat  her  for  my  pen! 

Upon  my  grandsire's  leathern  check 
Five  zones  their  bitter  bronze  had  set: 

Some  day  their  hazards  I  will  seek, 
I  promise  me  at  times.    Not  yet. 

I  think  my  grandsire  now  would  turn 

A  mild  but  speculative  eye 
On  me,  my  pen  and  its  concern. 

Then  gaze  again  to  sea — and  sigh. 

George  Sterling  [1P69- 


1  8oo  I'he   Kindly   Muse 


A  ROSE  TO  THE  LIVING 

A  ROSE  to  the  living  is  more 

Than  sumptuous  wreaths  to  the  dead: 
In  filhng  love's  infinite  store, 
A  rose  to  the  living  is  more, — 
If  graciously  given  before 

The  hungering  spirit  is  fled, — 
A  rose  to  the  living  is  more 

Than  sumptuous  wreaths  to  the  dead. 

Nixon  Walcrman  [1859- 


A  KISS 

Rose  kissed  me  to-day. 

Will  she  kiss  me  to-morrow? 
Let  it  be  as  it  may, 
Rose  kissed  me  to-day 
But  the  pleasure  gives  way 
To  a  savor  of  sorrow; — ■ 
Rose  kissed  me  to-day, — 

Will  she  kiss  me  to-morrow? 

Austin  Dobson  [1S40- 


BIFTEK  AUX  CHAMPIGNONS 

MiMi,  do  you  remember — 

Don't  get  behind  your  fan — 
That  morning  in  September 

On  the  cliffs  of  Grand  Manan, 
Where  to  the  shock  of  Fundy 

The  topmost  harebells  sway 
{Campanula  rotundi- 

Jolia:  cf.  Gray)? 

On  the  pastures  high  and  level. 

That  overlook  the  sea, 
Where  I  wondered  what  the  devil 

Those  little  things  could  be 


Biftek  Aux  Champignons  1801 

That  Mimi  stooped  to  gather, 

As  she  strolled  across  the  down, 
And  held  her  dress  skirt  rather — 

Oh,  now,  you  need  n't  frown. 

For  you  know  the  dew  was  heavy, 
And  your  boots,  /  know,  were  thin; 

So  a  Httle  extra  brevi- 
ty in  skirts  was,  sure,  no  sin. 

Besides,  who  minds  a  cousin? 
First,  second,  even  third, — 

I've  kissed  'em  by  the  dozen. 
And  they  never  once  demurred. 

"If  one's  allowed  to  ask  it," 

Quoth  I,  "Ma  belle  cousine, 
What  have  you  in  your  basket?" 

(Those  baskets  white  and  green 
The  brave  Passamaquoddies 

Weave  out  of  scented  grass. 
And  sell  to  tourist  bodies 

Who  through  Mt.  Desert  pass.) 

You  answered,  sHghtly  frowning, 

"  Put  down  your  stupid  book — 
That  everlasting  Browning! — 

And  come  and  help  me  look. 
Mushroom  you  spik  him  English, 

I  call  him  champignon: 
I'll  teach  you  to  distinguish 

The  right  kind  from  the  wrong." 

There  was  no  fog  on  Fundy 

That  blue  September  day; 
The  west  wind,  for  that  one  day, 

Had  swept  it  all  away. 
The  lighthouse  glasses  twinkled, 

The  white  gulls  screamed  and  flew, 
The  merry  sheep-bells  tinkled, 

The  merry  breezes  blew. 


i8o2  The   Kindly   Muse 

The  bayberry  aromatic, 

The  papery  immortelles 
(That  give  our  grandma's  attic 

That  sentimental  smell,' 
Tied  up  in  little  brush-brooms) 

Were  sweet  as  new-mown  hay, 
While  we  went  hunting  mushrooms 

That  blue  September  day. 

Henry  Augiistin  Beers  [1847- 


MISS   NANCY'S   GOWN 

In  days  when  George  the  Third  was  King 

And  ruled  the  Old  Dominion, 
And  Law  and  Fashion  owned  the  sway 

Of  Parhament's  opinion, 
A  good  ship  brought  across  the  sea, — 

A  treasure  fair  and  fine, — 
Miss  Nancy's  gown  from  London  town, 

The  latest  Court  design! 

The  plaited  waist  from  neck  to  belt 

Scarce  measured  half  a  span; 
The  sleeves,  balloon-like,  at  the  top 

Could  hold  her  feather  fan ; 
The  narrow  skirt  with  bias  gore 

Revealed  an  ankle  neat, 
Whene'er  she  put  her  dainty  foot 

From  carriage  step  to  street! 

By  skilful  hands  this  wondrous  gown 

Of  costliest  stuff  was  made, 
Cocoons  of  France  on  Antwerp  looms 

Wrought  to  embossed  brocade. 
Where  roses  red  and  violets 

In  blooming  beauty  grew, 
As  if  young  May  were  there  alway, 

And  June  and  April  too! 


Wing  Tee  Wee  1803 

And  from  this  bower  of  delight 

Miss  Nancy  reigned  a  Queen, 
Nor  one  disloyal  heart  rebelled 

In  all  her  wide  demesne: 
The  noble  House  of  Burgesses 

Forgot  its  tierce  debate 
O'er  rights  of  Crown,  when  Nancy's  gown 

Appeared  in  Halls  of  State! 

Through  jocund  reel,  or,  measured  tread 

Of  stately  minuet, 
Like  fairy  vision  shone  the  bloom 

Of  rose  and  violet, 
As,  hand  in  hand  with  Washington, 

The  hero  of  the  day. 
The  smiling  face  and  nymph-like  grace 

Of  Nancy  led  the  way! 

A  century,  since  that  gay  time 

The  merry  dance  was  trod. 
Has  passed,  and  Nancy  long  has  slept 

Beneath  the  churchyard  sod; 
Yet  on  the  brocade  velvet  gown 

The  rose  and  violet 
Are  blooming  bright  as  on  the  night 

She  danced  the  minuet! 

Zitdla  Cocke  [1847- 


WING   TEE   WEE 

Oh,  Wing  Tee  Wee 
Was  a  sweet  Chinee, 
And  she  lived  in  the  town  of  Tac. 
Her  eyes  were  blue, 
And  her  curling  cue 
Hung  dangling  down  her  back; 
And  she  fell  in  love  with  gay  Win  Sil 
When  he  wrote  his  love  on  a  laundry  bill. 


i8o4  The   Kindly   Muse 

And  oh,  Tim  Told 
Was  a  pirate  bold, 
And  he  sailed  in  a  Chinese  junk° 
And  he  loved,  ah  me! 
Sweet  Wing  Tee  Wee, 
But  his  valiant  heart  had  sunk; 
So  he  drowned  his  blues  in  fickle  fizz. 
And  vowed  the  maid  would  yet  be  his. 

So  bold  Tim  Told 
Showed  all  his  gold 
To  the  maid  in  the  town  of  Tac, 
And  sweet  Wing  Wee 
Eloped  to  sea, 
And  nevermore  came  back; 
For  in  far  Chinee  the  maids  are  fair. 
And  the  maids  are  false,  as  everywhere. 
/.  P.  Denison  [i8     - 

MY   GRANDMOTHER'S  TURKEY-TAIL  FAN 

It  owned  not  a  color  that  vanity  dons 

Or  slender  wits  choose  for  display; 
Its  beautiful  tint  was  a  delicate  bronze, 

A  brown  softly  blended  with  gray. 
From  her  waist  to  her  chin,  spreading  out  without  break, 

'Twas  built  on  a  generous  plan: 
The  pride  of  the  forest  was  slaughtered  to  make 
My  grandmother's  turkey- tail  fan. 

For  common  occasions  it  never  was  meant: 

In  a  chest  between  two  silken  cloths 
'Twas  kept  safely  hidden  with  careful  intent 

In  camphor  to  keep  out  the  moths. 
'Twas  famed  far  and  wide  through  the  whole  country  side, 

From  Beersheba  e'en  unto  Dan; 
And  often  at  meeting  with  envy  'twas  eyed, 
My  grandmother's  turkey-tail  fan. 

Camp-meetings,  indeed,  were  its  chief  est  delight. 

Like  a  crook  unto  sheep  gone  astray 
It  beckoned  backsliders  to  re-scek  the  right, 

And  exhorted  the  sinners  to  pray. 


A    Moral   in   Sevres  1805 

It  always  beat  time  when  the  choir  went  wrong,. 

In  psalmody  leading  the  van. 
Old  Hundred,  I  know,  was  its  favorite  song — 
My  grandmother's  turkey-tail  fan. 

A  fig  for  the  fans  that  arc  made  nowadays, 

Suited  only  to  frivolous  mirth! 
A  different  thing  is  the  fan  that  I  praise. 

Yet  it  scorned  not  the  good  things  of  earth. 
At  bees  and  at  quiltings  'twas  aye  to  be  seen. 

The  best  of  the  gossip  began 
When  in  at  the  doorway  had  entered  serene 
My  grandmother's  turkey-tail  fan. 

Tradition  relates  of  it  wonderful  tales. 

Its  handle  of  leather  was  buff. 
Though  shorn  of  its  glory,  e'en  now  it  exhales 

An  odor  of  hymn-ljooks  and  snuff. 
Its  primeval  grace,  if  you  like,  you  can  trace: 

'Twas  limned  for  the  future  to  scan. 
Just  under  a  smiling,  gold-spectacled  face. 
My  grandmother's  turkey-tail  fan. 

Samuel  Mintiirn  Peck  [1854- 


A   MORAL  IN  SEVRES 

Upon  my  mantel-piece  they  stand. 
While  all  its  length  between  them  lies; 

He  throws  a  kiss  with  graceful  hand. 
She  glances  back  with  bashful  eyes. 

The  china  Shepherdess  is  fair, 

The  Shepherd's  face  denotes  a  heart 

Burning  with  ardor  and  despair. 
Alas,  they  stand  so  far  apart! 

And  yet,  perhaps,  if  they  were  moved. 
And  stood  together  day  by  day. 

Their  love  had  not  so  constant  proved, 
Nor  would  they  still  have  smiled  so  gay. 


8o6  The   Kindly   Muse 

His  hand  the  Shepherd  might  have  kissed 
The  match-box  Angel's  heart  to  win; 

The  Shepherdess,  his  love  have  missed, 
And  flirted  with  the  Mandarin. 

But  on  my  mantel-piece  they  stand, 
While  all  its  length  between  them  lies; 

He  throws  a  kiss  with  graceful  hand, 
She  glances  back  with  bashful  eyes. 

Mildred  Howclls  [i8 


ON   THE  FLY-LEAF  OF  A  BOOK  OF  OLD  PLAYS 

At  Cato's  Head  in  Russell  Street 
These  leaves  she  sat  a-stitching; 

I  fancy  she  was  trim  and  neat, 
Blue-eyed  and  quite  bewitching. 

Before  her  on  the  street  below, 

All  powder,  ruffs,  and  laces, 
There  strutted  idle  London  beaux 

To  ogle  pretty  faces; 

While,  filling  many  a  Sedan  chair 
With  monstrous  hoop  and  feather, 

In  paint  and  powder  London's  fair 
Went  trooping  past  together. 

"    Swift,  Addison,  and  Pope,  mayhap 
They  sauntered  slowly  past  her, 
Or  printer's  boy,  with  gown  and  cap, 
For  Steele,  went  trotting  faster. 

For  beau  nor  wit  had  she  a  look; 

Nor  lord  nor  lady  minding, 
She  bent  her  head  above  this  book,  ' 

Attentive  to  her  binding.  '■''  ■ 

And  one  stray  thread  of  golden  hair. 

Caught  on  her  nimble  fingers. 
Was  stitched  within  this  volume,  where 

Until  to-day  it  lingers. 


The  Talented  Man  1807 

Past  and  forgotten,  beaux  and  fair, 

Wigs,  powder,  all  outdated; 
A  queer  antique,  the  Sedan  chair, 

Pope,  stiff  and  antiquated. 

Yet  as  I  turn  these  odd,  old  plays, 

This  single  stray  lock  finding, 
I'm  back  in  those  forgotten  days. 

And  watch  her  at  her  binding. 

Walter  Learned  [1847-191  ] 


THE  TALENTED   MAN 

A  LETTER  FROM  A  LADY  IN  LONDON  TO  A  LADY  AT  LAUSANNE 

Dear  Alice!  you'll  laugh  when  you  know  it, — 

Last  week,  at  the  Duchess's  ball, 
I  danced  with  the  clever  new  poet, — 

You've  heard  of  him, — Tully  St.  Paul. 
Miss  Jonquil  was  perfectly  frantic; 

I  wish  you  had  seen  Lady  Anne! 
It  really  was  very  romantic. 

He  is  such  a  talented  man! 

He  came  up  from  Brazen  Nose  CoUege, 

Just  caught,  as  they  call  it,  this  spring; 
And  his  head,  love,  is  stuffed  full  of  knowledge 

Of  eyery  conceivable  thing. 
Of  science  and  logic  he  chatters,  • 

As  fine  and  as  fast  as  he  can; 
Though  I  am  no  judge  of  such  matters, 

I'm  sure  he's  a  talented  man. 

His  stories  and  jests  are  delightful; — 

Not  stories  or  jests,  dear,  for  you; 
The  jests  are  exceedingly  spiteful, 

The  stories  not  alv/ays  quite  true. 
Perhaps  to  be  kind  and  veracious 

May  do  pretty  well  at  Lausanne; 
But  it  never  would  answer, — good  gracious! 

Chez  nous — in  a  talented  man. 


The  Kindly   Muse 

He  sneers, — how  my  Alice  would  scold  him! — 

At  the  bliss  of  a  sigh  or  a  tear; 
He  laughed — only  think ! — ^when  I  told  him 

How  we  cried  o'er  Trevelyan  last  year; 
I  vow  I  was  quite  in  a  passion ; 

I  broke  all  the  sticks  of  my  fan; 
But  sentiment's  quite  out  of  fashion, 

It  seems,  in  a  talented  man. 

Lady  Bab,  who  is  terribly  moral, 

Has  told  me  that  TuUy  is  vain, 
And  apt — which  is  silly — to  quarrel, 

And  fond — which  is  sad — of  champagne. 
I  listened,  and  doubted,  dear  Alice, 

For  I  saw,  when  my  Lady  began, 
It  was  only  the  Dowager's  malice;— 

She  does  hate  a  talented  man! 

He's  hideous,  I  own  it.    But  fame,  love, 

Is  all  that  these  eyes  can  adore; 
He's  lame, — but  Lord  .Byron  was  lame,  love, 

And  dumpy, — but  so  is  Tom  Moore. 
Then  his  voice, — such  a  voice!  my  sweet  creature, 

It's  like  your  Aunt  Lucy's  toucan: 
But  oh!  what's  a  tone  or  a  feature, 

When  once  one's  a  talented  man? 

My  mother,  you  know,  all  the  season. 

Has  talked  of  Sir  Geoffrey's  estate; 
And  truly,  to  do  the  fool  reason,  ;-;  , 

He  has  been  less  horrid  of  late. 
But  to-day,  when  we  drive  in  the  carnage, 

I'll  tell  her  to  lay  down  her  plan; — 
If  ever  I  venture  on  marriage. 

It  must  be  a  talented  man! 

P.  S. — I  have  found,  on  reflection. 

One  fault  in  my  friend, — entre  nous; 

Without  it,  he'd  just  be  perfection; — 
Poor  fellow,  he  has  not  a  soul 


A    1  .etter  of  Advice  i  809 

And  so,  when  he  comes  in  September 
To  shoot  with  my  uncle,  Sir  Dan, 

I've  promised  mamma  to  remember 
He's  only  a  talented  man! 

Winlhrop  Macku'orlh  Praed  [1802-1830] 


A  LETTER  OF  ADVICE 

FROM  MISS  MEDORA  TREVILIAN,  AT  PADUA,  TO  MISS 
ARAMINTA  VAVASOUR,  IN  LONDON 

"  En  fin,  Monsieur,  un  homme  aimahle; 

Voila  pourqiwi  je  ne  saurais  V aimer." — Scribe 

You  tell  me  you're  promised  a  lover, 

My  own  Araminta,  next  week; 
Why  cannot  my  fancy  discover 

The  hue  of  his  coat,  and  his  cheek? 
Alas!  if  he  look  like  another, 

A  vicar,  a  banker,  a  beau. 
Be  deaf  to  your  father  and  mother, 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

Miss  Lane,  at  her  Temple  of  Fashion, 

Taught  us  both  how  to  sing  and  to  speak. 
And  we  loved  one  another  with  passion, 

Before  we  had  been  there  a  week: 
You  gave  me  a  ring  for  a  token; 

I  wear  it  wherever  I  go; 
I  gave  you  a  chain, — it  is  broken? 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

O  think  of  our  favorite  cottage, 

And  think  of  our  dear  Lalla  Rookh! 
How  we  shared  with  the  milkmaids  their  pottage. 

And  drank  of  the  stream  from  the  brook ; 
How  fondly  our  loving  lips  faltered, 

"What  further  can  grandeur  bestow?" 
My  heart  is  the  same; — is  yours  altered? 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 


i8io  The   Kindly   Muse 

Remember  the  thrilling  romances 

We  read  on  the  bank  in  the  glen; 
Remember  the  suitors  our  fancies 

Would  picture  for  both  of  us  then ; 
They  wore  the  red  cross  on  their  shoulder, 

They  had  vanquished  and  pardoned  their  foe- 
Sweet  friend,  are  you  wiser  or  colder? 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

You  know,  when  Lord  Rigmarole's  carriage, 

Drove  off  with  your  cousin  Justine, 
You  wept,  dearest  girl,  at  the  marriage. 

And  whispered  "How  base  she  has  been!" 
You  said  you  were  sure  it  would  kill  you, 

If  ever  your  husband  looked  so ; 
And  you  will  not  apostatize, — will  you? 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

When  I  heard  I  was  going  abroad,  love, 

I  thought  I  was  going  to  die; 
We  walked  arm  in  arm  to  the  road,  love, 

We  looked  arm  in  arm  to  the  sky; 
And  I. said,  "When  a  foreign  postilion 

Has  hurried  me  off  to  the  Po, 
Forget  not  Medora  Treviiian: — 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

We  parted!  but  sympathy's  fetters 

Reach  far  over  valley  and  hill; 
I  muse  o'er  your  exquisite  letters. 

And  feel  that  your  heart  is  mine  still; 
And  he  who  would  share  it  with  me,  love,^ 

The  richest  of  treasures  below, — 
If  he's  not  what  Orlando  should  be,  love. 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

If  he  wears  a  top-boot  in  his  wooing, 

If  he  comes  to  you  riding  a  cob, 
If  he  talks  of  his  baking  or  brewing. 

If  he  puts  up  his  feet  on  the  hob. 


A   Letter  of  Advice  1 8 1 1 

If  he  ever  drinks  port  after  dinner, 

If  his  brow  or  his  breeding  is  low, 
If  he  calls  himself  "Thompson"  or  "Skinner," 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

If  he  studies  the  news  in  the  papers 

While  you  are  preparing  the  tea, 
If  he  talks  of  the  damps  or  the  vapors 

While  moonlight  lies  soft  on  the  sea, 
If  he's  sleepy  while  you  are  capricious, 

If  he  has  not  a  musical  "Oh!" 
If  he  does  not  call  Werther  delicious, — ■ 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

If  he  ever  sets  foot  in  the  city 

Among  the  stockbrokers  and  Jews, 
If  he  has  not  a  heart  full  of  pity. 

If  he  don't  stand  six  feet  in  his  shoes, 
If  his  lips  are  not  redder  than  roses. 

If  his  hands  are  not  whiter  than  snow, 
If  he  has  not  the  model  of  noses,— 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

If  he  speaks  of  a  tax  or  a  duty. 

If  he  does  not  look  grand  on  his  knees, 
If  he's  blind  to  a  landscape  of  beauty. 

Hills,  valleys,  rocks,  waters,  and  trees. 
If  he  dotes  not  on  desolate  towers, 

If  he  likes  not  to  hear  the  blast  blow, 
If  he  knows  not  the  language  of  flowers, — 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

He  must  walk  like  a  god  of  old  story 

Come  down  from  the  home  of  his  rest; 
He  must  smile  like  the  sun  in  his  glory 

On  the  buds  he  loves  ever  the  best; 
And  oh!  from  its  ivory  portal 

Like  music  his  soft  speech  must  flow! — = 
If  he  speak,  smile,  or  walk  Hke  a  mortal, 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 


i8i2  The  Kindly   Muse 

Don't  listen  to  tales  of  his  bounty, 

Don't  hear  what  they  say  of  his  birth, 
Don't  look  at  his  seat  in  the  county, 

Don't  calculate  what  he  is  worth; 
But  give  him  a  theme  to  write  verse  on, 

And  see  if  he  turns  out  his  toe; — 
If  he's  only  an  excellent  person. 

My  own  Araminta,  say  "No!" 

Wiiilhrop  Mackworth  Praed  [1802-1839] 


A   NICE  CORRESPONDENT 

"There  arc  plenty  of  roses"  (the  patriarch  speaks) 
"Alas  not  far  mc,  on  your  lips  and  your  cheeks; 
Fair  maiden  rose-laden  enough  and  to  spare. 
Spare,  spare  me  that  rose  that  you  wear  in  your  liair." 

The  glow  and  the  glory  are  plighted 
To  darkness,  for  evening  is  come; 

The  lamp  in  Glebe  Cottage  is  lighted, 
The  birds  and  the  sheep-bells  are  dumb. 

I'm  alone,  for  the  others  have  flitted 
To  dine  with  a  neighbor  at  Kew: 

Alone,  but  I'm  not  to  be  pitied — 
I'm  thinldng  of  you! 

I  wish  you  were  here!    Were  I  duUer 
Than  duU,  you'd  be  dearer  than  dear; 

I  am  dressed  in  your  favorite  color — ■ 
Dear  Fred,  how  I  wish  you  were  here! 

I  am  wearing  my  lazuh  necklace, 
The  necklace  you  fastened  askew! 

Was  there  ever  so  rude  or  so  reckless 
A  Darling  as  you? 

I  want  you  to  come  and  pass  sentence 
On  two  or  three  books  with  a  plot; 

Of  course  you  know  "Janet's  Repentance"? 
I  am  reading  Sir  Waverley  Scott. 


A  Nice  Correspondent  1813 

That  story  of  Edgar  and  Lucy, 

How  thrilling,  romantic,  and  true! 
The  Master  (his  bride  was  a  goosey!) 
Reminds  me  of  you. 

They  tell  me  Cockaigne  has  been  crowning 

A  Poet  whose  garland  endures; — 
It  was  you  that  first  told  me  of  Browning, — 

That  stupid  old  Browning  of  yours! 
His  vogue  and  his  verve  are  alarming, 

I'm  anxious  to  give  him  his  due; 
But,  Fred,  he's  not  nearly  so  charming 
A  Poet  as  you ! 

I  heard  how  you  shot  at  The  Beeches, 

I  saw  how  you  rode  Chanticleer, 
I  have  read  the  report  of  your  speeches, 

And  echoed  the  echoing  cheer. 
There's  a  whisper  of  hearts  you  are  breaking. 

Dear  Fred,  I  believe  it,  I  do! 
Small  marvel  that  Folly  is  making 
Her  Idol  of  you ! 

Alas  for  the  World,  and  its  dearly 

Bought  triumph, — its  fugitive  bliss; 
Sometimes  I  half  wish  I  were  merely 

A  plain  or  a  penniless  Miss; 
But,  perhaps,  one  is  blest  with  "a  measure 

Of  pelf,"  and  I'm  not  sorry,  too. 
That  I'm  pretty,  because  it's  a  pleasure. 
My  Darling,  to  you! 

Your  whim  is  for  frolic  and  fashion. 

Your  taste  is  for  letters  and  art;— 
This  rhyme  is  the  commonplace  passion 
That  glows  in  a  fond  woman's  heart: 
Lay  it  by  in  some  sacred  deposit 
For  relics — we  all  have  a  few! 
Love,  some  day  they'll  print  it,  because  it 
Was  written  to  You. 

Frederick  Locker-Lampsoii  [182  i-i 895] 


1 8 14  The   Kindly   Muse 


A   DEAD   LETTER 

A  cceur  blesse — I'ombre  el  le  silence. — Balzac 


I  DREW  it  from  its  china  tomb; — 

It  came  out  feebly  scented 
With  some  thin  ghost  of  past  perfume 

That  dust  and  days  had  lent  it. 

An  old,  old  letter,— folded  still!  '''^ 

To  read  with  due  composure, 
I  sought  the  sun-lit  window-sill,  ,  , 

Above  the  gray  enclosure, 

That,  glimmering  in  the  sultry  haze. 

Faint-flowered,  dimly  shaded, 
Slumbered  Uke  Goldsmith's  Madam  Blaize, 

Bedizened  and  brocaded. 

A  queer  old  place!    You'd  surely  say 
Some  tea-board  garden-maker  i 

Had  planned  it  in  Dutch  William's  day: 
To  please  some  florist  Quaker, 

So  trim  it  was.    The  yew-trees  still. 

With  pious  care  perverted, 
Grew  in  the  same  grim  shapes;  and  still 

The  lipless  dolphin  spurted; 

Still  in  his  wonted  state  abode 

The  broken-nosed  Apollo; 
And  still  the  C3^press-arbor  showed 

The  same  umbrageous  hollow. 

Only, — as  fresh  young  Beauty  gleams 

From  coffee-colored  laces, 
So  peeped  from  its  old-fashioned  dreams 

The  fresher  modern  traces; 


A   Dead   Letter  1815 

For  idle  mallet,  hoop,  and  ball 

Upon  the  lawn  were  lying; 
A  magazine,  a  tumbled  shawl, 

Round  which  the  swifts  were  flying; 

And,  tossed  beside  the  Guelder  rose, 

A  heap  of  rainbow  knitting. 
Where,  blinking  in  her  pleased  repose, 

A  Persian  cat  was  sitting. 

"A  place  to  love  in, — live, — for  aye, 

If  we  too,  like  Tithonus, 
Could  find  some  God  to  stretch  the  gray 

Scant  life  the  Fates  have  thrown  us; 

"But  now  by  steam  we  run  our  race, 

With  buttoned  heart  and  pocket; 
Our  Love's  a  gilded,  surplus  grace, — 

Just  like  an  empty  locket! 

"'The  time  is  out  of  joint.'    Who  will. 

May  strive  to  make  it  better; 
For  me,  this  warm  old  window-sill, 

And  this  old  dusty  letter." 


"Dear  John  (the  letter  ran),  it  can't,  can't  be. 
For  Father's  gone  to  Chorlcy  Fair  with  Sam, 

And  Mother's  storing  Apples, — Pruc  and  Me 
Up  to  our  Elbows  making  Damson  Jam: 

But  wc  shall  meet  before  a  Week  is  gone, — 

"Tis  a  long  Lane  that  has  no  Turning,'  John! 

•'Only  Lill  Sunday  next,  and  then  you'll  wait 
Behind  the  White-Thorn,  by  tlie  broken  Stile- 

We  can  go  round  and  catch  them  at  the  Gate, 
All  to  Ourselves,  for  nearly  one  long  MUe; 

Dear  Pruc  won't  look,  and  Father  he'll  go  on, 

Aitd  Sam's  two  Eyes  are  all  for  Cissy,  John! 


i8i6  The   Kindly   Muse 

"John,  she's  so  smart, — with  every  Ribbon  new, 
Flame-colored  Sack,  and  Crimson  Padesoy: 

As  proud  as  proud;  and  has  the  Vapors  too. 
Just  like  My  Lady; — calls  poor  Sam  a  Boy, 

And  vows  no  Sweet-heart's  worth  the  Thinking-on 

Till  he's  past  Thirty  ...  I  know  better,  John! 

"My  Dear,  I  don't  think  that  I  thought  of  much 
Before  we  knew  each  other,  I  and  you ; 

And  now,  why,  John,  your  least,  least  Finger-touch, 
Gives  me  enough  to  think  a  Summer  through. 

See,  for  I  send  you  Something!    There,  'tis  gone! 

Look  in  this  corner, — mind  you  find  it^  John!" 

m 

This  was  the  matter  of  the  note, — 

A  long-forgot  deposit. 
Dropped  in  an  Lidian  dragon's  throat 

Deep  in  a  fragrant  closet. 

Piled  with  a  dapper  Dresden  world, — 
Beaux,  beauties,  prayers,  and  poses, — 

Bonzes  with  squat  legs  undercurled. 
And  great  jars  filled  with  roses. 

Ah,  heart  that  wrote!    Ah,  lips  that  kissed! 

You  had  no  thought  or  presage 
Into  what  keeping  you  dismissed 

Your  simple  old-world  message! 

A  reverent  one.    Though  we  to-day 

Distrust  beliefs  and  powers. 
The  artless,  ageless  things  you  say 

Are  fresh  as  May's  own  flowers. 

Starring  some  pure  primeval  spring. 

Ere  Gold  had  grown  despotic, — 
Ere  Life  was  yet  a  selfish  thing. 

Or  Love  a  mere  exotic!  ;  •  , . 


The   Nymph  Complaining  1817 

I  need  not  search  too  much  to  find  r.rfT 

Whose  lot  it  was  to  send  it, 
That  feel  upon  me  yet  the  kind, 

Soft  hand  of  her  who  penned  it; 

And  see,  through  two-score  years  of  smoke, 

In  by-gone,  quaint  apparel, 
Shine  from  yon  time-black  Norway  oak 

The  face  of  Patience  Caryl, — 

The  pale,  smooth  forehead,  silver-tressed; 

The  gray  gown,  primly  flowered; 
The  spotless,  stately  coif  whose  crest 

Like  Hector's  horse-plume  towered; 

And  still  the  sweet  half-solemn  look 
Where  some  past  thought  was  clinging, 

As  when  one  shuts  a  serious  book 
To  hear  the  thrushes  singing. 

I  kneel  to  you!    Of  those  you  were. 
Whose  kind  old  hearts  grow  mellow, — 

Whose  fair  old  faces  grow  more  fair, 
As  Point  and  Flanders  yellow ; 

Whom  some  old  store  of  garnered  grief, 

Their  placid  temples  shading, 
Crowns  like  a  wreath  of  autumn  leaf 

With  tender  tints  of  fading. 

Peace  to  your  soul!     You  died  unwed — 

Despite  this  loving  letter. 
And  what  of  John?     The  less  that's  said 

Of  John,  I  think,  the  better. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 

THE  NYMPH   COMPLAINING   FOR  THE  DEATH 
OF   HER   FAWN 

The  wanton  troopers  riding  by 
Have  shot  my  fawn,  and  it  will  die. 
Ungentle  men!    They  cannot  thrive 
Who  killed  thee.    Thou  ne'er  didst,  alive, 


risi 


The  Kindly   Muse  if 

Them  any  harm;  alas!  nor  could 

Thy  death  to  them  do  any  good. 

I'm  sure  I  never  wished  them  ill, 

Nor  do  I  for  all  this;  nor  will: 

But,  if  my  simple  prayers  may  yet 

Prevail  with  Heaven  to  forget 

Thy  murder,  I  will  join  my  tears 

Rather  than  fail.    But  O  my  fears! 

It  cannot  die  so.    Heaven's  King 

Keeps  register  of  everything, 

And  nothing  may  we  use  in  vain; 

Even  beasts  must  be  with  justice  slain; 

Else  men  are  made  their  deodands. 

Though  they  should  wash  their  guilty  hands 

In  this  warm  life-blood,  which  doth  part 

From  thine,  and  wound  me  to  the  heart, 

Yet  could  they  not  be  clean;  their  stain 

Is  dyed  in  such  a  purple  grain. 

There  is  not  such  another  in 

The  world  to  offer  for  their  sin. 

Inconstant  Sylvio,  when  yet 
I  had  not  found  him  counterfeit, 
One  morning,  I  remember  well, 
Tied  in  this  silver  chain  and  bell. 
Gave  it  to  me:  nay,  and  I  know 
What  he  said  then — I'm  sure  I  do. 
Said  he,  "Look  how  your  huntsman  here 
Hath  taught  a  fawn  to  hunt  his  deer!" 
But  Sylvio  soon  had  me  beguiled: 
This  waxed  tame,  while  he  grew  wild, 
And,  quite  regardless  of  my  smart, 
Left  me  his  fawn,  but  took  his  heart. 

Thenceforth  I  set  myself  to  play 
My  solitary  time  away 
With  this;  and  very  well  content 
Could  so  mine  idle  life  have  spent; 
For  it  was  full  of  sport,  and  light 
Of  foot  and  heart,  and  did  invite 


The  Nymph  Complaining  1819 

Mc  to  its  game:  it  seemed  to  bless 
Itself  in  me.    How  could  I  less 
Than  love  it?    Oh,  I  cannot  be 
Unkind  to  a  beast  that  loveth  me! 

Had  it  lived  long,  I  do  not  know 
Whether  it,  too,  might  have  done  so 
As  Sylvio  did;  his  gifts  might  be 
Perhaps  as  false,  or  more,  than  he. 
But  lam  sure,  for  aught  that  I 
Could  in  so  short  a  time  espy, 
Thy  love  was  far  more  better  than 
The  love  of  false  and  cruel  man.  , 

With  sweetest  milk  and  sugar  first 

I  it  at  mine  own  fingers  nursed; 

And  as  it  grew,  so  every  day, 

It  waxed  more  white  and  sweet  than  they. 

It  had  so  sweet  a  breath!  and  oft 

I  blushed  to  see  its  foot  more  soft. 

And  white,  shall  I  say?  than  my  hand — 

Nay,  any  lady's  of  the  land! 

It  was  a  wondrous  thing  how  fleet 
'Twas  on  those  little  silver  feet. 
With  what  a  pretty  skipping  grace 
It  oft  would  challenge  me  the  race; 
And  when't  had  left  me  far  away, 
'Twould  stay,  and  run  again,  and  stay; 
For  it  was  nimbler  much  than  hinds,     C 
And  trod  as  if  on  the  four  winds.  ' 

r 

I  have  a  garden  of  my  own,  f 

But  so  with  roses  overgrown,  > 

And  lilies,  that  you  would  it  guess        7' 

To  be  a  little  wilderness; 

And  all  the  spring-time  of  the  year 

It  loved  only  to  be  there. 

Among  the  beds  of  lilies  I 

Have  sought  it  oft,  where  it  should  lie, 


i820  The   Kindly   Muse 

Yet  could  not,  till  itself  would  rise, 
Find  it,  although  before  mine  eyes; 
For  in  the  flaxen  lilies'  shade, 
It  like  a  bank  of  lilies  laid. 
Upon  the  roses  it  would  feed, 
Until  its  lips  e'en  seemed  to  bleed; 
And  then  to  me  'twould  boldly  trip, 
And  print  those  roses  on  my  lip. 
But  all  its  chief  delight  was  still 
On  roses  thus  itself  to  fill; 
And  its  pure  virgin  lips  to  fold 
In  whitest  sheets  of  lilies  cold. 
Had  it  lived  long,  it  would  have  been 
Lilies  without,  roses  within. 

0  help!   O  help!  I  see  it  faint 
And  die  as  calmly  as  a  saint ! 

See  how  it  weeps!  the  tears  do  come 
Sad,  slowly,  dropping  like  a  gum. 
So  weeps  the  wounded  balsam;  so 
The  holy  frankincense  doth  flow; 
The  brotherless  Hehades 
Melt  in  such  amber  tears  as  these. 

1  in  a  golden  vial  will 

Keep  these  two  crystal  tears,  and  fill 
It,  till  it  doth  overflow,  with  mine. 
Then  place  it  in  Diana's  shrine. 

Now  my  sweet  fawn  is  vanished  to 

Whither  the  swans  and  turtles  go ; 

In  fair  Elysium  to  endure 

With  milk-white  lambs  and  ermines  pure. 

O,  do  not  run  too  fast,  for  I 

Will  but  bespeak  thy  grave,  and  die. 

First  my  unhappy  statue  shall 
Be  cut  in  marble;  and  withal 
Let  it  be  weeping  too;  but  there 
The  engraver  sure  his  art  may  spare; 


On   the   Death   of  a   Favorite   Cat     1821 

For  I  so  truly  thee  bemoan 

That  I  shall  weep  though  I  be  stone, 

Until  my  tears,  still  dropping,  wear 

My  breast,  themselves  engraving  there; 

Then  at  my  feet  shalt  thou  be  laid, 

Of  purest  alabaster  made; 

For  I  would  have  thine  image  be 

White  as  I  can,  though  not  as  thee. 

Andrew  MarvcU  [ 1 6 2 1 - 1 6 7 8] 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  A  FAVORITE  CAT,  DROWNED 
IN  A  TUB  OF  GOLD  FISHES 

'TwAS  on  a  lofty  vase's  side, 

,    Where  China's  gayest  art  had  dyed 

The  azure  flowers  that  blow; 

Demurest  of  the  tabby  kind. 

The  pensive  Selima,  reclined, 

Gazed  on  the  lake  below. 

Her  conscious  tail  her  joy  declared; 
The  fair  round  face,  the  snowy  beard, 

The  velvet  of  her  paws. 
Her  coat,  that  with  the  tortoise  vies, 
Her  ears  of  jet,  and  emerald  eyes, 

She  saw;  and  purred  applause. 

Still  had  she  gazed,  but  'midst  the  tide 
Two  angel  forms  were  seen  to  glide. 

The  Genii  of  the  stream: 
Their  scaly  armor's  Tyrian  hue 
Through  richest  purple  to  the  view 

Betrayed  a  golden  gleam. 

The  hapless  Nymph  with  wonder  saw: 
A  whisker  first  and  then  a  claw. 

With  many  an  ardent  wish, 
She  stretched,  in  vain,  to  reach  the  prize. 
What  female  heart  can  gold  despise? 

What  Cat's  averse  to  fish? 


1 822  The   Kindly   Muse 

Presumptous  Maid!  with  looks  intent 
Again  she  stretched,  again  she  bent, 

Nor  knew  the  gulf  between. 
(Malignant  Fate  sat  by,  and  smiled.) 
The  slippery  verge  her  feet  beguiled, 

She  tumbled  headlong  in. 

Eight  times  emerging  from  the  flood 
She  mewed  to  every  watery  god. 

Some  speedy  aid  to  send. 
No  Dolphin  came,  no  Nereid  stirred: 
Nor  cruel  Tom  nor  Susan  heard, — 

A  Favorite  has  no  friend! 

From  hence,  ye  Beauties,  undeceived, 
Know,  one  false  step  is  ne'er  retrieved, 

And  be  with  caution  bold. 
Not  all  that  tempts  your  wandering  eyes 
And  heedless  hearts,  is  lawful  prize; 

Nor  all  that  glisters,  gold. 

Thomas  Gray  [1716-1771] 


VERSES   ON  A   CAT 

Clubby!  thou  surely  art,  I  ween, 
A  Puss  of  most  majestic  mien. 

So  stately  all  thy  paces! 
With  such  a  philosophic  air 
Thou  seek'st  thy  professorial  chair,  , , 

And  so  demure  thy  face  is! 

And  as  thou  sit'st,  thine  eye  seems  fraught 
With  such  intensity  of  thought 

That  could  we  read  it,  knowledge 
Would  seem  to  breathe  in  every  mew. 
And  learning  yet  undreamt  by  you 

Who  dwell  in  Hall  or  College. 


Epitaph  on  a   Hare  1823 

Oh!  when  in  solemn  taciturnity 

Thy  brain  seems  wandering  through  eternity, 

What  happiness  were  mine 
Could  I  then  catch  the  thoughts  that  flow, 
Thoughts  such  as  ne'er  were  hatched  below, 

But  in  a  head  like  thine. 

Oh  then,  throughout  the  livelong  day, 
With  thee  I'd  sit  and  purr  away 

In  ecstasy  sublime; 
And  in  thy  face,  as  from  a  book, 
I'd  drink  in  science  at  each  look. 

Nor  fear  the  lapse  of  time. 

Charles  Daiibcny  [1745-1827] 


EPITAPH  ON  A  HARE 

Here  lies,  whom  hound  did  ne'er  pursue. 
Nor  swifter  greyhound  follow, 

Whose  foot  ne'er  tainted  morning  dew, 
Nor  ear  heard  huntsman's  hallo; 

Old  Tiney,  surliest  of  his  kind, 
Who,  nursed  with  tender  care, 

And  to  domestic  bounds  confined. 
Was  still  a  wild  Jack-hare. 

Though  duly  from  my  hand  he  took 

His  pittance  every  night, 
He  did  it  with  a  jealous  look, 

And,  when  he  could,  would  bite. 

His  diet  was  of  wheaten  bread, 
And  milk,  and  oats,  and  straw; 

Thistles,  or  lettuces  instead, 
With  sand  to  scour  his  maw. 

On  twigs  of  hawthorn  he  regaled. 

On  pippins'  russet  peel; 
And,  when  his  juicy  salads  failed, 

Sliced  carrot  pleased  him  well. 


1824  The   Kindly   Muse 

A  Turkey  carpet  was  his  lawn, 

Whereon  he  loved  to  bound, 
To  skip  and  gambol  like  a  fawn, 

And  swing  his  rump  around. 

His  frisking  was  at  evening  hours, 

For  then  he  lost  his  fear; 
But  most  before  approaching  showers. 

Or  when  a  storm  drew  near. 

Eight  years  and  five  round-rolling  moons 

He  thus  saw  steal  away, 
Dozing  out  all  his  idle  noons, 

And  every  night  at  play. 

I  kept  him  for  his  humor's  sake, 

For  he  woidd  oft  beguile 
My  heart  of  thoughts  that  made  it  ache, 

And  force  me  to  a  smile. 

But  now,  beneath  this  walnut-shade 

He  finds  his  long,  last  home, 
And  waits,  in  snug  concealment  laid, 

Till  gentler  Puss  shall  come. 

He,  still  more  aged,  feels  the  shocks 
From  which  no  care  can  save. 

And,  partner  once  of  Tiney's  box, 
Must  soon  partake  his  grave. 

William  Cowper  [1731-1J 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MRS.   THROCKMORTON'S 
BULLFINCH 

Ye  Nymphs!  if  e'er  your  eyes  were  red 
With  tears  o'er  hapless  favorites  shed, 

0  share  Maria's  grief! 
Her  favorite,  even  in  his  cage, 
(What  will  not  hunger's  cruel  rage?) 

Assassined  by  a  thief. 


On  the   Death  of  a   Bullfinch        1825 

Where  Rhenus  strays  his  vines  among, 
The  egg  was  laid  from  which  he  sprung, 

And  though  by  nature  mute, 
Or  only  with  a  whistle  blessed, 
Well-taught,  he  all  the  sounds  expressed 

Of  flageolet  or  flute. 

The  honors  of  his  ebon  poll 

Were  brighter  than  the  sleekest  mole; 

His  bosom  of  the  hue 
With  which  Aurora  decks  the  skies, 
When  piping  winds  shall  soon  arise 

To  sweep  away  the  dew. 

Above,  below,  in  all  the  house. 
Dire  foe  alike  of  bird  and  mouse, 

No  cat  had  leave  to  dwell;  .  . 

And  Bully's  cage  supported  stood. 
On  props  of  smoothest-shaven  wood, 

Large-built  and  latticed  well. 

Well-latticed, — but  the  grate,  alas! 
Not  rough  with  wire  of  steel  or  brass. 

For  Bully's  plumage  sake. 
But  smooth  with  wands  from  Ouse's  side. 
With  which,  when  neatly  peeled  and  dried, 

The  swains  their  baskets  make. 

Night  veiled  the  pole — all  seemed  secure — 
When,  led  by  instinct  sharp  and  sure. 

Subsistence  to  provide, 
A  beast  forth  sallied  on  the  scout. 
Long-backed,  long-tailed,  with  whiskered  snout, 

And  badger-colored  hide. 

lie,  entering  at  the  study-door. 
Its  ample  area  'gan  explore; 

And  something  in  the  wind 
Conjectured,  sniffing  round  and  round, 
Better  than  all  the  books  he  found, 

Food,  chiefly,  for  the  mind. 


1 826  The   Kindly   Muse 

Just  then,  by  adverse  fate  impressed 
A  dream  disturbed  poor  Bully's  rest; 

In  sleep  he  seemed  to  view 
A  rat,  fast-clinging  to  the  cage. 
And,  screaming  at  the  sad  presage, 

Awoke  and  found  it  true. 

For,  aided  both  by  ear  and  scent. 
Right  to  his  mark  the  monster  went — 

Ah,  Muse!  forbear  to  speak 
Minute  the  horror  that  ensued; 
His  teeth  were  strong,  the  cage  was  wood-— , 

He  left  poor  Bully's  beak. 

O  had  he  made  that  too  his  prey! 

That  beak,  whence  issued  many  a  lay '';''^ 

Of  such  mellifluous  tone. 
Might  have  repaid  him  well,  I  wote, 
For  silencing  so  sweet  a  throat. 

Fast  stuck  within  his  own.  ''' 

Maria  weeps, — the  Muses  mourn; — 
So,  when  by  Bacchanalians  torn, 

On  Thracian  Hcbrus'  side 
The  tree-enchanter  Orpheus  fell. 
His  head  alone  remained  to  tell  ' ' 

The  cruel  death  he  died. 

William  Cow  per  [i  731-1800] 

AN  ELEGY  ON  A  LAP-DOG 

Shock's  fate  I  mourn;  poor  Shock  is  now  no  more: 
Ye  Muses!  mourn;  ye  Chambermaids!  deplore. 
Unhappy  Shock!    Yet  more  unhappy  fair. 
Doomed  to  survive  thy  joy  and  only  care. 
Thy  wretched  fingers  now  no  more  shall  deck, 
And  tie  the  favorite  ribbon  round  his  neck; 
No  more  thy  hand  shall  smooth  his  glossy  hair, 
And  comb  the  wavings  of  his  pendent  ear. 
Let  cease  thy  flowing  grief,  forsaken  maid! 
All  mortal  pleasures  in  a  moment  fade: 


My   Last  Terrier  1827 

Our  surest  hope  is  in  an  hour  destroyed, 

And  love,  best  gift  of  Heaven,  not  long  enjoyed. 

Methinks  I  see  her  frantic  with  despair. 
Her  streaming  eyes,  wrung  hands,  and  flowing  hair; 
Her  ]\Icchlin  pinners,  rent,  the  tloor  bestrow, 
And  her  torn  fan  gives  real  signs  of  woe. 
Hence,  Superstition!  that  tormenting  guest, 
That  haunts  with  fancied  fears  the  coward  breast; ' 
No  dread  events  upon  this  fate  attend, 
Stream  eyes  no  more,  no  more  thy  tresses  rend. 
Though  certain  omens  oft  forewarn  a  state. 
And  dying  lions  show  the  monarch's  fate. 
Why  should  such  fears  bid  Celia's  sorrow  rise? 
For,  when  a  lap-dog  falls,  no  lover  dies. 

Cease,  Celia,  cease;  restrain  thy  flowing  tears. 
Some  warmer  passion  will  dispel  thy  cares. 
In  man  you'll  find  a  more  substantial  bliss, 
More  grateful  toying  and  a  sweeter  kiss. 

He's  dead.    Oh!  lay  him  gently  in  the  ground! 
And  may  his  tomb  be  by  this  verse  renowned : 
Here  Shock,  the  pride  of  all  his  kind,  is  laid, 
Who  fawned  like  man,  but  ne'er  like  man  betrayed. 

John  Gay  [16S5-1732] 


MY  LAST  TERRIER 

I  MOURN  "Patroclus,"  whilst  I  praise 
Young  "Peter"  sleek  before  the  fire, 

A  proper  dog,  whose  decent  ways 
Renew  the  virtues  of  his  sire; 

"Patroclus"  rests  in  grassy  tomb, 

And  "Peter"  grows  into  his  room. 

For  though,  when  Time  or  Fates  consign 
The  terrier  to  his  latest  earth, 

Vowing  no  wastrel  of  the  line 

Shall  dim  the  memory  of  his  worth, 

I  meditate  the  silkier  breeds, ' 

Yet  still  an  Amurath  succeeds : 


1 828  The   Kindly    Muse 

Succeeds  to  bind  the  heart  again 
To  watchful  eye  and  strenuous  paw. 

To  tail  that  gratulates  amain 
Or  deprecates  offended  Law; 

To  bind,  and  break,  when  failing  eye 

And  palsied  paw  must  say  good-bye. 

Ah,  had  the  dog's  appointed  day 

But  tallied  with  his  master's  span, 
Nor  one  swift  decade  turned  to  gray 

The  busy  muzzle's  black  and  tan, 
To  reprobate  in  idle  men 
Their  threescore  empty  years  and  ten! 

Sure,  somewhere  o'er  the  Stygian  strait 

"Panurge"  and  "Bito,"  "Tramp"  and  "Mike," 

In  couchant  conclave  watch  the  gate. 
Till  comes  the  last  successive  tyke, 

Acknowledged  with  the  countersign: 

"  Your  master  was  a  friend  of  mine." 

In  dreams  I  see  them  spring  to  greet. 
With  rapture  more  than  tail  can  tell, 

Their  master  of  the  silent  feet 
Who  whistles  o'er  the  asphodel, 

And  through  the  dim  Elysian  bounds 

Leads  all  his  cry  of  little  hounds. 

John  Halsham  [i8    - 


GEIST'S  GRAVE 

Four  years! — and  didst  thou  stay  above 
The  ground,  which  hides  thee  now,  but  four? 
And  all  that  life,  and  all  that  love. 
Were  crowded,  Geist!  into  no  more? 

Only  four  years  those  winning  ways. 
Which  make  me  for  thy  presence  yearn. 
Called  us  to  pet  thee  or  to  praise, 
Dear  little  friend !  at  every  turn? 


Geist's   Grave  1829 

That  loving  heart,  that  patient  soul, 
Had  they  indeed  no  longer  span, 
To  run  their  course,  and  reach  their  goal 
And  read  their  homily  to  man? 

That  liquid,  melancholy  eye. 
From  wliose  pathetic,  soul-fed  springs 
Seemed  surging  the  Virgilian  cry. 
The  sense  of  tears  in  mortal  things — 

That  steadfast,  mournful  strain,  consoled 

By  spirits  gloriously  gay. 

And  temper  of  heroic  mould— 

What,  was  four  years  their  whole  short  day? 

Yes,  only  four! — and  not  the  course 
Of  all  the  centuries  yet  to  come, 
And  not  the  infinite  resource 
Of  Nature,  with  her  countless  sum 

Of  figures,  with  her  fulness  vast 
Of  new  creation  evermore. 
Can  ever  quite  repeat  the  past, 
Or  just  thy  little  self  restore. 

Stern  law  of  every  mortal  lot! 

Which  man,  proud  man,  finds  hard  to  bear, 

And  builds  himself  I  know  not  what 

Of  second  life  I  know  not  where. 

But  thou,  when  struck  thine  hour  to  go, 
On  us,  who  stood  despondent  by, 
A  meek  last  glance  of  love  didst  throw, 
And  humbly  lay  thee  down  to  die. 

Yet  would  we  keep  thee  in  our  heart — 
Would  fix  our  favorite  on  the  scene, 
Nor  let  thee  utterly  depart 
And  be  as  if  thou  ne'er  hadst  been. 


1830  The   Kindly   Muse 

And  so  there  rise  these  hnes  of  verse 
On  hps  that  rarely  form  them  now; 
While  to  each  other  we  rehearse: 
Such  ways,  such  arts,  such  looks  hadst  thou  ! 

We  stroke  thy  broad  brown  paws  again, 
We  bid  thee  to  thy  vacant  chair, 
We  greet  thee  by  the  window-pane, 
We  hear  thy  scuffle  on  the  stair; 

We  see  the  flaps  of  thy  large  ears 
Quick  raised  to  ask  which  way  we  go; 
Crossing  the  frozen  lake,  appears 
Thy  small  black  figure  on  the  snow! 

Nor  to  us  only  art  thou  dear, 
Who  mourn  thee  in  thine  English  home; 
Thou  hast  thine  absent  master's  tear. 
Dropped  by  the  far  Australian  foam. 

Thy  memory  lasts  both  here  and  there, 
And  thou  shaft  Hve  as  long  as  we. 
And  after  that — thou  dost  not  care! 
In  us  was  all  the  world  to  thee. 

Yet,  fondly  zealous  for  thy  fame, 
Even  to  a  date  beyond  our  own, 
We  strive  to  carry  down  thy  name 
By  mounded  turf  and  graven  stone. 

We  lay  thee,  close  within  our  reach, 
Here,  where  the  grass  is  smooth  and  warm, 
Between  the  holly  and  the  beech, 
Where  oft  we  watched  thy  couchant  form, 

Asleep,  yet  lending  half  an  ear 
To  travelers  on  the  Portsmouth  road;— 
There  choose  we  thee,  O  guardian  dear. 
Marked  with  a  stone,  thy  last  abode! 


I.addie  1 83 1 


Then  some,  who  through  this  garden  pass, 
When  we  too,  Hke  thyself,  are  day, 
Shall  see  thy  grave  upon  the  grass. 
And  stop  before  the  stone,  and  say: 

People  who  lived  here  long  ago 

Did  by  this  stone,  it  seems,  intend 

To  name  for  future  times  to  know 

The  dachs-hound,  Geist,  their  little  friend. 

Maithe-d'  Arnold  [1822- 

LADDIE 

Lowly  the  soul  that  waits 
At  the  white,  celestial  gates, 
A  threshold  soul  to  greet 
Beloved  feet. 

Down  the  streets  that  are  beams  of  sun 
Cherubim  children  run; 
They  welcome  it  from  the  wall; 
Their  voices  call. 

But  the  Warder  saith:  "Nay,  this 
Is  the  City  of  Holy  Bliss. 
What  claim  canst  thou  make  good 
To  angelhood?" 

"Joy,"  answereth  it  from  eyes 
That  are  amber  ecctasies. 
Listening,  alert,  elate. 
Before  the  gate. 

Oh,  how  tlie  frolic  feet 
On  lonely  memory  beat! 
What  rapture  in  a  run 
'Twixt  snow  and  sun! 

"Nay,  brother  of  the  sod, 
What  part  hast  thou  in  God? 
What  spirit  art  thou  of?" 
It  answers:  "Love," 


1832  The   Kindly   Muse 

Lifting  its  head,  no  less 
Cajoling  a  caress, 
Our  winsome  collie  wraith, 
Than  in  glad  faith 

The  door  will  open  wide, 
Or  kind  voice  bid:  "Abide, 
A  threshold  soul  to  greet 
The  longed-for  feet." 

Ah,  Keeper  of  the  Portal, 
If  Love  be  not  immortal, 
If  Joy  be  not  divine. 
What  prayer  is  mine? 

Katharine  Lee  Bates  [1850- 


"HOLD" 

I  KNOW,  where  Hampshire  fronts  the  Wight, 

A  little  church,  where  "after  strife" 
Reposes  Guy  de  Blanquely,  Knight, 

By  Alison  his  wife: 
I  know  their  features'  graven  lines 

In  time-stained  marble  monotone. 
While  crouched  before  their  feet  reclines 

Their  little  dog  of  stone! 

I  look  where  Blanquely  Castle  still 

Frowns  o'er  the  oak  wood's  summer  state, 
(The  maker  of  a  patent  pill 

Has  purchased  it  of  late). 
And  then  through  Fancy's  open  door 

I  backward  turn  to  days  of  old. 
And  see  Sir  Guy — a  bachelor 

Who  owns  a  dog  called  "Hold"! 

I  see  him  take  the  tourney's  chance, 
And  urge  his  coal-black  charger  on 


"Hold"  1833 


To  an  arbitrament  by  lance 

For  lovely  Alison; 
I  mark  the  onset,  see  him  hurl 

From  broidered  saddle  to  the  dirt 
His  rival,  that  ignoble  Earl — 

Black-hearted  JMassingbert! 

Then  Alison,  with  down-dropped  eyes, 

Where  happy  tears  bedim  the  blue, 
Bestows  a  valuable  prize 

And  adds  her  hand  thereto; 
My  lord,  his  surcoat  streaked  with  sand. 

Remounts,  low  muttering  curses  hot. 
And  with  a  base-born,  hireling  band 

He  plans  a  dastard  plot! 


'Tis  night — Sir  Guy  has  sunk  to  sleep, 

The  castle  keep  is  hushed  and  still — 
See,  up  the  spiral  stairway  creep. 

To  work  his  wicked  will. 
Lord  Massingbert  of  odious  fame, 

Soft  followed  by  his  cut -throat  staff; 
Ah,  "Hold"  has  justified  his  name 

And  pinned  his  lordship's  calf! 

A  growl,  an  oath,  then  torches  flare; 

Out  rings  a  sentry's  startled  shout; 
The  guard  are  racing  for  the  stair, 

Half-dressed,  Sir  Guy  runs  out; 
On  high  his  glittering  blade  he  waves. 

He  gives  foul  Massingbert  the  point. 
He  carves  the  hired  assassin  knaves 

Joint  from  plebeian  joint ! 


The  Knight  is  dead — his  sword  is  rust, 
But  in  his  day  I'm  certain  "Hold" 


1834  The   Kindly   Muse 

Wore,  as  his  master's  badge  of  trust, 

A  collarette  of  gold: 
And  still  I  like  to  fancy  that, 

Somewhere  beyond  the  Styx's  bound, 
Sir  Guy's  tall  phantom  stoops  to  pat 

His  little  phantom  hound! 

Patrick  R.  Chalmers  [li 


THE  BARB  OF  SATIRE 

THE  VICAR  OF  BRAY 

In  good  King  Charles's  golden  days, 

When  loyalty  no  harm  meant, 
A  zealous  high-churchman  was  I, 

And  so  I  got  preferment. 
To  teach  my  flock  I  never  missed: 

Kings  were  by  God  appointed, 
And  lost  are  those  that  dare  resist 
Or  touch  the  Lord's  anointed. 
And  this  is  law  that  I'll  maintain 

Until  my  dying  day,  sir, 
That  whatsoever  king  shall  reign, 
Still  I'll  be  the  Vicar  of  Bray,  sir. 

When  royal  James  possessed  the  crown,. 

And  popery  grew  in  fashion, 
The  penal  laws  I  hooted  down, 

And  read  the  Declaration; 
The  Church  of  Rome  I  found  would  fit 

FuU  weU  my  constitution; 
And  I  had  been  a  Jesuit 
.   But  for  the  Revolution. 

WTien  William  was  our  king  declared, 

To  ease  the  nation's  grievance, 
With  this  new  wind  about  I  steered, 

And  swore  to  him  allegiance; 
Old  principles  I  did  revoke, 

Set  conscience  at  a  distance; 
Passive  obedience  was  a  joke, 

A  jest  was  non-resistance. 

1835 


1836  The   Barb  of  Satire 

When  royal  Anne  became  our  queen, 

The  Church  of  England's  glory, 
Another  face  of  things  was  seen, 

And  I  became  a  Tory; 
Occasional  conformists  base, 

I  blamed  their  moderation, 
And  thought  the  Church  in  danger  was, 

By  such  prevarication. 

When  George  in  pudding-time  came  o'er, 

And  moderate  men  looked  big,  sir, 
My  principles  I  changed  once  more, 

And  so  became  a  Whig,  sir; 
And  thus  preferment  I  procured 

From  our  new  Faith's  defender, 
And  almost  every  day  abjured 

The  Pope  and  the  Pretender. 

The  illustrious  house  of  Hanover, 

And  Protestant  succession, 
To  these  I  do  allegiance  swear — 

While  they  can  keep  possession: 
For  in  my  faith  and  loyalty 

I  nevermore  will  falter, 
And  George  my  lawful  king  shall  be — 
Until  the  times  do  alter. 

And  this  is  law  that  I'll  maintain 

Until  my  dying  day,  sir, 
That  whatsoever  king  shall  reign, 
Still  I'll  be  the  Vicar  of  Bray,  sir. 

Unknown 


THE  LOST  LEADER 

[WILLIAM   WORDSWORTH] 

Just  for  a  handful  of  silver  he  left  us, 

Just  for  a  ribbon  to  stick  in  his  coat- 
Found  the  one  gift  of  which  fortune  bereft  us, 
Lost  all  the  others  she  lets  us  devote ; 


Ichabod  1837 

They,  with  the  gold  to  give,  doled  him  out  silver, 

So  much  was  theirs  who  so  little  allowed : 
How  all  our  copper  had  gone  for  his  service ! 

Rags — were  they  purple,  his  heart  had  been  proud — 
We  that  had  loved  him  so,  followed  him,  honored  him. 

Lived  in  his  mild  and  magnificent  eye. 
Learned  his  great  language,  caught  his  clear  accents, 

Made  him  our  pattern  to  live  and  to  die! 
Shakespeare  was  of  us,  Milton  was  for  us. 

Burns,  Shelley,  were  with  us, — they  watch  from  their 
graves ! 
He  alone  breaks  from  the  van  and  the  freemen, 

— He  alone  sinks  to  the  rear  and  the  slaves! 
We  shall  march  prospering, — not  through  his  presence; 

Songs  may  inspirit  us, — not  from  his  lyre; 
Deeds  wiU  be  done, — while  he  boasts  his  quiescence, 

Still  bidding  crouch  whom  the  rest  bade  aspire: 
Blot  out  his  name,  then,  record  one  lost  soul  more, 

One  task  more  declined,  one  more  footpath  untrod, 
One  more  devil's-triumph  and  sorrow  for  angels. 

One  wrong  more  to  man,  one  more  insult  to  God! 
Life's  night  begins:  let  him  never  come  back  to  us! 

There  would  be  doubt,  hesitation  and  pain, 
Forced  praise  on  our  part — the  glimmer  of  twilight, 

Never  glad  confident  morning  again! 
Best  fight  on  well,  for  we  taught  him — strike  gallantly, 

Menace  our  heart  ere  we  master  his  own ; 
Then  let  him  receive  the  new  knowledge  and  wait  us, 

Pardoned  in  heaven,  the  first  by  the  throne! 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1S89] 


ICHABOD 
[daniel  Webster] 

So  fallen!  so  lost!  the  light  withdrawn 
Which  once  he  wore!   i'^'-  <\  >'.'g7/ 

The  glory  from  his  gray  hairs  gone 
Forevermore! 


1838 


The   Barb  of  Satire 

Revile  him  not,  the  Tempter,  hath 

A  snare  for  all; 
And  pitying  tears,  not  scorn  and  wrath. 

Befit  his  fall! 

Oh,  dumb  be  passion's  stormy  rage, 

When  he  who  might 
Have  lighted  up  and  led  his  age, 

Falls  back  in  night. 

Scorn!  would  the  angels  laugh,  to  mark 

A  bright  soul  driven. 
Fiend-goaded,  down  the  endless  dark. 

From  hope  and  heaven! 

Let  not  the  land  once  proud  of  him 

Insult  him  now, 
Nor  brand  with  deeper  shame  his  dim, 

Dishonored  brow. 

But  let  its  humbled  sons,  instead, 

From  sea  to  lake, 
A  long  lament,  as  for  the  dead, 

In  sadness  make. 

Of  all  we  loved  and  honored,  naught 

Save  power  remains; 
A  fallen  angel's  pride  of  thought, 

Still  strong  in  chains. 

All  else  is  gone;  from  those  great  eyes 

The  soul  has  fled : 
When  faith  is  lost,  when  honor  dies, 

The  man  is  dead! 

Then,  pay  the  reverence  of  old  days 

To  his  dead  fame; 
Walk  backward,  with  averted  gaze, 

And  hide  the  shame! 

John  Greenleaf  Whitlier  li8o7-i{ 


What   Mr.   Robinson   Thinks        1839 


WHAT  MR.   ROBINSON  THINKS 

GuvENER  B.  is  a  sensible  man; 

He  stays  to  his  home  an'  looks  arter  his  folks; 
He  draws  his  furrer  cz  straight  ez  he  can, 
An'  into  nobody's  tater-patch  pokes; 
But  John  P. 
Robinson  he 
Sez  he  vvTjnt  vote  fer  Guvener  B. 

My!  aint  it  terrible?    Wut  shall  we  du? 

We  can't  never  choose  him  o'  course, — thet's  flat; 
Guess  we  shall  hev  to  come  round,  (don't  you?) 
An'  go  in  fer  thunder  an'  guns,  an'  all  that; 
Fer  John  P. 
Robinson  he 
Sez  he  wunt  vote  fer  Guvener  B. 

Gineral  C,  is  a  dreffle  smart  man: 

He's  ben  on  aU  sides  that  give  places  or  pelf; 
But  consistency  still  wuz  a  part  of  his  plan, — 

He's  ben  true  to  one  party, — an'  thet  is  himself; — 
So  John  P. 
Robinson  he 
Sez  he  shall  vote  fer  Gineral  C. 

Gineral  C.  he  goes  in  fer  the  war; 

He  don't  vally  princerple  more'n  an  old  cud; 
Wut  did  God  make  us  raytional  creeturs  fer, 
But  glory  an'  gunpowder,  plunder  an'  blood? 
So  John  P. 
Robinson  he 
Sez  he  shall  vote  fer  Gineral  C. 

We  were  gittin'  on  nicely  up  here  to  our  village, 

With  good  old  idees  o'  wut's  right  an'  wut  aint, 
We  kind  o'  thought  Christ  went  agin  war  an'  pillage, 
An'  thet  eppyletts  worn't  the  best  mark  of  a  saint; 
But  John  P. 
Robinson  he 
Sqz  this  kind  0'  thing's  an  exploded  idee. 


1840  The   Barb  of  Satire 

The  side  of  our  country  must  oilers  be  took, 

An'  Presidunt  Polk,  you  know,  he  is  our  country. 
An'  the  angel  thet  writes  all  our  sins  in  a  book 
Puts  the  debit  to  him,  an'  to  us  the  per  contry; 
An'  John  P. 
Robinson  he 
Sez  this  is  his  view  o'  the  thing  to  a  T. 

Parson  Wilbur  he  calls  all  these  argimunts  lies; 

Sez  they're  nothin'  on  airth  but  jest  fee,  Jaw,  fum; 
An'  thet  all  this  big  talk  of  our  destinies 
Is  half  on  it  ign'ance,  an'  t'other  half  rum; 
But  John  P. 
Robinson  he 
Sez  it  aint  no  sech  thing;  an',  of  course,  so  must  we. 

Parson  Wilbur  sez  he  never  heerd  in  his  hfe 

That  th'  Apostles  rigged  out  in  their  swailer-tail  coats, 
An'  marched  round  in  front  of  a  drum  an'  a  fife, 
To  git  some  on  'em  ofhce,  an'  some  on  'em  votes; 
But  John  P. 
Robinson  he 
Sez  they  didn't  know  everythin'  down  in  Judee. 

Wal,  it's  a  marcy  we've  gut  folks  to  tell  us 

The  rights  an'  the  wrongs  o'  these  matters,  I  vow,^ 
God  sends  country  lawyers,  an'  other  wise  fellers, 
To  start  the  world's  team  wen  it  gits  in  a  slough; 
Fer  John  P. 
Robinson  he 
Sez  the  world'll  go  right,  ef  he  hollers  out  Gee! 

James  Russell  Lowell  [iSig-iSgi] 


THE  DEBATE  IN  THE  SENNIT 

SOT  TO  A  NURSERY  RHYME 

'  "Here  we  stan'  on  the  Constitution,  by  thunder! 

It's  a  fact  o'  wich  ther's  bushils  o'  proofs; 
Fer  how  could  we  trample  on  't  so,  I  wonder. 
Eft  worn't  thet  it's  oilers  under  our  hoofs?" 


The   Debate  in   the  Sennit  1841 

Sez  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he; 

"Human  rights  haint  no  more 

Right  to  come  on  this  floor, 
No  more'n  the  man  in  the  moon,"  sez  he. 

"The  North  haint  no  kind  o'  bisness  with  nothin', 

An'  you've  no  idee  how  much  bother  it  saves; 
We  aint  none  riled  by  their  frettin'  an'  frothin', 
We're  used  to  layin'  the  string  on  our  slaves," 
Sez  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he; — 
Sez  Mister  Foote, 
"  I  should  like  to  shoot 
The  holl  gang,  by  the  gret  horn  spoon!"  sez  he. 

"Freedom's  Keystone  is  Slavery,  thet  ther's  no  doubt  on, 

It's  sutthin'  thet's — wha'd'ye  call  it? — divine, — ■ 
An'  the  slaves  thet  we  oilers  make  the  most  out  on 
Air  them  north  o'  Mason  an'  Dixon's  line," 
Sez  John  C.  Calhouy,  sez  he; — 
"Fer  all  thet,"  sez  Mangum, 
"  'T  would  be  better  to  hang  'em 
An'  so  git  red  on  'en  soon,"  sez  he. 

"The  mass  ough'  to  labor  an'  we  lay  on  soffies, 

Thet's  the  reason  I  want  to  spread  Freedom's  aree; 
It  puts  all  the  cunninest  on  us  in  office, 
An'  reelises  our  Maker's  orig'nal  idee," 
Sez  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he; — 
"Thet's  ez  plain,"  sez  Cass, 
"  Ez  thet  some  one's  an  ass. 
It's  ez  clear  ez  the  sun  is  at  noon,"  sez  he. 

"Now  don't  go  to  say  I'm  the  friend  of  oppression. 

But  keep  all  your  spare  breath  fer  coolin'  your  broth, 
Fer  I  oilers  hev  strove  (at  least  thet's  my  impression) 
To  make  cussed  free  with  the  rights  o'  the  North," 
Sez  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he;— 
"Yes,"  sez  Davis  o'  Miss., 
"The  perfection  o'  bliss 
Is  in  skinnin'  thet  same  old  coon,"  sez  he. 


1842  The   Barb  of  Satire 

"Slavery's  a  thing  thet  depends  on  complexion, 

It's  God's  law  thet  fetters  on  black  skins  don't  chafe; 
Ef  brains  wuz  to  settle  it  (horrid  reflection!) 
Wich  of  our  onnable  body'd  be  safe?" 
Sez  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he; — 
Sez  Mister  Hannegan, 
Afore  he  began  agin, 
"Thet  exception  is  quite  oppertoon,"  sez  he. 

"Gen'nle  Cass,  Sir,  you  needn't  be  twitchin'  your  collar, 

Vour  merit's  quite  clear  by  the  dut  on  your  knees; 
At  the  North  we  don't  make  no  distinctions  o'  color; 
You  can  all  take  a  lick  at  our  shoes  wen  you  please," 
Sez  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he; — 
Sez  Mister  Jarnagin, 
"They  wun't  hev  to  larn  agin. 
They  all  on  'em  know  the  old  toon,"  sez  he. 

"The  slavery  question  aint  no  ways  bewilderin', 

North  an'  South  hev  one  int'rest,  it's  plain  to  a  glance, 
No'thern  men,  like  us  patriarchs,  don't  sell  their  childrin, 
But  they  du  sell  themselves,  ef  they  git  a  good  chance," 
Sez  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he; — ■ 
Sez  Atherton  here, 
"This  is  gittin'  severe, 
I  wish  I  could  dive  like  a  loon,"  sez  he. 

"It'll  break  up  the  Union,  this  talk  about  freedom. 

An'  your  fact'ry  gals  (soon  ez  we  split)  '11  make  head, 
An'  gittin'  some  Miss  chief  or  other  to  lead  'em, 
'11  go  to  work  raisin'  permiscoous  Ned," 
Sez  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he; — 
"Yes,  the  North,"  sez  Colquitt, 
"Ef  we  Southeners  all  quit. 
Would  go  dov/n  like  a  busted  balloon,"  sez  he. 

"Jest  look  wut  is  doin',  wut  annyky's  brewin' 
In  the  beautiful  clime  o'  the  olive  an'  vine, 

All  the  wise  aristoxy's  atumblin'  to  ruin. 

An'  the  sankylot's  drorin'  an'  drinkin'  their  wine," 


The   Marquis  of  Carabas  1843 

Scz  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he; — • 
"Yes,"  sez  Johnson,  "m  France 
They're  beginnin'  to  dance 
Beelzebub's  own  rigadoon,"  sez  he. 

"The  South's  safe,  enough,  it  don't  feel  a  mite  skeery, 

Our  slaves  in  their  darkness  an'  dut  air  tu  blest 
Not  to  welcome  with  proud  hallylugers  the  ery 

Wen  our  eagle  kicks  yourn  from  the  naytional  nest," 
Sez  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he; — 
"Oh,"  sez  Westcott  o'  Florida, 
"Wut  treason  is  horrider 
Than  our  priv'leges  tryin'  to  proon?"  sez  he. 

"It's  'coz  they're  so  happy,  thet,  wen  crazy  sarpints 

Stick  their  nose  in  our  bizness,  we  git  so  darned  riled; 
We  think  it's  our  dooty  to  give  pooty  sharp  hints, 

Thet  the  last  crumb  of  Editi  on  airth  sha'n't  be  spiled," 
Sez  John  C.  Calhoun,  sez  he; — 
"Ah,"  sez  Dixon  H.  Lewis, 
"It  perfectly  true  is 
Thet  slavery's  airth's  grettest  boon,"  sez  he. 

James  Russell  Lowell  [iSig-iSgi] 


THE  MARQUIS  OF  CARABAS 

A  SONG   WITH  A   STOLEN  BURDEN 

Off  with  your  hat!  along  the  street 

His  Lordship's  carriage  rolls; 
Respect  to  greatness — when  it  shines 

To  cheer  our  darkened  souls. 
Get  off  the  step,  you  ragged  boys! 

Policeman,  where's  your  staff? 
This  is  a  sight  to  check  with  awe 
The  most  irreverent  laugh. 
Chapeau  has! 
Chapcau  has! 
Gloire  an  Marquis  de  Carabas / 


I  844  The   Barb   of  Satire 

Stand  further  back!  we'll  see  him  well; 

Wait  till  they  lift  him  out: 
It  takes  some  time;  his  Lordship's  old, 

And  suffers  from  the  gout. 
Now  look!  he  owns  a  castled  park 

For  every  finger  thin; 
He  has  more  sterling  pounds  a  day 

Than  wrinkles  in  his  skin. 

The  founder  of  his  race  was  son 

To  a  king's  cousin,  rich; 
(The  mother  was  an  oyster  wench — 

She  perished  in  a  ditch). 
His  patriot  worth  embalmed  has  been 

In  poets'  loud  applause: 
He  made  twelve  thousand  pounds  a  year 

By  aiding  France's  cause. 

The  second  marquis,  of  the  stole 

Was  groom  to  the  second  James; 
He  all  but  caught  that  recreant  king 

When  flying  o'er  the  Thames. 
Devotion  rare!  by  Orange  Will 

With  a  Scotch  county  paid; 
He  gained  one  more — in  Ireland — when 

Charles  Edward  he  betrayed. 

He  lived  to  see  his  son  grow  up 

A  general  famed  and  bold, 
Who  fought  his  country's  fights — and  one, 

For  half  a  million,  sold. 
His  son  (alas!  the  house's  shame) 

Frittered  the  name  away: 
Diced,  wenched  and  drank — at  last  got  shot, 

Through  cheating  in  his  play! 

Now,  see,  where,  focused  on  one  head, 

The  race's  glories  shine: 
The  head  gets  narrow  at  the  top, 

But  mark  the  jaw — how  fine! 


1 845 


A   Modest  Wit 

Don't  call  it  satyr-like;  you'd  wound  '  ■ 

Some  scores,  whose  honest  pates 
The  self-same  type  present,  upon 

The  Carabas  estates! 

Look  at  his  skin — at  four-score  years 

How  fresh  it  gleams  and  fair: 
Ho  never  tasted  ill-dressed  food, 

Or  breathed  in  tainted  air. 
The  noble  blood  glows  through  his  veins 

Still,  with  a  healthful  pink; 
His  brow  scarce  wrinkled! — Brows  keep  so 

That  have  not  got  to  think. 

His  hand  's  ungloved! — it  shakes,  'tis  true, 

But  mark  its  tiny  size, 
(High  birth's  true  sign)  and  shape,  as  on 

The  lackey's  arm  it  lies. 
That  hand  ne'er  penned  a  useful  line. 

Ne'er  worked  a  deed  of  fame, 
Save  slaying  one,  whose  sister  he — 

Its  owner — ^brought  to  shame. 

They've  got  him  in — he's  gone  to  vote 

Your  rights  and  mine  away ; 
Perchance  our  lives,  should  men  be  scarce, 

To  fight  his  cause  for  pay. 
We  are  his  slaves!  he  owns  our  lands, 

Our  woods,  our  seas,  and  skies; 

He'd  have  us  shot  like  vicious  dogs. 

Should  we  in  murmuring  rise! 

Cliapeaii  has! 

Chapeau  has! 

Gloire  au  Marquis  de  Carabas! 

Rohai  Brough  [1828-1860] 

A   MODEST  WIT 

A  SUPERCILIOUS  nabob  of  the  East — 

Haughty,  being  great — purse-proud,  being  rich-^ 
A  governor,  or  general,  at  the  least, 

I  have  forgotten  which — 


1846  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Had  in  his  family  a  humble  youth, 

Who  went  from  England  in  his  patron's  suit, 

An  unassuming  boy,  in  truth 

A  lad  of  decent  parts,  and  good  repute. 

This  youth  had  sense  and  spirit; 

But  yet  with  all  his  sense, 

Excessive  diffidence 
Obscured  his  merit. 

One  day,  at  table,  flushed  with  pride  and  wine, 
His  Honor,  proudly  free,  severely  merry, 

Conceived  it  would  be  vastly  fine 
To  crack  a  joke  upon  his  secretary. 

"  Young  man,"  he  said,  "by  what  art,  craft,  or  trade, 
Did  your  good  father  gain  a  livehhood?"  — 

"He  was  a  saddler,  sir,"  Modestus  said, 
"And  in  his  time  was  reckoned  good." 

"A  saddler,  eh!  and  taught  you  Greek, 

Instead  of  teaching  you  to  sew! 
Pray,  why  did  not  your  father  make 

A  saddler,  sir,  of  you?" 

Each  parasite,  then,  as  in  duty  bound. 

The  joke  applauded,  and  the  laugh  went  round. 

At  length  Modestus,  bowing  low. 
Said  (craving  pardon,  if  too  free  he  made), 

"Sir,  by  your  leave,  I  fain  would  know 
Your  father's  trade!" 

"My  father's  trade!  by  heaven,  that's  too  bad! 
My  father's  trade?     Why,  blockhead,  are  you  mad? 
My  father,  sir,  did  never  stoop  so  low — 
He  was  a  gentleman,  I'd  have  you  know." 

"Excuse  the  hberty  I  take," 

Modestus  said,  with  archness  on  his  brow, 
"Pray,  why  did  not  your  father  make 

A  gentleman  of  you?" 

Selteck  Osborn  [1783-1826] 


Jolly  jack  1847 

JOLLY  JACK 

When  fierce  political  debate 

Throughout  the  isle  was  storming, 
And  Rads  attacked  the  throne  and  state, 

And  Tories  the  reforming, 
To  calm  the  furious  rage  of  each. 

And  right  the  land  demented, 
Heaven  sent  us  Jolly  Jack,  to  teach 

The  way  to  be  contented. 

Jack's  bed  was  straw,  'twas  warm  and  soft, 

His  chair,  a  three-legged  stool; 
His  broken  jug  was  emptied  oft. 

Yet,  somehow,  always  full. 
His  mistress'  portrait  decked  the  wall, 

His  mirror  had  a  crack; 
Yet,  gay  and  glad,  though  this  was  aU 

His  wealth,  lived  Jolly  Jack. 

To  give  advice  to  avarice. 

Teach  pride  its  mean  condition, 
And  preach  good  sense  to  dull  pretence, 

Was  honest  Jack's  high  mission. 
Our  simple  statesman  found  his  rule 

Of  moral  in  the  flagon, 
And  "held  his  philosophic  school 

Beneath  the  "George  and  Dragon.'' 

When  village  Solons  cursed  the  Lords, 

And  called  the  malt-tax  sinful. 
Jack  heeded  not  their  angry  words. 

But  smiled  and  drank  his  skinful. 
And  when  men  wasted  health  and  life, 

In  search  of  rank  and  riches. 
Jack  marched  aloof  the  paltry  strife. 

And  wore  his  threadbare  breeches. 

"I  enter  not  the  Church,"  he  said, 

"But  I'll  not  seek  to  rob  it;" 
■So  worthy  Jack  Joe  Miller  read, 

While  others  studied  Cobbett. 


1848  The   Barb  of  Satire 

His  talk  it  was  of  feast  and  fun; 

His  guide  the  Almanack; 
From  youth  to  age  thus  gaily  run 

The  life  of  Jolly  Jack. 

And  when  Jack  prayed,  as  oft  he  would, 

He  humbly  thanked  his  Maker; 
"I  am,"  said  he,  "O  Father  good! 

Nor  Catholic  nor  Quaker: 
Give  each  his  creed,  let  each  proclaim 

His  catalogue  of  curses; 
I  trust  in  Thee,  and  not  in  them, 

In  Thee,  and  in  Thy  mercies! 

"Forgive  me  if,  midst  all  Thy  works, 

No  hint  I  see  of  damning; 
And  think  there's  faith  among  the  Turks, 

And  hope  for  e'en  the  Brahmin. 
Harmless  my  mind  is,  and  my  mirth. 

And  kindly  is  my  laughter; 
I  cannot  see  the  smiling  earth. 

And  think  there's  hell  hereafter." 

Jack  died;  he  left  no  legacy. 

Save  that  his  story  teaches: — 
Content  to  peevish  poverty; 

HumiHty  to  riches. 
Ye  scornful  great,  ye  envious  small, 

Come  follow  in  his  track; 
We  all  were  happier,  if  we  all 

Would  copy  Jolly  Jack. 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [181 1-1863] 


THE  KING  OF  BRENTFORD* 

AFTER    BERANGER 

There  was  a  King  in  Brentford,— of  whom  no  legends  tell, 
But  who,  without  his  glory,— could  eat  and  sleep  right  well. 
His  Polly's  cotton  nightcap,— it  was  his  crown  of  state, 
He  slept  of  evenings  early, — and  rose  of  mornings  late. 
*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3840. 


Hoch  !   Der  Kaiser  1849 

All  in  a  fine  mud  palace, — each  day  he  took  four  meals, 
And  for  a  guard  of  honor, — a  dog  ran  at  his  heels. 
Sometimes  to  view  his  kingdoms, — rode  forth  this  monarch 

good. 
And  then  a  prancing  jackass — he  royally  bestrode. 

There  were  no  costly  habits — with  which  this  King  was 

cursed. 
Except  (and  where's  the  harm  on't?) — a  somewhat  lively 

thirst; 
But  people  must  pay  taxes, — and  Kings  must  have  their 

sport ; 
So  out  of  every  gallon — His  Grace  he  took  a  quart. 

He  pleased  the  ladies  round  him, — with  manners  soft  and 

bland ; 
With  reason  good,  they  named  him, — the  father  of  his  land. 
Each  year  his  mighty  armies — marched  forth    in   gallant 

show ; 
Their  enemies  were  targets, — their  bullets  they  were  tow. 

He  vexed  no  quiet  neighbor, — no  useless  conquest  made. 
But  by  the  laws  of  pleasure, — his  peaceful  realm  he  swayed. 
And  in  the  years  he  reigned, — through  all  this  country  wide, 
There  was  no  cause  for  weeping, — save  when  the  good  man 
died. 

The  faithful  men  of  Brentford, — do  still  their  King  deplore, 
His  portrait  yet  is  swinging, — beside  an  alehouse  door. 
And  topers,  tender-hearted, — regard  his  honest  phiz, 
And  envy  times  departed, — that  knew  a  reign  like  his. 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 


HOCH!  DER  KAISER 

Der  Kaiser  of  dis  Faterland 
Und  Gott  on  high  all  dings  command, 
Ve  two — ach!     Don't  you  understand? 
Myself — und  Gott. 


1850  The   Barb  of  Satire 


Vile  some  men  sing  der  power  divine, 
Mine  soldiers  sing  "Der  Wacht  am  Rhine,''         ;.;,/ 
Und  drink  der  health  in  Rhenish  wine  .nor'. 

Of  Me— und  Gott. 


Dere's  France,  she  swaggers  all  aroundt; 
She's  ausgespield,  of  no  account, 
To  much  we  dink  she  don't  amount; 
Myself— und  Gott. 

She  will  not  dare  to  tight  again, 
But  if  she  shouldt,  I'll  show  her  blain 
Dot  Elsass  und  (in  Frenc?i)  Lorraine 
Are  mein — by  Gott! 

Dere's  grandma  dinks  she's  nicht  small  beer, 
Mit  Boers  und  such  she  interfere; 
She'U  learn  none  owns  dis  hemisphere 
But  me — und  Gott! 


She  dinks,  good  frau,  fine  ships  she's  got 
Und  soldiers  mit  der  scarlet  goat. 
Ach!     We  could  knock  dem!     Pouf!     Like  dot, 
Myself— mit  Gott! 

In  dimes  of  peace,  brepare  for  wars, 
I  bear  de  spear  und  helm  of  Mars, 
Und  care  not  for  a  dousand  Czars, 
Myself— mit  Gott! 

In  fact,  I  humor  efery  whim, 
Mit  aspect  dark  und  visage  grim; 
Gott  pulls  mit  me,  und  I  mit  him, 
Myself— und  Gott! 

Alexander  Macgregor  Rose  [1846-189! 


NONGTONGPAW 

John  Bull  for  pastime  took  a  prance, 
Some  time  ago,  to  peep  at  France; 
To  talk  of  sciences  and  arts, 
And  knowledge  gained  in  foreign  parts. 


U3  litjriT 


Nongtongpaw  1851 

Monsieur,  obsequious,  heard  him  speak, 
And  answered  John  in  heathen  Greek: 
To  all  he  asked,  'bout  all  he  saw, 
'Twas,  "Monsieur,  je  vous  n'entends  pas." 

John,  to  the  Palais-Royal  come, 
Its  splendor  almost  struck  him  dumb. 
"I  say,  whose  house  is  that  there  here?" 
"House!    Je  vous  n'entends  pas,  Monsieur." 
"What,  Nongtongpaw  again!"  cries  John; 
"This  fellow^  is  some  mighty  Don: 
No  doubt  he's  plenty  for  the  maw, — 
I'll  breakfast  with  this  Nongtongpaw." 

John  saw  Versailles  from  Marli's  height, 
And  cried,  astonished  at  the  sight, 
"Whose  fine  estate  is  that  there  here?"       , 
"State!     Je  vous  n'entends  pas,  Monsietir.* 
"His?  what,  the  land  and  houses  too? 
The  fellow's  richer  than  a  Jew: 
On  everything  he  lays  his  claw! 
I  should  like  to  dine  with  Nongtongpaw." 

Next  tripping  came  a  courtly  fair, 

John  cried,  enchanted  with  her  air, 

"What  lovely  wench  is  that  there  here?"  '  "^ 

"Ventch!     Je  vous  n'entends  pas.  Monsieur." 

"What,  he  again?     Upon  my  life! 

A  palace,  lands,  and  then  a  wife 

Sir  Joshua  might  delight  to  draw: 

I  should  like  to  sup  with  Nongtongpaw. 

"But  hold!  whose  funeral's  that?"  cries  John. 

"Je  vous  n'entends  pas." — "What,  is  he  gone? 

Wealth,  fame,  and  beauty  could  not  save 

Poor  Nongtongpaw,  then,  from  the  grave! 

His  race  is  run,  his  game  is  up, — 

I'd  with  him  breakfast,  dine,  and  sup; 

But  since  he  chooses  to  withdraw, 

Good  night  t'  ye,  Mounseer  Nongtongpaw!" 

Charles  Dibdin  [1745-1814] 


1852  The   Barb  of  Satire 


THE  LION  AND  THE   CUB 

How  fond  are  men  of  rule  and  place, 
Who  court  it  from  the  mean  and  base! 
These  cannot  bear  an  equal  nigh, 
But  from  superior  merit  fly. 
They  love  the  cellar's  vulgar  joke, 
And  lose  their  hours  in  ale  and  smoke. 
There  o'er  some  petty  club  preside; 
So  poor,  so  paltry,  is  their  pride! 
Nay,  even  with  fools  whole  nights  will  sit, 
In  hopes  to  be  supreme  in  wit. 
If  these  can  read,  to  these  I  write, 
To  set  their  worth  in  truest  light. 

A  Lion-cub,  of  sordid  mind. 

Avoided  all  the  lion  kind; 

Fond  of  applause,  he  sought  the  feasts 

Of  vulgar  and  ignoble  beasts; 

With  asses  all  his  time  he  spent, 

Their  club's  perpetual  president. 

He  caught  their  manners,  looks,  and  airs; 

An  ass  in  everything  but  ears! 

If  e'er  his  Highness  meant  a  joke. 

They  grinned  applause  before  he  spoke; 

But  at  each  word  what  shouts  of  praise ! 

"Good  gods!  how  natural  he  brays!" 

Elate  with  flattery  and  conceit. 
He  seeks  his  royal  sire's  retreat; 
Forward,  and  fond  to  show  his  parts. 
His  Highness  brays;  the  Lion  starts. 

"Puppy!  that  cursed  vociferation 
Betrays  thy  life  and  conversation: 
Coxcombs,  an  ever-noisy  race. 
Are  trumpets  of  their  own  disgrace." 

"Why  so  severe?"  the  Cub  replies; 
"Our  senate  always  held  me  wise!" 

"How  weak  is  pride,"  returns  the  sire: 
"All  fools  are  vain  when  fools  admire! 


The   Hare   With   Many   Friends     1853 

But  know,  what  stupid  asses  prize, 
Lions  and  noble  beasts  despise." 

John  Gay  [1O85-1732] 


THE   HARE  WITH  MANY  FRIENDS 

Friendship,  like  love,  is  but  a  name. 
Unless  to  one  you  stint  the  flame. 
The  child,  whom  many  fathers  share, 
Hath  seldom  known  a  father's  care. 
'Tis  thus  in  friendship;  who  depend 
On  many,  rarely  find  a  friend. 

A  Hare,  who,  in  a  civil  way, 
Complied  with  everything,  like  Gay, 
Was  known  by  all  the  bestial  train. 
Who  haunt  the  wood,  or  graze  the  plain; 
Her  care  was  never  to  offend. 
And  every  creature  was  her  friend. 

As  forth  she  went  at  early  dawn. 
To  taste  the  dew-besprinkled  lawn. 
Behind  she  hears  the  hunter's  cries, 
And  from  the  deep-mouthed  thunder  flies: 
She  starts,  she  stops,  she  pants  for  breath; 
She  hears  the  near  advance  of  death; 
She  doubles,  to  mislead  the  hound, 
And  measures  back  her  mazy  round: 
Till,  fainting  in  the  public  way. 
Half  dead  with  fear  she  gasping  lay. 

WTiat  transport  in  her  bosom  grew. 
When  first  the  Horse  appeared  in  view! 

"Let  me,"  says  she,  "your  back  ascend, 
And  owe  my  safety  to  a  friend. 
You  know  my  feet  betray  my  flight : 
To  friendship  every  burden's  light." 

The  Horse  repUed:  "Poor  honest  Puss, 
It  grieves  my  heart  to  see  thee  thus; 
Be  comforted;  relief  is  near. 
For  all  your  friends  are  in  the  rear." 

She  next  the  stately  Bull  implored; 
And  thus  replied  the  mighty  lord : 


1854  The   Barb  of  Satire 

"Since  every  beast  alive  can  tell 
That  I  sincerely  wish  you  well, 
I  may,  -without  offence,  pretend, 
To  take  the  freedom  of  a  friend. 
Love  calls  me  hence;  a  favorite  cow 
Expects  me  near  yon  barley -mow; 
And  when  a  lady's  in  the  case, 
You  know,  all  other  things  give  place. 
To  leave  you  thus  might  seem  unkind; 
But  see,  the  Goat  Is  just  behind." 

The  Goat  remarked  her  pulse  was  high, 
Her  languid  head,  her  heavy  eye; 
"My  back,"  says  he,  "may  do  you  harm; 
The  Sheep's  at  hand,  and  wool  is  warm." 

The  Sheep  was  feeble,  and  complained 
His  sides  a  load  of  wool  sustained : 
Said  he  was  slow,  confessed  his  fears, 
For  hounds  eat  sheep  as  well  as  Hares. 

She  now  the  trotting  Calf  addressed, 
To  save  from  death  a  friend  distressed. 
"Shall  I,"  says  he,  "of  tender  age. 
In  this  important  care  engage? 
Older  and  abler  passed  you  by; 
How  strong  are  those,  how  weak  am  I! 
Should  I  presume  to  bear  you  hence. 
Those  friends  of  mine  may  take  offence. 
Excuse  me,  then.     You  know  my  heart; 
But  clearest  friends,  alas!  must  part. 
How  shall  we  all  lament!     Adieu! 
For  see,  the  hounds  are  just  in  view." 

John  Gay  [1685-1732] 

THE    SYCOPHANTIC    FOX   AND    THE    GULLIBLE 
RAVEN 

A  RAVEN  sat  upon  a  tree. 

And  not  a  word  he  spoke,  for 
His  beak  contained  a  piece  of  Brie, 
Or,  maybe,  it  was  Roquefort? 
We'll  make  it  any  kind  you  please — 
At  all  events,  it  was  a  cheese. 


The  Sycophantic  Fox  and  Gullible  Raven  i  855 

Beneath  the  tree's  umbrageous  limb 

A  hungry  fox  sat  smihng; 
He  saw  the  raven  watching  him, 
And  spolce  in  words  beguiling: 

"  J' ad  mire,"  .said  he,  "/o«  beau  plumage," 
(The  which  was  simply  persiflage). 

Two  things  there  are,  no  doubt  you  know, 

To  which  a  fox  is  used, —     ' 
A  rooster  that  is  bound  to  crow, 
A  crow  that's  bound  to  roost. 
And  whichsoever  he  espies 
He  tells  the  most  unblushing  lies. 

"Sweet  fowl,"  he  said,  "I  understand 

You're  more  than  merely  natty: 
I  hear  you  sing  to  beat  the  band 
And  Adelina  Patti. 

Pray  render  with  your  liquid  tongue 
A  bit  from  'Gdtterdammerung.'  " 

This  subtle  speech  was  aimed  to  please 

The  crow,  and  it  succeeded: 
He  thought  no  bird  in  aU  the  trees 
Could  sing  as  well  as  he  did. 
In  flattery  completely  doused. 
He  gave  the  "Jewel  Song"  from  "Faust." 

But  gravitation's  law,  of  course, 

As  Isaac  Newton  showed  it, 
Exerted  on  the  cheese  its  force, 
And  elsewhere  soon  bestowed  it. 
In  fact,  there  is  no  need  to  tell 
What  happened  when  to  earth  it  fell. 

I  blush  to  add  that  when  the  bird 

Took  in  the  situation. 
He  said  one  brief,  emphatic  word. 
Unfit  for  pubH cation. 

The  fox  was  greatly  startled,  but 
He  only  sighed  and  answered  "Tut!" 


1856  The   Barb  of  Satire  ;i  ] 

The  moral  is :  A  fox  is  bound 

To  be  a  shameless  sinner. 
And  also :  When  the  cheese  comes  round 
You  know  it's  after  dinner. 

But  (what  is  only  known  to  few) 
The  fox  is  after  dinner,  too.. 

Guy  Wetmore  Carryl  [i  873-1 904] 


THE  FRIEND  OF  HUMANITY  AND  THE  KNIFE- 
GRINDER 

FRIEND    OF   HUMANITY 

Needy  knife-grinder!  whither  are  you  going? 
Rough  is  the  road;  your  wheel  is  out  of  order. — 
Bleak  blows  the  blast; — your  hat  has  got  a  hole  in't. 
So  have  your  breeches! 

Weary  knife-grinder!  little  think  the  proud  ones 
Who  in  their  coaches  roll  along  the  turnpike- 
Road,  what  hard  work  'tis  crying  all  day, 
"Knives  and 
Scissors  to  grind  O!" 

Tell  me,  knife-grinder,  how  you  came  to  grind  knives? 
Did  some  rich  man  tyrannically  use  you? 
Was  it  the  squire?  or  parson  of  the  parish? 
Or  the  attorney? 

Was  it  the  squire  for  killing  of  his  game?  or 
Covetous  parson,  for  his  tithes  destraining? 
Or  roguish  lawyer  made  you  lose  your  little 
All  in  a  lawsuit? 

(Have  you  not  read  the  Rights  of  Man,  by  Tom  Paine?) 
Drops  of  compassion  tremble  on  my  eyelids. 
Ready  to  fall,  as  soon  as  you  have  told  your 
Pitiful  story. 


Villon's  Straight  Tip  to  All  Cross  Coves    1857 

KNIFE-GRINDER 

Story?  God  bless  you!  I  have  none  to  tell,  sir; 
Only,  last  night,  a-drinking  at  the  Chequers, 
This  poor  old  hat  and  breeches,  as  you  see,  were 
Torn  in  a  scuffle 

Constables  came  up  for  to  take  me  into 
Custody;  they  took  me  before  the  justice; 
Justice  Oldmixon  put  me  in  the  parish 
Stocks  for  a  vagrant. 

I  should  be  glad  to  drink  your  honor's  health  in 
A  pot  of  beer,  if  you  will  give  me  sixpence; 
But  for  my  part,  I  never  love  to  meddle 
With  politics,  sir. 

FRIEND    OF   HUMANITY 

I  give  thee  sixpence!     I  will  see  thee  damned  first, — 
Wretch  1  whom  no  sense  of  wrongs  can  rouse  to  vengeance ! — 
Sordid,  unfeeling,  reprobate,  degraded. 
Spiritless  outcast! 

(Kicks  the  Knifc-prinder,  overturns  his  wheel,  and  exit  in  a  transport  of  repub- 
lican enthusiasm  and  universal  philanthropy. ) 

George  Canning  [1770-1827] 


VILLON'S  STRAIGHT  TIP  TO  ALL  CROSS  COVES 

"  Tout  aux  tavernes  et  aux  fiells." 

Suppose  you  screeve?  or  go  cheap- jack? 

Or  fake  the  broads?  or  fig  a  nag? 
Or  thimble-rig?  or  knap  a  yack? 

Or  pitch  a  snide?  or  smash  a  rag? 

Suppose  you  duff?  or  nose  and  lag? 
Or  get  the  straight,  and  land  your  pot? 

How  do  you  melt  the  multy  swag? 
Booze  and  the  blowens  cop  the  lot. 

Fiddle,  or  fence,  or  mace,  or  mack; 

Or  moskeneer,  or  flash  the  drag; 
Dead-lurk  a  crib,  or  do  a  crack; 

Pad  w-ith  a  slang,  or  chuck  a  fag; 


1858  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Bonnet,  or  tout,  or  mump  and  gag; 
Rattle  the  tats,  or  mark  the  spot; 

You  can  not  bag  a  single  stag; 
Booze  and  the  blowens  cop  the  lot. 

Suppose  you  try  a  different  tack. 

And  on  the  square  you  flash  your  flag? 
At  penny-a-Iining  make  your  whack. 

Or  with  the  mummers  mug  and  gag? 

For  nix,  for  nix  the  dibbs  you  bag! 
At  any  graft,  no  matter  what. 

Your  merry  goblins  soon  stravag: 
Booze  and  the  blowens  cop  the  lot. 

THE   MORAL 

It's  up  the  spout  and  Charley  Wag 
With  wipes  and  tickers  and  what  not, 

Until  the  squeezer  nips  your  scrag, 
Booze  and  the  blowens  cop  the  lot. 

William  Ernest  Henley  [1849-1003] 

VILLON'S  BALLADE 

OF  GOOD  COUNSEL,  TO  HIS  FRIENDS  OF  EVIL  LIFE 

Nay,  be  you  pardoner  or  cheat, 
■  Or  cogger  keen,  or  mumper  shy, 
You'll  burn  your  fingers  at  the  feat, 
And  howl  like  other  folks  that  fry. 
All  evil  folks  that  love  a  lie! 
And  where  goes  gain  that  greed  amasses. 
By  wile,  and  guile,  and  thievery? 
'Tis  all  to  taverns  and  to  lasses! 

Rhyme,  rail,  dance,  play  the  cymbals  sweet, 
With  game,  and  shame,  and  jollity. 
Go  jigging  through  the  field  and  street. 
With  myst'ry  and  morality; 
Win  gold  at  gleek, — and  that  will  fly. 
Where  all  your  gain  at  passage  passes, — 
And  that's?    You  know  as  well  as  I, 
'Tis  all  to  taverns  and  to  lasses! 


A   Little   Brother  of  the   Rich       1S59 

Nay,  forth  from  all  such  filth  retreat, 

Go  delve  and  ditch,  in  wet  or  dry. 

Turn  groom,  give  horse  and  mule  their  meat, 

If  you've  no  clerkly  skill  to  ply; 

You'll  gain  enough,  with  husbandry, 

But — sow  hempseed  and  such  wild  grasses, 

And  where  goes  all  you  take  thereby? — 

'Tis  all  to  taverns  and  to  lasses! 

ENVOY 

Your  clothes,  your  hose,  your  broidery, 
Your  linen  that  the  snow  surpasses. 
Or  ere  they're  worn,  off,  off  they  fly, 
'Tis  all  to  taverns  and  to  lasses! 

A  ndrew  Lang  [  1 844- 1912] 


A  LITTLE  BROTHER  OF  THE  RICH 

To  put  new  shingles  on  old  roofs; 

To  give  old  women  wadded  skirts; 
To  treat  premonitory  coughs 

With  seasonable  flannel  shirts; 
To  soothe  the  stings  of  poverty 

And  keep  the  jackal  from  the  door, — 
These  are  the  works  that  occupy 

The  Little  Sister  of  the  Poor. 

She  carries,  everywhere  she  goes. 

Kind  words  and  chickens,  jams  and  coals; 
Poultices  for  corporeal  woes, 

And  sympathy  for  downcast  souls: 
Her  currant  jelly,  her  quinine. 

The  lips  of  fever  move  to  bless; 
She  makes  the  humble  sick-room  shine 

With  unaccustomed  tidiness. 

A  heart  of  hers  the  instant  twin 
And  vivid  counterpart  is  mine; 

I  also  serve  my  fellow-men, 

Though  in  a  somewhat  different  line. 


i86o  The   Barb  of  Satire 

The  Poor,  and  their  concerns,  she  has 

Monopolized,  because  of  which 
It  falls  to  me  to  labor  as 

A  Little  Brother  of  the  Rich. 

For  their  sake  at  no  sacrifice 

Does  my  devoted  spirit  quail; 
I  give  their  horses  exercise ; 

As  ballast  on  their  yachts  I  sail. 
Upon  their  tallyhos  I  ride 

And  brave  the  chances  of  a  storm; 
I  even  use  my  own  inside 

To  keep  their  wines  and  victuals  warm. 

Those  whom  we  strive  to  benefit 

Dear  to  our  hearts  soon  grow  to  be; 
I  love  my  Rich,  and  I  admit 

That  they  are  very  good  to  me. 
Succor  the  Poor,  my  sisters, — I, 

While  heaven  shall  still  vouchsafe  me  health, 
Will  strive  to  share  and  mollify 

The  trials  of  abounding  wealth. 

Edivard  Sandjord  Martin  [1S56- 

THE  WORLD'S  WAY 

At  Haroun's  court  it  chanced,  upon  a  time, 
An  Arab  poet  made  this  pleasant  rhyme : 

"The  new  moon  is  a  horseshoe,  wrought  of  God, 
Wherewith  the  Sultan's  stallion  shall  be  shod." 

On  hearing  this,  the  Sultan  smiled,  and  gave 
The  man  a  gold-piece.     Sing  again,  O  slave! 

Above  his  lute  the  happy  singer  bent. 
And  turned  another  gracious  compHment. 

And,  as  before,  the  smiling  Sultan  gave 
The  man  a  sekkah.     Sing  again,  O  slave! 

Again  the  verse  came,  fluent  as  a  rill 
That  wanders,  silver-footed,  down  a  hill. 


For   My   Own    Monument  1861 

The  Sultan,  listening,  nodded  as  before, 
Still  gave  the  gold,  and  still  demanded  more. 

The  nimble  fancy  that  had  climbed  so  high 
Grew  weary  with  its  climbing  by  and  by: 

Strange  discords  rose;  the  sense  went  quite  amiss; 
The  singer's  rhymes  refused  to  meet  and  kiss: 

Invention  flagged,  the  lute  had  got  unstrung, 
And  twice  he  sang  the  song  already  sung. 

The  Sultan,  furious,  called  a  mute,  and  said, 
O  Miista,  straightway  whip  me  of  his  head! 

Poets!  not  in  Arabia  alone 

You  get  beheaded  when  your  skill  is  gone. 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [1837-1907] 


FOR  MY  OWN   MONUMENT 

As  doctors  give  physic  by  way  of  prevention. 
Mat,  alive  and  in  health,  of  his  tombstone  took  care; 

For  delays  are  unsafe,  and  his  pious  intention 
May  haply  be  never  fulfilled  by  his  heir. 

Then  take  Mat's  word  for  it,  the  sculptor  is  paid; 

That  the  figure  is  fine,  pray  believe  your  own  eye; 
Yet  credit  but  lightly  what  more  may  be  said, 

For  we  flatter  ourselves,  and  teach  marble  to  lie. 

Vet  counting  as  far  as  to  fifty  his  years. 
His  virtues  and  vices  were  as  other  men's  are; 

High  hopes  he  conceived,  and  he  smothered  great  fears, 
In  a  life  parti-colored,  half  pleasure,  half  care. 

Nor  to  business  a  drudge,  nor  to  faction  a  slave, 
He  strove  to  make  interest  and  freedom  agree; 

In  public  cmplojnTients  industrious  and  grave, 

And  alone  with  his  friends,  lord!  how  merry  was  he! 


1 862  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Now  in  equipage  stately,  now  humbly  on  foot, 

Both  fortunes  he  tried,  but  to  neither  would  trust; 

And  whirled  in  the  round,  as  the  wheel  turned  about. 
He  found  riches  had  wings,  and  knew  man  was  but  dust. 

This  verse,  little  polished,  though  mighty  sincere, 

Sets  neither  his  titles  nor  merit  to  view; 
It  says  that  his  relics  collected  lie  here, 

And  no  mortal  yet  knows  too  if  this  may  be  true. 

Fierce  robbers  there  are  that  infest  the  highway, 
So  Mat  may  be  killed,  and  his  bones  never  found; 

False  witness  at  court,  and  fierce  tempests  at  sea, 
So  Mat  may  yet  chance  to  be  hanged  or  be  drowned. 

If  his  bones  lie  in  earth,  roll  in  sea,  fly  in  air. 

To  Fate  we  must  yield,  and  the  thing  is  the  same; 

And  if  passing  thou  giv'st  him  a  smiile  or  a  tear. 
He  cares  not — yet,  prithee,  be  kind  to  his  fame. 

Matthew  Prior  [1664-1721] 


THE  BISHOP  ORDERS  HIS  TOMB  AT  SAINT 
PRAXED'S   CHURCH 

Vanity,  saith  the  preacher,  vanity! 
Draw  round  my  bed:  is  Anselm  keeping  back? 
Nephews — sons  mine  .  .      ah  God,  I  know  not!     Well- 
She,  men  would  have  to  be  3'our  mother  once. 
Old  Gandolf  envied  me,  so  fair  she  was! 
What's  done  is  done,  and-she  is  dead  beside, 
Dead  long  ago,  and  I  am  Bishop  since. 
And  as  she  died  so  must  we  die  ourselves. 
And  thence  ye  may  perceive  the  world's  a  dream. 
Life,  how  and  what  is  it?    As  here  I  lie 
In  this  state-chamber,  dying  by  degrees, 
Hours  and  long  hours  in  the  dead  night,  I  ask 
"Do  I  live,  am  I  dead?"     Peace,  peace  seems  aU. 
Saint  Praxed's  ever  was  the  church  for  peace; 
And  so,  about  this  tomb  of  mine.     I  fought 
With  tooth  and  nail  to  save  my  niche,  ye  know: 


The   Bishop  Orders   His  Tomb     1863 

— Old  Gandolf  cozened  me,  despite  my  care; 

Shrewd  was  that  snatch  from  out  the  corner  South 

He  graced  his  carrion  with,  God  curse  the  same! 

Yet  still  my  niche  is  not  so  cramped,  but  thence 

One  sees  the  pulpit  o'  the  epistle-side. 

And  somewhat  of  the  choir,  those  silent  seats, 

And  up  into  the  aery  dome  where  live 

The  angels,  and  a  sunbeam's  sure  to  lurk: 

And  I  shall  fill  my  slab  of  basalt  there, 

And  'neath  my  tabernacle  take  my  rest, 

With  those  nine  columns  round  me,  two  and  two, 

The  odd  one  at  my  feet  where  Anselm  stands: 

Peach  blossom  marble  all,  the  rare,  the  ripe 

As  fresh-poured  red  wine  of  a  mighty  pulse. 

— Old  Gandolf  with  his  paltry  onion-stone, 

Put  me  where  I  may  look  at  him !    True  peach, 

Rosy  and  flawless:  how  I  earned  the  prize! 

Draw  close:  that  conflagration  of  my  church 

— What  then?    So  much  was  saved  if  aught  were  missed! 

My  sons,  ye  would  not  be  my  death?     Go  dig 

The  white-grape  vineyard  where  the  oil-press  stood, 

Drop  water  gently  till  the  surface  sink. 

And  if  ye  find.  .  .     Ah  God,  I  know  not,  I!  .  .  . 

Bedded  in  store  of  rotten  fig-leaves  soft, 

And  corded  up  in  a  tight  olive-frail, 

Some  lump,  ah  God,  of  lapis  lazuli, 

Big  as  a  Jew's  head  cut  off  at  the  nape, 

Blue  as  a  vein  o'er  the  Madonna's  breast.  .  . 

Sons,  all  have  I  bequeathed  you,  villas,  all. 

That  brave  Frascati  villa  with  its  bath, 

So,  let  the  blue  lump  poise  between  my  knees. 

Like  God  the  Father's  globe  on  both  his  hands 

Ye  worship  in  the  Jesu  Church  so  gay. 

For  Gandolf  shall  not  choose  but  see  and  burst! 

Swift  as  a  weaver's  shuttle  fleet  our  years: 

Man  goeth  to  the  grave,  and  where  is  he? 

Did  I  say  basalt  for  my  slab,  sons?     Black — 

'T  was  ever  antique-black  I  meant!     How  else 

Shall  ye  contrast  my  frieze  to  come  beneath? 

The  bas-relief  in  bronze  ye  promised  me, 


1864  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Those  Pans  and  Nymphs  ye  wot  of,  and  perchance 

Some  tripod,  thyrsus,  with  a  vase  or  so. 

The  Saviour  at  his  sermon  on  the  mount, 

Saint  Praxed  in  a  glory,  and  one  Pan 

Ready  to  twitch  the  Nymph '.s  last  garment  off, 

And  Moses  with  the  tables  .  .  .  but  I  know 

Ye  mark  me  not!     What  do  they  whisper  thee,         . 

Child  of  my  bowels,  Anselm?     Ah,  ye  hope  ,  ' 

To  revel  down  my  villas  while  I  gasp 

Bricked  o'er  with  beggar's  mouldy  travertine 

Which  Gandolf  from  his  tomb-top  chuckles  at! 

Nay,  boys,  ye  love  me — all  of  jasper,  then! 

'T  is  jasper  ye  stand  pledged  to,  lest  I  grieve 

My  bath  must  needs  be  left  behind,  alas! 

One  block,  pure  green  as  a  pistachio-nut. 

There's  plenty  jasper  somewhere  in  the  world — 

And  have  I  not  Saint  Praxed's  ear  to  pray 

Horses  for  ye,  and  brown  Greek  manuscripts, 

And  mistresses  with  great  smooth  marbly  limbs? 

— That's  if  ye  carve  my  epitaph  aright. 

Choice  Latin,  picked  phrase,  Tully's  every  word, 

No  gaudy  ware  like  Gandolf's  second  line — 

Tully,  my  masters?     Ulpian  serves  his  need! 

And  then  how  I  shall  lie  through  centuries. 

And  hear  the  blessed  mutter  of  the  mass. 

And  see  God  made  and  eaten  all  day  long. 

And  feel  the  steady  candle-flame,  and  taste 

Good  strong  thick  stupefying  incense-smoke! 

For  as  I  lie  here,  hours  of  the  dead  night. 

Dying  in  state  and  by  such  slow  degrees, 

I  fold  my  arms  as  if  they  clasped  a  crook. 

And  stretch  my  feet  forth  straight  as  stone  can  point. 

And  let  the  bedclothes,  for  a  mortcloth,  drop 

Into  great  laps  and  folds  of  sculptor's- work: 

And  as  yon  tapers  dwindle,  and  strange  thoughts 

Grow,  with  a  certain  hum.ming  in  my  ears, 

About  the  life  before  I  lived  this  life. 

And  this  life  too,  popes,  cardinals  and  priests, 

Saint  Praxed  at  his  sermon  on  the  mount, 

Your  tall  pale  mother  with  her  talking  eyes. 


Up  at  a   Villa — Down  in   the   City     i<S65 

And  new-found  agate  urns  as  fresh  as  day, 
And  marble's  language,  Latin  pure,  discreet, 
— Aha,  ELUCESCEBAT  quoth  our  friend? 
No  Tully,  said  I,  Ulpian  at  the  best! 
Evil  and  brief  hath  been  my  pilgrimage. 
All  lapis,  all,  sons!     Else  I  give  the  Pope 
My  villas!     Will  ye  ever  eat  my  heart? 
Ever  your  eyes  were  as  a  lizard's  quick. 
They  glitter  like  your  mother's  for  my  soul, 
Or  ye  would  heighten  my  impoverished  frieze, 
Piece  out  its  starved  design,  and  fill  my  vase 
With  grapes,  and  add  a  visor  and  a  Term, 
And  to  the  tripod  ye  would  tie  a  lynx 
That  in  his  struggle  throws  the  thyrsus  down. 
To  comfort  me  on  my  entablature 
Whereon  I  am  to  lie  till  I  must  ask 
"Do  I  live,  am  I  dead?"     There,  leave  me,  there! 
For  ye  have  stabbed  me  with  ingratitude 
To  death — ye  wish  it — God,  ye  wish  it!     Stone- 
Gritstone,  a-crumble!     Clammy  squares  which  sweat 
As  if  the  corpse  they  keep  were  oozing  through — 
And  no  more  lapis  to  delight  the  world! 
Well,  go!     I  bless  ye.     Fewer  tapers  there. 
But  in  a  row:  and,  going,  turn  your  backs 
— ^Ay,  like  departing  altar-ministrants. 
And  leave  me  in  my  church,  the  church  for  peace, 
That  I  may  watch  at  leisure  if  he  leers — 
Old  Gandolf — at  me,  from  his  onion-stone. 
As  still  he  envied  me,  so  fair  she  was! 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1889] 


UP  AT  A   VILLA— DOWN   IN   THE   CITY 

AS   DISTINGUISHED    BY   AN   ITALIAN   PERSON   OF    QUALITY 

Had  I  but  plenty  of  money,  money  enough  and  to  spare, 
The  house  for  me,  no  doubt,  were  a  house  in  the  city-square. 
Ah,  such  a  life,  such  a  life,  as  one  leads  at  the  window 
there ! 


1 866  The  Barb  of  Satire 

Something  to  see,  by  Bacchus,  something  to  hear,  at  least! 
There,  the  whole  day  long,  one's  life  is  a  perfect  feast; 
While  up  at  a  villa  one  lives,  I  maintain  it,  no  more  than  a 
beast. 

Well  now,  look  at  our  villa!  stuck  like  the  horn  of  a  bull 
Just  on  a  mountain-edge  as  bare  as  the  creature's  skull. 
Save  a  mere  shag  of  a  bush  with  hardly  a  leaf  to  pull ! 
— I  scratch  my  own,  sometimes,  to  see  if  the  hair's  turned 
wool. 

But  the  city,  oh  the  city — the  square  with  the  houses !    Why? 

They  are  stone-faced,  white  as  a  curd,  there's  something  to 
take  the  eye! 

Houses  in  four  straight  lines,  not  a  single  front  awry! 

You  watch  who  crosses  and  gossips,  who  saunters,  who 
hurries  by; 

Green  blinds,  as  a  matter  of  course,  to  draw  when  the  sun 
gets  high; 

And  the  shops  with  fanciful  signs  which  are  painted  prop- 
erly. 

What  of  a  villa?     Though  winter  be  over  in  Marcli  by 

rights, 
'Tis  May  perhaps  ere  the  snow  shall  have  withered  well  off 

the  heights: 
You've  the  brown  ploughed  land  before,  where  the  oxen 

steam  and  wheeze, 
And  the  hills  over-smoked  behind  by  the  faint  gray  olive 

trees. 

Is  it  better  in  May,  I  ask  you?    You've  summer  all  at  once; 
In  a  day  he  leaps  complete  with  a  few  strong  April  suns. 
'Mid  the  sharp  short  emerald  wheat,   scarce  risen  three 

fingers  well, 
The  Avild  tulip,  at  end  of  its  tube,  blows  out  its  great  red 

bell. 
Like  a  thin  clear  bubble  of  blood,  for  the  children  to  pick 

and  sell. 


Up  at  a  Villa — Down   in  the   City     1867 

Is  it  ever  hot  in  the  square?  There's  a  fountain  to  spout 
and  splash! 

In  the  shade  it  sings  and  springs;  in  the  shine  such  foam- 
bows  flash 

On  the  horses  with  curling  fish-tails,  that  prance  and  paddle 
and  pash 

Round  the  lady  atop  in  the  conch — fifty  gazers  do  not 
abash, 

Though  all  that  she  wears  is  some  weeds  round  her  waist  in 

cL     a  sort  of  sash. 

All  the  year  round  at  the  villa,  nothing's  to  see  though  you 
linger, 

Except  yon  cypress  that  points  like  Death's  lean  lifted  fore- 
finger. 

Some  think  fireflies  pretty,  when  they  mi.x  in  the  corn  and 
mingle, 

Or  thrid  the  stinking  hemp  till  the  stalks  of  it  seem  a-tingle. 

Late  August  or  early  September,  the  stunning  cicala  is 
shrill 

And  the  bees  keep  their  tiresome  whine  round  the  resinous 
firs  on  the  hill. 

Enough  of  the  seasons, — I  spare  you  the  months  of  the 
fever  and  chill. 

Ere  you  open  your  eyes  in  the  city,  the  blessed  church-bells 

begin : 
No  sooner  the  bells  leave  off,  than  the  diligence  rattles  in: 
You  get  the  pick  of  the  news,  and  it  costs  you  never  a 

pin. 
By  and  by  there's  the  travelling  doctor  gives  pills,  lets 

blood,  draws  teeth; 
Or  the  Pulcinello-trumpet  breaks  up  the  market  beneath. 
At  the  post-ofhce  such  a  scene-picture — the  new  play,  piping 

hot! 
And  a  notice  how,  only  this  morning,  three  liberal  thieves 

were  shot. 
Above  it,  behold  the  Archbishop's  most  fatherly  of  rebukes, 
And  beneath,  with  his  crown  and  his  lion,  some  little  new 

law  of  the  Duke's! 


1 868  The   Barb  of  Satire  ; 

Or  a  sonnet  with  flowery  marge,  to  the  Reverend  Don  So- 
and-so, 

Who  is  Dante,  Boccaccio,  Petrarca,  St.  Jerome,  and  Cicero, 

"And  moreover,"  (the  sonnet  goes  rhyming),  "the  skirts  of 
St.  Paul  has  reached. 

Having  preached  us  those  six  Lent-lectures  more  unctuous 
than  ever  he  preached." 

Noon  strikes, — here  sweeps  the  procession!  our  Lady  borne 
smiling  and  smart 

With  a  pink  gauze  gown  all  spangles,  and  seven  swords 
stuck  in  her  heart! 

Bang-whang-whang,  goes  the  drum,  tootle-tc-tootle  the  fife; 

No  keeping  one's  haunches  still:  it's  the  greatest  pleasure  in 
life. 

But  bless  you,  it's  dear — it's  dear!  fowls,  wine,  at  double 

the  rate. 
They  have  clapped  a  new  tax  upon  salt,  and  what  oil  pays 

passing  the  gate 
It's  a  horror  to  think  of.    And  so,  the  villa  for  me,  not  the 

city! 
Beggars  can  scarcely  be  choosers:  but  still — ah,  the  pity, 

the  pity! 
Look,  two  and  two  go  the  priests,  then  the  monks  with 

cowls  and  sandals, 
And  the  penitents  dressed  in  white  skirts,  a-holding  the 

yellow  candles; 
One,  he  carries  a  flag  up  straight,  and  another  a  cross  with 

handles. 
And  the  Duke's  guard  brings  up  the  rear,  for  the  better 

prevention  of  scandals. 
Bang-whang-whang,  goes  the  drum,  tootle-tc-tootle  the  fife. 
Oh,  a  day  in  the  city-square,  there  is  no  such  pleasure  in  life! 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1889] 

ALL  SAINTS' 

In  a  church  which  is  furnished  with  mullion  and  gable. 
With  altar  and  reredos,  with  gargoyle  and  groin, 

The  penitents'  dresses  are  sealskin  and  sable, 
The  odor  of  sanctity's-eau-de-cologne. 


An  Address  to  the   Unco   Guid     1869 

But  only  could  Lucifer,  flying  from  Hades, 

Gaze  down  on  this  crowd  with  its  pariiers  and  paints. 

He  would  say,  as  he  looked  at  the  lords  and  the  ladies, 
"Oh,  where  is  All  Sinners'  if  this  is  All  Saints'?" 

Edmund  Yates  [1831-1894] 

AN  ADDRESS  TO  THE  UNCO  GUID,  OR  THE 
RIGIDLY  RIGHTEOUS 

My  son,  these  maxims  make  a  nile, 

And  lump  them  aye  thesither: 
The  RiRid  Righteous  is  a  fool 

The  Rigid  Wise  anither: 
The  cleanest  corn  that  e'er  was  dight 

May  hae  some  pyles  o'  cafif  in; 
Sae  ne'er  a  fellow-creature  slight 

For  random  fits  o'  daffin. 

Solomon — Eccles.  vii,  16. 

Oh  ye  wha  are  sae  guid  yoursel', 

Sae  pious  and  sae  holy, 
Ye've  naught  to  do  but  mark  and  tell 

Your  neebor's  fauts  and  folly: — 
Whase  life  is  like  a  weel-gaun  mill, 

Supplied  wi'  store  o'  water. 
The  heaped  happer's  ebbing  still. 

And  still  the  clap  plays  clatter. 

Hear  me,  ye  venerable  core, 

As  counsel  for  poor  mortals, 
That  frequent  pass  douce  Wisdom's  door. 

For  glaikit  Folly's  portals! 
I,  for  their  thoughtless,  careless  sakes. 

Would  here  propone  defences. 
Their  donsie  tricks,  their  black  mistakes, 

Their  failings  and  mischances.  .  , 

Ye  see  your  state  wi'  theirs  compared, 

And  shudder  at  the  niffer; 
But  cast  a  moment's  fair  regard. 

What  maks  the  mighty  differ? 
Discount  what  scant  occasion  gave 

That  purity  ye  pride  in. 
And  (what's  aft  mair  than  a'  the  lave) 

Your  better  art  o'  hidin'. 


i870  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Think,  when  your  castigated  pulse 

Gies  now  and  then  a  wallop, 
What  ragings  must  his  veins  convulse^ 

That  stiU  eternal  gallop: 
Wi'  wind  and  tide  fair  i'  your  tail, 

Right  on  ye  scud  your  sea-v/ay; — 
But  in  the  teeth  o'  baith  to  sail, 

It  makes  an  unco  lee-way. 

See  Social  Life  and  Glee  sit  down. 

All  joyous  and  unthinking, 
Till,  quite  transmugrified,  they've  grown 

Debauchery  and  Drinking: 
Oh,  would  they  stay  to  calculate 

The  eternal  consequences; 
Or  your  more  dreaded  hell  to  state, 

Damnation  of  expenses! 

Ye  high,  exalted,  virtuous  dames, 

Tied  up  in  godly  laces. 
Before  ye  gie  poor  Frailty  names, 

Suppose  a  change  o'  cases; 
A  dear-loved  lad,  convenience  snug, 

A  treacherous  inclination, — 
But,  let  me  whisper  i'  your  lug, 

Ye're  aiblins  nae  temptation. 

Then  gently  scan  your  brother  man, 

Still  gentler  sister  woman; 
Though  they  may  gang  a  kennin'  wrang. 

To  step  aside  is  human : 
One  point  must  stiU  be  greatly  dark. 

The  moving  why  they  do  it; 
And  just  as  lamely  can  ye  mark 

How  far  perhaps  they  rue  it. 

Who  made  the  heart,  'tis  He  alone  11 

Decidedly  can  try  us; 
He  knows  each  chord, — its  various  tone, 

Each  spring, — its  various  bias: 


The   Deacon's   Masterpiece         1871 

Then  at  the  balance  let's  be  mute; 

We  never  can  adjust  it; 
What's  done  we  partly  may  compute, 

But  know  not  what's  resisted. 

Robert  Burns  [i 759-1 796] 

THE  DEACON'S  MASTERPIECE,   OR  THE 
WONDERFUL   "ONE-HOSS    SHAY" 

A   LOGICAL   STORY 

Have  you  heard  of  the  wonderful  one-hoss  shay, 

That  was  built  in  such  a  logical  way 

It  ran  a  hundred  years  to  a  day, 

And  then,  of  a  sudden,  it — ah,  but  stay, 

I'll  tell  you  what  happened  without  delay. 

Scaring  the  parson  into  fits, 

Frightening  people  out  of  their  wits, — 

Have  you  ever  heard  of  that,  I  say? 

Seventeen  hundred  and  fifty-five. 
Georgius  Scciindus  was  then  alive, — 
Snuffy  old  drone  from  the  German  hive. 
That  was  the  year  when  Lisbon-town 
Saw  the  earth  open  and  gulp  her  down, 
And  Braddock's  army  was  done  so  brown, 
Left  without  a  scalp  to  its  crown. 
It  was  on  the  terrible  Earthquake-day 
That  the  Deacon  finished  the  one-hoss  shay. 

Now  in  building  of  chaises,  I  tell  you  what, 

There  is  always  somewhere  a  weakest  spot, — 

In  hub,  tire,  felloe,  in  spring  or  thill, 

In  panel,  or  crossbar,  or  floor,  or  sill. 

In  screw,  bolt,  thoroughbrace, — lurking  still, 

Find  it  somewhere  you  must  and  will, — 

Above  or  below,  or  within  or  without, — 

And  that's  the  reason,  beyond  a  doubt, 

That  a  chaise  breaks  down,  but  doesn't  wear  out. 

But  the  Deacon  swore  (as  Deacons  do. 
With  an  "I  dew  vum,"  or  an  "I  tell  ycou") 


1872  The   Barb  of  Satire 

He  would  build  one  shay  to  beat  the  taown 
'N'  the  keounty  'n'  all  the  kentry  raoun'; 
It  should  be  so  built  that  it  couldn'  break  daown: 
"Fur,"  said  the  Deacon,  "  't's  mighty  plain 
Thut  the  weakes'  place  mus'  stan'  the  strain ; 
'N'  the  way  t'  fix  it,  uz  I  maintain. 

Is  only  jest 
T'  make  that  place  uz  strong  uz  the  rest." 

So  the  Deacon  inquired  of  the  village  folk 

Where  he  could  find  the  strongest  oak. 

That  couldn't  be  split  nor  bent  nor  broke,- 

That  was  for  spokes  and  floor  and  sills; 

He  sent  for  lancewood  to  make  the  thills; 

The  crossbars  were  ash,  from  the  straightest  trees, 

The  panels  of  white-wood,  that  cuts  like  cheese, 

But  lasts  like  iron  for  things  like  these; 

The  hubs  of  logs  from  the  "Settler's  ellum,"  — 

Last  of  its  timber, — they  couldn't  sell  'em, 

Never  an  axe  had  seen  their  chips. 

And  the  wedges  flew  from  between  their  lips, 

Their  blunt  ends  frizzled  like  celery-tips; 

Step  and  prop-iron,  bolt  and  screw. 

Spring,  tire,  axle,  and  linchpin  too. 

Steel  of  the  finest,  bright  and  blue; 

Thoroughbrace  bison-skin,  thick  and  wide; 

Boot,  top,  dasher,  from  tough  old  hide 

Found  in  the  pit  when  the  tanner  died. 

That  was  the  way  he  "put  her  through." 

"There!"  said  the  Deacon,  "naow  she'll  dew!" 

Do!  ■  I  tell  you,  I  rather  guess 

She  was  a  wonder,  and  nothing  less! 

Colts  grew  horses,  beards  turned  gray. 

Deacon  and  deaconess  dropped  away. 

Children  and  grandchildren — where  were  they? 

But  there  stood  the  stout  old  one-hoss  shay 

As  fresh  as  on  Lisbon-earthquake-day! 

Eighteen  hundred; — it  came  and  found 
The  Deacon's  masterpiece  strong  and  sound. 


The   Deacon's    Masterpiece         1^73 

Eighteen  hundred  increased  by  ten; 
"Hahnsum  kerridge"  they  called  it  then. 
Eighteen  hundred  and  twenty  came; — 
Running  as  usual;  much  the  same. 
Thirty  and  Forty  at  last  arrive, 
And  then  come  Fifty,  and  Fifty-five. 

Little  of  all  we  value  here 

Wakes  on  the  morn  of  its  hundredth  year 

Without  both  feeling  and  looking  queer. 

In  fact,  there's  nothing  that  keeps  its  youth, 

So  far  as  I  know,  but  a  tree  and  truth. 

(This  is  a  moral  that  runs  at  large; 

Take  it. — You're  welcome. — No  extra  charge.) 

First  of  November, — the  Earthquake-day, — 
There  are  traces  of  age  in  the  one-hoss  shay. 
A  general  flavor  of  mild  decay, 
But  nothing  local,  as  one  may  say. 
There  couldn't  be, — for  the  Deacon's  art 
Had  made  it  so  like  in  every  part 
That  there  wasn't  a  chance  for  one  to  start. 
For  the  wheels  were  just  as  strong  as  the  thills, 
And  the  floor  was  just  as  strong  as  the  sills, 
And  the  panels  just  as  strong  as  the  Hoot, 
And  the  whipple-tree  neither  less  nor  more, 
And  the  back-crossbar  as  strong  as  the  fore, 
And  spring  and  axle  and  hub  encore. 
And  yet,  as  a  whole,  it  is  past  a  doubt 
In  another  hour  it  will  be  worn  out! 

First  of  November,  Fifty-five! 
This  morning  the  parson  takes  a  drive. 
Now,  small  boys,  get  out  of  the  way! 
Here  comes  the  wonderful  one-hoss  shay, 
Drawn  by  a  rat-railed,  ewe-necked  bay. 
"Huddup!"  said  the  parson. — Off  went  they. 

The  parson  was  working  liis  Sunday's  text, — 
Had  got  to  fiftJily,  and  stopped  perplexed 
At  what  the — Moses— was  coming  next. 


1874  The   Barb  of  Satire 

All  at  once  the  horse  stood  still, 

Close  by  the  meet'n'-house  on  the  hill. 

First  a  shiver,  and  then  a  thrill, 

Then  something  decidedly  like  a  spill, — 

And  the  parson  was  sitting  upon  a  rock. 

At  half  past  nine  by  the  meet'n'-house  clock, — = 

Just  the  hour  of  the  Earthquake  shock! 

What  do  you  think  the  parson  found, 

When  he  got  up  and  stared  around? 

The  poor  old  chaise  in  a  heap  or  mound, 

As  if  it  had  been  to  the  mill  and  ground! 

You  see,  of  course,  if  you're  not  a  dunce, 

How  it  went  to  pieces  all  at  once, — 

All  at  once,  and  nothing  first, — 

Just  as  bubbles  do  when  they  burst. 

End  of  the  wonderful  one-hoss  shay. 
Logic  is  logic.     That's  all  I  say. 

Oliver  Woidcll  Holmes  [1809- 1894] 

BALLADE  OF  A  FRIAR* 

AFTER   CLEMENT   MAROT 

Some  ten  or  twenty  times  a  day, 
To  bustle  to  the  town  with  speed. 
To  dabble  in  what  dirt  he  may, — 
Le  Frere  Lubin's  the  man  you-  need! 
But  any  sober  life  to  lead 
Upon  an  exemplary  plan, 
Requires  a  Christian  indeed, — 
Le  Frere  Lubin  is  not  the  man! 

Another's  wealth  on  his  to  lay. 
With  all  the  craft  of  guile  and  greed. 
To  leave  you  bare  of  pence  or  pay, — 
Le  Frere  Lubin's  the  man  you  need! 
But  watch  him  with  the  closest  heed. 
And  dun  him  with  what  force  you  can, — 
He'll  not  refund,  hovve'er  you  plead, — 
Le  Frere  Lubin  is  not  the  man — 
*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3838. 


The  Chameleon  1875 

An  honest  girl  to  lead  astray, 

With  subtle  saw  and  promised  meed, 

Requires  no  cunning  crone  and  gray, — 

Le  Frere  Lubin's  the  man  you  need! 

He  preaches  an  ascetic  creed, 

But, — tr}'  him  with  the  water  can — 

A  dog  will  drink,  whate'er  his  breed, — 

Le  Frere  Lubin  is  not  the  man! 

ENVOY 

In  good  to  fail,  in  ill  succeed, 
Le  Frere  Lubin's  the  man  you  need! 
In  honest  works  to  lead  the  van, 
Le  Frere  Lubin  is  not  the  man! 

Andrew  Lang  [1S44-1912] 


THE  CHAMELEON 

Oft  has  it  been  my  lot  to  mark 
A  proud,  conceited,  talking  spark. 
With  eyes,  that  hardty  served  at  most 
To  guard  their  master  'gainst  a  post, 
Yet  round  the  world  the  blade  has  been 
To  see  whatever  could  be  seen, 
Returning  from  his  finished  tour. 
Grown  ten  times  perter  than  before; 
Whatever  word  you  chance  to  drop, 
The  traveled  fool  your  mouth  will  stop; 
"Sir,  if  my  judgment  you'll  allow, 
I've  seen — and  sure  I  ought  to  know," 
So  begs  you'd  pay  a  due  submission, 
And  acquiesce  in  his  decision. 

Two  travelers  of  such  a  cast. 
As  o'er  Arabia's  wilds  they  passed. 
And  on  their  way  in  friendly  chat. 
Now  talked  of  this,  and  then  of  that. 
Discoursed  awhile,  'mongst  other  matter, 
Of  the  chameleon's  form  and  nature. 


1876  The   Barb  of  Satire 

"A  stranger  animal,"  cries  one, 
"Sure  never  lived  beneath  the  sun. 
A  lizard's  body,  lean  and  long, 
A  fish's  head,  a  serpent's  tongue, 
Its  foot  with  triple  claw  disjoined; 
And  what  a  length  of  tail  behind! 
How  slow  its  pace;  and  then  its  hue — 
Who  ever  saw  so  fine  a  blue?" 

"Hold,  there,"  the  other  quick  replies, 
"  'Tis  green, — I  saw  it  with  these  eyes, 
As  late  with  open  mouth  it  lay. 
And  warmed  it  in  the  sunny  ray: 
Stretched  at  its  ease,  the  beast  I  viewed 
And  saw  it  eat  the  air  for  food." 
"I've  seen  it,  sir,  as  well  as  you, 
And  must  again  affirm  it  blue;  . 
At  leisure  I  the  beast  surveyed. 
Extended  in  the  cooling  shade." 
"  'Tis  green,  'lis  green,  sir,  I  assure  ye!" 
"Green!"  cries  the  other  in  a  fury — • 
"Why,  sir! — d'ye  think  I've  lost  my  eyes?" 
"  'Twere  no  great  loss,"  the  friend  replies, 
"For,  if  they  always  serve  you  thus, 
You'll  find  them  of  but  little  use." 

So  high  at  last  the  contest  rose. 

From  words  they  almost  came  to  blows: 

When  luckily  came  by  a  third — 

To  him  the  question  they  referred, 

And  begged  he'd  tell  'em,  if  he  knew. 

Whether  the  thing  was  green  or  blue. 

"Sirs,"  cries  the  umpire,  "cease  your  pother! 

The  creature's  neither  one  or  t'other. 

I  caught  the  animal  last  night. 

And  viewed  it  o'er  by  candlelight: 

I  marked  it  well — 't  was  black  as  jet — 

You  stare — but,  sirs,  I've  got  it  yet, 

And  can  produce  it."     "Pray,  sir,  do: 

I'll  lay  my  life  the  thing  is  blue." 


The   Blind   Men  and  the  Elephant     1877 

"And  I'll  be  sworn,  that  when  you've  seen 
The  reptile,  you'll  pronounce  him  green." 

"Well,  then,  at  once  to  ease  the  doubt," 
Replies  the  man,  "I'll  turn  him  out: 
And  when  before  your  eyes  I've  set  him, 
If  you  don't  find  him  black,  I'll  cat  him." 
He  said:  then  full  before  their  sight 
Produced  the  beast,  and  lo! — 'twas  white. 

Both  stared,  the  man  looked  wondrous  wise — 
"My  children,"  the  chameleon  cries, 
(Then  first  the  creature  found  a  tongue), 
"You  all  are. right,  and  all  are  wrong: 
When  next  you  talk  of  what  you  view, 
Think  others  see  as  well  as  you: 
Nor  wonder,  if  you  find  that  none 
Prefers  your  eyesight  to  his  own." 

After  De  La  Mollc,  by  James  Merrick  [17  20-1 769] 

THE  BLIND  MEN  AND  THE  ELEPHANT 

A  HINDOO  FABLE 

It  was  six  men  of  Indostan 

To  learning  much  inclined, 
Who  went  to  see  the  Elephant 

(Though  all  of  them  were  blind), 
That  each  by  observation 

Might  satisfy  his  mind. 

The  First  approached  the  Elephant, 

And  happening  to  fall 
Against  his  broad  and  sturdy  side. 

At  once  began  to  bawl: 
"God  bless  me!  but  the  Elephant 

Is  very  like  a  wall!" 

The  Second,  feeling  of  the  tusk,  --; 

Cried,  "Ho!  what  have  we  here 
So  very  round  and  smooth  and  sharp? 

To  me  'tis  mighty  clear 


1878  The   Barb  of  Satire     iH   arlT 

This  wonder  of  an  Elephant 
Is  very  Hke  a  spear!" 

The  Third  approached  the  animal, 

And  happening  to  take 
The  squirming  trunk  within  his  hands, 

Thus  boldly  up  and  spake: 
"I  see,"  quoth  he,  "the  Elephant 

Is  very  like  a  snake!" 

The  Fourth  reached  out  an  eager  hand,     jf 

And  felt  about  the  knee. 
"What  most  this  wondrous  beast  is  like 

Is  mighty  plain,"  quoth  he; 
"  'Tis  clear  enough  the  Elephant 

Is  very  like  a  tree!" 

The  Fifth  who  chanced  to  touch  the  ear. 
Said:  "E'en  the  blindest  man 

Can  tell  what  this  resembles  most; 
Deny  the  fact  who  can. 

This  marvel  of  an  Elephant 
Is  very  like  a  fan!" 

The  Sixth  no  sooner  had  begun 

About  the  beast  to  grope. 
Than,  seizing  on  the  swinging  tail 

That  fell  within  his  scope, 
"I  see,"  quoth  he,  "the  Elephant 

Is  very  like  a  rope!" 

And  so  these  men  of  Indostan 

Disputed  loud  and  long, 
Each  in  his  own  opinion 

Exceeding  stiff  and  strong, 
Though  each  was  partly  in  the  rights 

And  all  were  in  the  wrong! 

MORAL 

So  oft  in  theologic  wars, 

The  disputants,  I  ween. 
Rail  on  in  utter  ignorance 

Of  what  each  other  mean,     i 


The   Philosopher's  Scales  1879 

And  prate  about  an  Elephant 
Not  one  of  them  has  seen! 

John  Godfrey  Saxe  [1816-1887] 

THE  PHILOSOPHER'S   SCALES 

A  MONK,  when  his  rites  sacerdotal  were  o'er, 

In  the  depths  of  his  cell  with  its  stone-covered  floor, 

Resigning  to  thought  his  chimerical  brain, 

Once  formed  the  contrivance  we  now  shall  explain; 

But  whether  by  magic's  or  alchemy 's  powers  IT 

We  know  not;  indeed,  'tis  no  business  of  ours. 

Perhaps  it  was  only  by  patience  and  care, 

At  last,  that  he  brought  his  invention  to  bear. 

In  youth  'twas  projected,  but  years  stole  away, 

And  ere  'twas  complete  he  was  wrinkled  and  gray; 

But  success  is  secure,  unless  energy  fails; 

And  at  length  he  produced  the  Philosopher's  Scales. 

"WTiat  were  they?"  you  ask.     You  shall  presently  see; 
These  scales  were  not  made  to  weigh  sugar  and  tea. 
Oh  no ;  for  such  properties  wondrous  had  they. 
That  qualities,  feelings,  and  thoughts  they  could  weigh, 
Together  with  articles  small  or  immense. 
From  mountains  or  planets  to  atoms  of  sense. 

Naught  was  there  so  bulky  but  there  it  would  lay, 
And  naught  so  ethereal  but  there  it  would  stay. 
And  naught  so  reluctant  but  in  it  must  go: 
All  which  some  examples  more  clearly  will  show. 

The  first  thing  he  weighed  was  the  head  of  Voltaire, 
Which  retained  all  the  wit  that  had  ever  been  there; 
As  a  weight,  he  threw  in  the  torn  scrap  of  a  leaf 
Containing  the  prayer  of  the  penitent  thief; 
When  the  skull  rose  aloft  with  so  sudden  a  spell 
That  it  bounced  like  a  ball  on  the  roof  of  the  cell. 

One  time  he  put  in  Alexander  the  Great, 
With  the  garment  that  Dorcas  had  made,  for  a  weight; 
And  though  clad  in  armor  from  sandals  to  crowTi, 
The  hero  rose  up  and  the  garment  went  down. 


i88o  The   Barb  of  Satire 

A  long  row  of  almshouses,  amply  endowed 

By  a  well-esteemed  Pharisee,  busy  and  proud, 

Next  loaded  one  scale;  while  the  other  was  pressed 

By  those  mites  the  poor  widow  dropped  into  the  chest: 

Up  flew  the  endowment,  not  weighing  an  ounce, 

And  down,  down  the  farthing-worth  came  with  a  bounce. 

By  further  experiments  (no  matter  how) 
He  found  that  ten  chariots  weighed  less  than  one  plough; 
A  sword  with  gilt  trappings  rose  up  in  the  scale,  u   .jm  j 
Though  balanced  by  only  a  ten-penny  nail;        .rfw  iuQ. 
A  shield  and  a  helmet,  a  buckler  and  spear,       ■orul  aW 

Weighed  less  than  a  widow's  uncr3'stallized  tear.      , 

It'  1 

A  lord  and  a  lady  went  up  at  full  sail,  • ' 

When  a  bee  chanced  to  hght  on  the  opposite  scale;  'i 
Ten  doctors,  ten  lawyers,  two  courtiers,  one  earl,  ■  '"'A 
Ten  counsellors'  wigs,  full  of  powder  and  curl,  ''t'S  iuH 
All  heaped  in  one  balance  and  swinging  from  thence,  ^ 
'V^^eighed  less  than  a  few  grains  of  candor  and  sensq;^^-- 
A  first-water  diamond,  with  brilhants  begirt,  .,  ^.^^fj-j^ 
Than  one  good  potato  just  washed  from  the  dirt;  ,  , 
Yet  not  mountains  of  silver  and  gold  could  suffice 
One  pearl  to  outweigh, — 'twas  the  Pearl  of  Great  Price. 

Last  of  all,  the  whole  world  was  bowled  in  at  the  grate. 
With  the  soul  of  a  beggar  to  serve  for  a  weight. 
When  the  former  sprang  up  with  so  strong  a  rebuff 
That  it  made  a  vast  rent  and  escaped  at  the  roof! 
When  balanced  in  air,  it  ascended  on  liigh. 
And  sailed  up  aloft,  a  balloon  in  the  sky; 
While  the  scale  with  the  soul  in't  so  mightily  fell .  . 
That  it  jerked  the  philosopher  out  of  his  cell.    .' 

Jane  Taylor  [i78'3-i824] 

THE   MAIDEN  AND   THE  LILY 

A  LILY  in  my  garden  grew. 

Amid  the  thyme  and  clover; 
No  fairer  lily  ever  blew,  • 

Search  all  the  wide  world  over.       ^d  oiTT 


The  Owl-Critic  1881 

Its  beauty  passed  into  my  heart:     ^-  oa  ^-inm  ' 

I  know  'twas  very  silly, 
But  I  was  then  a  foohsh  maid, 

And  it — a  perfect  hly. 

One  day  a  learned  man  came  by, 

With  years  of  knowledge  laden. 
And  him  I  questioned  with  a  sigh, 

Like  any  foolish  maiden : — 
"  Wise  sir,  please  tell  me  wherein  lies — 

I  know  the  question's  silly — 
The  something  that  my  art  defies. 

And  makes  a  perfect  lily." 

He  smiled,  then  bending  plucked  the  flower, 

Then  tore  it,  leaf  and  petal, 
And  talked  to  me  for  full  an  hour. 

And  thought  the  point  to  settle: — 
"Therein  it  lies,"  at  length  he  cries; 

And  I — I  know  'twas  silly — 
Could  only  weep  and  say,  "But  where — ■ 

O  doctor,  where's  my  lily?" 

John  Frascr  [1750-1811] 


THE  OWL-CRITIC 

"Who  stuffed  that  white  owl?"    No  one  spoke  in  the  shop: 
The  barber  was  busy,  and  he  couldn't  stop; 
The  customers,  waiting  their  turns,  were  all  reading 
The  Daily,  the  Herald,  the  Post,  little  heeding 
The  young  man  who  blurted  out  such  a  blunt  question; 
Not  one  raised  a  head,  or  even  made  a  suggestion; 
And  the  barber  kept  on  shaving. 

"Don't  you  see.  Mister  Brown," 

Cried  the  youth  with  a  frown, 

"How  wrong  the  whole  thing  is, 

How  preposterous  each  wing  is. 

How  flattened  the  head  is,  how  jammed  down  the  neck  is — 

In  short,  the  whole  owl,  what  an  ignorant  wreck  'tis! 


1 882  The   Barb  of  Satire 

I  make  no  apology; 
I've  learned  owl-eolog)'. 

I've  passed  days  and  nights  in  a  hundred  collections, 
And  cannot  be  blinded  to  any  deflections 
Arising  from  unskilful  fingers  that  fail 
To  stuff  a  bird  right,  from  his  beak  to  his  tail. 
Mister  Brown!  Mister  Brown! 
Do  take  that  bird  down, 

Or  you'll  soon  be  the  laughing-stock  all  over  town!" 
And  the  barber  kept  on  shaving. 

"I've  studied  owls 
And  other  night  fowls, 
And  I  tell  you 
What  I  know  to  be  true: 
An  owl  cannot  roost 
With  his  limbs  so  unloosed; 
No  owl  in  this  world 
Ever  had  his  claws  curled. 
Ever  had  his  legs  slanted. 
Ever  had  his  bill  canted, 
Ever  had  his  neck  screwed 
Into  that  attitude. 
He  can't  do  it,  because 
'Tis  against  all  bird-laws. 
Anatomy  teaches. 
Ornithology  preaches 
An  owl  has  a  toe 
That  f(j;/'/  turn  out  so! 
I've  made  the  white  owl  my  study  for  years, 
•And  to  see  such  a  job  almost  moves  me  to  tears! 
Mister  Brown,  I'm  amazed 
You  should  be  so  gone  crazed 
As  to  put  up  a  bird 
In  that  posture  absurd! 

To  look  at  that  owl  really  brings  on  a  dizziness; 
The  man  who  stuffed  Iiini  don't  half  know  his  business!" 
And  the  barber  kept  on  shaving. 

■'"Examine  those  eyes. 
I'm  filled  with  surprise  .iioxfa  nl 


The   Ballad  of  Imitation  1883 

Taxidermisls  should  pass 
Off  on  you  such  poor  glass; 
So  unnatural  they  seem 
They'd  make  Audubon  scream, 
And  John  Burroughs  laugh 
To  encounter  such  chaff. 
Do  take  that  bird  down; 
Have  him  stuffed  again,  Brown!" 

And  the  barber  kept  on  shaving. 

"With  some  sawdust  and  bark 

I  could  stuff  in  the  dark 

An  owl  better  than  that. 

I  could  make  an  old  hat 

Look  more  like  an  owl 

Than  that  horrid  fowl, 

Stuck  up  there  so  stiff  like  a  side  of  coarse  leather. 

In  fact,  about  him  there's  not  one  natural  feather." 

Just  then,  with  a  wink  and  a  sly  normal  lurch. 
The  owl,  very  gravely,  got  down  from  his  perch, 
Walked  round,  and  regarded  his  fault-finding  critic 
(Who  thought  he  was  stuffed)  with  a  glance  analytic. 
And  then  fairly  hooted,  as  if  he  would  say: 
"Your  learning's  at  fault  this  time,  any  way; 
Don't  waste  it  again  on  a  live  bird,  I  pray. 
I'm  an  owl;  you're  another.     Sir  Critic,  good-day!" 
And  the  barber  kept  on  shaving. 

James  Thomas  Fields  [1816-1881] 

THE   B.\LLAD   OF   IMITATION 

C'est  imiter  guelgu'un  que  dc  planter  des  clwux. — Alfred  de  Musset 

If  they  hint,  O  Musician,  the  piece  that  you  played 

Is  naught  but  a  copy  of  Chopin  or  Spohr; 
That  the  ballad  you  sing  is  but  merely  "conveyed" 

From  the  stock  of  the  Arnes  and  the  Purcells  of  yore; 

That  there's  nothing,  in  short,  in  the  words  or  the  score, 
That  is  not  as  out-worn  as  the  "Wandering  Jew"; 

Make  answer — Beethoven  could  scarcely  do  more — 
That  the  man  who  plants  cabbages  imitates,  too! 


1884  The   Barb  of  Satire 

If  they  tell  you,  Sir  Artist,  your  light  and  your  shade 

Are  simply  "adapted"  from  other  men's  lore; 
That — plainly  to  speak  of  a  "spade"  as  a  "spade"— 

You've  "stolen"  your  grouping  from  three  or  from  four; 

That  (however  the  writer  the  truth  may  deplore), 
'Twas  Gainsborough  painted  your  "Little  Boy  Blue"; 

Smile  only  serenely — though  cut  to  the  core —  -    -  - 
For  the  man  who  plants  cabbages  imitates,  too!         '- ' 

And  you  too,  my  Poet,  be  never  dismayed 

If  they  whisper  your  Epic — "Sir  Eperon  d'Or" — 

Is  nothing  but  Tennyson  thinly  arrayed 

In  a  tissue  that's  taken  from  Morris's  store;  ,  , 

That  no  one,  in  fact,  but  a  child  could  ignore      ;  ,^,  f 

That  you  "lift"  or  "accommodate"  all  that  you  do; 
Take  heart — though  your  Pegasus'  withers  be  sore — 

For  the  man  who  plants  cabbages  imitates,  too! 

PoSTCRiPTUM.— And  you,  whom  we  all  so  adore, 
Dear  Critics,  whose  verdicts  are  always  so  new! —    ■ 

One  word  in  your  ear.     There  were  Critics  before.  ;-.'^. 
And  the  man  who  plants  cabbages  imitates,  tool^i'/O 

Austin  Dohson  [1840- 


THE   CONUNDRUM   OF  THE   WORKSHOPS 

When  the  flush  of  a  new-born  sun  fell  first  on  Eden's  green 

and  gold, 
Our  father  Adam  sat  under  the  Tree  and  scratched  with  a 

stick  in  the  mould ; 
And  the  first  rude  sketch  that  the  world  had  seen  was  joy 

to  his  mighty  heart. 
Till  the  Devil  whispered  behind  the  leaves:  "It's  pretty, 

but  is  it  Art?" 

Wherefore  he  called  to  his  wife,  and  fled  to  fashion  his 

work  anew — 
The  first  of  his  race  who  cared  a  fig  for  the  first,  most  dread 

review; 


The  Conundrum   of  the  Workshops    1885 

And  he  Icfl  his  lore  (o  the  use  of  his  sons — and  that  was  a 

glorious  gain 
When  the  Devil  chuckled:  "Is  it  Art?"  in  the  ear  of  the 

branded  Cain. 

They  builded  a  tower  to  shiver  the  sky  and  wrench  the 
stars  apart. 

Till  the  Devil  grunted  behind  the  bricks:  "It's  striking, 
but  is  it  Art?" 

The  stone  was  dropped  at  the  quarry-side  and  the  idle  der- 
rick swung. 

While  each  man  talked  of  the  aims  of  Art,  and  each  in  an 
alien  tongue. 

They  fought  and  they  talked  in  the  North  and  the  South, 

they  talked  snd  they  fought  in  the  West, 
Till  the  waters  rose  on  the  jabbering  land,  and  the  poor  Red 

Clay  had  rest — 
Had  rest  till  the  dank,  blank-canvas  dawn  when  the  dove 

was  preened  to  start, 
And  the  Devil  bubbled  below  the  keel:  "It's  human,  but 

is  it  Art?"  i-.irt'jr(>i 

The  tale  is  as  old  as  the  Eden  Tree — and  new  as  the  new- 
cut  tooth — 

For  each  man  knows  ere  his  Hp-thatch  grows  he  is  master 
of  Airt  and  Truth; 

And  each  man  hears  as  the  twilight  nears,  to  the  beat  of 
his  dying  heart, 

The  DevU  drum  on  the  darkened  pane:  "You  did  it,  but 
was  it  Art?" 

We  have  learned  to  whittle  the  Eden  Tree  to  the  shape  of 

a  surplice-peg, 
We  have  learned  to  bottle  our  parents  twain  in  the  yolk  of 

an  addled  egg, 
We  know  that  the  tail  must  wag  the  dog,  as  the  horse  is 

drawn  by  the  cart; 
But  the  Devil  whoops,  as  he  whooped  of  old:  "It's  clever, 

but  is  it  Art?"  '"^  j^djflauld  o/l7/ 


1 886  The   Barb  of  Satire 

When  the  flicker  of  London  sun  falls  faint  on  the  Club- 
room's  green  and  gold, 

The  sons  of  Adam  sit  them  down  and  scratch  with  their 
pens  in  the  mould — 

They  scratch  with  their  pens  in  the  mould  of  their  graves, 
and  the  ink  and  the  anguish  start, 

For  the  Devil  mutters  behind  the  leaves:  "It's  pretty,  but   • 
is  it  Art?" 

Now,  if  we  could  win  to  the  Eden  Tree  where  the  Four 

Great  Rivers  flow. 
And  the  Wreath  of  Eve  is  red  on  the  turf  as  she  left  it  long 

ago, 
And  if  we  could  come  when  the  sentry  slept,  and  softly 

scurry  through, 
By  the  favor  of  God   we  might  know  as  much — as  our 
,-    g  father  Adam  knew. 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865-''''"''^ 


THE  V-A-S-E 

From  the  madding  crowd  they  stand  apart, 
The  maidens  four  and  the  Work  of  Art; 

And  none  might  tell  from  sight  alone 
In  which  had  Culture  ripest  grown, — 

The  Gotham  Million  fair  to  see. 
The  Philadelphia  Pedigree, 

The  Boston  Mind  of  azure  hue, 

Or  the  soulful  Soul  from  Kalamazoo, — 

For  all  loved  Art  in  a  seemly  way, 
With  an  earnest  soul  and  a  capital  A. 

Long  they  worshipped;  but  no  one  broke 
The  sacred  stillness,  until  up  spoke 

The  Western  one  from  the  nameless  place, 
Who  blushing  said:  "What  a  lovely  vace!" 


Hem  and   Haw  i88 

Over  three  faces  a  sad  smile  ilew, 

And  they  edged  away  from  Kalamazoo. 

But  Gotham's  haughty  soul  was  stirred 
To  crush  the  stranger  with  one  small  word. 

Deftly  hiding  reproof  in  praise, 

She  cries:  "'  'Tis,  indeed,  a  lovely  vaze!" 

But  brief  her  unworthy  triumph  when 
The  lofty  one  from  the  home  of  Penn, 

With  the  consciousness  of  two  grandpapas, 
Exclaims:  "It  is  quite  a  lovely  vahs!" 

And  glances  round  with  an  anxious  thrill, 
Awaiting  the  word  of  Beacon  Hill. 

But  the  Boston  maid  smiles  courteouslee, 
And  gently  murmurs:  "Oh  pardon  me! 

"I  did  not  catch  your  remark,  because 

I  was  so  entranced  with  that  charming  vaws!" 

Dies  -erii  praegelida 
Sinistra  qiiimi  Bostonia. 

James  Jeffrey  Roche  [i 847-1908] 


HEM   AND   HAW 

Hem  and  Haw  were  the  sons  of  sin. 
Created  to  shally  and  shirk; 
Hem  lay  'round  and  Haw  looked  on 
While  God  did  all  the  work. 

Hem  was  a  fogy,  and  Haw  was  a  prig, 
For  both  had  the  dull,  dull  mind; 
And  whenever  they  found  a  thing  to  do, 
They  yammered  and  went  it  blind. 


I  888  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Hem  was  the  father  of  bigots  and  bores; 
As  the  sands  of  the  sea  were  they. 
And  Haw  was  the  father  of  all  the  tribe 
Who  criticise  to-day. 

But  God  was  an  artist  from  the  first, 
And  knew  what  he  was  about; 
While  over  his  shoulder  sneered  these  two, 
And  advised  him  to  rub  it  out. 

They  prophesied  ruin  ere  man  was  made : 
"Such  foUy  must  surely  fail!" 
And  when  he  was  done,  "Do  you  think,  my  Lord, 
He's  better  without  a  tail?" 

And  still  in  the  honest  working  world, 
With  posture  and  hint  and  smirk. 
These  sons  of  the  devil  are  standing  by 
While  Man  does  all  the  work. 

They  balk  endeavor  and  baffle  reform. 
In  the  sacred  name  of  law ; 
And  over  the  quavering  voice  of  Hem, 
Is  the  droning  voice  of  Haw. 

Bliss  Carman  [1861- 


MINIVER   CHEEVY 

Miniver  Cheevy,  child  of  scorn, 

Grew  lean  while  he  assailed  the  seasons; 

He  wept  that  he  was  ever  born. 
And  he  had  reasons. 

Miniver  loved  the  days  of  old 

When  swords  were  bright  and  steeds  were  prancing; 
The  vision  of  a  warrior  bold 

Would  set  him  dancing. 

Miniver  sighed  for  what  was  not, 

And  dreamed,  and  rested  from  his  labors; 

He  dreamed  of  Thebes  and  Camelot, 
And  Priam's  neighbors. 


Then  Ag'in  1889 

Miniver  mourned  the  ripe  renown 

That  made  so  many  a  name  so  fragrantpri  Yd 
He  mourned  Romance,  now  on  the  town,    '      ' 

And  Art,  a  vagrant. 

Miniver  loved  the  Medici, 

Albeit  he  had  never  seen  one; 
He  wouhl  have  sinned  incessantly 

Could  he  have  been  one. 

Miniver  cursed  the  commonplace, 
And  eyed  a  khaki  suit  with  loathing; 

He  missed  the  medieval  grace 
Of  iron  clothing. 

Miniver  scorned  the  gold  he  sought, 
But  sore  annoyed  was  he  without  it; 

Miniver  thought,  and  thought,  and  thought, 
And  thought  about  it. 

Miniver  Cheevy,  born  too  late. 

Scratched  his  head  and  kept  on  thinking; 

Miniver  coughed,  and  called  it  fate. 
And  kept  on  drinking. 

Edwin  Arlington  Robinson  [i86g- 


THEN  AG'IN 

Jim  Bowker,  he  said,  cf  he'd  had  a  fair  show, 
And  a  big  enough  town  for  his  talents  to  grow. 
And  the  least  bit  assistance  in  hoein'  his  row, 

Jim  Bowker,  he  said, 
He'd  filled  the  world  full  of  the  sound  of  his  name, 
An'  dumb  the  top  round  in  the  ladder  of  fame; 

It  may  have  been  so; 
I  dunno; 

Jest  so  it  might  been. 
Then  ag'in — 

But  he  had  tarnal  luck — everythin'  went  ag'in  him. 

The  arrers  er  fortune  they  alius  'ud  pin  him ; 

So  he  didn't  get  no  chance  to  show  off  what  was  in  him. 


1 890  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Jim  Bowker,  he  said, 
Ef  he'd  had  a  fair  show,  you  couldn't  tell  where  he'd  come, 
An'  the  feats  he'd  a-done,  an'  the  heights  he'd  a-clumb — 
It  may  have  been  so; 

I  dunno; 
Jest  so  it  might  been. 
Then  ag'in — 

But  we're  all  like  Jim  Bowker,  thinks  I,  more  or  less — 
Charge  fate  for  our  bad  luck,  ourselves  for  success. 
An'  give  fortune  the  blame  for  all  our  distress. 

As  Jirh  Bowker,  he  said. 
Ef  it  hadn'  been  for  luck  an'  misfortune  an'  sich, 
We  might  a-been  famous,  an'  might  a-been  rich. 
It  might  be  jest  so; 

I  dunno; 
Jest  so  it  might  been, 
Then  ag'in — 

Sam  Walter  Foss  [1858-1911] 

A  CONSERVATIVE 

The  garden  beds  I  wandered  by 

One  bright  and  cheerful  morn. 
When  I  found  a  new-fledged  butterfly, 

A-sitting  on  a  thorn, 
A  black  and  crimson  butterfly, 

All  doleful  and  forlorn. 

I  thought  that  life  could  have  no  sting 

To  infant  butterflies, 
So  I  gazed  on  this  unhappy  thing 

With  wonder  and  surprise, 
While  sadly  with  his  waving  wing 

He  wiped  his  weeping  eyes. 

Said  I,  "What  can  the  matter  be? 

Why  weepest  thou  so  sore? 
With  garden  fair  and  sunlight  free 

And  floAvers  in  goodly  store:" — 
But  he  only  turned  away  from  me      ,,,    ,.-,  . 
uilil  >.  And  burst  into  a  roar,     n  joj^  j'nbib  ad  08 


Similar  Cases  1891 

Cried  he,  "My  legs  are  thin  and  few 

Where  once  I  had  a  swarm! 
Soft  fuzzy  fur — a  joy  to  view — 

Once  kept  my  body  warm, 
Before  these  flapping  wing-things  grew, 

To  hamper  and  deform!" 

At  that  outrageous  bug  I  shot 

The  fury  of  mine  eye; 
Said  I,  in  scorn  all  burning  hot, 

In  rage  and  anger  high, 
"You  ignominious  idiot! 

Those  wings  are  made  to  fly! 

'I  do  not  want  to  fly,"  said  he,  ^j.p 

"I  onl)^  want  to  squirm!" 
And  he  drooped  his  wings  dejectedly, 

But  still  his  voice  was  firm: 
"I  do  not  want  to  be  a  fly! 

I  want  to  be  a  worm!" 

0  yesterday  of  unknown  lack! 
To-day  of  unknown  bliss! 

1  left  my  fool  in  red  and  black, 
The  last  I  saw  was  this, — 

The  creature  madly  climbing  back 
Into  his  chrysalis. 

Charlotte  Perkins  Stetson  Gilman  [i86o- 


SIMILAR  CASES 

There  was  once  a  little  animal, 

No  bigger  than  a  fox, 
And  on  five  toes  he  scampered 

Over  Tertiary  rocks. 
They  called  him  Eohippus, 

And  they  called  him  very  small, 
And  they  thought  him  of  no  value — 

When  they  thought  of  him  at  all; 


1892  The   Barb  of  Satire 

For  the  lumpish  old  Dinoceras 

And  Corj/phodon  so  slow 
Were  the  heavy  aristocracy 

In  days  of  long  ago. 

Said  the  little  Eohippus, 

"I  am  going  to  be  a  horse! 
And  on  my  middle  finger-nails 

To  run  my  earthly  course! 
I'm  going  to  have  a  flowing  tail! 

I'm  going  to  have  a  mane! 
I'm  going  to  stand  fourteen  hands  high 

On  the  psychozoic  plain!" 

The  Coryphodon  was  horrified, 

The  Dinoceras  was  shocked; 
And  they  chased  young  Eohippus, 

But  he  skipped  away  and  mocked. 
And  they  laughed  enormous  laughter, 

And  they  groaned  enormous  groans, 
And  they  bade  young  Eohippus 

Go  view  his  father's  bones. 
Said  they,  "  You  always  were  as  small 

And  mean  as  now  we  see, 
And  that's  conclusive  evidence 

That  you're  always  going  to  be. 
What!    Be  a  great,  tall,  handsome  beast, 

With  hoofs  to  gallop  on? 
Why!    You'd  have  to  change  your  nature!" 

Said  the  Loxolophodon. 
They  considered  him  disposed  of. 

And  retired  with  gait  serene; 
That  was  the  way  they  argued 

In  "the  early  Eocene." 

There  was  once  an  Anthropoidal  Ape,  1 

Far  smarter  than  the  rest. 
And  everything  that  they  could  do 

He  always  did  the  best; 


Similar  Cases  1893 

So  they  naturally  disliked  him, 
And  they  gave  him  shoulders  cool, 

And  when  they  had  to  mention  him 
They  said  he  was  a  fool. 

Cried  this  pretentious  Ape  one  day, 

"I'm  going  to  be  a  Man! 
And  stand  upright,  and  hunt,  and  fight, 

And  conquer  all  I  can! 
I'm  going  to  cut  down  forest  trees, 

To  make  my  houses  higher! 
I'm  going  to  kill  the  Mastodon! 

I'm  going  to  make  a  fire!" 

Loud  screamed  the  Anthropoidal  Apes 

With  laughter  wild  and  gay; 
They  tried  to  catch  that  boastful  one, 

But  he  always  got  away. 
So  they  yelled  at  him  in  chorus, 

Which  he  minded  not  a  whit; 
And  they  pelted  him  with  cocoanuts, 

\Vhich  didn't  seem  to  hit. 
And  then  they  gave  him  reasons 

Which  they  thought  of  much  avail. 
To  prove  how  his  preposterous 

Attempt  was  sure  to  fail. 
Said  the  sages,  "In  the  first  place. 

The  thing  cannot  be  done! 
And,  second,  if  it  could  be, 

It  would  not  be  any  fun! 
And,  third,  and  most  conclusive. 

And  admitting  no  reply, 
You  would  have  to  change  your  nature ! 

We  should  like  to  see  you  try !" 
They  chuckled  then  triumphantly, 

These  lean  and  hairy  shapes, 
For  these  things  passed  as  arguments 

With  the  Anthropoidal  Apes. 

There  was  once  a  Neolithic  Man, 
An  enterprising  wight. 


1894  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Who  made  his  chopping  implements 

Unusually  bright. 
Unusually  clever  he, 

Unusually  brave, 
And  he  drew  delightful  Mammoths 

On  the  borders  of  his  cave. 
To  his  Neolithic  neighbors, 

Who  were  startled  and  surprised. 
Said  he,  "My  friends,  in  course  of  lime, 

We  shall  be  civilized ! 
We  are  going  to  live  in  cities ! 

We  arc  going  to  fight  in  wars! 
We  arc  going  to  eat  three  times  a  day 

Without  the  natural  cause! 
We  are  going  to  turn  life  upside  down 

About  a  thing  called  gold ! 
We  are  going  to  want  the  earth,  and  take 

As  much  as  we  can  hold! 
We  are  going  to  wear  great  piles  of  stuff 

Outside  our  proper  skins ! 
We  are  going  to  have  diseases! 

And  Accomplishments!!     And  Sins!!!" 

Then  they  all  rose  up  in  fury 

Against  their  boastful  friend, 
For  prehistoric  patience 

Cometh  quickly  to  an  end. 
Said  one,  "This  is  chimerical! 

Utopian!     Absurd!" 
Said  another,  "What  a  stupid  life! 

Too  dull,  upon  my  word!  " 
Cried  all,  "Before  such  things  can  come, 

You  idiotic  child. 
You  must  alter  Human  Nature!  " 

And  they  all  sat  back  and  smiled. 
Thought  they,  "An  answer  to  that  last 

It  will  be  hard  to  find!" 
It  was  a  clinching  argument 

To  the  Neolithic  Mind! 

Charlotte  Perkins  Stetson  Gilman  [i860- 


Man  and  the  Ascidian  189c 


MAN  AND   THE  ASCIDIAN 

A   MORALITY 

"The  Ancestor  remote  of  Man," 

Says  Darwin,  "is  the  Ascidian," 

A  scanty  sort  of  water-beast 

That,  ninety  million  years  at  least 

Before  Gorillas  came  to  be. 

Went  swimming  up  and  down  the  sea. 

Their  ancestors  the  pious  praise, 
And  like  to  imitate  their  ways; 
How,  then,  docs  our  first  parent  live, 
What  lesson  has  his  life  to  give? 

The  Ascidian  tadpole,  young  and  gay, 
Doth  Life  with  one  bright  eye  survey, 
His  consciousness  has  easy  play. 
He's  sensitive  to  grief  and  pain. 
Has  tail,  a  spine,  and  bears  a  brain, 
And  everything  that  fits  the  state 
Of  creatures  we  call  vertebrate. 
But  age  comes  on;  with  sudden  shock 
He  sticks  his  head  against  a  rock ! 
His  tail  drops  off,  his  eye  drops  in. 
His  brain's  absorbed  into  his  skin; 
He  does  not  move,  nor  feel,  nor  know 
The  tidal  water's  ebb  and  flow, 
But  still  abides,  unstirred,  alone, 
A  sucker  sticking  to  a  stone. 

And  we,  his  children,  truly  we 

In  youth  are,  Hke  the  Tadpole,  free. 

And  where  we  would  we  blithely  go. 

Have  brains  and  hearts,  and  feel  and  know. 

Then  Age  comes  on !     To  Habit  we 

Affix  ourselves  and  are  not  free; 

The  Ascidian's  rooted  to  a  rock, 

And  we  are  bond-slaves  of  the  clock; 


1896  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Our  rocks  are  Medicine — Letters— Law, 
From  these  our  heads  we  cannot  drawi^r 
Our  loves  drop  off,  our  hearts  drop  in. 
And  daily  thicker  grows  our  skin. 

Ah,  scarce  we  live,  we  scarcely  know 
.     The  wide  world's  moving  ebb  and  flow, 
The  clanging  currents  ring  and  shock. 
But  we  are  rooted  to  the  rock. 
And  thus  at  ending  of  his  span. 
Blind,  deaf,  and  indolent,  does  Man 
Revert  to  the  Ascidian. 

Atidrew  Lang  [1844-1012] 


THE   CALF-PATH 

One  day,  through  the  primeval  wood, 
A  calf  walked  home,  as  good  calves  should; 
But  made  a  trail  all  bent  askew, 
A  crooked  trail  as  all  calves  do. 

Since  then  two  hundred  years  have  fled, 
And,  I  infer,  the  calf  is  dead. 
But  still  he  left  behind  his  trail. 
And  thereby  hangs  my  moral  tale. 

The  trail  was  taken  up  next  day 
By  a  lone  dog  that  passed  that  way; 
And  then  a  wise  bell-wether  sheep 
Pursued  the  trail  o'er  vale  and  steep, 
And  drew  the  flock  behind  him,  too. 
As  good  bell-wethers  always  do. 

And  from  that  day,  o'er  hill  and  glade. 
Through  those  old  woods  a  path  was  made; 
And  many  men  wound  in  and  out, 
And  dodged,  and  turned,  and  bent  about 
And  uttered  words  of  righteous  wrath 
Because  'twas  such  a  crooked  path. 


The  Calf- Path  1897 

But  still  they  followed — do  not  laugh — 
The  first  migrations  of  that  calf, 
And  through  this  winding  wood-way  stalked, 
Because  he  wobbled  when  he  walked. 

This  forest  path  became  a  lane, 
That  bent,  and  turned,  and  turned  again; 
This  crooked  lane  became  a  road, 
Where  many  a  poor  horse  with  his  load 
Toiled  on  beneath  the  burning  sun, 
And  traveled  some  three  miles  in  one. 
And  thus  a  century  and  a  half 
They  trod  the  footsteps  of  that  calf. 

The  years  passed  on  in  swiftness  fleet, 
The  road  became  a  village  street; 
x'\nd  this,  before  men  were  aware, 
A  city's  crowded  thoroughfare; 
And  soon  the  central  street  was  tills 
Of  a  renowned  metropolis ; 
And  men  two  centuries  and  a  half 
Trod  in  the  footsteps  of  that  calf. 

Each  day  a  hundred  thousand  rout 
Followed  the  zigzag  calf  about; 
And  o'er  his  crooked  journey  went 
The  traffic  of  a  continent. 
A  hundred  thousand  men  were  led 
By  one  calf  near  three  centuries  dead. 
They  followed  still  his  crooked  way. 
And  lost  one  hundred  years  a  day; 
For  thus  such  reverence  is  lent 
To  well-established  precedent. 

A  moral  lesson  this  might  teach, 
Were  I  ordained  and  called  to  preach: 
For  men  are  prone  to  go  it  blind 
Along  the  calf-paths  of  the  mind. 
And  work  away  from  sun  to  sun 
To  do  what  other  men  have  done. 


1898  The   Barb  of  Satire 

They  follow  in  the  beaten  track, 
And  out  and  in,  and  forth  and  back, 
And  still  their  devious  course  pursue. 
To  keep  the  path  that  others  do. 

But  how  the  wise  old  wood-gods  laugh, 
Who  saw  the  first  primeval  calf! 
Ah!  many  things  this  tale  might  teach, — 
But  I  am  not  ordained  to  preach. 

Sam  Waller  Foss  [185  8-1 9 11] 


WEDDED   BLISS 

"O  COME  and  be  my  mate!"  said  the  Eagle  to  the  Hen; 

"I  love  to  soar,  but  then 

I  want  my  mate  to  rest 

Forever  in  the  nest!" 

Said  the  Hen,  "I  cannot  fly, 

I  have  no  wish  to  try. 
But  I  joy  to  see  my  mate  careering  through  the  sky!" 
They  wed,  and  cried,  "Ah,  this  is  Love,  my  own!" 
And  the  Hen  sat,  and  the  Eagle  soared,  alone. 

"O  come  and  be  my  mate!"  said  the  Lion  to  the  Sheep; 

"My  love  for  you  is  deep! 

I  slay, — a  Lion  should, — 

But  you  are  mild  and  good!" 

Said  the  Sheep,  "I  do  no  ill — 

Could  not,  had  I  the  will — 
But  I  joy  to  see  my  mate  pursue,  devour  and  kill." 
They  wed,  and  cried,  "Ah,  this  is  Love,  my  own!" 
And  the  Sheep  browsed,  the  Lion  prowled,  alone. 

"O  come  and  be  my  mate!"  said  the  Salmon  to  the  Clam; 

"You  are  not  ■wise,  but  I  am. 

I  know  the  sea  and  stream  as  well; 

You  know  nothing  but  your  shell." 

Said  the  Clam,  "I'm  slow  of  motion, 

But  my  love  is  all  devotion. 
And  I  joy  to  have  my  mate  traverse  lake  and  stream  and 


Ad  Chloen,   M.  A.  1899 

They  wed,  and  cried,  "Ah,  this  is  Love,  my  own!" 
And  the  Clam  suckedy,  the  Salmon  swam,  alone. 

Charlolle  Perkins  Slclson  Gil  man  [1860- 


THE  HINDOO'S   DEATH 

A  Hindoo  died;  a  happy  thing  to  do. 
When  fifty  years  united  to  a  shrew. 
Released,  he  hopefully  for  entrance  cries 
Before  the  gates  of  Brahma's  paradise. 
"Hast  been  through  purgatory?"  Bralima  said. 
"I  have  been  married!"  and  he  hung  his  head. 
"Come  in!  come  in!  and  welcome  to  my  son! 
INIarriage  and  purgatorj'  are  as  one." 
In  bliss  extreme  he  entered  heaven's  door, 
And  knew  the  bliss  he  ne'er  had  known  before. 

He  scarce  had  entered  in  the  gardens  fair, 
Another  Hindoo  asked  admission  there. 
The  self-same  question  Brahma  asked  again: 
"Hast  been  through  purgatory?"    "No;  what  then?" 
"Thou  canst  not  enter!"  did  the  god  reply. 
"He  who  went  in  was  there  no  more  than  I." 
"All  that  is  true,  but  he  has  married  been. 
And  so  on  earth  has  suffered  for  all  his  sin." 
"Married?     Tis  well,  for  I've  been  married  twice." 
''Begone!    We'll  have  no  fools  in  paradise!" 

George  Birdscyc  [iS     - 


AD   CHLOEN,   M.  A. 
(fresh  from  her  cambrhdge  examnation) 

Lady,  very  fair  are  you. 
And  your  eyes  are  very  blue. 

And  your  hose; 
And  your  brow  is  like  the  snow, 
And  the  various  things  )'ou  know 

Goodness  knows. 


1900  The   Barb  of  Satire 

I  ■         And  the  rose-flush  on  your  cheek,  ''   '  'fT 
And  your  algebra  and  Greek 

Perfect  are; 
And  that  lovmg  lustrous  eye 
Recognizes  in  the  sky 

Every  star. 

You  have  pouting  piquant  lips, 
You  can  doubtless  an  eclipse 

Calculate; 
But  for  3'our  cerulean  hue, 
I  had  certainly  from  you 

Met  my  fate. 

If  by  an  arrangement  dual 

I  were  Adams  mixed  with  Whewell, 

Then  some  day 
I,  as  wooer,  perhaps  might  come 
To  so  sweet  an  Artium 

Magistra. 

Mortimer  Collins  [182 7-1 876] 

"AS  LIKE  THE  WOMAN  AS   YOU   CAN" 

"As  like  the  Woman  as  you  can" — 

{Thus  the  New  Adam  was  beguiled)  — 
"So  shall  you  touch  the  Terfect  Man"— 

{God  in  the  Garden  heard  and  smiled). 
"Your  father  perished  with  his  day: 

A  clot  of  passions  fierce  and  blind. 
He  fought,  he  hacked,  he  crushed  his  way: 

Your  muscles,  Child,  must  be  of  mind. 

"The  Brute  that  lurks  and  irks  within. 

How,  till  you  have  him  gagged  and  bound, 
Escape  the  foulest  form  of  Sin?" 

{God  in  the  Garden  laughed  and  frowned). 
"So  vile,  so  rank,  the  bestial  mood 

In  which  the  race  is  bid  to  be, 
It  wrecks  the  Rarer  Womanhood : 

Live,  therefore,  you,  for  Purity! 


"No   Fault  in   Women"  i^oi 

"Take  for  your  mate  no  gallant  croup, 

No  girl  all  grace  and  natural  will: 
To  work  her  mission  were  to  stoop, 

Maybe  to  lapse,  from  Well  to  111. 
Choose  one  of  whom  your  grosser  make" — 

{God  in  the  Garden  laughed  outright) —       .'7-r[  i 
"The  true  refining  touch  may  take, 

Till  both  attain  to  Life's  last  height. 

"There,  equal,  purged  of  soul  and  sense. 

Beneficent,  high-thinking,  just. 
Beyond  the  appeal  of  Molcnce, 

Incapable  of  common  Lust, 
In  mental  Marriage  still  prevail" — 

(God  in  the  Garden  hid  His  face) — 
"Till  you  achieve  that  Female-Male 

In  which  shall  culminate  the  race." 

William  Ernest  Henley  [1840-1903] 


"NO  FAULT  IN  WOMEN" 

No  fault  in  women  to  refuse 

The  offer  which  they  most  would  choose: 

No  fault  in  women  to  confess 

How  tedious  they  are  in  their  dress: 

No  fault  in  women  to  lay  on 

The  tincture  of  vermilion, 

And  there  to  give  the  cheek  a  dye 

Of  white,  where  Nature  doth  deny: 

No  fault  in  women  to  make  show 

Of  largeness,  when  they've  nothing  so; 

When,  true  it  is,  the  outside  swells 

With  inward  buckram,  little  else: 

No  fault  in  woman,  though  they  be 

But  seldom  from  suspicion  free: 

No  fault  in  womankind  at  all, 

If  they  but  slip,  and  never  fall. 

Robert  Her  rick  [1591-1674] 


1902  The   Barb  of  Satire 


"ARE  WOMEN  FAIR?" 

"Are  women  fair?"    Ay!  wondrous  fair  to  see  too. 
"Are  women  sweet?"    Yea,  passing  sweet  they  be  too; 
Most  fair  and  sweet  to  them  that  only  love  them; 
Chaste  and  discreet  to  all  save  those  that  prove  them. 

"Are  women  wise?"    Not  wise,  but  they  be  witty. 
"Are  women  witty?"    Yea,  the  more  the  pity; 
They  are  so  witty,  and  in  wit  so  wily, 
That  be  you  ne'er  so  wise,  they  will  beguile  ye. 

"Are  women  fools?"    Not  fools,  but  fondlings  many. 
"Can  women  found  be  faithful  unto  any?" 
When  snow-white  swans  do  turn  to  color  sable, 
Then  women  fond  will  be  both  firm  and  stable. 

"Are  women  saints?"    No  saints,  nor  yet  no  devils. 
"Are  women  good?"     Not  good,  but  needful  evils; 
So  Angel-like,  that  devils  I  do  not  doubt  them; 
So  needful  evils,  that  few  can  live  without  them. 

"Are  women  proud?"    Ay!  passing  proud,  and  praise  them. 
"Are  women  kind?"    Ay!  wondrous  kind  and  please  them, 
Or  so  imperious,  no  man  can  endure  them. 
Or  so  kind-hearted,  any  may  procure  them. 

Francis  Davison  {?)   [fl.  1602] 


A   STRONG  HAND 

Tender-handed  stroke  a  nettle. 
And  it  stings  you  for  your  pains; 

Grasp  it  like  a  lad  of  mettle. 
And  it  soft  as  silk  remains: 

So  it  is  with  these  fair  creatures, 

Use  them  kindly,  they  rebel; 
But  be  rough  as  nutmeg  graters, 

And  the  rogues  obey  you  well. 

Aaron  Hill  [1685-1750J 


The   Fair  Circassian  1903 

WOMEN'S  LONGING 

From  "Women  Pleased" 

Tell  me  what  is  that  only  thing 

For  which  all  women  long; 
Yet,  having  what  they  most  desire, 

To  have  it  docs  them  wrong? 

'Tis  not  to  be  chaste,  nor  fair, 
(Such  gifts  malice  may  impair), 
Richly  trimmed,  to  walk  or  ride,'  '^ 
Or  to  wanton  uncspied. 
To  preserv^e  an  honest  name 
And  so  to  give  it  up  to  fame — 
These  are  toys.     In  good  or  ill 
They  desire  to  have  their  will: 
Yet,  when  they  have  it,  they  abuse  it. 
For  they  know  not  how  to  use  it. 

Joint  Fletcher  [1579-1625] 

TRIOLET 

All  women  born  are  so  perverse 

No  man  need  boast  their  love  possessing. 

If  naught  seem  better,  nothing's  worse: 

All  women  born  are  so  perverse. 

From  Adam's  wife,  that  proved  a  curse, 

Though  God  had  made  her  for  a  blessing, 

All  women  born  are  so  perverse 

No  man  need  boast  their  love  possessing. 

Robert  Bridges  [1844- 

THE   FAIR   CIRCASSIAN 

Forty  \'iziers  saw  I  go 
Up  to  the  Seraglio, 
Burning,  each  and  every  man, 
For  the  fair  Circassian. 


1904  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Ere  the  morn  had  disappeared, 
Every  Vizier  wore  a  beard; 
Ere  the  afternoon  was  born, 
Every  Vizier  came  back  shorn. 

"Let  the  man  that  woos  to  win 
Woo  with  an  unhairy  chin;" 
Thus  she  said,  and  as  she  bid 
Each  devoted  Vizier  did. 

From  the  beards  a  cord  she  made, 
Looped  it  to  the  bakistrade. 
Glided  down  and  went  away 
To  her  own  Circassia. 

When  the  Sultan  heard,  waxed  he 
Somewhat  wroth,  and  presently 
In  the  noose  themselves  did  lend 
Every  Vizier  did  suspend. 

Sages  all,  this  rhyme  who  read, 
Guard  your  beards  with  prudent  heed, 
And  beware  the  wily  plans 
Of  the  fair  Circassians. 

Richard  Garnctt  [1835-1906] 


THE  FEMALE  PHAETON 

Thus  Kitty,  beautiful  and  young. 

And  wild  as  colt  untamed. 
Bespoke  the  fair  from  whence  she  sprung. 

With  Httle  rage  inflamed: 

Inflamed  with  rage  at  sad  restraint, 
Which  wise  mamma  ordained ; 

And  sorely  vexed  to  play  the  saint. 
Whilst  wit  and  beauty  reigned: 

"Shall  I  thumb  holy  books,  confined 

With  Abigails,  forsaken? 
Kitty's  for  other  things  designed, 

Or  I  am  much  mistaken. 


-li  f! 


The   Lure  1905 

"Must  Lady  Jenny  frisk  about, 

And  visit  with  her  cousins? 
At  balls  must  she  make  all  the  rout,. 

And  bring  home  hearts  by  dozens? 

"What  has  she  better,  pray,  than  I, 

What  hidden  charms  to  boast, 
That  all  mankind  for  her  should  die. 

Whilst  I  am  scarce  a  toast? 

"Dearest  mamma!  for  once  let  me, 

Unchained,  my  fortune  try; 
I'll  have  my  earl  as  well  as  she. 

Or  know  the  reason  why. 

"I'll  soon  with  Jenny's  pride  quit  score, 

Make  all  her  lovers  fall: 
They'll  grieve  I  was  not  loosed  before; 

She,  I  was  loosed  at  all." 

Fondness  prevailed,  mamma  gave  way; 

Kitty,  at  heart's  desire, 
Obtained  the  chariot  for  a  day, 

And  set  the  world  on  fire. 

M'altkew  Prior  [1664-1721] 


THE  LURE 


"What  bait  do  you  use,"  said  a  Saint  to  the  Devil, 
'  "When  you  lish  where  the  souls  of  men  abound?" 
"Well,  for  special  tastes,"  said  the  King  of  Evil, 
"Gold  and  Fame  arc  the  best  I've  found." 

"But  for  general  use?"  asked  the  Saint.     "Ah,  then," 
Said  the  Demon,  "I  angle  for  Man,  not  men. 
And  a  thing  I  hate 

Is  to  change  my  bait,  ri^dT 

So  I  fish  with  a  woman  the  whole  year  round." 

John  Boyle  O'  Re  illy  [1844-1890J 


1906  The   Barb  of  Satire 


THE  BALLAD  OF  CASSANDRA  BROWN 

Though  I  met  her  in  the  summer,  when  one's  heart  lies 

round  at  ease, 
As  it  were  in  tennis  costume,  and  a  man's  not  hard  to  please, 
Yet  I  think  at  any  season  to  have  met  her  was  to  love. 
While  her  tones,  unspoiled,  unstudied,  had  the  softness  of 

the  dove. 

At  request  she  read  us  poems  in  a  nook  among  the  pines, 
And  her  artless  voice  lent  music  to  the  least  melodious 

lines;  B  v/oni 

Though  she  lowered  her  shadowing  lashes,  in  an  earnest 

reader's  wise. 
Yet  we  caught  blue  gracious  glimpses  of  the  heavens  that 

were  her  eyes. 

As  in  paradise  I  listened.    Ah,  I  did  not  understand 

That  a  little  cloud,   no  larger   than  the  average  human 

hand. 
Might,  as  stated  oft  in  fiction,  spread  into  a  sable  pall. 
When  she  said  that  she  should  study  Elocution  in  the  fall! 

I  admit  her  earliest  efforts  were  not  in  the  Ercles  vein; 
She  began  with  "Lit-tle  Maaybel,  with  her  faayce  against 

the  payne 
And  the  beacon-light  a-t-r-r-remble" — which,  although  it 

made  me  wince, 
Is  a  thing  of  cheerful  nature  to  the  things  she's  rendered 

since. 

Having  learned  the  Soulful  Quiver,  she  acquired  the  Melting 
Mo-o-an,  •>  ^u\  )ijH 

And  the  way  she  gave  "Young  Grayhead"  would  have 
liquefied  a  stone. 

Then  the  Sanguinary  Tragic  did  her  energies  employ. 

And  she  tore  my  taste  to  tatters  when  she  slew  "The  Polish 
Boy." 


A   Reasonable  Affliction  1907 

It's  not  pleasant  for  a  fellow  when  the  jewel  of  his  soul 

Wades  through  slaughter  on  the  carpet,  while  her  orbs  in 
frenzy  roll; 

What  was  I  that  I  should  murmur?  Yet  it  gave  me  griev- 
ous pain 

That  she  rose  in  social  gatherings,  and  Searched  among  the 
Slain. 

I  was  forced  to  look  upon  her,  in  my  desperation  dumb, 
Knowing  well  that  when  her  awful  opportunity  was  come 
She  would  give  us  battle,  murder,  sudden  death  at  very  least, 
As  a  skeleton  of  warning,  and  a  blight  upon  the  feast. 

Once,  ah!  once  I  fell  a-dreaming;  some  one  played  a  polo- 
naise 

I  associated  strongly  with  those  happier  August  days; 

And  I  mused,  "I'll  speak  this  evening,"  recent  pangs  for- 
gotten quite — 

Sudden  shrilled  a  scream  of  anguish:  "Curfew  SHALL  not 
ring  to-night!" 

Ah,  that  sound  was  as  a  curfew,  quenching  rosy,  warm 

romance — 
Were  it  safe  to  wed  a  woman  one  so  oft  would  wish  in 

France? 
Oh,   as  she   "cull- imbed"   that  ladder,  swift  my  mounting 

hope  came  down : 
I  am  still  a  single  cynic;  she  is  still  Cassandra  Brown! 

Helen  Gray  Cone  [1859- 

A  REASONABLE  AFFLICTION 

On  his  death-bed  poor  Lubin  lies: 

His  spouse  is  in  despair; 
With  frequent  cries,  and  mutual  sighs, 

They  both  express  their  care. 

"A  different  cause,"  says  Parson  Sly, 

"The  same  effect  may  give: 
Poor  Lubin  fears  that  he  may  die; 

His  wife,  that  he  may  live." 

Matlheiv  Prior  [1664-1721] 


1908  The   Barb  of  Satire 

THE  WOMAN  WITH  THE  SERPENT'S  TONGUE 

She  is  not  old,  she  is  not  young, 
The  woman  with  the  Serpent's  Tongue, 
The  haggard  cheek,  the  hungering  eye, 
The  poisoned  words  that  wildly  fly. 
The  famished  face,  the  fevered  hand, — 
Who  slights  the  worthiest  in  the  land. 
Sneers  at  the  just,  contemns  the  brave, 
And  blackens  goodness  in  its  grave. 

In  truthful  numbers  be  she  sung. 

The  Woman  with  the  Serpent's  Tongue; 

Concerning  whom.  Fame  hints  at  things  ..^o 

Told  but  in  shrugs  and  whisperings: 

Ambitious  from  her  natal  hour. 

And  scheming  all  her  life  for  power; 

With  little  left  of  seemly  pride; 

With  venomed  fangs  she  cannot  hide;  ^.'.- 

Who  half  makes  love  to  you  to-day, 

To-morrow  gives  her  guest  away. 

Burnt  up  within  by  that  strange  soul 

She  cannot  slake,  or  yet  control: 

Malignant-lipped,  unkind,  unsweet; 

Past  all  example  indiscreet; 

Hectic,  and  always  overstrung, — 

The  Woman  with  the  Serpent's  Tongue. 

To  think  that  such  as  she  can  mar 
Names  that  among  the  noblest  are! 
That  hands  like  hers  can  touch  the  springs 
That  move  who  knows  what  men  and  things? 
That  on  her  will  their  fates  have  hung! — 
The  Woman  with  the  Serpent's  Tongue. 

William  Watson  [1858- 

SUPPOSE 

How  sad  if,  by  some  strange  new  law, 

All  kisses  scarred ! 
For  she  who  is  most  beautiful 

Would  be  most  marred. 


Fable  1909 

And  we  miglit  l)e  surprised  to  see 

Some  lovely  wife 
Smooth- visaged,  while  a  seeming  prude 

Was  marked  for  life. 

Aline  Reeve  AldricJi  [1866-1S92] 


TOO  CANDID  BY  HALF 

As  Tom  and  his  wife  were  discoursing  one  day 
Of  their  several  faults  in  a  bantering  way, 

Said  she,  "Though  my  wit  you  disparage, 
I'm  sure,  my  dear  husband,  our  friends  will  attest 
This  much,  at  the  least,  that  my  judgment  is  best." 

Quoth  Tom,  "So  they  said  at  our  marriage." 

John  Godfrey  Saxe  [1816-1887] 


FABLE 

The  mountain  and  the  squirrel 

Had  a  quarrel, 

And  the  former  called  the  latter  "Little  Prig;" 

Bun  replied, 

"You  are  doubtless  very  big; 

But  all  sorts  of  things  and  weather 

Must  be  taken  in  together. 

To  make  up  a  year 

And  a  sphere. 

And  I  think  it  no  disgrace 

To  occupy  my  place. 

If  I'm  not  so  large  as  you, 

You  are  not  so  small  as  I, 

And  not  half  so  spry. 

I'll  not  deny  you  make 

A  very  pretty  squirrel  track; 

Talents  d:ffcr;  all  is  well  and  wisely  put; 

If  1  cannot  carry  forests  on  my  back, 

Neither  can  you  crack  a  nut." 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-1882I 


ipio  The   Barb  of  Satire 


WOMAN'S  WILL 

That  man's  a  fool  who  tries  by  art  and  skill 
To  stem  the  torrent  of  a  woman's  will: 
For  if  she  will,  she  will;  you  may  depend  on't — 
And  if  she  won't,  she  won't — and  there's  an  end  on't. 

Unknown 

WOMAN'S  WILL 

Men,  dying,  make  their  wills,  but  wives 

Escape  a  task  so  sad; 
Why  should  they  make  what  all  their  lives 

The  gentle  dames  have  had? 

John  Godfrey  Saxe  [1816-1887] 

PLAYS 

Alas,  how  soon  the  hours  arc  over 
Counted  us  out  to  play  the  lover! 
And  how  much  narrower  is  the  stage 
Allotted  us  to  play  the  sage! 

But  when  we  play  the  fool,  how  wide 
The  theatre  expands!  beside, 
How  long  the  audience  sits  before  us! 
How  many  prompters!  what  a  chorus! 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 

THE  REMEDY  WORSE  THAN  THE  DISEASE 

I  SENT  for  Ratclifife;  was  so  ill, 
That  other  doctors  gave  me  over: 

He  felt  my  pulse,  prescribed  his  pill, 
And  I  was  likely  to  recover. 

But,  when  the  wit  began  to  wheeze. 
And  wine  had  warmed  the  poHtician, 

Cured  yesterday  of  my  disease, 
I  died  last  night  of  my  physician. 

Matthew  Prior  [  1 664- 1 7  3 1 ] 


Certain    Maxims  of  Hafiz  191 1 


THE  NET  OF  LAW 

The  net  of  law  is  spread  so  wide, 
No  sinner  from  its  sweep  may  hide. 

Its  meshes  are  so  fine  and  strong, 
They  take  in  every  child  of  wrong. 

O  wondrous  web  of  mystery! 
Big  fish  alone  escape  from  thee! 

James  Jc_ffrcy  Roche  [1847-1908] 


COLOGNE 

In  Kohl,  a  town  of  monks  and  bones. 

And  pavements  fanged  with  murderous  stones, 

And  rags,  and  hags,  and  hideous  wenches; 

I  counted  two  and  seventy  stenches. 

All  well  defined,  and  several  stinks! 

Ye  Nymphs  that  reign  o'er  sewers  and  sinks, 

The  river  Rhine,  it  is  well  known. 

Doth  wash  your  city  of  Cologne; 

But  tell  me.  Nymphs!  what  power  divine 

Shall  henceforth  wash  the  river  Rhine? 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [1772-1834] 


EPITAPH  ON  CHARLES  II 

Here  lies  our  Sovereign  Lord  the  King, 

Whose  word  no  man  relies  on. 
Who  never  said  a  foolish  thing. 

Nor  ever  did  a  wise  one. 

John  Wilmot  [1647-1680] 


CERTAIN  MAXIMS  OF  HAFIZ 
I 

If  It  be  pleasant  to  look  on,  stalled  in  the  packed  serai, 
Does  not  the  Young  Man  try  Its  temper  and  pace  ere  he 
buy? 


19 1 2  The   Barb  of  Satire 

If  She  be  pleasant  to  look  on,  what  does  the  Young  Man 

say? 
"Lo!    She  is  pleasant  to  look  on,  give  Her  to  me  today!" 


Yea,  though  a  Kaffir  die,  to  him  is  remitted  Jehanijum 
If  he  borrowed  in  life  from  a  native  at  sixty  per  cent  per 
annum. 

,.  Ill 

I" 

Blister  wc  not  for  bur  salt?    So  when  the  heart  is  vexed, 
The  pain  of  one  maiden's  refusal  is  drowned  in  the  pain  of 
the  next. 

IV 

The  temper  of  chums,  the  love  of  your  wife,  and  a  new 

piano's  tune — 
Which  of  the  three  will  you  trust  at  the  end  of  an  Indian 

June? 

v 

Who  are  the  rulers  of  Ind — to  whom  shall  we  bow  the  knee? 
Make  your  peace  with  the  women,  and  men  will  make  you 
L.  G. 


Does  the  woodpecker  flit  round  the  young /cm^// .?     Does 

grass  clothe  a  new-built  wall? 
Is  she  under  thirty,  the  woman  who  holds  a  boy  in  her 

thraU? 

VII 

If  She  grow  suddenly  gracious — reflect.     Is  it  all  for  thee? 
The  black-buck  is  stalked  through  the  bullock,  and  Man 
through  jealousy.  •/ « /^-^n 

VIII 

Seek  not  for  favor  of  women.    So  shall  you  find  it  indeed. 
Does  not  the  boar  break  cover  just  when  you're  lighting  a 
weed? 


Certain   Maxims  of  Hafiz  iQiJ 


IX 


If  He  play,  being  young  and  unskilful,  for  shekels  of  silver 

and  gold, 
Take  His  money,  my  son,  praising  Allah.     The  kid  was 

ordained  to  be  sold.  ' ' 


With  a  "weed"  among  men  or  horses  verily  this  is  the 

best, 
That  you  work  him  in  office  or  dog-cart  lightly — but  give 

him  no  rest. 

XI 

Pleasant  the  snaffle  of  Courtship,  improving  the  manners 
and  carriage; 

But  the  colt  who  is  wise  will  abstain  from  the  terrible  thorn- 
bit  of  Marriage. 

XII 

As  the  thriftless  gold  of  the  babul,  so  is  the  gold  that  we 

spend 
On  a  Derby  Sweep,  or  our  neighbor's  wife,  or  the  horse  that 

we  buy  from  a  friend. 

xni 

The  ways  of  a  man  with  a  maid  be  strange,  yet  simple  and 

tame 
To  the  ways  of  a  man  with  a  horse,  when  selling  or  racing 
,   that  same. 

XIV 

In  pubHc  Her  face  turneth  to  thee,  and  pleasant  Her  smile 

when  ye  meet. 
It  is  ill.     The  cold  rocks  of  El-Gidar  smile  thus  on  the 

waves  at  their  feet. 
In  pubHc  Her  face  is  averted,  with  anger  She  nameth  thy 

'      name. 
It  is  well.     Was  there  ever  a  loser  content  with  the  loss  of 

the  game? 


IQI4  The   Barb  of  Satire 

XV 

If  She  have  spoken  a  word,  remember  thy  Hps  are  sealed, 
And  the  Brand  of  the  Dog  is  upon  him  by  whom  is  the 

secret  revealed. 
If  She  have  written  a  letter,  delay  not  an  instant,  but  burn 

it. 
Tear  it  in  pieces,  O  Fool,  and  the  wind  to  her  mate  shall 

return  it! 
If  there  be  trouble  to  Herward,  and  a  lie  of  the  blackest 

can  clear. 
Lie,  while  thy  lips  can  move  or  a  man  is  alive  to  hear. 

XVI 

My  Son,  if  a  maiden  deny  thee  and  scufflingly  bid  thee 

give  o'er. 
Yet  lip  meets  with  lip  at  the  lastward — get  out!    She  has 

been  there  before. '  ^^'^^'^'-'^ 
They  are  pecked  on  the  ear  and  the  chin  and  the  nose  who 

are  lacking  in  lore. 

XVII 

If  we  fall  in  the  race,  though  we  win,  the  hoof-slide  is  scarred 

on  the  course. 
Though  Allah  and  Earth  pardon  Sin,  remaineth  forever 

Remorse. 

xvin 
"By  all  lam  misunderstood!"  if  the  Matron  shall  say,  or 

the  Maid:— 
"Alas!  I  do  not   understand,"  my  son,  be  thou  nowise 

afraid. 
In  vain  in  the  sight  of  the  Bird  is  the  net  of  the  Fowler 

displayed.  .    :' 

XIX 

My  Son,  if  I,  Hafiz,  thy  father,  take  hold  of  thy  knees  in 

>-:'    my  pain. 

Demanding  thy  name  on  stamped  paper,  one  day  or  one 

houF— refrain. 
Are  the  links  of  thy  fetters  so  light  that  thou  cravest  an- 
,      othef  rnan's  chain? 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 


Epigrams  191 5 


A   BAKER'S  DUZZEN  UV  WIZE  SAWZ 

Them  ez  wants,  must  choose. 
Them  ez  hez,  must  lose. 
Them  ez  knows,  won't  blab. 
Them  ez  guesses,  will  gab. 
Them  ez  borrows,  sorrows. 
Them  ez  lends,  spends. 
Them  ez  gives,  lives. 
Them  ez  keeps  dark,  is  deep. 
Them  ez  kin  earn,  kin  keep. 
Them  ez  aims,  hits. 
Them  ez  hez,  gits. 
Them  ez  waits,  win. 
Them  ez  will,  kin. 

Edward  Rowland  Sill  [i  841-1887] 

EPIGRAMS 

What  is  an  epigram?  a  dwarfish  whole, 
Its  body  brevity,  and  wit  its  soul. 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [17  7  2-1 834] 


As  in  smooth  oil  the  razor  best  is  whet, 
So  wit  is  by  politeness  sharpest  set; 
Their  want  of  edge  from  their  offence  is  seen, 
Both  pain  the  heart  when  exquisitely  keen. 

Unknown 

"I  HARDLY  ever  ope  my  lips,"  one  cries; 

"Simonides,  what  think  you  of  my  rule?" 
"If  you're  a  fool,  I  think  you're  very  wise; 

If  you  are  wise,  I  think  you  are  a  fool." 

Richard  Garnctt  [i83S-igo6] 


Philosopher,  whom  dost  thou  most  affect, 
Stoics  austere,  or  Epicurus'  sect? 
Friend,  'tis  my  grave  infrangible  design 
With  those  to  study,  and  with  these  to  dine. 

,  Richard  Garnett  [  1 83 5- 1 go6] 


19 1 6  The   Barb  of  Satire 

Joy  is  the  blossom,  sorrow  is  the  fruit, 
Of  human  life;  and  worms  are  at  the  root. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 


No  truer  word,  save  God's,  was  ever  spoken, 
Than  that  the  largest  heart  is  soonest  broken. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [i 775-1864] 


This  house,  where  once  a  lawyer  dwelt. 

Is  now  a  smith's.     Alas! 
How  rapidly  the  iron  age 

Succeeds  the  age  of  brass! 

William  Erskine  [i 769-1822] 

"I  WOULD,"  says  Fox,  "a  tax  devise 

That  shall  not  fall  on  me." 
"Then  tax  receipts,"  Lord  North  replies, 

"For  those  you  never  see." 

Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan  [1751-1816] 


You  beat  your  pate,  and  fancy  wit  will  come. 
Knock  as  you  please, — there's  nobody  at  home. 

i'Xi  }'-;r)a  Alexander  Pope  [1688-1744] 


If  a  man  who  turnips  cries 
Cry  not  when  his  father  dies, 
'Tis  a  proof  that  he  would  rather 
Have  a  turnip  than  a  father. 

Samuel  Johnson  [i 709-1 784] 


Life  is  a  jest,  and  all  thing's  show  it; 
I  said  so  once,  and  now  I  know  it. 

John  Gay  [1685-1732] 


I  AM  his  Highness'  dog  at  Kew. 

Prav,  sir,  tell  me,— whose  dog  are  you? 

Alexander  Pope  [i 688-1 744] 


Epigrams  191 7 

Sir,  I  admit  your  general  rule, 
That  every  poet  is  a  fool. 
But  you  yourself  may  serve  to  show  it, 
That  every  fool  is  not  a  poet. 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [i 772-1834] 


Damis,  an  author  cold  and  weak, 
Thinks  as  a  critic  he's  divane; 

Likely  enough;  we  often  make 
Good  vinegar  of  sorry  wine. 

Unkno'iim 

Swans  sing  before  they  die — 'twere  no  bad  thing 
Did  certain  persons  die  before  they  sing. 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [1772-1834] 


He  who  in  his  pocket  hath  no  money 
Should,  in  his  mouth,  be  never  without  honey. 

Unknown 

Nobles  and  heralds,  by  your  leave. 

Here  lies  what  once  was  Matthew  Prior, 

The  son  of  Adam  and  of  Eve; 

Can  Bourbon  or  Nassau  claim  higher? 

Matthew  Prior  [1664-17  21] 


Here  lie  I,  Martin  Elginbrodde; 
Hae  mercy  o'  my  soul,  Lord  God, 
As  I  wad  do  were  I  Lord  God, 
And  ye  were  Martin  Elginbrodde. 

George  Macdonald  [1824-1005] 


Who  killed  Kildare?    WTio  dared  Kildare  to  kill? 
Death  killed  Kildare — who  dare  kill  whom  he  will. 

JoiHitlian  Sv'ift  [1667-1745] 


With  death  doomed  to  grapple, 

Beneath  the  cold  slab  he 
Who  lied  in  the  chapel 

Now  lies  in  the  abbey. 

Byron' a  epitaph  for  Pitt 


19 1 8  The  Barb  of  Satire 

When  doctrines  meet  with  general  approbation, 
It  is  not  heresy,  but  reformation. 

David  Garrick  [1717-1770] 


Teeason  doth  never  prosper;  what's  the  reason? 
Why,  if  it  prosper,  none  dare  call  it  treason. 

John  Harington  [1561-1612] 


God  bless  the  King — I  mean  the  faith's  defender! 
God  bless  (no  harm  in  blessing!)  the  Pretender! 
But  who  pretender  is,  or  who  is  King — 
God  bless  us  all!— that's  quite  another  thing. 

John  Byrom  [1602-1763] 


'Tis  highly  rational,  we  can't  dispute. 

The  Love,  being  naked,  should  promote  a  suit: 

But  doth  not  oddity  to  him  attach 

Whose  fire's  so  oft  extinguished  by  a  match? 

Richard  Garnctt  [1835-1006] 


"Come,  come,"  said  Tom's  father,  "at  your  time  of  life, 
There's  no  longer  excuse  for  thus  playing  the  rake. — 

It  is  time  you  should  think,  boy,  of  taking  a  wife." — 
"Why,  so  it  is,  father, — whose  wife  shall  I  take?" 

Thomas  Moore  [1770-1852] 


When  Eve  upon  the  first  of  men 

The  apple  pressed  with  specious  cant, 

O,  what  a  thousand  pities  then 
That  Adam  was  not  Adam-ant! 

Thomas  Moore  [1770-1852] 


.Whilst  Adam,  slept.  Eve  from  his  side  arose: 
>  Strange !  his  first  sleep  should  be  his  last  rep>ose ! 

Unknown 

"What?  rise  again  with  all  one's  bones," 

Quoth  Giles,  "I  hope  you  fib: 
I  trusted,  when  I  went  to  Heaven, 

To  go  without  my  rib." 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [17 7 2-1 834] 


General   Summary  1919 

Here  lies  my  wife:  here  let  her  lie! 
Now  she's  at  rest,  and  so  am  I. 

John  Drydeii  [i  631-1700] 


After  such  years  of  dissension  and  strife, 
Some  wonder  that  Peter  should  weep  for  his  wife; 
But  his  tears  on  her  grave  are  nothing  surprising, — 
He's  laying  her  dust,  for  fear  of  its  rising. 

Thomas  Hood  [1709-1845] 

WRITTEN  ON  A  LOOKING-GLASS 

I  CHANGE,  and  so  do  women  too; 
But  I  reflect,  which  women  never  do. 

Unknown 

AN  EPITAPH 

A  LOVELY  young  lady  I  mourn  in  my  rhymes: 
She  was  pleasant,  good-natured,  and  civil  sometimes. 
Her  figure  was  good:  she  had  very  fine  eyes, 
And  her  talk  was  a  mixture  of  foolish  and  wise. 
Her  adorers  were  many,  and  one  of  them  said, 
"She  waltzed  rather  well!    It's  a  pity  she's  dead!" 

George  John  Cayley  [  ?  ] 

ON  A  HENPECKED   SQUIRE 

As  father  Adam  first  was  fooled 
(A  case  that's  still  too  common). 

Here  lies  a  man  a  woman  ruled. 
The  Devil  ruled  the  woman. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1706] 

GENERAL  SUMMARY 

We  are  very  slightly  changed 
From  the  semi-apes  who  ranged 

India's  prehistoric  clay; 
Whoso  drew  the  longest  bow, 
Ran  his  brother  down,  you  know, 

As  we  run  men  down  to-day. 


1920  The   Barb  of  Satire 

"Dowb,"  the  first  of  all  his  race, 
Met  the  Mammoth  face  to  face 

On  the  lake  or  in  the  cave, 
Stole  the  steadiest  canoe, 
Ate  the  quarry  others  slew, 

Died — and  took  the  finest  grave. 

When  they  scratched  the  reindeer-bone, 
Someone  made  the  sketch  his  own, 

Filched  it  from  the  artist — then, 
Even  in  those  earl}?^  days, 
Won  a  simple  Viceroy's  praise 

Through  the  toil  of  other  men. 

Ere  they  hewed  the  Sphinx's  visage, 
Favoritism  governed  kissage, 
Even  as  it  does  in  this  age. 

Who  shall  doubt  the  secret  hid 
Under  Cheops'  pyramid 
Was  that  the  contractor  did 

Cheops  out  of  several  millions? 
Or  that  Joseph's  sudden  rise 
To  Comptroller  of  Supplies 
Was  a  fraud  of  monstrous  size 

On  King  Pharaoh's  swart  Civilians? 

Thus,  the  artless  songs  I  sing 
Do  not  deal  with  anything 
New  or  never  said  before. 
;,:,)-  As  it  was  in  the  beginning. 

Is  to-day  official  sinning, 

And  shall  be  for  evermore. 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 


THE   MIMICS 

AN   OMAR  FOR  LADIES 

I 

One  for  her  Club  and  her  o^^'n  Latch-key  fights, 
Another  wastes  in  Study  her  good  Nights. 

Ah,  take  the  Clothes  and  let  the  Culture  go, 
Nor  heed  the  grumble  of  the  Women's  Rights! 

Look  at  the  Shop-girl  all  about  us — "Lo, 
The  Wages  of  a  month,"  she  says,  "I  blow 

Into  a  Hat,  and  when  my  hair  is  waved, 
Doubtless  my  Friend  will  take  me  to  the  Show." 

And  she  who  saved  her  coin  for  Flannels  red. 
And  she  who  caught  Pneumonia  instead. 

Will  both  be  Underground  in  Fifty  Years, 
And  Prudence  pays  no  Premium  to  the  dead. 

Th'  exclusive  Style  you  set  your  heart  upon 
Gets  to  the  Bargain  counters — and  anon. 
Like  monograms  on  a  Saleslady's  tie, 
Cheers  but  a  moment — soon  for  you  'tis  gone. 

Tliink,  in  the  sad  Four  Hundred's  gilded  halls, 
Whose  endless  Leisure  ev'n  themselves  appalls. 

How  Ping-pong  raged  so  high — then  faded  out 
To  those  far  Suburbs  that  still  chase  its  Balls. 

They  say  Sixth  Avenue  and  the  Bowery  keep 
The  dernier  cri  that  once  was  far  from  cheap; 

Green  veils,  one  season  chic — De[^artnient  stores 
Mark  down  in  vain — no  profit  shall  they  reap. 
1921 


1922  The   Mimics 


I  sometimes  think  that  never  lasts  so  long 
The  Style  as  when  it  starts  a  bit  too  strong; 

That  all  the  Pompadours  the  parterre  boasts 
Some  Chorus-girl  began,  with  Dance  and  Song. 

And  this  Revival  of  the  Chignon  low 

That  fills  the  most  of  us  with  helpless  Woe, 

Ah,  criticise  it  Softly!  for  who  knows 
What  long-necked  Peeress  had  to  wear  it  so! 

Ah,  my  beloved,  try  each  Style  you  meet; 
To-day  brooks  no  loose  ends,  you  must  be  neat. 

Tomorrow!  why  tomorrow  you  may  be 
Wearing  it  down  your  back  like  Marguerite! 

For  some  we  once  admired,  the  Very  Best 
That  ever  a  French  hand-boned  Corset  prest, 

Wore  what  they  used  to  call  Prunella  Boots, 
And  put  on  Nightcaps  ere  they  went  to  rest. 

And  we  that  now  make  fun  of  Waterfalls 
They  wore,  and  whom  their  Crinoline  appalls, 

Ourselves  shall  from  old  dusty  Fashion  plates 
Assist  our  Children  in  their  Costume  balls. 

Ah,  make  the  most  of  what  we  yet  may  wear. 
Before  we  grow  so  old  that  we  don't  care! 

Before  we  have  our  Hats  made  all  alike, 
Sans  Plumes,  sans  Wings,  sans  Chiffon,  and — sans  Hair! 


Alike  to  her  who  Dines  both  Loud  and  Long, 
Or  her  who  Banting  shuns  the  Dinner-gong, 

Some  Doctor  from  his  Office  chair  will  shout, 
"It  makes  no  Difference — both  of  you  are  Wrong!" 

Why,  all  the  Health-Reformers  who  discussed 
High  Heels  and  Corsets  learnedly  are  thrust 

Square-toed    and    Waistless    forth;    their    Duds    are 
scorned, 
And  Venus  might  as  well  have  been  a  Bust. 


Fragment  in  Imitation  of  Wordsworth     1923 

Myself  Avhen  slim  did  eagerly  frequent 
Delsarlc  and  Ling,  and  heard  great  Argument 

Of  muscles  trained  to  Hold  me  up,  but  still 
Spent  on  my  Modiste  what  I'd  always  spent! 

With  walking  Clubs  I  did  the  best  I  could; 

With  my  own  Feet  I  tramped  my  Ten  Miles,  good; 

And  this  was  All  that  I  got  out  of  it — 
I  ate  much  more  for  Dinner  than  I  should. 


And  fear  not  lest  your  Rheumatism  seize 
The  Joy  of  Life  from  other  people's  Sprees; 

The  Art  W'ill  not  have  Perished — an  coiitraire, 
Posterity  will  practise  it  with  Ease! 

When  you  and  I  have  ceased  Champagne  to  Sup, 
Be  sure  there  will  be  IMore  to  Keep  it  Up; 

And  while  we  pat  Old  Tabby  b}'  the  fire, 
Full  many  a  Girl  will  lead  her  Brindled  Pup. 

Josephine  Daskam  Bacon  [1876- 

"WHEN  LOVELY  WOMAN" 

AFTER   GOLDSMITH 

When  lovely  woman  wants  a  favor. 

And  finds,  too  late,  that  man  won't  bend, 

What  earthly  circumstance  can  save  her 
From  disappointment  in  the  end? 

The  only  way  to  bring  him  over, 

The  last  experiment  to  try. 
Whether  a  husband  or  a  lover. 

If  he.  have  feeling  is — to  cry. 

Phoebe  Cary  [1824-1871] 

FRAGMENT  IN  IMITATION  OF  WORDSWORTH 

There  is  a  river  clear  and  fair^ 
'Tis  neither  broad  nor  narrow ; 
It  winds  a  little  here  and  there- 
It  wiiids  about  like  any  hare; 


1^24  The   Mimics 


And  then  it  holds  as  straight  a  course  /M 
As,  on  the  turnpike  road,  a  horse,  MjiusiaQ 
Or,  through  the  air,  an  arrow.  *  1C» 

The  trees  that  grow  upon  the  shore 
Have  grown  a  hundred  years  or  more;        ,7 
So  long  there  is  no  knowing:  •  // 

Old  Daniel  Dobson  does  not  know 
When  first  those  trees  began  to  grow ; 
But  still  they  grew,  and  grew,  and  grew, 
As  if  they'd  riothing  else  to  do, 
But  ever  must  be  growing. 

The  impulses  of  air  and  sky 

Have  reared  their  stately  heads  so  high, 

And  clothed  their  boughs  with  green; 

Their  leaves  the  dews  of  evening  quaff^T-  ,, 

And  when  the  wind  blows  loud  and  keen, 

I've  seen  the  jolly  timbers  laugh, 

And  shake  their  sides  with  merry  glee — 

Wagging  their  heads  in  mockery. 

Fixed  are  their  feet  in  solid  earth 

Where  winds  can  never  blow; 

But  visitings  of  deeper  birth 

Have  reached  their  roots  below. 

For  they  have  gained  the  river's  brink 

And  of  the  living  waters  drink. 

There's  little  Will,  a  five  years'  child — 

He  is  my  youngest  boy; 

To  look  on  eyes  so  fair  and  wild, 

It  is  a  very  joy. 

He  hath  conversed  with  sun  and  shower. 

And  dwelt  with  every  idle  flower, 

As  fresh  and  gay  as  them. 

He  loiters  with  the  briar-rose,— 

The  blue-bells  are  his  playfellows. 

That  dance  upon  their  slender  stem. 

And  I  have  said,  my  little  Will, 
Why  should  he  not  continue  still 


Only   Seven  19^5 

A  thing  of  Nature's  rearing? 

A  thing  beyond  the  world's  control — 

A  living  vegetable  soul, — 

No  human  sorrow  fearing. 

It  were  a  blessed  sight  to  see 
That  child  become  a  willow-tree, 
His  brother  trees  among. 
He'd  be  four  times  as  tall  as  me, 
And  live  three  times  as  long. 

Catherine  M.  Fanshawc  [1765-1834] 


ONLY  SEVEN 

AFTER    WORDSWORTH 

I  MARVELLED  why  a  simple  child, 
That  lightly  draws  its  breath, 

Should  utter  groans  so  very  wild, 
And  look  as  pale  as  death. 

Adopting  a  parental  tone, 

I  asked  her  why  she  cried; 
The  damsel  answered  with  a  groan, 

"I've  got  a  pain  inside! 

"I  thought  it  would  have  sent  me  mad 

Last  night  about  eleven." 
Said  I,  "What  is  it  makes  you  bad? 
How  many  apples  have  you  had?" 

She  answered,  "Only  seven!" 

"And  are  you  sure  you  took  no  more. 

My  little  maid?"  quoth  I; 
"Oh,  please,  sir,  mother  gave  me  four, 

But  they  were  in  a  pie!" 

"If  that's  the  case,"  I  stammered  out, 
"Of  course  you've  had  eleven." 

The  maiden  answered  with  a  pout, 
"I  ain't  had  more  nor  seven!" 


1926  The   Mimics 

I  wondered  hugely  what  she  meant, 
And  said,  "I'm  bad  at  riddles; 

But  I  know  where  little  girls  are  sent 
For  telling  taradiddles. 

"Now,  if  you  don't  reform,"  said  I,  '■ 
"You'll  never  go  to  heaven." 

But  all  in  vain;  each  time  I  try, 

That  little  idiot  makes  reply, 
"I  ain't  had  more  nor  seven!" 

postscript: 

To  borrow  Wordsworth's  name  was  wrong, 

Or  slightly  misapplied; 
And  so  I'd  better  call  my  song 

"Lines  after  Ache-inside." 

Henry  Samhrooke  Leigh  [1837-1S 


LUCY  LAKE 

AFTER   WORDSWORTH      . 

■^flliqobA 

Poor  Lucy  Lake  was  overgrotirnj 
But  somewhat  underbrained. 

She  did  not  know  enough,  I  own, 
To  go  in  when  it  rained. 

Yet  Lucy  was  constrained  to  go; 

Green  bedding, — ^you  infer. 
Few  people  knew  she  died,  but  oh, 

The  difference  to  her! 

Navlon  Mackintosh  [1S58- 

JANE   SMITH 

AFTER   WORDSWORTH 

I  JOURNEYED,  on  a  winter's  day, '  " 

Across  the  lonely  wold; 
No  bird  did  sing  upon  the  spray,  ' 

And  it  was  very  cold. 


Father  William  1927 

I  had  a  coach  with  horses  four,  '-     /fn  .  ' 

Three  white  (though  one  was  black) , 

And  on  they  went  the  common  o'er,  ' 

Nor  swiftness  did  they  lack. 

A  little  girl  ran  by  my  side, 

And  she  was  pinched  and  thin. 
"Oh,  please,  sir,  do  give  me  a  ride! 

I'm  fetching  mother's  gin." 

"Enter  my  coach,  sweet  child,"  said  I, 

"For  you  shall  ride  with  me; 
And  I  will  get  you  your  supply 

Of  mother's  eau-de-vie." 

The  publican  was  stern  and  cold. 

And  said:  "Her  mother's  score 
Is  writ,  as  you  shall  soon  behold, 

Behind  the  bar-room  door!  ' 

I  blotted  out  the  score  with  tears, 

And  paid  the  money  down; 
And  took  the  maid  of  thirteen  years 

Back  to  her  mother's  town. 

And  though  the  past  with  surges  wild 

Fond  memories  may  sever, 
The  vision  of  that  happy  child 

Will  leave  my  spirits  never! 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 


FATHER  WILLIAM 

From  "  Alice  in  Wonderland  "^ 
AFTER   SOUTHEY 

"You  are  old.  Father  William,"  the  young  man  said, 
"And  your  hair  has  become  very  white; 

And  yet  you  incessantly  stand  on  your  head — 
Do  you  think,  at  your  age,  it  is  right?" 


1928  The   Mimics 

"In  my  youth,"  Father  William  replied  to  his  son, 

"I  feared  it  might  injure  the  brain; 
But,  now  that  I'm  perfectly  sure  I  have  none, 

Why,  I  do  it  again  and  again." 

"You  are  old,"  said  the  youth,  "as  I  mentioned  before, 

And  have  grown  most  uncommonly  fat; 
Yet  you  turned  a  back-somersault  in  at  the  door — 

Pray,  what  is  the  reason  of  that?" 

"In  my  youth,"  said  the  sage,  as  he  shook  his  gray  locks, 
"I  kept  all  my  limbs  very  supple 

By  the  use  of  this  ointment — one  shilling  the  box- 
Allow  me  to  sell  you  a  couple?" 

"You  are  old,"  said  the  youth,  "and  your  jaws  are  too  weak 

For  anything  tougher  than  suet; 
Yet  you  finished  the  goose,  with  the  bones  and  the  beak — 

Pray,  hov/  did  you  manage  to  do  it?" 

"In  my  youth,"  said  his  father,  "I  took  to  the  law, 

And  argued  each  case  with  my  wife; 
And  the  muscular  strength  which  it  gave  to  my  jaw. 

Has  lasted  the  rest  of  my  life." 

"You  are  old,"  said  the  youth,  "one  would  hardly  suppose 

That  your  eye  was  as  steady  as  ever; 
Yet  you  balanced  an  eel  on  the  end  of  your  nose — 

What  made  you  so  awfully  clever?" 

"I  have  answered  three  questions  and  that  is  enough," 

Said  his  father;  "don't  give  yourself  airs! 
Do  you  think  I  can  listen  all  day  to  such  stuff? 

Be  off,  or  I'll  kick  you  downstairs!" 

Lewis  Carroll  [183  2- 1898] 

THE  NEW  ARRIVAL 

AFTER   CAMPBELL 

There  came  to  port  last  Sunday  night 

The  queerest  little  craft, 
Without  an  inch  of  rigging  on; 

I  looked  and  looked — and  laughed ! 


Disaster  19^9 

It  seemed  so  curious  that  she 

Should  cross  the  Unknown  water, 
And  moor  herself  within  my  room — 

My  daughter!  O,  my  daughter! 

Yet  by  these  presents  witness  all 

She's  welcome  fifty  times, 
And  comes  consigned  in  hope  and  love — 

And  common-metre  rhymes. 
She  has  no  manifest  but  this; 

No  flag  floats  o'er  the  water; 
She's  too  new  for  the  British  Lloyds — 

My  daughter!  O,  my  daughter! 

Ring  out,  wild  bells —  and  tame  ones  too; 

Ring  out  the  lover's  moon. 
Ring  in  the  little  worsted  socks. 

Ring  in  the  bib  and  spoon. 
Ring  out  the  muse,  ring  in  the  nurse. 

Ring  in  the  milk  and  water. 
Away  with  paper,  pen,  and  ink — 

My  daughter!  O,  my  daughter! 

George  Washington  Cable  [1844- 

DISASTER 

AFTER   MOORE 

'TwAS  ever  thuS  from  childhood's  hour 

My  fondest  hopes  would  not  decay: 
I  never  loved  a  tree  or  flower 

Which  was  the  first  to  fade  away! 
The  garden,  where  I  used  to  delve 

Short-f rocked,  still  yields  me  pinks  in  plenty; 
The  pear-tree  that  I  climbed  at  twelve, 

I  see  still  blossoming,  at  twenty. 

I  never  nursed  a  dear  gazelle. 

But  I  was  given  a  paroquet — 
How  I  did  nurse  him  if  unwell! 

He's  imbecile,  but  lingers  yet. 


1930  The  Mimics 

He's  green,  with  an  enchanting  tuft; 

He  melts  me  with  his  small  black  eye: 
He'd  look  inimitable  stuffed,  ,,,1/. 

And  knows  it — but  he  will  not  die!        /' 

I  had  a  kitten — I  was  rich 

In  pets — but  all  too  soon  my  kitten 
Became  a  full-sized  cat,  by  which 

I've  more  than  once  been  scratched  and  bitten; 
And  when  for  sleep  her  limbs  she  curled 

One  day  beside  her  untouched  plateful. 
And  glided  calmly  from  the  world, 

I  freely  own  that  I  was  grateful. 

And  then  I  bought  a  dog — a  queen! 

Ah,  Tiny,  dear  departing  pug! 
She  lives,  but  she  is  past  sixteen. 

And  scarce  can  crawl  across  the  rug. 
I  loved  her  beautiful  and  kind ; 

Delighted  in  her  pert  Bow-wow: 
But  now  she  snaps  if  you  don't  mind; 

'Twere  lunacy  to  love  her  now. 

I  used  to  think,  shculd  e'er  mishap 

Betide  my  crumple-visagcd  Ti, 
In  shape  of  prowling  thief,  or  trap. 

Or  coarse  bull-terrier — I  should  die. 
But  ah!  disasters  have  their  use; 

And  life  might  e'en  be  too  ^nshiny: 
Nor  would  I  make  myself  a  goose, 

If  some  big  dog  should  swallow  Tiny. 

Charles  Stiiarl  Calvcrley  [1831-18J 


'TWAS  EVER  THUS 

AFTER   MOORE 

I  NEVER  reared  a  young  gazelle, 
(Because,  you  see,  I  never  tried) ; 

But  had  it  known  and  loved  me  well, 
No  doubt  the  creature  would  have  died. 


A   Grievance  iQ^i 

My  rich  and  aged  Uncle  John 

Has  known  me  long  and  loves  me  well 

But  still  persists  in  living  on — 

I  would  he  were  a  young  gazelle.  'O) 

I  never  loved  a  tree  or  flower; 

But,  if  1  had,  1  beg  to  say  i 

The  blight,  the  wind,  the  sun,  or  shower  "  '^ 

Would  soon  have  withered  it  away. 
I've  dearly  loved  my  Uncle  John, 

From  childhood  to  the  present  hour, 
And  yet  he  will  go  living  on — 

I  would  he  were  a  tree  or  flower! 

Henry  Sanibrooke  Leigh  [183  7-1 883] 


A   GRIEVANCE 

AFTER   BYRON 

Dear  Mr.  Editor:  I  wish  to  say — 

If  you  will  not  be  angry  at  my  writing  it — 

But  I've  been  used,  since  childhood's  happy  day, 
When  I  have  thought  of  something,  to  inditing  it; 

I  seldom  think  of  things;  and,  by  the  way, 
Although  this  meter  may  not  be  exciting,  it 

Enables  one  to  be  extremely  terse. 

Which  is  not  what  one  ah\'ays  is  in  verse. 

I  used  to  know  a  man, — such  things  befall 

The  observant  wayfarer  through  Fate's  domain — 

He  was  a  man,  take  him.  for  all  in  all. 
We  shall  not  look  upon  his  like  again; 

I  know  that  statem.ent's  not  original; 

What  statement  is,  since  Shakespeare?  or,  since  Cain; 

What  murder?    I  believe  'twas  Shakespeare  said  it,  or 

Perhaps  it  may  have  been  your  Fighting  Editor. 

Though  why  an  Editor  should  light,  or  why 

A  Fighter  should  abase  himself  to  edit, 
Are  problems  far  too  difficult  and  high 

For  me  to  solve  with  any  sort  of  credit. 


1932  The   Mimics 

Some  greatly  more  accomplislied  man  than  I    '  ^ 

Must  tackle  them:  let's  say  then  Shakespeare  said  it; 
And,  if  he  did  not,  Lewis  Morris  may 
(Or  even  if  he  did).     Some  other  day, 

When  I  have  nothing  pressing  to  impart, 
I  should  not  mind  dilating  on  this  matter. 

I  feel  its  import  both  in  head  and  heart. 
And  always  did, — especially  the  latter. 

I  could  discuss  it  in  the  busy  mart 

Or  on  the  lonely  housetop;  hold!  this  chatter 

Diverts  me  from  my  purpose.     To  the  pointjn/ 

The  time,  as  Hamlet  said,  is  out  of  joint, 

And  perhaps  I  was  born  to  set  it  right, — 
A  fact  I  greet  with  perfect  equanimity. 

I  do  not  put  it  down  to  "cursed  spite," 
I  don't  see  any  cause  for  cursing  in  it.     I 

Have  always  taken  very  great  delight 

In  such  pursuits  since  first  I  read  divinity. 

Whoever  will  may  write  a  nation's  songs 

As  long  as  I'm  allowed  to  right  its  wrongs. 

What's  Eton  but  a  nursery  of  wrong-righters, 

A  mighty  mother  of  effective  men; 
A  training  ground  for  amateur  reciters, 

A  sharpener  of  the  sword  as  of  the  pen; 
A  factory  of  orators  and  fighters, 

A  forcing-house  of  genius?     Now  and  then 
The  world  at  large  shrinks  back,  abashed  and  beaten, 
Unable  to  endure  the  glare  of  Eton. 

I  think  I  said  I  knew  a  man:  what  then? 

I  don't  suppose  such  knowledge  is  forbid. 
We  nearly  all  do,  more  or  less,  know  men, — • 

Or  think  we  do;  nor  will  a  man  get  rid 
Of  that  delusion  while  he  wields  a  pen. 

But  who  this  man  was,  what,  if  aught,  he  did, 
Nor  why  I  mentioned  him,  I  do  not  know, 
Nor  what  I  "wished  to  say"  a  while  ago. 

J ames  Kenneth  Stephen  [1859-1892] 


"Not  a  Sou    Had   He   Got"       1933 
"NOT  A   SOU  HAD   HE   GOT" 

AFTER   CHARLES   WOLFE 

Not  a  sou  had  he  got — not  a  guinea  or  note — 

And  he  looked  confoundedly  flurried, 
As  he  bolted  awa}^  without  paying  his  shot, 

And  the  landlady  after  him  hurried. 

We  saw  him  again  at  dead  of  night. 

When  home  from  the  club  returning; 
We  twigged  the  doctor  beneath  the  light 

Of  the  gas-lamp  brilliantly  burning. 

All  bare  and  exposed  to  the  midnight  dews, 

Reclined  in  a  gutter  we  found  him ; 
And  he  looked  like  a  gentleman  taking  a  snooze 

With  his  Marshall  cloak  around  him. 

"The  doctor's  as  drunk  as  the  devil,"  we  said, 
,^  And  we  managed  a  shutter  to  borrow; 
We  raised  him;  and  sighed  at  the  thought  that  his  head 
Would  consumedly  ache  on  the  morrow. 

We  bore  him  home,  and  we  put  him  to  bed. 
And  we  told  his  wife  and  his  daughter 

To  give  him  next  morning  a  couple  of  red- 
Herrings,  with  soda-water. 

Loudly  they  talked  of  his  money  that's  gone, 

And  his  lady  began  to  upbraid  him; 
But  little  he  recked,  so  they  let  him  snore  on 

'Neath  the  counterpane,  just  as  we  laid  him. 

We  tucked  him  in,  and  had  hardly  done, 

When,  beneath  the  window  calling, 
We  heard  the  rough  voice  of  a  son  of  a  gun 

Of  a  watchman  "One  o'clock!"  bawling. 

Slowly  and  sadly  we  all  walked  down  / 

From  his  room  on  the  uppermost  story; 
A  rushlight  we  placed  on  the  cold  hearth-stone, 

And  we  left  him  alone  in  his  glory. 

Richard  Harris  Barham  [1788-1845] 


1934  The   Mimics 


THE  WHITING  AND  THE  SNAIL 

From  "Alice  in  Wonderland" 
AFTER   MARY  HOWITT 

"  Will  you  walk  a  little  faster?"  said  a  whiting  to  a  snail, 
"There's  a  porpoise  close  behind  us,  and  he's  treading  on  my 

tail. 
See  how  eagerly  the  lobsters  and  the  turtles  all  advance! 
They  are  waiting  on  the  shingle — will  you  come  and  join 

the  dance?  ""  """^ 

Will  you,  won't  you,  will  you,  won't  you,  will  you  join 

the  dance? 
Will  you,  won't  you,  will  you,  won't  you,  won't  you  join 

the  dance?  ,,,  ,,  ,i . 

"You  can  really  have  no  notion  how  delightful  it  will  be 
When  they  take  us  up  and  throw  us,  with  the  lobsters,  out 

to  sea!" 
But  the  snail  replied,  "Too  far,  too  far!"  and  gave  a  look 

askance — 
Said  he  thanked  the  whiting  kindly,  but  he  would  not  join 

the  dance. 
Would  not,  could  not,  would  not,  could  not,  would  not 

join  the  dance. 
Would  not,  could  not,  would  not,  could  not,  could  not 

join  the  dance. 

"What  matters  it  how  far  we  go?"  his  scaly  friend  re- 
plied. 
"There  is  another  shore,  you  know,  upon  the  other  side. 
The  further  off  from  England  the  nearer  is  to  France — 
Then  turn  not  pale,  beloved  snail,  but  come  an,d  jc^jn  the 
dance. 
Will  you,  won't  you,  will  you,  won't  you,  \vill  ybu  j6in 

the  dance? 
Will  you,  won't  you,  will  you,  won't  you,  won't  you  join 

the  dance?" 
:?ifti-88^ij  V  Lewis  Carroll  [iSs2-iSq8] 


The   Higher  Pantheism  in  a  Nutshell     1935 
THE  RECOGNITION 

AFTER   TENNYSON 

Home  they  brought  her  sailor  son, 

Grown  a  man  across  the  sea, 
Tall  and  broad  and  black  of  beard. 

And  hoarse  of  voice  as  man  may  be. 

Hand  to  shake  and  mouth  to  kiss, 

Both  he  offered  ere  he  spoke; 
But  she  said,  "What  man  is  this 

Comes  to  play  a  sorry  joke?"  ' 

Then  they  praised  him, — called  him  "smart," 

"Tightest  lad  that  ever  stept;" 
But  her  son  she  did  not  know, 

And  she  neither  smiled  nor  wept. 

Rose,  a  nurse  of  ninety  years, 

Set  a  pigeon-pie  in  sight;  1 

She  saw  him  eat: — "  'Tis  he!  'tis  he!" 

She  knew  him — by  his  appetite!  1 

Frederick  William  Sawyer  [1810-1875] 

,....qd 
THE  HIGHER   PANTHEISM   IN  A  NUTSHELL 

AFTER   TENNYSON 

■  ,boO 
One,  who  is  not,  we  see:  but  one,  whom  we  see  not,  isjjbbi^ 
Surely  this  is  not  that :  but  that  is  assuredly  this. 

What,  and  wherefore,  and  whence?  for  under  is  over  and 

under;  :I  :THT 

If  thunder  could  be  without  lightning,  lightning  could  be 

without  thunder. 

Doubt  is  faith  in  the  main  :  but  faith,  on  the  whole,  is  doubt; 
We  cannot  believe  by  proof:  but  could  we  believe  without? 


1936  The  Mimics 

Why,  and  whither,  and  how?  for  barley  and  rye  are  not 

clover; 
Neither  are  straight  lines  curves:  yet  over  is  under  and 
over. 

Two  and  two  may  be  four:  but  four  and  four  are  not  eight; 
Fate  and  God  may  be  twain:  but  God  is  the  same  thing  as 
fate. 

Ask  a  man  what  he  thinks,  and  get  from  a  man  what  he 

feels; 
God,  once  caught  in  the  fact,  shows  you  a  fair  pair  of  heels. 

Body  and  spirit  are  twins:  God  only  knows  which  is  which; 
The  soul  squats  down  in  the  flesh,  like  a  tinker  drunk  in  a 
ditch. 

One  and  two  are  not  one:  but  one  and  nothing  is  two; 
Truth  can  hardly  be  false,  if  falsehood  cannot  be  true. 

Once   the   mastodon  was:   pterodactyls   were   common  as 

cocks; 
Then  the  mammoth  was  God;  now  is  He  a  prize  ox. 

Parallels  all  things  are:  yet  many  of  these  are  askew. 
You  are  certainly  I:  but  certainly  I  am  not  you. 

Springs  the  rock  from  the  plain,  shoots  the  stream  from  the 

rock; 
Cocks  exist  for  the  hen:  but  hens  exist  for  the  cock. 

God,  whom  we  see  not,  is:  and  God,  who  is  not,  we  see; 
Fiddle,  we  know,  is  diddle:  and  diddle,  we  take  it,  is  dee. 
Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-190Q] 


THE  WILLOW-TREE 

AFTER  HOOD 


^RrfWl 


Long  by  the  willow-trees 
Vainly  they  sought  her, 
iij(jif.ij7.         'W^ild  rang  the  mother's  screams 


The  Willow-Tree  1937 

O'er  the  gray  water: 
"Where  is  my  lovely  one? 
Where  is  my  daughter? 

"Rouse  thee,  Sir  Constable — 

Rouse  thee  and  look; 
Fisherman,  bring  your  net, 

Boatman,  your  hook. 
Beat  in  the  lily-beds, 

Dive  in  the  brook!" 

Vainly  the  constable 

Shouted  and  called  her; 
Vainly  the  fisherman 

Beat  the  green  alder; 
Vainly  he  flung  the  net, 

Never  it  hauled  her! 

Mother  beside  the  fire 

Sat,  her  nightcap  in; 
Father,  in  easy  chair, 

Gloomily  napping. 
When  at  the  window-sill 

Came  a  light  tapping! 

And  a  pale  countenance 

Looked  through  the  casement. 
Loud  beat  the  mother's  heart, 

Sick  with  amazement. 
And  at  the  vision  which 

Came  to  surprise  her. 
Shrieked  in  an  agony — 

"Lor"!  it's  Elizar!" 

Yes,  'twas  Elizabeth- 
Yes,  'twas  their  girl; 

Pale  was  her  cheek,  and  her 
Hair  out  of  curl. 

"Mother,"  the  loving  one, 
Blushing  exclaimed, 

"Let  not  your  innocent 
Lizzy  be  blamed. 


1938  The   Mimics 

"Yesterday,  going  to  Aunt 

Jones's  to  tea, 
Mother,  dear  mother,  I 

Forgot  the  door-key! 
And  as  the  night  was  cold 

And  the  way  steep, 
Mrs.  Jones  kept  me  to 

Breakfast  and  sleep." 

Whether  her  Pa  and  Ma 

Fully  believed  her. 
That  we  shall  never  know, 

Stern  they  received  her; 
And  for  the  work  of  that 

Cruel,  though  short,  night 
Sent  her  to  bed  without 

Tea  for  a  fortnight. 

MORAL 

Hey  diddle  diddlety. 

Cat  and  the  fiddlety. 
Maidens  of  England,  take  caution  by  she! 

Let  love  and  suicide 

Never  tempt  you  aside, 
And  always  remember  to  take  the  door-key. 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 

POETS    AND    LINNETS 

AFTER    ROBERT    BROWNING 

Where'er  there's  a  thistle  to  feed  a  linnet 
And  linnets  are  plenty,  thistles  rife — 
Or  an  acorn-cup  to  catch  dew-drops  in  it 
There's  ample  promise  of  further  life. 
Now,  mark  hovv^  we  begin  it. 

For  linnets  will  follow,  if  linnets  are  minded, 
As  blows  the  white-feather  parachute; 
And  ships  will  reel  by  the  tempest  blinded — 
Aye,  ships  and  shiploads  of  men  to  boot! 
How  deep  whole  fleets  you'll  find  hid. 


Ballad 


^939 


And  we  blow  the  thistle-dov/n  hither  and  thither 

Forgetful  of  Unnets,  and  men,  and  God. 

The  dew!  for  its  want  an  oak  will  wither — 

By  the  dull  hoof  into  the  dust  is  trod,  ^'^'^  srfT 

And  then  who  strikes  the  cither? 

But  thistles  were  only  for  donkeys  intended. 

And  that  donkeys  are  common  enough  is  clear, 

And  that  drop!  what  a  vessel  it  migfft  have  befriended, 

Does  it  add  any  flavor  to  Glugabib's  beer? 

Well,  there's  my  musing  ended.        Tom  Hood  [1835-1874] 

THE  JAM-POT 
The  Jam-pot — tender  thought! 

I  grabbed  it — so  did  you. 
"What  wonder  while  we  fought  'i 

Together  that  it  flew 
In  shivers?"  you  retort. 

You  should  have  loosed  your  hold 
One  moment— checked  your  fist. 

But,  as  it  was,  too  bold 

You  grappled  and  you  missed. 

More  plainly— you  were  sold. 

"Well,  neither  of  us  shared 
k.  The  dainty."     That  your  plea? 
"Well,  neither  of  us  cared," 

I  answer.  .  .  .     "Let  me  see. 
How  have  your  trousers  fared?" 

Rud yard  Kipling  [1865- 

BALLAD 

ATTER   WILLIAM   MORRIS 
PART   I 

The  auld  wife  sat  at  her  ivied  door, 
{Butter  and  eggs  and  a  pound  of  cheese) 

A  thing  she  had  frequently  done  before; 

And  her  spectacles  lay  on  her  aproned  knees. 

The  piper  he  piped  on  the  hiU-top  high, 
(Butter  and  eggs  and  a  pound  of  cheese) 


1940  The   Mimics 

Till  the  cow  said  "I  die,"  and  the  goose  asked  "Why?" 
And  the  dog  said  nothing,  but  searched  for  fleas,     ui 

The  farmer  he  strode  through  the  square  farmyard ; 

{Butter  and  eggs  and  a  pound  of  cheese) 
His  last  brew  of  ale  was  a  trifle  hard— 

The  connection  of  which  with  the  plot  one  sees.       '  J 

The  farmer's  dauglker  hath  frank  blue  eyes; 

{Butter  and  eggs  and  a  pound  of  cheese)  i j 

She  hears  the  rooks  caw  in  the  windy  skies,        ,  ,    j^f 
As  she  sits  at  her  lattice  and  shells  her  peas. 

The  farmer's  daughter  hath  ripe  red  lips; 

{Butter  and  eggs  and  a  pound  of  cheese) 
If  you  try  to  approach  her,  away  she  skips 

Over  tables  and  chairs  with  apparent  ease. 

The  farmer's  daughter  hath  soft  brown  hair; 

{Butter  and  eggs  and  a  pound  of  cheese) 
And  I  met  with  a  ballad,  I  can't  say  where. 

Which  wholly  consisted  of  lines  like  these. 

lART  II 

She  sat,  with  her  hands  'neath  her  dimpled  cheeks, 

{Butter  and  eggs  and  a  pound  of  cheese) 
And  spake  not  a  word.    While  a  lady  speaks 

There  is  hope,  but  she  didn't  even  sneeze. 

She  sat,  with  her  hands  'neath  her  crimson  cheeks, 

{Butter  and  eggs  and  a  pound  of  cheese) 
She  gave  up  mending  her  father's  breeks. 

And  let  the  cat  roil  in  her  new  chemise. 

She  sat,  with  her  hands  'neath  her  burning  cheeks, 

{Butter  and  eggs  and  a  pound  of  cheese) 
And  gazed  at  the  piper  for  thirteen  weeks; 

Then  she  followed  him  out  o'er  the  misty  leas. 

Her  sheep  followed  her,  as  their  tails  did  them. 

{Butter  and  eggs  and  a  pound  of  cheese) 
And  this  song  is  considered  a  perfect  gem, 

And  as  to  the  meaning,  it's  what  you  please. 

Cliana  i>tiiart  Calvertty  I1S31-1884J 


The   Poster-Girl  1941 


THE  POSTER-GIRL 

AFTER  DANTE  GABRIEL  ROSSETTI 

The  blessed  Poster-girl  leaned  out 
From  a  pinky -purple  heaven; 

One  eye  was  red  and  one  was  green; 
Her  bang  was  cut  uneven; 

She  had  three  fingers  on  her  hand, 

And  the  hairs  on  her  head  were  seven. 

Her  robe,  ungirt  from  clasp  to  hem, 

No  sunflowers  did  adorn, 
But  a  heavy  Turkish  portiere 

Was  very  neatly  worn; 
And  the  hat  that  lay  along  her  back 

Was  yellow  like  canned  corn. 

It  was  a  kind  of  wobbly  wave 

That  she  was  standing  on, 
And  high  aloft  she  flung  a  scarf 

That  must  have  weighed  a  ton; 
And  she  was  rather  tall — at  least 

She  reached  up  to  the  sun. 

She  curved  and  writhed,  and  then  she  said, 
Less  green  of  speech  than  blue: 

"  Perhaps  I  am  absurd — perhaps 
I  don't  appeal  to  you; 

But  my  artistic  worth  depends 
Upon  the  point  of  view." 

I  saw  her  smile,  although  her  eyes 

Were  only  smudgy  smears; 
And  then  she  swished  her  swirling  arms, 

And  wagged  her  gorgeous  ears. 
She  sobbed  a  bluc-and-green-checked  sob. 

And  wept  some  purple  tears. 

Carolyn  Wells  [i86  - 


194^  The   Mimics 


AFTER   DILETTANTE    CONCETTI 

AFTER   DANTE    GABRIEL   ROSSETTI 

"Why  do  you  wear  your  hair  like  a  man, 

Sister  Helen? 
This  week  is  the  third  since  you  began." 
"I'm  writing  a  ballad;  be  still  if  you  can, 

Little  brother. 
(0  Mother  Carey,  mother! 
What  chickens  are  these  between  sea  and  heaven?)^' 

"But  why  does  your  figure  appear  so  lean, 

Sister  Helen? 
And  why  do  you  dress  in  sage,  sage  green?" 
"  Children  should  never  be  heard,  if  seen. 

Little  brother! 
(0  Mother  Carey,  mother! 
What  fowls  are  a-iving  in  tlic  stormy  heaven!) " 

"But  why  is  your  face  so  yellowy  white, 

Sister  Helen? 
And  why  are  your  skirts  so  funnily  tight?" 
"Be  quiet,  you  torment,  or  how  can  I  write, 

Little  brother? 
(0  Mother  Carey,  mother! 
How  gathers  thy  train  to  the  sea  from  tlic  heaven!)" 

"And  who's  Mother  Carey,  and  what  is  her  train, 

Sister  Helen? 
And  why  do  you  call  her  again  and  again?" 
"You  troublesome  boy,  why  that's  the  refrain, 

Little  brother. 
(0  Mother  Carey,  mother! 
What  work  is  toward  in  the  startled  heaven?)" 

"And  what's  a  refrain?     What  a  curious  word, 

Sister  Helen! 
Is  the  ballad  you're  writing  about  a  sea-bird?" 
"Not  at  all;  why  should  it  be?    Don't  be  absurd, 


After   Dilettante   Concetti  ^943 

Little  brother. 
(O  Mother  Carey,  mother! 
Thy  brood  flies  lower  as  lowers  the  heaven.)'^ 

{A  big  brother  speakcth:) 

"The  refram  you've  studied  a  meaning  had, 

Sister  Helen! 
It  gave  strange  force  to  a  weird  ballad. 
But  refrains  have  become  a  ridiculous  'fad', 

Little  brother. 
And  Mother  Carey,  another, 
Has  a  bearing  on  nothing  in  earth  or  heaven. 

"But  the  finical  fashion  has  had  its  day, 

Sister  Helen. 
And  let's  try  in  the  style  of  a  different  lay 
To  bid  it  adieu  in  poetical  way, 

Little  brother. 
So,  Mother  Carey,  mother! 
Collect  your  chickens  and  go  to — heaven." 

{A  pause.     Then  the  big  brother  singcth,  accompanying  him- 
self in  a  plaintive  wise  on  the  triangle:) 

"Look  in  my  face.     My  name  is  Uscd-to-was, 
I  am  also  called  Played-out  and  Donc-to-death, 
And  It-will-wash-no-morc.     Awakenelh 

Slowly,  but  sure  awakening  it  has, 

The  common-sense  of  man;  and  I,  alas! 

The  ballad-burden  trick,  now  known  too  well. 
Am  turned  to  scorn,  and  grown  contemptible — 

A  too  transparent  artifice  to  pass. 

"What  a  cheap  dodge  I  am!     The  cats  who  dart 
Tin-kettled  through  the  streets  in  wild  surprise 
Assail  judicious  ears  not  otherwise; 
And  yet  no  critics  praise  the  urchin's  'art'. 
Who  to  the  wretched  creature's  caudal  part 
Its  foolish  empty-jingling  'burden'  ties." 

Henry  Ditjf  Traill  [1842-1900] 


1944  '^^^   Mimics 


IF 

AFTER   SWINBURNE 

If  life  were  never  bitter, 

And  love  were  always  sweet, 
Then  who  would  care  to  borrow 
A  moral  from  to-morrow — 
If  Thames  would  always  glitter, 

And  joy  would  ne'er  retreat, 
If  life  were  never  bitter, 

And  love  were  always  sweet! 

If  care  were  not  the  waiter 

Behind  a  fellow's  chair. 
When  easy-going  sinners 
Sit  down  to  Richmond  dinners, 
And  life's  swift  stream  flows  straighter, 

By  Jove,  it  would  be  rare. 
If  care  were  not  the  waiter 

Behind  a  fellow's  chair. 

If  wit  were  always  radiant. 

And  wine  were  always  iced. 
And  bores  were  kicked  out  straightway 
Through  a  convenient  gateway; 
Then  down  the  year's  long  gradient 

'Twere  sad  to  be  enticed, 
If  wit  were  always  radiant. 

And  wine  were  always  iced. 

Mortimer  Collins  [182 7- 1876] 


NEPHELIDIA 

AFTER    SWINBURNE 

From  the  depth  of  the  dreamy  decline  of  the  dawn  through 
a  notable  nimbus  of  nebulous  noonshine, 
Pallid  and  pink  as  the  palm  of  the  flag-flower  that  flickers 
with  fear  of  the  flies  as  they  float. 


Nephelidia  I945 

Are  the  looks  of  our  lovers  that  lustrously  lean  from  a  mar- 
vel of  mystic,  miraculous  moonshine, 

•n^_These  that  we  feel  in  the  blood  of  our  blushes  that  thicken 
and  threaten  with  throbs  through  the  throat? 

Thicken  and  thrill  as  a  theatre  thronged  at  appeal  of  an 
actor's  appalled  agitation, 
Fainter  with  fear  of  the  fires  of  the  future  than  pale  with 
the  promise  of  pride  in  the  past; 

Flushetl  with  the  famishing  fulness  of  fever  that  reddens 
with  radiance  of  rathe  recreation, 
Gaunt  as  the  ghastliest  of  glimpses  that  gleam  through 
the  gloom  of  the  gloaming  when  ghosts  go  aghast? 

Nay,  for  the  nick  of  the  tick  of  the  time  is  a  tremulous 
touch  on  the  temples  of  terror, 
Strained  as  the  sinews  yet  strenuous  with  strife  of  the 
dead  who  is  dumb  as  the  dust -heaps  of  death; 
Surely  no  soul  is  it,  sweet  as  the  spasm  of  erotic,  emotional, 
exquisite  error. 
Bathed  in  the  balms  of  beatified  bliss,  beatific  itself  by 
beatitude's  breath. 
Surely  no  spirit  or  sense  of  a  soul  that  was  soft  to  the  spirit 
and  soul  of  our  senses 
Sweetens  the  stress  of  suspiring  suspicion  that  sobs  in 
the  semblance  and  sound  of  a  sigh; 
Only  this  oracle  opens  Olympian  in  mystical  moods  and 
triangular  tenses, — 
"Life  is  the  lust  of  a  lamp  for  the  light  that  is  dark  till 
the  dawn  of  the  day  when  we  die." 

]Mild  is  the  mirk  and  monotonous  music  of  memory,  melo- 
diously mute  as  it  may  be, 
\Vhile  the  hope  in  the  heart  of  a  hero  is  bruised  by  the 
breach  of  men's  rapiers,  resigned  to  the  rod; 
IMade  meek  as  a  mother  whose  bosom-beats  bound  with 
the  bliss-bringing  bulk  of  a  balm-breathing  baby, 
As  they  grope  through  the  graveyard  of  creeds  under 
skies  growing  green  at  a  groan  for  the  grimness  of 
God. 


1946  The   Mimics 

Blank  is  the  book  of  his  bounty  beholden  of  old,  and  its 
binding  is  blacker  than  bluer: 
Out  of  blue  into  black  is  the  scheme  of  the  skies,  and  their 
dews  are  the  wine  of  the  blood-shed  of  things; 
Till  the  darkling  desire  of  dehght  shall  be  free  as  a  fawn 
that  is  freed  from  the  fangs  that  pursue  her, 
Till  the  heart-beats  of  hell  shall  be  hushed  by  a  hymn 
from  the  hunt  that  has  harried  the  kennel  of  kings. 
Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [18^7-11/^9] 

COMMONPLACES 

AFTER   HEINE 

Rain  on  the  face  of  the  sea. 

Rain  on  the  sodden  land, 
And  the  window-pane  is  blurred  with  rain 

As  I  watch  it,  pen  in  hand. 

Mist  on  the  face  of  the  sea. 

Mist  on  the  sodden  land, 
Filling  the  vales  as  daylight  fails, 

And  blotting  the  desolate  sand. 

Voices  from  out  of  the  mist. 

Calling  to  one  another: 
"Hath  love  an  end,  thou  more  than  friend. 

Thou  dearer  than  ever  brother?" 

Voices  from  out  of  the  mist. 

Calling  and  passing  away; 
But  I  cannot  speak,  for  my  voice  is  weak. 

And.  .  .  .  this  is  the  end  of  my  lay. 

Rndyard  Kipling  [1865- 

THE   PROMISSORY  NOTE 

AFTER   POE 

In  the  lonesome  latter  years 

(Fatal  years!) 
To  the  dropping  of  my  tears 
Danced  the  mad  and  mystic  spheres 


The    Promissory   Note  ^947 

In  a  rounded,  reeling  rune, 
'Neath  the  moon. 
To  the  dripping  and  the  dropping  of  my  tears. 
Ah,  my  soul  is  swathed  in  gloom, 
(Ulalume!) 
In  a  dim  Titanic  tomb, 
For  my  gaunt  and  gloomy  soul 
Ponders  o'er  the  penal  scroll, 
O'er  the  parchment  (not  a  rhyme). 
Out  of  place, — out  of  time, — 
I  am  shredded,  shorn,  unshifty, 

(Oh,  the  fifty!) 
And  the  days  have  passed,  the  three, 
Over  me! 
And  the  debit  and  the  credit  are  as  one  to  him  and  me! 

'Twas  the  random  runes  I  wrote 
At  the  bottom  of  the  note, 

(Wrote  and  freely 

Gave  to  Greeley) 
In  the  middle  of  the  night, 
In  the  mellow,  moonless  night, 
When  the  stars  were  out  of  sight. 
When  my  pulses,  like  a  knell, 

(Israfel!) 
Danced  with  dim  and  dying  fays. 
O'er  the  ruins  of  my  days,  ' 

O'er  the  dimcless,  timeless  days, 
When  the  fifty,  drawn  at  thirty, 
Seeming  thrifty,  yet  the  dirty 
Lucre  of  the  market,  was  the  most  that  I  could  raise! 

Fiends  controlled  it, 
(Let  him  hold  it!) 
Devils  held  me  for  the  inkstand  and  the  pen; 
Now  the  days  of  grace  are  o'er, 

(Ah,  Lenore!) 
I  am  but  as  other  men; 
WTiat  is  time,  time,  time. 


1948  The   Mimics 

To  my  rare  and  runic  rhyme, 
To  my  random,  reeling  rhyme, 
By  the  sands  along  the  shore. 
Where  the  tempest  whispers,  "Pay  him!"  and  I  answer, 
"Nevermore!" 

Bayard  Taylor  [1825-1878] 


MRS.   JUDGE  JENKINS 

BEING   THE   ONLY   GENUINE    SEQUEL   TO    "mAUD   MULLER" 
AFTER    WHITTIER 

Maud  Muller  all  that  summer  day 
Raked  the  meadow  sweet  with  hay; 

Yet,  looking  down  the  distant  lane, 
She  hoped  the  Judge  would  come  again. 

But  when  he  came,  with  smile  and  bow, 

Maud  only  blushed,  and  stammered,  "Ha-ow?" 

And  spoke  of  her  "pa,"  and  wondered  whether 
He'd  give  consent  they  should  wed  together. 

Old  Muller  burst  in  tears,  and  then 

Begged  that  the  Judge  would  lend  him  "ten"; 

For  trade  was  dull  and  wages  low. 

And  the  "craps,"  this  year,  were  somewhat  slow. 

And  ere  the  languid  summer  died, 
Sweet  Maud  became  the  Judge's  bride. 

But  on  the  day  that  they  were  mated, 
Maud's  brother  Bob  was  intoxicated; 

And  Maud's  relations,  twelve  in  all, 
Were  very  drunk  at  the  Judge's  hall; 

And  when  the  summer  came  again, 
The  young  bride  bore  him  babies  twain; 


Mrs.   Judge  Jenkins  1949 

And  the  Judge  was  blest,  but  thought  it  strange 
That  bearing  children  made  such  a  change. 

For  Maud  grew  broad,  and  red,  and  stout, 
And  the  waist  that  his  arm  once  clasped  about 

Was  more  than  he  now  could  span;  and  he 
Sighed  as  he  pondered,  ruefully. 

How  that  which  in  Maud  was  native  grace 
In  Mrs.  Jenkins  was  out  of  place; 

And  thought  of  the  twins,  and  wished  that  they 
Looked  less  like  the  men  who  raked  the  hay 

On  Muller's  farm,  and  dreamed  with  pain 
Of  the  day  he  wandered  down  the  lane. 

And,  looking  down  that  dreary  track, 
He  half  regretted  that  he  came  back. 

For,  had  he  waited,  he  might  have  wed 
Some  maiden  fair  and  thoroughbred; 

For  there  be  women  as  fair  as  she, 
Whose  verbs  and  nouns  do  more  agree. 

Alas  for  maiden!  alas  for  judge! 

And  the  sentimental, — that's  one-half  "fudge"; 

For  Maud  soon  thought  the  Judge  a  bore, 
With  all  his  learning  and  all  his  lore; 

And  the  Judge  would  have  bartered  Maud's  fair  face 
For  more  refinement  and  social  grace. 

If,  of  all  words  of  tongue  and  pen. 
The  saddest  are,  "It  might  have  been," 

More  sad  are  these  we  daily  see: 
"It  is,  but  hadn't  ought  to  be." 

Bret  II arte  [183  9- 1902] 


95^  The   Mimics 

THE  MODERN  HIAWATHA 

From   "  The   Song  of  Milkanwatha  " 

He  killed  the  noble  JMudjokivis, 
With  the  skin  he  made  him  mittens, 
Made  them  with  the  fur  side  inside, 
Made  them  with  the  skin  side  outside, 
He,  to  get  the  wa.rm  side  inside. 
Put  the  inside  skin  side  outside: 
He,  to  get  the  cold  side  outside, 
Put  the  warm  side  fur  side  inside: 
That's  why  he  put  the  fur  side  inside, 
Why  he  put  the  skin  side  outside. 
Why  he  turned  them  inside  outside. 

George  A.  Strong  [1832-1012] 

HOW  OFTEN 

AFTER   LONGFELLOW 

They  stood  on  the  bridge  at  midnight, 
In  a  park  not  far  from  the  town; 

They  stood  on  the  bridge  at  midnight. 
Because  they  didn't  sit  down. 

The  moon  rose  o'er  the  city, 

Behind  the  dark  church  spire; 
The  moon-rose  o'er  the  city, 

And  kept  on  rising  higher. 

How  often,  oh!  how  often 

They  whispered  words  so  soft; 

How  often,  oh!  how  often. 
How  often,  oh!  how  oft. 

Ben  King  [1857-1894] 

"IF   I   SHOULD   DIE   TO-NIGHT" 

AFTER   MEYERS 

If  I  should  die  to-night 
And  you  should  come  to  my  cold  corpse  and  say, 
Weeping  and  heartsick  o'er  my  lifeless  clay — 

If  I  should  die  to-night, 


Culture  in   the   Slums  ^951 

And  you  should  come  in  deepest  grief  and  woe —  " 
And  say:  "Here's  that  ten  dollars  that  I  owe," 

I  might  arise  in  my  large  white  cravat 

And  say,  "What's  that?" 

If  I  should  die  to-night 

'      r,    'J 

And  you  should  come  to  my  cold  corpse  and  kneel. 
Clasping  my  bier  to  show  the  grief  you  feel, 

I  say,  if  I  should  die  to-night 
And  you  should  come  to  me,  and  there  and  then 
Just  even  hint  at  paying  me  that  ten, 

I  migh.t  arise  the  while, 

But  I'd  drop  dead  again. 

Ben  King  [1857-1804] 

SINCERE   FLATTERY 

OF  w.  w.  (aaiericanus) 

The  clear  cool  note  of  the  cuckoo  which  has  ousted  the 
legitimate  nest-holder, 

The  whistle  of  the  railway  guard  dispatching  the  train  to 
the  inevitable  collision, 

The  maiden's  monosyllabic  reply  to  a  polysyllabic  proposal, 

The  fundamental  note  of  the  last  trump,  which  is  presum- 
ably D  natural; 

All  of  these  are  sounds  to  rejoice  in,  yea,  to  let  your  very 
ribs  re-echo  with : 

But  better  than  all  of  them  is  the  absolutely  last  chord  of 
the  apparently  inexhaustible  pianoforte  player. 

James  Kenneth  Stephen  [1859-1802] 

CULTURE  IN  THE   SLUMS 

INSCRIBED   TO   AN   INTENSE   POET 
I.      RONDEAU 

"O  CRIKEY,  Bill!"  she  ses  to  me,  she  ses. 

"Look  sharp,"  ses  she,  "with  them  there  sossiges. 
Yea!  sharp  with  them  there  bags  of  mysteree! 
For  lo!"  she  ses,  "for  lo!  old  pal,"  ses  she, 

"I'm  blooming  peckish,  neither  more  nor  less." 


95^  The   Mimics 

Was  it  not  prime — I  leave  you  all  to  guess 
How  prime! — to  have  a  Jude  in  love's  distress 
Come  spooning  round,  and  murmuring  balmilee, 
"O  crikey,  Bni!" 

For  in  such  rorty  wise  doth  Love  express 

His  blooming  views,  and  asks  for  your  address. 

And  makes  it  right,  and  does  the  gay  and  free. 

I  kissed  her — I  did  so!     And  her  and  me 
Was  pals.     And  if  that  ain't  good  business, 
"0  crikey,  Bill!" 

n.      VILLANELLE 

Now  ain't  they  utterly  too-too 

(She  ses,  my  JVIissus  mine,  ses  she), 
Them  flymy  little  bits  of  Blue. 

Joe,  just  you  kool  'em — nice  and  skew 

Upon  our  old  meogginee, 
Now  ain't  they  utterly  too-too? 

They're  better  than  a  pot'n'  a  screw. 
They're  equal  to  a  Sunday  spree, 
Them  flymy  little  bits  of  Blue! 

Suppose  I  put  'em  up  the  flue. 

And  booze  the  profits,  Joe?     Not  me. 
Now  ain't  they  utterly  too-too? 

I  do  the  Tgh  Art  fake,  I  do. 

Joe,  I'm  consummate;  and  I  see 
Them  flymy  little  bits  of  Blue. 

Which,  Joe,  is  why  I  ses  ter  you — 

/Esthetic-like,  and  limp,  and  free — 
Now  ain't  they  utterly  too-too, 
Them  flymy  little  bits  of  Blue? 

William  Ernest  Henley  [1840-1903] 


The  Poets  at  Tea  ^953 

THE  POETS  AT  TEA 

I. — (macaulay) 

Pour,  varlet,  pour  the  water, 

The  water  steaming  hot! 
A  spoonful  for  each  man  of  us, 

Another  for  the  pot! 
We  shall  not  drink  from  amber, 

No  Capuan  slave  shall  mix 
For  us  the  snows  of  Athos 

With  port  at  thirty-six; 
Whiter  than  snow  the  crystals 

Grown  sweet  'neath  tropic  fires, 
More  rich  the  herb  of  China's  field, 
The  pasture-lands  more  fragrance  yield; 
Forever  let  Britannia  wield 

The  teapot  of  her  sires! 

II. — (tennyson) 

I  think  that  I  am  drawing  to  an  end: 
For  on  a  sudden  came  a  gasp  for  breath. 
And  stretching  of  the  hands,  and  blinded  eyes. 
And  a  great  darkness  falling  on  my  soul. 
O  Hallelujah!     .     .     .     Kindly  pass  the  milk. 

III. — (swinburne) 

As  the  sin  that  was  sweet  in  the  sinning 

Is  foul  in  the  ending  thereof, 
As  the  heat  of  the  summer's  beginning 

Is  past  in  the  winter  of  love: 
O  purity,  painful  and  pleading! 

O  coldness,  ineffably  gray! 
O  hear  us,  our  handmaid  unheeding. 

And  take  it  away! 


IV. — (cowper) 

The  cosy  fire  is  bright  and  gay, 
The  merry  kettle  boils  away 


1954  The   Mimics 

And  hums  a  cheerful  song. 
I  sing  the  saucer  and  the  cup; 
Pray,  Mary,  fill  the  teapot  up, 

And  do  not  make  it  strong. 


V. — (browning) 

Tut!     Bah!     We  take  as  another  case — - 

Pass  the  pills  on  the  window-sill;  notice  the  capsule 
(A  sick  man's  fancy,  no  doubt,  but  I  place 

Reliance  on  trade-marks.  Sir) — so  perhaps  you'll 
Excuse  the  digression — this  cup  which  I  hold 

Light-poised — Bah,  it's  spilt  in  the  bed! — well,  let's  on 
go- 
Hold  Bohea  and  sugar,  Sir;  if  you  were  told 

The  sugar  was  salt,  would  the  Bohca  be  Congo? 

VI. — (wordsworth) 

"Come,  little  cottage  girl,  you  seem 

To  want  my  cup  of  tea; 
And  will  you  take  a  little  cream? 

Now  tell  the  truth  to  me." 

She  had  a  rustic,  woodland  grin. 

Her  cheek  was  soft  as  silk. 
And  she  replied,  "Sir,  please  put  in 

A  little  drop  of  milk." 

"Why,  what  put  milk  into  your  head? 

'Tis  cream  my  cows  supply;" 
And  five  times  to  the  child  I  said, 

"Why,  pig-head,  tell  me,  why?" 

"You  call  me  pig-head,"  she  repHed; 

"My  proper  name  is  Ruth. 
I  called  that  milk" — she  blushed  with  pride — 

"You  bade  me  speak  the  truth." 


The  Poets  at  Tea  1955 

VII. — (poe) 

Here's  a  mellow  cup  of  tea — golden  tea! 
What  a  world  of  rapturous  thought  its  fragrance  brings  to 
me! 

Oh,  from  out  the  silver  cells 

How  it  wells! 

How  it  smells! 
Keeping  tune,  tunc,  tunc, 
To  the  tintinnabulation  of  the  spoon. 
And  the  kettle  on  the  lire 
Boils  its  spout  ofif  with  desire, 
With  a  desperate  desire 
And  a  crystalline  endeavor 
Now^,  now  to  sit,  or  never, 
On  the  top  of  the  pale-faced  moon, 
But  he  always  came  home  to  tea,  tea,  tea,  tea,  tea, 
Tea  to  the  n-ih. 


vni. — (rossetti) 

The  lilies  lie  in  my  lady's  bower, 
(O  weary  mother,  drive  the  cows  to  raost), 
They  faintly  droop  for  a  little  hour; 
My  lady's  head  droops  like  a  flower. 

She  took  the  porcelain  in  her  hand 
(O  weary  mother,  drive  the  cows  to  roost) ; 
She  poured;  I  drank  at  her  command; 
Drank  deep,  and  now — you  understand! 
(O  weary  mother,  drive  the  cows  to  roost). 

IX. — (burns) 

Wcel,  gin  ye  speir,  I'm  no  inclined, 
Whusky  or  tay — to  state  my  mind 

Fore  ane  or  ither; 
For,  gin  I  tak  the  hrst,  I'm  fou. 
And  gin  the  next,  I'm  dull  as  you: 

Mix  a'  thegither. 


1956  The   Mimics 

X. — (WALT   whitman) 

One  cup  for  my  self-hood, 

Many  for  you.    Allons,  camerados,  we  will  drink  together, 

O   hand-in-hand!     That   tea-spoon,   please,   when   you've 

done  with  it. 
What  butter-colored  hair  you've  got.     I  don't  want  to  be 

personal. 
All  right,  then,  you  needn't.    You're  a  stale-cadaver. 
Eighteen-pcncc  if  the  bottles  are  returned. 
Allons,  from  all  bat-eyed  formulas. 

Barry  Pain  [18    - 


WORDSWORTH 

Two  voices  are  there:  one  is  of  the  deep; 

It  learns  the  storm  cloud's  thunderous  melody. 

Now  roars,  now  murmurs  with  the  changing  sea, 

Now  birdlike  pipes,  now  closes  soft  in  sleep; 

And  one  is  of  an  old  half-witted  sheep 

Which  bleats  articulate  monotony, 

And  indicates  that  two  and  one  are  three. 

That  grass  is  green,  lakes  damp,  and  mountains  steep: 

And,  Wordsworth,  both  are  thine:  at  certain  tim'  s. 

Forth  from  the  heart  of  thy  melodious  rhymes 

The  form  and  pressure  of  high  thoughts  will  burst; 

At  other  times— good  Lord!  I'd  rather  be 

Quite  unacquainted  with  the  A,  B,  C, 

Than  write  such  hopeless  rubbish  as  thy  worst; 

James  Kenneth  Stephen  [1859-1892] 


SONS  OF  THE  EMERALD  ISLE 

FATHER  O'FLYNN 

Of  priests  we  can  offer  a  charmin'  variety, 
Fur  renowned  for  larnin'  and  piety; 
Still,  I'd  advance  ye  widout  impropriety, 
Father  O'Flynn  as  the  flower  of  them  all. 

Here's  a  health  to  you.  Father  O'Flynn, 
Sldinie,  and  sldinte,  and  sldinte  agin; 

Powerfulest  preacher,  and 

Tinderest  teacher,  and 
Kindliest  creature  in  ould  Donegal. 

Don't  talk  of  your  Provost  and  Fellows  of  Trinity, 
r'amous  forever  at  Greek  and  Latinity, 
Faix!  and  the  divels  and  all  at  Divinity — 
Father  O'Flynn  'd  make  hares  of  them  all! 
Come,  I  vinture  to  give  ye  my  word, 
Niver  the  likes  of  his  logic  was  heard, 
Down  from  mythology 
Into  thayology, 
Troth!  and  concholog>'  if  he'd  the  call. 

Och!  Father  O'Flynn,  you've  the  wonderful  way  wid  you, 
All  ould  sinners  are  wishful  to  pray  wid  you, 
All  the  young  childer  are  wild  for  to  play  wid  you. 
You've  such  a  way  wid  you,  Father  avick! 
Still,  for  all  you've  so  gentle  a  soul. 
Gad,  you've  your  flock  in  the  grandest  control, 
Checking  the  crazy  ones, 
Coaxin'  onaisy  ones, 
Liftin'  the  lazy  ones  on  wid  the  stick. 
I9S7 


1958  Sons  of  the   Emerald   Isle 

And,  though  quite  avoidin'  all  foolish  frivolity, 
Still,  at  all  seasons  of  innocent  jollity, 
Where  was  the  play-boy  could  claim  an  equality 
At  comicality,  Father,  wid  you? 

Once  the  Bishop  looked  grave  at  your  jest, 
Till  this  remark  set  him  off  wid  the  rest: 
"Is  it  lave  gaiety 
All  to  the  laity? 
Cannot  the  clargy  be  Irishmen  too?" 

Here's  a  health  to  you.  Father  O'Flynn, 
Sldinte,  and  sldinte,  and  sldinte  agin; 

Powerfulest  preacher,  and 

Tinderest  teacher^  and 
Kindliest  creature  in  ould  Donegal. 

Alfred  Perceval  Graves  [1846- 


FATHER  MOLLOY 

OR,    THE   CONFESSION 

j'noa 
Paddy  McCabe  was  dying  one  day,  -  .■^ 

And  Father  Molloy  he  came  to  confess  him; 
Paddy  prayed  hard  he  would  make  no  delay. 

But  forgive  him  his  sins  and  make  haste  for  to  bless  him. 
"First  tell  me  your  sins,"  says  Father  Molloy, 
"For  I'm  thinking  you've  not  been  a  very  good  boy." 
"Oh,"  says  Paddy,  "so  late  in  the  evenin',  I  fear 
'Twould  throulile  you  such  a  long  story  to  hear, 
For  you've  ten  long  miles  o'er  the  mountains  to  go, 
While  the  road  /  've  to  travel  's  much  longer  you  know. 
So  give  us  your  blessin'  and  get  in  the  saddle; 
To  tell  all  my  sins  my  poor  brain  it  would  addle; 
And  the  docther  gave  ordhers  to  keep  me  so  quiet —   . 
'Twould  disturb  me  to  tell  all  my  sins,  if  I'd  thry  it; 
And  your  Riverence  has  towld  us,  unless  we  tell  all, 
'Tis  worse  than  not  makin'  confession  at  all. 
So  I'll  say  in  a  word  I'm  no  very  good  boy — 
And,  therefore,  your  blessin',  sweet  Father  Molloy." 


Father  Molloy  i959 

"Well,  I'll  read  from  a  book,"  says  Father  Molloy, 

"The  manifold  sins  that  humanity's  heir  to; 
And  when  you  hear  those  that  your  conscience  annoy, 

You'll  just  squeeze  my  hand,  as  acknowledging  thereto." 
Then  the  father  began  the  dark  roll  of  iniquity, 
And  Paddy,  thereat,  felt  his  conscience  grow  rickety, 
And  he  gave  such  a  squeeze  that  the  priest  gave  a  roar — 
"Oh,  murdher!"  says  Paddy,  "don't  read  any  more. 
For,  if  you  keep  readin',  by  all  that  is  thrue. 
Your  Riverence's  fist  will  be  soon  black  and  blue; 
Besides,  to  be  throubled  my  conscience  begins. 
That  your  Riverencc  should  have  any  hand  in  my  sins; 
So  you'd  betther  suppose  I  committed  them  all, 
For  whether  they're  great  ones,  or  whether  they're  small,  i 
Or  if  they're  a  dozen,  or  if  they're  fourscore, 
'Tis  your  Riverence  knows  how  to  absolve  them,  astore;  '' 
So  I'll  say  in  a  word,  I'm  no  very  good  boy—  ) 

And,  therefore,  your  blessin',  sweet  Father  Molloy." 

"Well,"  says  Father  Molloy,  "if  your  sins  I  forgive, 

So  you  must  forgive  all  your  enemies  truly; 
And  promise  me  also  that,  if  you  should  live,  '-•'i  ii" 

You'll    leave    off    your   old    tricks,    and    begin    to   liVe 
newly." 
"I  forgive  ev'rybody,"  says  Pat,  with  a  groan, 
"Except  that  big  vagabone  Micky  Malone; 
And  him  I  will  murdher  if  ever  I  can — " 
"Tut,  tut!"  says  the  priest,  "you're  a  very  bad  man; 
For  without  your  forgiveness,  and  also  repentance. 
You'll  ne'er  go  to  Heaven,  and  that  is  my  sentence." 
"Poo!"  says  Paddy  McCabe,  "that's  a  very  hard  case— 
With  your  Riverence  and  Heaven  I'm  content  to  make 

pace; 
But  with  Heaven  and  your  Riverence  I  wondher — Och  lionc— 
You  would  think  of  comparin'  that  blackguard  Malone — 
But  since  I'm  hard  pressed  and  that  I  must  forgive, 
I  forgive — if  I  die — but  as  sure  as  I  live 
That  ugly  blackguard  I  will  surely  dcsthroy! — 
So,  now  for  your  blessin',  sweet  Father  Molloy." 

Samuel  Lover  [1797-1868) 


i960         Sons  of  the  Emerald   Isle 


PADDY  O'RAFTHER 

Paddy,  in  want  of  a  dinner  one  day, 
Credit  all  gone,  and  no  money  to  pay, 
Stole  from  a  priest  a  fat  pullet,  they  say,  '^^ 

And  went  to  confession  just  after;  -  -  '^'^^^^ 

"Your  riv'rince,"  says  Paddy,  "I  stole  this  fat  hen/*^  '•'"^ 
"What,  what!"  says  the  priest,  "at  your  ould  thricks  again? 
Faith,  you'd  rather  be  stalin'  than  sayin'  amen, 
Paddy  O'Rafther!" 

"Sure,  you  wouldn't  be  angry,"  says  Pat,  "if  you  knew 
That  the  best  of  intintions  I  had  in  my  view —  ^.^i 

For  I  stole  it  to  make  it  a  prisint  to  you,  >] 

And  you  can  absolve  me  afther." 
"Do  you  think,"  says  the  priest,  "I'd  partake  of  youf,  J-h^ff? 
Of  your  seven  small  senses  you  must  be  bereft —    .  [I'j  cR 
You're  the  biggest  blackguard  that  I  know,  right  and  left, 
Paddy  O'Rafther." 

"Then  what  shall  I  do  with  the  pullet,"  says  Pat, 
"If  your  riv'rince  won't  take  it?    By  this  and  by  that 
I  don't  know  no  more  than  a  dog  or  a  cat 

What  your  riv'rince  would  have  me  be  afther." 
"Why,  then,"  says  his  rev'rence,  "you  sin-blijided  owl, 
Give  back  to  the  man  that  you  stole  from  his  fowl:  , 

For  if  you  do  not,  'twill  be  worse  for  your  sowl, 

Paddy  O'Rafther."  ^    ,.  , 

Says  Paddy,  "I  asked  him  to  take  it— 'tis  thrue  '  ■'''"'  lo'^ 
As  this  minit  I'm  talkin',  your  riv'rince,  to  you;  '  "  i^oY 
But  he  wouldn't  resaive  it — so  what  can  I  do?" 

Says  Paddy,  nigh  choken  with  laughter. 
"By  my  throth,"  says  the  priest,  "but  the  case  is  absthruse, 
If  he  won't  take  his  hen,  why  the  man  is  a  goose: 
'Tis  not  the  first  time  my  advice  was  no  use, 
Paddy  O'Rafther. 

"But,  for  sake  of  your  sowl,  I  would  sthrongly  advise 
To  some  one  in  want  you  would  give  your  supplies — 
Some  widow,  or  orphan,  with  tears  in  their  eyes; 


Larrie  O'Dee  1961 

And  then  you  may  come  to  mc  afther." 
So  Paddy  went  off  to  the  brisk  Widow  Hoy, 
And  the  pullet  between  them  was  eaten  with  joy, 
And,  says  she,  "  'Pon  my  word,  you're  the  cleverest  boy, 
Paddy  O'Rafther!" 

Then  Paddy  went  back  to  the  priest  the  next  day, 
And  told  him  the  fowl  he  had  given  away 
To  a  poor  lonely  widow,  in  want  and  dismay, 
The  loss  of  her  spouse  weeping  afther. 
"Well,  now,"  says  the  priest,  "I'll  absolve  you,  my  lad,  ; 
For  repentantly  making  the  best  of  the  bad, 
In  feeding  the  hungry  and  cheering  the  sad, 
Paddy  O'Rafther!" 

Samuel  Lover  [i 797-1868]    / 


LARRIE  O'DEE 

Now  the  Widows  McGee, 

And  Larrie  O'Dee, 
Had  two  little  cottages  out  on  the  green, 
With  just  room  enough  for  two  pig-pens  between. 
The  widow  was  young  and  the  widow  was  fair. 
With  the  brightest  of  eyes  and  the  brownest  of  hair. 
And  it  frequently  chanced,  when  she  came  in  the  morn, 
With  the  swill  for  her  pig,  Larrie  came  with  the  corn, 
And  some  of  the  ears  that  he  tossed  from  his  hand 
In  the  pen  of  the  widow  were  certain  to  land. 

One  morning  said  he: 

"Och!  Misthress  McGec, 
It's  a  w-aste  of  good  lumber,  this  runnin'  two  rigs, 
\\'id  a  fancy  purtition  betwane  our  two  pigs!" 
"Indade,  sir,  it  is!"  answered  Widow  McGee, 
With  the  sweetest  of  smiles  upon  Larrie  O'Dee. 
"And  thin,  it  looks  kind  o'  hard-hearted  and  manejc/*  o'-h 
Kapin'  two  friendly  pigs  so  exsaidenly  near 
That  whiniver  one  grunts  the  other  can  hear, 
And  yit  kape  a  cruel  purtition  betwane.'' 


1962  Sons  of  the   Emerald    Isle 

"Schwate  Widow  McGee," 

Answered  Larrie  O'Dce, 
"If  ye  fale  in  your  heart  we  arc  mane  lo  the  pigs, 
Ain't  we  mane  to  ourselves  to  be  runnin'  two  rigs? 
Och!  it  made  me  heart  ache  when  I  paped  through  the 

cracks 
Of  mc  shanty,  lasht  March,  at  yez  swingin'  yer  axe; 
An'  a  bobbin'  yer  head  an  a-shtompin'  yer  fate, 
Wid  yer  purty  white  hands  jisht  as  red  as  a  bate, 
A-shplittin'  yer  kindlin'-wood  out  in  the  shtorm, 
When  one  Httle  shtove  it  would  kape  us  both  warm!" 

"Now,  piggy,"  says  she, 

"Larrie's  courtin'  o'  me, 
Wid  his  dilicate  tinder  allusions  to  you; 
So  now  ycz  must  tell  me  jisht  what  1  must  do: 
For,  if  I'm  to  say  yes,  shtir  the  swill  wid  yer  snout; 
But  if  I'm  to  say  no,  ye  must  kape  yer  nose  out. 
Now,  Larrie,  for  shame!  to  be  bribin'  a  pig 
By  tossin'  a  handful  of  corn  in  its  shwig!" 
"Me  darlint,  the  piggy  says  yes,"  answered  he. 
And  that  was  the  courtship  of  Larrie  O'Dee. 

Willi atn  W.  Fink  [18    - 


THE  IRISHMAN  AND   THE  LADY 

There  was  a  lady  lived  at  Leith, 

A  lady  very  stylish,  man; 
And  yet,  in  spite  of  all  her  teeth, 
She  fell  in  love  with  an  Irishman — 
A  nasty,  ugly  Irishman, 
A  wild,  tremendous  Irishman, 
A  tearing,  swearing,  thumping,  bumping,  ranting,  roaring 
Irishman. 

His  face  was  no  ways  beautiful. 

For  with  small-pox  'twas  scarred  across; 
And  the  shoulders  of  the  ugly  dog 

Were  almost  double  a  yard  across. 


The    Irishman   and   the   Lady        1963 

Oh,  the  lum[)  of  an  Irishman, 
The  whiskey-devouring  Irishman, 
The  great  he-rogue  with  his  wonderful  brogue — the  fighting, 
rioting  Irishman. 

One  of  his  eyes  was  bottle-green, 

And  the  other  eye  was  out,  my  dear; 
And  the  calves  of  his  wicked-looking  legs 
Were  more  than  two  feet  about,  my  dear. 
Oh,  the  great  big  Irishman, 
The  rattling,  battling  Irishman — 
The  stamping,  ramping,  swaggering,  staggering,  leathering 
swash  of  an  Irishman. 

He  took  so  much  of  Lundy-foot 

That  he  used  to  snort  and  snuffle — O! 
And  in  shape  and  size  the  fellow's  neck 
Was  as  bad  as  the  neck  of  a  buffalo. 
Oh,  the  horrible  Irishman, 
The  thundering,  blundering  Irishman — 
The  slashing,  dashing,  smashing,  lashing,  thrashing,  hash- 
ing Irishman. 

His  name  was  a  terrible  name,  indeed. 

Being  Timothy  Thady  Mulligan; 
And  whenever  he  emptied  his  tumbler  of  punch 
He'd  not  rest  till  he  filled  it  full  again. 
The  boozing,  bruising  Irishman, 
The  'toxicated  Irishman — 
The  whiskey,  frisky,  rummy,  gummy,  brandy,  no  dandy 
Irishman. 

This  was  the  lad  the  lady  loved. 

Like  all  the  girls  of  quality;  '  '^' 

And  he  broke  the  skulls  of  the  men  of  Leith, 
Just  by  the  way  of  jollity. 
Oh,  the  leathering  Irishman, 
The  barbarous,  savage  Irishman — 
The  hearts  of  the  maids,  and  the  gentlemen's  heads,  were 
bothered  I'm  sure  by  this  Irishman. 

.iirt  .nr.m  t        William  Maginn  [1793-1S42I 


1964  Sons  of  the   Emerald   Isle 


IRISH  ASTRONOMY 

a  veritable  myth,  touching  the  constellation  of 
O'Ryan,  ignorantly  and  falsely  spelled  Orion 

O'Ryan  was  a  man  of  might 

Whin  Ireland  was  a  nation, 
But  poachin'  was  his  heart's  delight 

And  constant  occupation. 
He  had  an  ould  militia  gun, 

And  sartin  sure  his  aim  was; 
He  gave  the  keepers  many  a  run 

And  wouldn't  mind  the  game  laws. 

St.  Pathrick  wanst  was  passin'  by 

O'Ryan's  little  houldin'. 
And,  as  the  saint  felt  wake  and  dhry, 

He  thought  he'd  enther  bould  in. 
"O'Ryan,"  says  the  saint,  "avick! 

To  praich  at  Thurles  I'm  goin', 
So  let  me  have  a  rasher  quick. 

And  a  dhrop  of  Innishowen." 

"No  rasher  will  I  cook  for  you. 

While  betther  is  to  spare,  sir. 
But  here's  a  jug  of  mountain  dew. 

And  there's  a  rattlin'  hare,  sir." 
St.  Pathrick  he  looked  mighty  sweet. 

And  says  he,  "  Good  luck  attind  you, 
And,  when  you're  in  your  windin'  sheet, 

It's  up  to  heaven  I'll  sind  you." 

O'Ryan  gave  his  pipe  a  whifif — 

"Them  tidin's  is  thransportin'; 
But  may  I  ax  your  saintship  if 

There's  any  kind  of  sportin'?" 
St.  Pathrick  said,  "A  Lion's  there, 

Two  Bears,  a  Bull,  and  Cancer" — 
"Bedad,"  says  Mick,  "the  huntin's  rare; 
i'-t^^i        St.  Pathrick,  I'm  your  man,  sir." 


The   Fiddler  of  Dooney  1965 

So,  to  conclude  my  song  aright, 

For  fear  I'd  tire  your  patience, 
You'll  see  O'Ryan  any  night 

Amid  the  constellations. 
And  Venus  follows  in  his  track, 

Till  Mars  grows  jealous  raally. 
But,  faith,  he  fears  the  Irish  knack  1 

Of  handling  the  shillaly. 

Charles  Graham  Ilalpine  [1829-1868] 


THE  FIDDLER  OF  DOONEY 

When  I  play  on  my  fiddle  in  Dooney, 
Folk  dance  like  a  wave  of  the  sea; 

My  cousin  is  priest  in  Kilvarnet, 
My  brother  in  Moharabuiee. 

I  passed  my  brother  and  cousin: 
They  read  in  their  books  of  prayer; 

I  read  in  my  book  of  songs 
I  bought  at  the  Sligo  fair. 

When  we  come  at  the  end  of  time. 

To  Peter  sitting  in  state, 
He  will  smile  on  the  three  old  spirits, 

But  call  me  first  through  the  gate; 

For  the  good  are  always  the  merry, 

Save  by  an  evil  chance, 
And  the  merry  love  the  fiddle, 

And  the  merry  love  to  dance: 

And  when  the  folk  there  spy  me. 

They  all  come  up  to  me. 
With  "Here  is  the  fiddler  of  Dooney!" 

And  dance  like  a  wave  of  the  sea. 

William  Butler  Veals  [1865- 


1966         Sons  of  the   Emerald  Isle 


THE  BIRTH  OF  ST.   PATRICK 

On  the  eighth  day  of  March  it  was,  some  people  say, 
That  Saint  Pathrick  at  midnight  he  first  saw  the  day; 
While  others  declare  'twas  the  ninth  he  was  born, 
And  'twas  all  a  mistake  between  midnight  and  morn; 
For  mistakes  will  occur  in  a  hurry  and  shock, 
And  some  blamed  the  babby — and  some  blamed  the  clock — - 
Till  with  all  their  cross-questions  sure  no  one  could  know 
If  the  child  was  too  fast,  or  the  clock  was  too  slow. 

Now  the  first  faction-fight  in  owld  Ireland,  they  say, 
Was  all  on  account  of  Saint  Pathrick's  birthday: 
Some  fought  for  the  eighth — for  the  ninth  more  would  die, 
And  who  wouldn't  see  right,  sure  they  blackened  his  eye! 
At  last,  both  the  factions  so  positive  grew, 
That  each  kept  a  birthday,  so  Pat  then  had  two. 
Till  Father  Mulcahy,  who  showed  them  their  sins, 
Said,  "No  one  could  have  two  birthdays,  but  a  twins." 

Says  he,  "Boys,  don't  be  fightin'  for  eight  or  for  nine. 
Don't  be  always  dividin' — but  sometimes  combine; 
Combine  eight  with  nine,  and  seventeen  is  the  mark, 
So  let  that  be  his  birthday." — "Amen,"  says  the  clerk. 
"If  he  wasn't  a  twins,  sure  our  hist'ry  will  show 
That,  at  least,  he's  worth  any  two  saints  that  we  know!" 
Then  they  all  got  blind  dhrunk — which  complated  their 

bliss. 
And  we  keep  up  the  practice  from  that  day  to  this. 

Samuel  Lover  [1707-1864] 

SAINT  PATRICK 

St.  Patrick  was  a  gentleman, 

Who  came  of  decent  people; 
He  built  a  church  in  Dublin  town. 

And  on  it  put  a  steeple. 
His  father  was  a  Gallagher; 

His  mother  was  a  Brady; 
His  aunt  was  an  O'Shaughnessy, 

His  uncle  an  O'Grady. 


Saint    Patrick  1967 

So,  success  attend  St.  Patrick's  fist, 

For  he's  a  saint  so  clever; 
Oh!  he  gave  the  snakes  and  toads  a  twist, 

And  bothered  them  forever! 

The  Wicklow  hills  are  very  high, 

And  so's  the  Hill  of  Howth,  sir; 
But  there's  a  hill,  much  bigger  still. 

Much  higher  nor  them  both,  sir: 
'Twas  on  the  top  of  this  high  hill 

St.  Patrick  preached  his  sarmint 
That  drove  the  frogs  into  the  bogs. 

And  banished  all  the  varmint. 

There's  not  a  mile  in  Ireland's  isle 

Where  dirty  varmin  musters. 
But  where  he  put  his  dear  fore-foot. 

And  murdered  them  in  clusters. 
The  toads  went  pop,  the  frogs  went  hop. 

Slap-dash  into  the  water; 
And  the  snakes  committed  suicide 

To  save  themselves  from  slaughter. 

Nine  hundred  thousand  reptiles  blue 

He  charmed  with  sweet  discourses, 
And  dined  on  them  at  Killaloe 

In  soups  and  second  courses. 
Where  blind-worms  crawling  in  the  grass 

Disgusted  all  the  nation, 
He'gave  them  a  rise,  which  opened  their  eyes 

To  a  sense  of  their  situation. 

No  wonder  that  those  Irish  lads 

Should  be  so  gay  and  frisky, 
For  sure  St.  Pat  he  taught  them  that. 

As  well  as  making  whiskey; 
No  wonder  that  the  saint  himself 

Should  understand  distilling, ' 
Since  his  mother  kept  a  shebeen-shop 

In  the  town  of  Enniskillen. 


1968  Sons  of  the  Emerald   Isle 

O,  was  I  but  so  fortunate 

As  to  be  back  in  Munster, 
'Tis  I'd  be  bound  that  from  that  ground 

I  never  more  would  once  stir. 
For  there  St.  Patrick  planted  turf, 

And  plenty  of  the  praties, 
With  pigs  galore,  ma  gra,  ma  'store, 
And  cabbages — and  ladies! 

So,  success  attend  St.  Patrick's  fist. 

For  he's  a  saint  so  clever; 
O,  he  gave  the  snakes  and  toads  a  twist 
And  bothered  them  forever! 

Henry  BcnncU  [1785-   ?  ] 

MR.   MOLONY'S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BALL 

GIVEN    TO    THE    NEPAULESE     AMBASSADOR    BY    THE    PENIN- 
SULAR   AND    ORIENTAL    COMPANY 

O  WILL  ye  choose  to  hear  the  news? 

Bedad,  I  cannot  pass  it  o'er: 
I'll  tell  you  all  about  the  Ball 

To  the  Naypaulase  Ambassador. 
Begor!  this  fete  all  balls  does  bate,  • 

At  which  I've  worn  a  pump,  and  I 
Must  here  relate  the  splendthor  great 

Of  th'  Oriental  Company. 

These  men  of  sinse  dispoised  expinse. 

To  fete  these  black  Achilleses. 
"We'll  show  the  blacks,"  says  they,  "Almack's, 

And  take  the  rooms  at  Willis's." 
With  flags  and  shawls,  for  these  Nepauls, 

They  hung  the  rooms  of  Willis  up. 
And  decked  the  walls,  and  stairs,  and  halls 

With  roses  and  with  lilies  up. 

And  Jullien's  band  it  tuck  its  stand 

So  sweetly  in  the  middle  there. 
And  soft  bassoons  played  heavenly  chunes, 

And  violins  did  fiddle  there. 


Mr.    Molony's   Account  of  the   Ball     1969 

And  when  the  Coort  was  tired  of  spoort, 
I'd  lave  you,  boys,  to  think  therie  was 

A  nate  buffet  before  them  set, 

Where  lashins  of  good  dhrink  there  was! 

At  ten  before  the  ball-room  door, 

His  moighty  Excellency  was; 
He  smoiled  and  bowed  to  all  the  crowd, 

So  gorgeous  and  immense  he  was. 
His  dusky  shuit,  sublime  and  mute, 

Into  the  doorway  followed  him; 
And  O  the  noise  of  the  blackguard  boys, 

As  they  hurrood  and  hollowed  him! 

The  noble  Chair  stud  at  the  stair, 

And  bade  the  dthrums  to  thump;  and  he 
Did  thus  evince,  to  that  Black  Prince, 

The  welcome  of  his  Company. 
O  fair  the  girls,  and  rich  the  curls, 

And  bright  the  oys,  you  saw  there,  was; 
And  fixed  each  oye  ye  there  could  spoi. 

On  Gineral  Jung  Bahawther  was ! 

This  Gineral  great  then  tuck  his  sate, 

With  all  the  other  ginerals, 
(Bedad,  his  troat,  his  belt,  his  coat. 

All  bleezed  with  precious  minerals) ; 
And  as  he  there,  with  princely  air, 

Recloinin  on  his  cushion  was. 
All  round  about  his  royal  chair, 

The  squeezin  and  the  pushin  was. 

O  Pat,  such  girls,  such  Jukes  and  Earls, 

Such  fashion  and  nobihtee! 
Just  think  of  Tim,  and  fancy  him 

Amidst  the  hoigh  gentility! 
There  was  Lord  De  L'Huys,  and  the  Portygeese 

Ministher  and  his  lady  there. 
And  I  reckonized,  with  much  surprise, 

Our  messmate.  Bob  O'Grady,  there; 


1970  Sons  of  the   Emerald  Isle 

There  was  Baroness  Brunow,  that  looked  Uke  Juno, 

And  Baroness  Rehausen  there, 
And  Countess  Roullier,  that  looked  pecuHar 

Well,  in  her  robes  of  gauze  in  there. 
There  was  Lord  Crowhurst  (I  knew  him  first 

When  only  Mr.  Pips  he  was) , 
And  Mick  O'Toole,  the  great  big  fool, 

That  after  supper  tipsy  was. 

There  was  Lord  Fingall  and  his  ladies  all. 

And  Lords  Killeen  and  Dufferin, 
And  Paddy  Fife,  with  his  fat  wife, — 

I  wondther  how  he  could  stuff  her  in. 
There  was  Lord  Belfast,  that  by  me  passed. 

And  seemed  to  ask  how  should  /  go  there? 
And  the  Widow  Macrae,  and  Lord  A.  Hay, 

And  the  Marchioness  of  Sligo  there. 

Yes,  Jukes  and  Earls,  and  diamonds  and  pearls, 

And  pretty  girls,  was  spoorting  there; 
And  some  beside  (the  rogues !)  I  spied. 

Behind  the  windies,  coorting  there. 
O,  there's  one  I  know,  bedad,  would  show 

As  beautiful  as  any  there; 
And  I'd  like  to  hear  the  pipers  blow. 

And  shake  a  fut  with  Fanny  there! 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 


BACHELOR'S   HALL 

Bachelor's  Hall!  what  a  quare-lookin'  place  it  is! 

Kape  me  from  sich  all  the  days  of  me  life! 
Sure,  but  I  think  what  a  burnin'  disgrace  it  is, 

Niver  at  all  to  be  gettin'  a  wife. 

Say  the  old  bachelor,  gloomy  an'  sad  enough, 

Placin'  his  tay-kettle  over  the  fire; 
Soon  it  tips  over — Saint  Patrick!  he's  mad  enough, 

If  he  were  prisent,  to  fight  with  the  squire! 


The  Sabine   Farmer's  Serenade      1971 

Now,  like  a  pig  in  a  mortar-bed  wallowin', 
Say  the  old  bachelor  kneading  his  dough; 

Troth,  if  his  bread  he  could  ate  without  swallowin', 
How  it  would  favor  his  palate,  ye  know ! 

He  looks  for  the  platter — Grimalkin  is  scourin'  it! 

Sure,  at  a  baste  like  that,  swearin'  's  no  sin; 
His  dishcloth  is  missing;  the  pigs  are  devourin'  it — 

Thunder  and  turf!  what  a  pickle  he's  in! 

When  his  male's  over,  the  table's  left  sittin'  so; 

Dishes,  take  care  of  yourselves,  if  ye  can; 
Divil  a  drop  of  hot  water  will  visit  ye, — 

Och,  let  him  alone  for  a  baste  of  a  man! 

Pots,  dishes,  pans,  an'  such  grasy  commodities, 

Ashes  and  praty-skins,  kiver  the  floor; 
His  cupboard's  a  storehouse  of  comical  oddities, 

Sich  as  had  niver  been  neighbors  before. 

Late  in  the  night,  when  he  goes  to  bed  shiverin', 

Niver  a  bit  is  the  bed  made  at  all; 
He  crapes  like  a  terrapin  under  the  kiverin' ; — ■ 

Bad  luck  to  the  pictur  of  Bachelor's  Hall! 

John  Finley  [1796-1S66] 


THE  SABINE   FARMER'S   SERENADE 

'TwAS  on  a  windy  night, 

At  two  o'clock  in  the  morning. 
An  Irish  lad  so  tight, 

All  wind  and  weather  scorning. 
At  Judy  Callaghan's  door, 
Sitting  upon  the  pahngs. 
His  love-tale  he  did  pour, 

And  this  was  part  of  his  waiHngs: — 
Only  say 
Yoii'll  be  Mrs.  Brallaghan; 

Don't  say  nay, 
Charming  Judy  Callaghan. 


1972 


Sons  of  the   Emerald  Isle 

Oh!  list  to  what  I  say, 

Charms  you've  got  like  Venus; 
Own  your  love  you  may, 

There's  but  the  wall  between  us. 
You  lie  fast  asleep 

Snug  in  bed  and  snoring; 
Round  the  house  I  creep. 

Your  hard  heart  imploring. 

I've  got  a  pig  and  a  sow, 

I've  got  a  sty  to  sleep  'em 
A  calf  and  a  brindled  cow, 

And  a  cabin  too,  to  keep  'em; 
Sunday  hat  and  coat, 

An  old  gray  mare  to  ride  on, 
Saddle  and  bridle  to  boot, 

Which  you  may  ride  astride  on. 

I've  got  an  acre  of  ground, 

I've  got  it  set  with  praties; 
I've  got  of  'baccy  a  pound, 

I've  got  some  tea  for  the  ladies; 
I've  got  the  ring  to  wed, 

Some  whiskey  to  make  us  gaily; 
I've  got  a  feather  bed 

And  a  handsome  new  shillelagh. 

You've  got  a  charming  eye. 

You've  got  some  spelling  and  reading 
You've  got,  and  so  have  I, 

A  taste  for  genteel  breeding; 
You're  rich,  and  fair,  and  young. 

As  everybody's  knowing; 
You've  got  a  decent  tongue 

Whene'er  'tis  set  a-going. 

For  a  wife  till  death 

I  am  wiUing  to  take  ye; 
But,  och!  I  waste  my  breath, 

The  devil  himself  can't  wake  ye. 


The  Widow   Malone  ''^^  i973 

'Tis  just  beginning  to  rain, 

So  I'll  get  under  cover; 
To-morrow  I'll  come  again, 

And  be  your  constant  lover. 

Only  say 
You'll  be  Mrs.  Brallaghan; 

Don't  say  nay, 
Charming  Judy  Callaghan. 

Francis  Sylvester  Mahony    [1804-1 866] 

THE  WIDOW   MALONE 

Did  ye  hear  of  the  Widow  Malone, 

Ohone! 
Who  lived  in  the  town  of  Athlone, 

Alone? 
Oh!  she  melted  the  hearts 
Of  the  swains  in  them  parts. 
So  lovely  the  Widow  Malone, 

Ohone! 
So  lovely  the  Widow  Malone. 

Of  lovers  she  had  a  full  score, 

Or  more; 

And  fortunes  they  all  had  galore, 

In  store; 

From  the  minister  down 

To  the  Clerk  of  the  Crown, 

All  were  courting  the  Widow  Malone, 

Ohone! 

All  were  courting  the  Widow  Malone. 

But  so  modest  was  Mistress  Malone, 

'Twas  known 
No  one  ever  could  see  her  alone, 

Ohone! 
Let  them  ogle  and  sigh, 
They  could  ne'er  catch  her  eye, 
So  bashful  the  Widow  Malone, 

Ohone! 
So  bashful  the  Widow  Malone. 


1974         Sons  of  the   Emerald   Isle 

Till  one  Mister  O'Brien  from  Clare, — • 

How  quare! 
It's  little  for  blushing  they  care 

Down  there — 
Put  his  arm  round  her  waist, 
Took  ten  kisses  at  laste — 
"Oh,"  says  he,  "you're  my  Molly  Malone, 

My  own ; — 
"Oh,"  says  he,  "you're  my  Molly  Malone!" 

And  the  widow  they  all  thought  so  shy. 

My  eye! 
Ne'er  thought  of  a  simper  or  sigh — , 

For  why? 
But,  "Lucius,"  says  she, 
"Since  you've  now  made  so  free. 
You  may  marry  your  Molly  Malone, 

Ohone ! 
You  may  m.arry  your  Molly  Malone." 

There's  a  moral  contained  in  my  song, 

Not  wrong; 
And,  one  comfort,  it's  not  very  long. 

But  strong: 
If  for  widows  you  die. 
Learn  to  kiss,  not  to  sigh. 
For  they're  all  like  sweet  Mistress  Malone, 

Ohone ! 
Oh!  they're  very  like  Mistress  Malone! 

Charles  James  Lever  [1806-187  2] 

WIDOW   MACHREE 

From  "  Handy  Andy  " 

Widow  Machree,  it's  no  wonder  you  frown, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree, 
Faith,  it  ruins  your  looks,  that  same  dirty  black  gown, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree. 
How  altered  your  air. 
With  that  close  cap  you  wear — 
'Tis  destroying  your  hair 


Widow   Machree  ^975 

Which  should  be  flowing  free; 
Be  no  longer  a  churl 
Of  its  black  silken  curl, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree! 

Widow  Machree,  now  the  summer  is  come, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree, 
When  everything  smiles,  should  a  beauty  look  glum? 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree. 
See,  the  birds  go  in  pairs, 
And  the  rabbits  and  hares, — 
Why,  even  the  bears 

Now  in  couples  agree; 
And  the  mute  little  lish, 
Though  they  can't  spake,  they  wish, — 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree. 

Widow  Machree,  and  w-hen  winter  comes  in, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree, 
To  be  poking  the  fire  all  alone  is  a  sin, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree. 
Sure  the  shovel  and  tongs 
To  each  other  belongs. 
And  the  kettle  sings  songs 

Full  of  family  glee; 
While  alone  with  your  cup. 
Like  a  hermit,  you  sup, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree. 

And  how  do  you  know,  with  the  comforts  I've  towld, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree, 
But  you're  keeping  some  poor  fellow  out  in  the  cowld? 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree. 
With  such  sins  on  your  head 
Sure  your  peace  would  be  fled, 
Could  you  sleep  in  your  bed 

Without  thinking  to  see 
Some  ghost  or  some  sprite. 
That  would  wake  you  each  night. 

Crying,  "Och  hone!     Widow  Machree"? 


1976  Sons   of  the   Emerald   Isle 

Then  take  ni}'  advice,  darling  Widow  Machree, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree, 
And,  with  rny  advice,  faith,  I  wish  you'd  take  me, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree. 
You'd  have  me  to  desire 
Then  to  stir  up  the  fire. 
And  sure  Hope  is  no  liar 

In  whispering  to  me, 
That  the  ghosts  would  depart, 
When  you'd  me  near  your  heart, 

Och  hone!     Widow  Machree! 

Samuel  Lover  [1797-1868] 

THE   PEACEABLE  RACE 

"Who  says  that  the  Irish  are  fighters  be  birth?" 

Says  little  Dan'  Crone. 
"Faix,  there's  not  a  more  peaceable  race  on  th'  earth, 

If  ye  I'ave  'em  alone. 

"Tim  O'Toole?  '  Well,  I  grant  ye  now,  there  is  a  lad 
That's  beset  wid  the  curse  o'  pugnacity  bad, 
But  he's  jisht  th'  ixciption  that's  provin'  the  rule; 
An'  what  else  could  ye  ask  from  a  lad  hke  O'Toole? 
Shure,  he's  sich  a  big  mountain  o'  muscle  and  bone, 
Sizin'  up  to  the  heft  o'  some  siventeen  stone. 
That  he  fair  aggravates  iv'ry  other  bould  buck 
To  be  wishful  to  thump  him  a  little  for  luck. 
An'  to  prove  that  there's  others  as  clever  as  him. 
Now,  I  ask  ye,  suppose  ye  was  sturdy  as  Tim, 
Don't  ye  think  'twould  be  right  ye  should  take  a  delight 
In  defindin'  yer  title  an'  testin'  yer  might?" 
Says  little  Dan  Crone. 

"Is  it  me?    Arrah!  now  it  is  jokin'  ye  are. 

But  I  bid  ye  be  careful  an'  not  go  too  far. 

Shure,  it's  true  I'm  no  more  nor  the  height  o'  yer  waist. 

But  there's  many  a  bigger  has  sampled  a  taste 

O'  the  knuckles  that's  bunched  in  this  little  ould  fisht. 

WTiere's  the  dog  wouldn't  fight  whin  his  tail  gets  a  twisht? 


The   Recruit  1977 

Do  I  hunt  fur  the  throuble?     Mayhap,  now,  it's  thrue 

Upon  certain  occasions  that's  jisht  what  I  do. 

Shure,  how  else  would  they  know — I'm  that  stunted  an' 

small — 
I'd  the  heart  of  a  man  in  me  body  at  all?" 
Says  little  Dan  Crone. 

"Well,  thin,  keep  yer  opinion.     'Tis  little  it's  worth," 

Says  little  Dan  Crone. 
"Faix,  we're  jisht  the  most  peaceable  race  on  the  earth. 

If  ye  I'ave  us  alone." 

Thomas  Atigtistiii  Daly  [1871- 


THE   RECRUIT 

Sez  Corporal  Madden  to  Private  McFadden: 
"Bedad  yer  a  bad  'un! 
Now  turn  out  yer  toes! 
Yer  belt  is  unhookit, 
Yer  cap  is  on  crookit, 
Ye  may  not  be  dhrunk, 
But,  be  jabers,  ye  look  it! 
Wan — two! 
Wan — two! 
Ye  monkey- faced  divil,  I'll  jolly  ye  through! 
Wan — two ! — 
Time!     Mark! 
Ye  march  like  the  aiglc  in  Cintheral  Parrk!" 

Sez  Corporal  Madden  to  Private  McFadden: 
"A  saint  it  ud  sadden 
To  dhrill  such  a  mug! 
Eyes  front! — ye  baboon,  ye! — 
Chin  up! — ye  gossoon,  ye! 
Ye've  jaws  like  a  goat — 
Halt!  ye  leather-lipped  loon,  ye! 

Wan — two! 

Wan — two ! 


1978  Sons  of  the  Emerald   Isle 

Ye  whiskered  orang-outang,  I'll  fix  you!  :r;l  "rijirf  ^  ■>(] 
Wan — two  !-— 
Time!     Mark! 
Ye've  eyes  like  a  bat! — can  ye  see  in  the  dark?" 

..  iVl 
Sez  Corporal  Madden  to  Private  McFadden: 
"  Yer  figger  wants  padd'n' — 
Sure,  man,  ye've  no  shape! 
Behind  ye  yer  shoulders 
Stick  out  like  two  bowlders; 
Yer  shins  is  as  thin 
As  a  pair  of  pen-holders! 
Wan — two! 
Wan — two ! 
Yer  belly  belongs  on  yer  back,  ye  Jew! 
Wan — two ! — 
Time!     Mark! 
I'm  dhry  as  a  dog — I  can't  shpake  but  I  bark!" 

Sez  Corporal  Madden  to  Private  McFadden: 
"  Me  heart  it  ud  gladden 
To  blacken  yer  eye. 
Ye're  gettin'  too  bold,  ye 
Compel  me  to  scold  ye, — 
'Tis  halt!  that  I  say,— 
Will  ye  heed  what  I  told  ye? 
Wan— two ! 
Wan — two! 
Be  jabers,  I'm  dhryer  than  Brian  Boru! 
Wan — two ! — 
Time!     Mark! 
What's  wur-ruk  for  chickens  is  sport  for  the  lark!" 

Sez  Corporal  Madden  to  Private  McFadden: 
"I'll  not  stay  a  gadd'n 
Wid  dagoes  like  you! 
I'll  travel  no  farther, 
I'm  dyin'  for — wather; — 
Come  on,  if  ye  like, — 
Can  ye  loan  me  a  quather? 


Finnigin  to   Flannigan  I979 

Ya-as,  you, 

What,— two? 
And  ye'U  pay  the  potheen?     Ye're  a  daisy!     Whurroo! 

You'll  do! 

Whist!     Mark! 
The  Rigiment's  flatthered  to  own  ye,  me  spark!" 
Robert  William  Chambers  [1865- 


FINNIGIN  TO  FLANNIGAN 

SuPERiNTiNDiNT  wuz  Flannigan; 
Boss  av  the  siction  wuz  Finnigin; 
Whiniver  the  kyars  got  offen  the  thrack 
An'  muddled  up  things  t'  th'  divil  an'  back, 
Finnigin  writ  it  to  Flannigan, 
Afther  the  wreck  wuz  all  on  agin; 
That  is,  this  Finnigin 
Repoorted  to  Flannigan. 

Whin  Finnigin  furst  writ  to  Flannigan, 
He  writed  tin  pages — did  Finnigin, 
An'  he  tould  jist  how  the  smash  occurred;  . 
Full  minny  a  tajus,  blunderin'  wurrd 
Did  Finnigin  write  to  Flannigan 
Afther  the  kyars  had  gone  on  agin. 
That  wuz  how  Finnigin 
Repoorted  to  Flannigan. 

Now  Flannigan  knowed  more  than  Finnigin — • 

He'd  more  idjucation — had  Flannigan; 

An'  it  wore'm  clane  an'  complately  out 

To  tell  what  Finnigin  writ  about 

In  his  writin'  to  Musther  Flannigan. 

So  he  writed  back  to  Finnigin: 

"Don't  do  sich  a  sin  agin; 

Make  'em  brief,  Finnigin!" 

Whin  Finnigin  got  this  from  Flannigan, 

He  blushed  rosy  rid — did  Finnigin; 

An'  he  said:  "I'll  gamble  a  whole  month's  pa-ay 

That  it  will  be  minny  an'  minny  a  da-ay 


1980         Sons  of  the  Emerald   Isle 

Befoore  Sup'rintindint,  that's  Flannigan, 
Gits  a  whack  at  this  very  same  sin  agin. 
From  Finnigin  to  Flannigan 
Repoorts  won't  be  long  agin." 


Wan  da-ay  on  the  siction  av  Finnigin, 

On  the  road  sup'rintinded  be  Flannigan, 

A  rail  give  way  on  a  bit  av  a  curve 

An'  some  kyars  wint  off  as  they  made  the  shwerve. 

"There's  nobody  hurted,"  sez  Finnigin, 

"But  repoorts  must  be  made  to  Flannigan." 

An'  he  winked  at  McGorrigan, 

As  married  a  Finnigin. 

He  wuz  shantyin'  thin,  wuz  Finnigin, 

As  minny  a  railroader's  been  agin. 

An'  the  shmoky  ol'  lamp  wuz  burnin'  bright 

In  Finnigin's  shanty  all  that  night — 

Bilin'  down  his  repoort,  wuz  Finnigin! 

An'  he  writed  this  here:  "Musther  Flannigan: 

Off  agin,  on  agin, 

Gone  agin. — Finnigin." 

'   Strickland  W.  Gillilan  [i86g- 


BARNEY  McGEE 

Barney  McGee,  there's  no  end  of  good  luck  in  you. 

Will-o'-the-wisp,  with  a  flicker  of  Puck  in  you, 

Wild  as  a  bull-pup  and  all  of  his  pluck  in  you, — 

Let  a  man  tread  on  your  coat  and  he'll  see! — 

Eyes  like  the  lakes  of  Killarney  for  clarity, 

Nose  that  turns  up  without  any  vulgarity, 

Smile  like  a  cherub,  and  hair  that  is  carroty, — 

Wow,  you're  a  rarity,  Barney  McGee! 

Mellow  as  Tarragon,  prouder  than  Aragon — 

Hardly  a  paragon,  you  will  agree — 

Here's  all  that's  fine  to  you! 

Books  and  old  wine  to  you! 

Girls  be  divine  to  you,.  Barney  McGee! 


;l      Barney    McGee  198 1 

Lucky  the  day  when  I  met  you  unwittingly,,,  ^{1;,,,.  ,ii;..,..-i 

Dining  where  vagabonds  came  and  went  flittingly. 

Here's  some  Barbcra  to  drinli  it  belittingly, 

That  day  at  Silvio's,  Barney  ]VIcGee! 

Many's  the  time  we  have  quaffed  our  Chianti  there, 

Listened  to  Silvio  quoting  us  Dante  there,— 

Once  more  to  drink  Ncbiolo  spumante  there. 

Plow  we'd  pitch  Pommery  into  the  sea! 

There  where  the  gang  of  us  met  ere  Rome  rang  of  us, 

They  had  the  hang  of  us  to  a  degree. 

How  they  would  trust  to  you! 

That  was  but  just  to  you. 

Here's  o'er  their  dust  to  you,  Barney  McGee! 

Barney  IVIcGee,  when  you're  sober  you  scintillate. 

But  when  you're  in  drink  you're  the  pride  of  the  intellect; 

Divil  a  one  of  us  ever  came  in  till  late. 

Once  at  the  bar  where  you  happened  to  be — 

Every  eye  there  like  a  spoke  in  you  centering, 

You  with  your  eloquence,  blarney,  and  bantering — 

All  Vagabondia  shouts  at  your  entering. 

King  of  the  Tenderloin,  Barney  McGee! 

There's  no  satiety  in  your  society 

With  the  variety  of  your  esprit. 

Here's  a  long  purse  to  you. 

And  a  great  thirst  to  you! 

Fate  be  no  worse  to  you,  Barney  McGee! 

Och,  and  the  girls  whose  poor  hearts  you  deracinate. 

Whirl  and  bewilder  and  flutter  and  fascinate! 

Faith,  it's  so  killing  you  are,  you  assassinate, — 

Murder's  the  word  for  you,  Barney  McGee! 

Bold  when  they're  sunny  and  smooth  when  they're  showery, — 

Oh,  but  the  style  of  you,  fluent  and  flowery! 

Chesterfield's  way,  with  a  touch  of  the  Bowery! 

How  would  they  silence  you,  Barney  maclirce? 

Naught  can  your  gab  allay,  learned  as  Rabelais 

(You  in  his  abbey  lay  once  on  a  spree). 

Here's  to  the  smile  of  you 

(Oh,  but  the  guile  of  you!) 

And  a  long  while  of  you,  Barney  McGee! 


1982  Sons  of  the  Emerald  Isle  - 

Facile  with  phrases  of  length  and  Latinity, 

Like  honorificabilitudinity, 

Where  is  the  maid  could  resist  your  vicinity, 

Wiled  by  the  impudent  grace  of  your  plea? 

Then  your  vivacity  and  pertinacity 

Carry  the  day  with  the  divil's  audacity; 

No  mere  veracity  robs  your  sagacity 

Of  perspicacity,  Barney  McGee. 

When  all  is  new  to  them,  what  will  you  do  to  them? 

Will  you  be  true  to  them?    Who  shall  decree? 

Here  s  a  fair  strife  to  you! 

Health  and  long  life  to  you! 

And  a  great  wife  to  you,  Barney  McGee! 

Barney  McGee,  you're  the  pick  of  gentility; 
Nothing  can  phase  you,  you've  such  a  facility; 
Nobody  ever  yet  found  your  utility, — • 
That  is  the  charm  of  you,  Barney  McGee; 
Under  conditions  that  others  would  stammer  in, 
Still  unperturbed  as  a  cat  or  a  Cameron, 
Polished  as  somebody  in  the  Decameron, 
Putting  the  glamor  on  prince  or  Pawnee! 
In  your  meanderin',  love,  and  philanderin', 
Calm  as  a  mandarin  sipping  his  tea ! 
Under  the  art  of  you, 
Parcel  and  part  of  you. 
Here's  to  the  heart  of  you,  Barney  McGee! 

You  who  were  ever  alert  to  befriend  a  man, 
You  who  were  ever  the  first  to  defend  a  man, 
You  who  had  always  the  money  to  lend  a  man, 
Down  on  his  luck  and  hard  up  for  a  V! 
Sure,  you'll  be  playing  a  harp  in  beatitude 
(And  a  quare  sight  you  will  be  in  that  attitude) — 
Some  day,  where  gratitude  seems  but  a  platitude. 
You'll  find  your  latitude,  Barney  McGee. 
That's  no  flim-flam  at  all,  frivol  or  sham  at  all. 
Just  the  plain —    Damn  it  all,  have  one  with  me! 
Here's  luck  and  more  to  you! 
Friends  by  the  score  to  you, 
True  to  the  core  to  you,  Barney  McGee! 

Richard  Hovey  [1864-1900] 


PIPE  AND  CAN 

A  RELIGIOUS  USE  OF  TOBACCO 

The  Indian  weed  now  withered  quite; 
Green  at  morn,  cut  down  at  night; 
Shows  thy  decay :  all  flesh  is  hay : 
Thus  think,  then  drink  Tobacco. 

And  when  the  smoke  ascends  on  high, 
Think  thou  behold'st  the  vanity 
Of  worldly  stuff,  gone  with  a  puff: 
Thus  think,  then  drink  Tobacco. 

But  when  the  pipe  grows  foul  within, 
Think  of  thy  soul  defiled  with  sin, 
And  that  the  fire  doth  it  require: 
Thus  think,  then  drink  Tobacco. 

The  ashes,  that  are  left  behind, 
May  serve  to  put  thee  still  in  mind' 
That  unto  dust  return  thou  must: 
Thus  think,  then  drink  Tobacco. 

Robert  Wisdome  (?)  [?-is68] 

ODE  TO  TOBACCO 

Thou  who,  when  fears  attack, 
Bid'st  them  avaunt,  and  Black 
Care,  at  the  horseman's  back 

Perching,  unseatest; 
Sweet  when  the  morn  is  gray; 
Sweet,  when  they've  cleared  away 
Lunch;  and  at  close  of  day 

Possibly  sweetest: 

I  have  a  liking  old 
For  thee,  though  manifold 
Stories,  I  know,  are  told, 
1983 


1984  Pip^  ^^^   ^^^ 

Not  to  thy  credit; 
How  one  (or  two  at  most) 
Drops  make  a  cat  a  ghost — 
Useless,  except  to  roast — 

Doctors  have  said  it: 

How  they  who  use  fusees 
All  grow  by  slow  degrees 
Brainless  as  chimpanzees, 

Meagre  as  lizards; 
Go  mad,  and  beat  their  wives: 
Plunge  (after  shocking  lives) 
Razors  and  carving-knives 

Into  their  gizzards. 

Confound  such  knavish  tricks! 
Yet  know  I  five  or  six 
Smokers  who  freely  mix 

Still  with  their  neighbors; 
Jones — (who,  I'm  glad  to  say, 
Asked  leave  of  Mrs.  J.) — 
Daily  absorbs  a  clay 

After  his  labors. 

Cats  may  have  had  their  goose 
Cooked  by  tobacco- juice; 
Still  why  deny  its  use 

Thoughtfully  taken? 
We're  not  as  tabbies  are: 
Smith,  take  a  fresh  cigar! 
Jones,  the  tobacco- jar! 

Here's  to  thee.  Bacon! 

Charles  Sluart  Caherley  [1831-1S84] 


THE  PIPE  OF  TOBACCO 

Let  the  toper  regale  in  his  tankard  of  ale, 
Or  with  alcohol  moisten  his  thrapple, — 

Only  give  me,  I  pray,  a  good  pipe  of  soft  clay, 
Nicely  tapered  and  thin  in  the  stapple;— 


The    Pipe  of  Tobacco  198c 

And  I  shall  puff,  puff — let  who  will  say  enough! 

No  luxury  else  I'm  in  lack  o', — 
No  malice  I  hoard  'gainst  Queen,  Prince,  Duke,  or  Lord, 

While  I  pull  at  my  Pipe  of  Tobacco. 

When  I  feel  the  hot  strife  of  the  battle  of  life, 

And  the  prospect  is  aught  but  enticin' — 
IMayhap  some  real  ill,  like  a  protested  bill, 

Dims  the  sunshine  that  tinged  the  horizon, — 
Only  let  me  pufif,  puff — be  they  ever  so  rough, 

All  the  sorrows  of  life  I  lose  track  o''; 
The  mists  disappear,  and  the  vista  is  clear, 

With  a  soothing  mnld  Pipe  of  Tobacco. 

And  when  joy  after  pain,  like  the  sun  after  rain, 

Stills  the  waters  long  turbid  and  troubled, 
That  life's  current  may  flow  with  a  ruddier  glow, 

And  the  sense  of  enjoyment  be  doubled, — 
Oh!  let  me  puff,  puff — till  I  feel  quantum  sujf. 

Such  luxury  still  I'm  in  lack  o'! 
Be  joy  ever  so  sweet,  it  would  be  incomplete 

Without  a  good  Pipe  of  Tol^acco. 

Should  my  recreant  muse — sometimes  apt  to  refuse 

The  guidance  of  bit  and  of  bridle — 
Still  blankly  demur,  spite  of  whip  and  of  spur, 

Unimpassioned,  inconstant,  or  idle, — - 
Only  let  me  puff,  puff — till  the  brain  cries  enough; — 

Such  excitement  is  all  I'm  in  lack  o'; 
And  the  poetic  vein  soon  to  fancy  gives  rein, 

Inspired  by  a  Pipe  of  Tobacco. 

And  when  with  one  accord,  round  the  jovial  board, 

In  friendship  our  bosoms  are  glowing. 
While  with  toast  and  with  song  we  the  evening  prolong, 

And  with  nectar  the  goblets  are  flowing — 
Still  let  us  puff,  puff — be  life  smooth,  be  it  rough, 

Such  enjoyment  we're  ever  in  lack  o': 
The  more  peace  and  good-will  will  abound  as  we  till 

A  jolly  good  Pipe  of  Tobacco! 

John  Usher  [?] 


1986        Pipe  and  Can 


INTER  SODALES 

Over  a  pipe  the  Angel  of  Conversation 
Loosens  with  glee  the  tassels  of  his  purse, 
And,  in  a  fine  spiritual  exaltation, 
Hastens,  a  rosy  spendthrift,  to  disburse 
The  coins  new-minted  of  imagination. 

An  amiable,  a  delicate  animation 
Informs  our  thought,  and  earnest  we  rehearse 
The  sweet  old  farce  of  mutual  admiration 
Over  a  pipe. 

Heard  in  this  hour's  delicious  divagation 
How  soft  the  song!  the  epigram  how  terse! 
With  what  a  genius  for  administration 
We  rearrange  the  rumbling  universe. 
And  map  the  course  of  man's  regeneration 
Over  a  pipe! 

William  Ernest  Henley  [1849- 1903] 


AN  INVITATION 

I  BEG  you  come  tonight  and  dine. 

A  welcome  waits  you,  and  sound  wine,- 

The  Roederer  chilly  to  a  charm, 

As  Juno's  breath  the  claret  warm. 

The  sherry  of  an  ancient  brand. 

No  Persian  pomp,  you  understand, — 

A  soup,  a  fish,  two  meats,  and  then 

A  salad  fit  for  aldermen 

(When  aldermen,  alas  the  days! 

Were  really  worth  their  mayonnaise) : 

A  dish  of  grapes  whose  clusters  won 

Their  bronze  in  Carolinian  sun ; 

Next,  cheese — for  you  the  Neufchatel, 

A  bit  of  Cheshire  likes  me  weU; 

Cafe  an  lait  or  coffee  black. 

With  Kirsch  or  Kiimmel  or  cognac 


A  Salad  1987 


(The  German  band  in  Irving  Place 
By  this  time  purple  in  the  face) ; 
Cigars  and  pipes.     These  being  through, 
Friends  shall  drop  in,  a  very  few — 
Shakespeare  and  Milton,  and  no  more. 
When  these  are  guests  I  bolt  the  door, 
With  "Not  at  home"  to  anyone 
Excepting  Alfred  Tennyson. 

Unknoifn 
AD   MINISTRAM* 

AFTER   HORACE 

.  J:,', 

Dear  Lucy,  you  know  what  my  wish  is, — 

I  hate  all  jour  Frenchified  fuss; 
Your  silly  entrees  and  made  dishes 

Were  never  intended  for  us. 
No  footman  in  lace  and  in  ruffles 

Need  dangle  behind  my  arm-chair; 
And  never  mind  seeking  for  truffles, 

Although  they  be  ever  so  rare. 

But  a  plain  leg  of  mutton,  my  Lucy, 

I  prithee  get  ready  at  three: 
Have  it  smoking,  and  tender  and  juicy, 

And  what  better  meat  can  there  be? 
And  when  it  has  feasted  the  master, 

'Twill  amply  suffice  for  the  maid; 
Meanwhile  I  will  smoke  my  canaster, 

And  tipple  my  ale  in  the  shade. 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 

A  SALAD 

To  make  this  condiment,  your  poet  begs 
The  pounded  yellow  of  two  hard-boiled  eggs; 
Two  boiled  potatoes,  passed  through  kitchen  sieve, 
Smootliness  and  softness  to  the  salad  give; 
Let  onion  atoms  lurk  within  the  bowl, 
And,  half-suspected,  animate  the  whole.. 
Of  mordant  mustard  add  a  single  spoon. 
Distrust  the  condiment  that  bites  so  soon ; 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3577. 


1988  Pipe  and   Can 

But  deem  it  not,  thou  man  of  herbs,  a  fault, 

To  add  a  double  quantity  of  salt; 

Four  times  the  spoon  with  oil  from  Lucca  drown, 

And  twice  with  vinegar  procured  from  town; 

And,  lastly,  o'er  the  flavored  compound  toss 

A  magic  soupQon  of  anchovy  sauce. 

Oh,  green  and  glorious!     Oh,  herbaceous  treat! 

'Twould  tempt  the  dying  anchorite  to  eat: 

Back  to  the  world  he'd  turn  his  fleeting  soul, 

And  plunge  his  fingers  in  the  salad-bowl! 

Serenely  full,  the  epicure  would  say. 

Fate  cannot  harm  me,  I  have  dined  to-day. 

Sydney  Smith  [1771-1845] 


VERSES  PLACED  OVER  THE  DOOR  AT  THE 

ENTRANCE  INTO  THE  APOLLO  ROOM  AT 

THE  DEVIL  TAVERN 

Welcome  all  who  lead  or  follow, 

To  the  Oracle  of  Apollo — 

Here  he  speaks  out  of  his  pottle. 

Or  the  tripos,  his  tower  bottle: 

All  his  answers  are  divine, 

Truth  itself  doth  flow  in  wine. 

Hang  up  all  the  poor  hop-drinkers, 

Cries  old  Sim,  the  king  of  skinkers; 

He  the  half  of  life  abuses, 

That  sits  watering  with  the  Muses. 

Those  dull  girls  no  good  can  mean  us; 

Wine  it  is  the  milk  of  Venus, 

And  the  poet's  horse  accounted : 

Ply  it,  and  you  all  are  mounted. 

'Tis  the  true  Phoebian  liquor. 

Cheers  the  brain,  makes  wit  the  quicker, 

Pays  all  debts,  cures  all  diseases, 

And  at  once  three  senses  pleases. 

Welcome  all  who  lead  or  follow, 

To  the  Oracle  of  Apollo. 

BcnJonson  [iS73?-i6s7] 


"Give   Me  Ale"  1989 


LINES  ON  THE   MERMAID  TAVERN 

Souls  of  Poets  dead  and  gone, 
What  Elysium  have  ye  known, 
Happy  field  or  mossy  cavern, 
Choicer  than  the  Mermaid  Tavern? 
Have  ye  tippled  drink  more  fine 
Than  mine  host's  Canary  wine? 
Or  are  fruits  of  Paradise 
Sweeter  than  those  dainty  pies 
Of  venison?    O  generous  food! 
Dressed  as  though  bold  Robin  Hood 
Would,  with  his  Maid  Marian, 
Sup  and  bowse  from  horn  and  can. 

I  have  heard  that  on  a  day 
Mine  host's  sign-board  flew  awa)'' 
Nobody  knew  whither,  till 
An  Astrologer's  old  quill 
To  a  sheepskin  gave  the  story, — 
Said  he  saw  you  in  your  glory. 
Underneath  a  new-old  Sign 
Sipping  beverage  divine, 
And  pledging  with  contented  smack 
The  Mermaid  in  the  Zodiac! 

Souls  of  Poets  dead  and  gone. 
What  Elysium  have  ye  known- 
Happy  field  or  mossy  cavern — 
Choicer  than  the  Mermaid  Tavern? 

John  Keats  [1795-1821] 


"GIVE   ME  ALE" 

When  as  the  chill  Sirocco  blows. 
And  Winter  tells  a  heavy  tale; 
When  pyes  and  daws  and  rooks  and  crows 
Sit  cursing  of  the  frosts  and  snows; 
Then  give  me  ale. 


IQQO  Pipe  and   Can 

Ale  in  a  Saxon  rumkin  then, 

Such  as  will  make  grimalkin  prate; 
Bids  valor  burgeon  in  taU  men, 
Quickens  the  poet's  wit  and  pen, 
Despises  fate. 

Ale,  that  the  absent  battle  fights. 

And  frames  the  march  of  Swedish  drum, 
Disputes  with  princes,  laws,  and  rights, 
What's  done  and  past  tells  mortal  wights, 
And  v/hat's  to  come. 

Ale,  that  the  plowman's  heart  up-keeps 

And  equals  it  with  tyrants'  thrones, 
That  wipes  the  eye  that  over-weeps, 
And  lulls  in  sure  and  dainty  sleeps 
The  o'er-wearied  bones. 

Grandchild  of  Ceres,  Bacchus'  daughter, 

Wine's  emulous  neighbor,  though  but  stale, 
Ennobling  all  the  nymphs  of  water. 
And  filling  each  man's  heart  with  laughter — 
Ha!   give  me  ale! 

Unknowi 


"JOLLY   GOOD  ALE  AND   OLD" 

From    "  Gammer  Gurton's  Needle  " 

I  CANNOT  eat  but  httle  meat, 

My  stomach  is  not  good; 
But  sure  I  think  that  I  can  drink 

With  him  that  wears  a  hood. 
Though  I  go  bare,  take  ye  no  care, 

I  nothing  am  a-cold; 
I  stuff  my  skin  so  full  wit 
Of  jolly  good  ale  atia  old. 

Back  and  side  go  bare,  go  bare; 

Both  foot  and  hand  go  cold; 

But,  belly,  God  send  thee  good  ale  enough, 

Whether  it  be  new  or  old. 


Drink  To-day  1991 


I  love  no  roast  but  a  nut-brown  toast, 

And  a  crab  laid  in  the  fire; 
A  little  bread  shall  do  me  stead; 

Much  bread  I  not  desire. 
No  frost  nor  snow,  no  wind,  I  trow, 

Can  hurt  me  if  I  wold; 
I  am  so  wrapped  and  thoroughly  lapped 

Of  joUy  good  ale  and  old. 

And  Tib,  my  wife,  that  as  her  life 

Loveth  well  good  ale  to  seek. 
Full  oft  drinks  she  till  ye  may  see 

The  tears  run  down  her  cheek: 
Then  doth  she  trowl  to  me  the  bowl 
■   Even  as  a  maltworm  should, 
And  saith,  "Sweetheart,  I  took  my  part 
-  Of  this  jolly  good  ale  and  old." 

Now  let  them  drink  till  they  nod  and  wink, 

Even  as  good  fellows  should  do; 
They  shall  not  miss  to  have  the  bliss 

Good  ale  doth  bring  men  to; 
And  all  poor  souls  that  have  scoured  bowls 

Or  have  them  lustily  trolled, 
God  save  the  lives  of  them  and  their  wives. 
Whether  they  be  young  or  old. 
Back  and  side  go  bare,  go  bare; 
Both  foot  and  hand  go  cold; 
But,  belly,  God  send  thee  good  ale  enough. 
Whether  it  be  new  or  old. 

John  Still  [iS43?-i6o8] 


DRINK  TO-DAY 

From  "The  Bloody  Brother" 

Drink  to-day,  and  drown  all  sorrow; 
You  shall  perhaps  not  do  it  to-morrow: 
Best,  while  you  have  it,  use  your  breath; 
There  is  no  drinking  after  death. 


1992  Pipe  and  Can 

Wine  works  the  heart  up,  wakes  the  wit, 
There  is  no  cure  'gainst  age  but  it: 
It  helps  the  headache,  cough,  and  phthisic, 
And  is  for  all  diseases  physic. 

Then  let  us  swill,  boys,  for  our  health; 
Who  drinks  well,  loves  the  commonwealth. 
And  he  that  will  to  bed  go  sober 
Falls  with  the  leaf  still  in  October. 

John  Fletcher  [1570-1625] 


CORONEMUS  NOS   ROSIS  ANTEQUAM 
MARCESCANT 

Let  us  drink  and  be  merry,  dance,  joke,  and  rejoice, 

With  claret  and  sherry,  theorbo  and  voice! 

The  changeable  world  to  our  joy  is  unjust,  .. 

All  treasure's  uncertain. 

Then  down  with  your  dust! 
In  frolics  dispose  your  pounds,  shillings,  and  pence, 
For  we  shall  be  nothing  a  hundred  years  hence. 

We'll  sport  and  be  free  with  Moll,  Betty,  and  Dolly, 
Have  oysters  and  lobsters  to  cure  melancholy: 
Plsh-dinners  will  make  a  man  spring  like  a  flea, 

Dame  Venus,  love's  lady. 

Was  born  of  the  sea: 
With  her  and  with  Bacchus  we'll  tickle  the  sense. 
For  we  shall  be  past  it  a  hundred  years  hence. 

Your  most  beautiful  bride  who  with  garlands  is  crowned 
And  kills  with  each  glance  as  she  treads  on  the  ground, 
Whose  lightness  and  brightness  doth  shine  in  such  splendor 

That  none  but  the  stars 

Are  thought  fit  to  attend  her. 
Though  now  she  be  pleasant  and  sweet  to  the  sense, 
Will  be  damnable  mouldy  a  hundred  years  hence. 

Then  why  should  we  turmoil  in  cares  and  in  fears, 
Turn  all  our  tranquill'ty  to  sighs  and  to  tears? 


Drinking  ^993 

Let's  eat,  drink,  and  play  till  the  worms  do  corrupt  us, 

'Tis  certain,  Post  mortem 

Nulla  voluptas. 
For  health,  wealth  and  beauty,  wit,  learning  and  sense, 
Must  all  come  to  nothing  a  hundred  years  hence. 

Thomas  Jordan  [i6i2?-i68s] 


THE  EPICURE 

AFTER   ANACREON 

Fill  the  bowl  with  rosy  wine. 
Around  our  temples  roses  twine, 
And  let  us  cheerfully  awhile. 
Like  the  wine  and  roses,  smile. 
Crowned  with  roses,  we  contemn 
Gyges'  wealthy  diadem. 

To-day  is  ours;  what  do  we  fear? 
To-day  is  ours;  wc  have  it  here! 
Let's  treat  it  kindly,  that  it  may 
Wish,  at  least,  with  us  to  stay. 
Let's  banish  business,  banish  sorrow, 
To  the  gods  belongs  to-morrow. 

Abraham  Cowley  [i 618-1667] 


DRINKING 

AFTER   ANACREON 

The  thirsty  earth  soaks  up  the  rain. 
And  drinks,  and  gapes  for  drink  again; 
The  plants  suck  in  the  earth,  and  are, 
With  constant  drinking,  fresh  and  fair; 
The  sea  itself  (which  one  would  think 
Should  have  but  little  need  of  drink), 
Drinks  twice  ten  thousand  rivers  up, 
So  filled  that  they  o'erflow  the  cup. 
The  busy  sun  (and  one  would  guess 
By's  drunken  fiery  face  no  less), 


1994  Pipe  and  C 


an 


Drinks  up  the  sea,  and,  when  he's  done, 

The  moon  and  stars  drink  up  the  sun: 

They  drink  and  dance  by  their  own  light; 

They  drink  and  revel  all  the  night. 

Nothing  in  nature's  sober  found,  i/j. 

But  an  eternal  "health"  goes  round. 

Fill  up  the  bowl  then,  fill  it  high — 

Fill  all  the  glasses  there;  for  why 

Should  every  creature  drink  but  I? 

Why,  men  of  morals,  tell  me  why? 

Abraham  Cowley  [i 6 18-1667] 

THE  WINTER   GLASS 

Then  let  the  chill  Sirocco  blow, 
And  gird  us  round  with  hills  of  snow; 
Or  else  go  whistle  to  the  shore. 
And  make  the  hollow  mountains  roar. 

Whilst  we  together  jovial  sit 
Careless,  and  crowned  with  mirth  and  wit; 
Where  though  bleak  winds  confine  us  home. 
Our  fancies  round  the  world  shall  roam. 

We'll  think  of  all  the  friends  we  know. 
And  drink  to  all  worth  drinking  to: 
When  having  drank  all  thine  and  mine. 
We  rather  shall  want  health  than  wine. 

But  where  friends  fail  us,  we'll  supply 
Our  friendships  with  our  charity. 
Men  that  remote  in  sorrows  live, 
Shall  by  our  lusty  brimmers  thrive. 

We'll  drink  the  wanting  into  wealth. 
And  those  that  languish  into  health, 
The  afflicted  into  joy,  the  oppressed 
Into  security  and  rest. 

The  worthy  in  disgrace  shall  find 
Favor  return  again  more  kind. 
And  in  restraint  who  stifled  lie. 
Shall  taste  the  air  of  liberty. 


I 


Harry   Carey's   General   Reply       ^995 

The  brave  shall  triumph  in  success, 
The  lovers  shall  have  mistresses, 
Poor  unregarded  virtue  praise, 
And  the  neglected  poet  bays. 

Thus  shall  our  healths  do  others  good, 
Whilst  we  ourselves  do  all  we  would; 
For  freed  from  env\'  and  from  care, 
WTiat  would  we  be  but  what  we  are? 

'Tis  the  plump  grape's  immortal  juice 
That  does  this  happiness  produce, 
And  will  preserve  us  free  together, 
IMaugre  mischance,  or  wind  and  weather. 

Then  let  old  Winter  take  his  course, 
And  roar  abroad  till  he  be  hoarse. 
And  his  lungs  crack  with  ruthless  ire, 
It  shall  but  serve  to  blow  our  fire. 

Let  him  our  little  castle  ply 
With  all  his  loud  artillery. 
Whilst  sack  and  claret  man  the  fort, 
His  fury  shall  become  our  sport. 

Or,  let  him  Scotland  take,  and  there 
Confine  the  plotting  Presbyter; 
His  zeal  may  freeze,  whilst  we,  kept  warm 
With  love  and  wine,  can  know  no  harm. 

Charles  Cotton  [i 630-1 687] 


HARRY     CAREY'S    GENERAL    REPLY,    TO    THE 

LIBELLING    GENTRY.   WHO   ARE  ANGRY  AT 

HIS   WELFARE 

With  an  honest  old  friend  and  a  merry  old  song, 
And  a  flask  of  old  port,  let  me  sit  the  night  long. 
And  laugh  at  the  malice  of  those  who  repine 
That  they  must  swig  porter  while  I  can  drink  wine. 


1996  Pipe  and  Can 

I  envy  no  mortal  though  ever  so  great, 
Nor  scorn  I  a  wretch  for  his  lowly  estate; 
But  what  I  abhor  and  esteem  as  a  curse 
Is  poorness  of  Spirit,  not  poorness  of  Purse. 

Then  dare  to  be  generous,  dauntless,  and  gay, 
Let's  merrily  pass  life's  remainder  away; 
Upheld  by  our  friends,  we  our  foes  may  despise. 
For  the  more  wc  are  envied,  the  higher  we  rise. 

Henry  Carey  [    ?    -1743] 


GAFFER   GRAY 

"Ho!  why  dost  thou  shiver  and  shake, 

Gaffer  Gray, 
And  why  doth  thy  nose  look  so  blue?" 
"  'Tis  the  weather  that's  cold, 
'Tis  I'm  grown  very  old. 
And  my  doublet  is  not  very  new, 
WeU-a-day!" 

"Then  line  that  warm  doublet  with  ale. 

Gaffer  Gray, 

And  warm  thy  old  heart  with  a  glass." 

"Nay,  but  credit  I've  none. 

And  my  money's  all  gone; 

Then  say  how  m.ay  that  come  to  pass? 

Well-a-day!" 

"Hie  away  to  the  house  on  the  brow, 

Gaffer  Gray, 
And  knock  at  the  joUy  priest's  door." 
"The  priest  often  preaches 
Against  worldly  riches. 
But  ne'er  gives  a  mite  to  the  poor, 
Well-a-day!" 

"The  lawyer  lives  under  the  hill. 

Gaffer  Gray, 
Warmly  fenced  both  in  back  and  in  front." 


"A   Reason   Fair  to   Fill   My  Glass"     1997 

"He  will  fasten  his  locks, 
And  will  threaten  the  stocks, 
Should  he  evermore  find  me  in  want. 
Weli-a-day!" 

"The  squire  has  fat  beeves  and  brown  ale, 

Gaffer  Gray, 

And  the  season  will  welcome  you  there." 

"His  fat  beeves  and  his  beer. 

And  his  merry  new  year. 

Are  all  for  the  flush  and  the  fair, 

Wcll-a-day!" 

"My  keg  is  but  low,  I  confess, 

Gaffer  Gray, 
What  then?     While  it  lasts,  man,  we'll  live." 
"The  poor  man  alone, 
When  he  hears  the  poor  moan. 
Of  his  morsel  a  morsel  will  give, 
Well-a-day." 

Thomas  Holer  eft  [i  745-1809] 

"A  REASON  FAIR  TO  FILL  MY   GLASS" 

I've  oft  been  asked  by  prosing  souls 

And  men  of  sober  tongue, 
What  joys  there  are  in  draining  bowls 

And  tippling  all  night  long? 
But  though  these  cautious  knaves  I  scorn. 

For  once  I'll  not  disdain 
To  tell  them  why  I  drink  till  morn 

And  fill  my  glass  again. 

'Tis  by  the  glow  my  bumper  gives 

Life's  picture's  mellow  made; 
The  fading  light  then  brightly  lives. 

And  softly  sinks  the  shade: 
Some  happier  tint  still  rises  there 

With  every  drop  I  drain, 
And  that  I  think's  a  reason  fair 

To  fill  my  glass  again. 


1998  Pipe  and   Can  H   A 

My  muse,  too,  when  her  wings  are  dry, 

No  frohc  flight  will  take, 
But  round  the  bowl  she'll  dip  and  fly 

Like  swallows  round  a  lake; 
Then  if  the  nymplis  wiJl  have  their  share 

Before  they'll  bless  their  swain, 
Why  that  I  think's  a  reason  fair 

To  fill  my  glass  again. 

In  life  I've  rung  all  changes  through, 

Run  every  pleasure  down 
'Mid  each  extreme  of  folly,  too. 

And  lived  with  half  the  town; 
For  me  there's  nothing  new  or  rare 

Till  wine  deceives  my  brain. 
And  that  I  think's  a  reason  fair 

To  fill  my  glass  again. 

There's  many  a  lad  I  knew  is  dead, 

And  many  a  lass  grown  old. 
And  as  the  lesson  strikes  my  head 

My  weary  heart  grows  cold; 
But  wine  awhile  drives  off  despair, 

N/iy,  bids  a  hope  remain, 
Why,  that  I  think's  a  reason  fair 

To  fill  my  glass  again. 

I  find  too  when  I  stint  my  glass 

And  sit  with  sober  air, 
I'm  posed  by  some  dull  reasoning  ass 

Who  treads  the  path  of  care; 
Or,  harder  still,  am  doomed  to  bear 

Some  coxcomb's  fribbling  strain, 
And  that  I'm  sure's  a  reason  fair 

To  fill  my  glass  again,   rl^'f  SnJ' 

Though  hipped  and  vexed  at  England's  fate 

In  these  convulsive  days, 
I  can't  endure  the  ruined  state 

My  sober  eye  surveys; 


1999 


"  Let  the    loast  Pass  " 

But  through  the  bottle's  dazzhng  glare 

The  gloom  is  seen  less  plain, 
And  that  I  think's  a  reason  fair 

To  fill  my  glass  again. 

Charles  Morris  [174 5-1 J 


"LET  THE  TOAST  PASS" 

From  "  The  School  for  Scandal  " 

Here's  to  the  maiden  of  bashful  fifteen, 

Here's  to  the  widow  of  fifty; 
Here's  to  the  flaunting  extravagant  quean, 

And  here's  to  the  housewife  that's  thrifty. 

1  Iff  TUO  ! 

Let  the  toast  pass, 
:  Drink  to  the  lass, 

I'll  warrant  she'll  prove  an  excuse  for  the  glass. 

Here's  to  the  charmer  whose  dimples  we  prize, 

Now  to  the  maid  who  has  none,  sir; 
Here's  to  the  girl  with  a  pair  of  blue  eyes. 

And  here's  to  the  nymph  with  but  one,  sir. 

Here's  to  the  maid  with  a  bosom  of  snow. 
And  to  her  that's  as  brown  as  a  berry; 

Here's  to  the  wife,  with  a  face  full  of  woe, 
And  now  to  the  girl  that  is  merry. 

For  let  'em  be  clumsy,  or  let  'em  be  slim, 

Young  or  ancient,  I  care  not  a  feather;        ;.i 
So  fill  the  pint  bumper  quite  up  to  the  brim, 
So  fill  up  your  glasses,  nay  fill  to  the  brim, 
And  let  us  e'en  toast  them  together. 

Let  the  toast  pass,  p 

Drink  to  the  lass, 

I'll  warrant  she  II  prove  an  excuse  for  the  glass, 
l^chard  Brinsley  Sheridan  [1751-1816] 


2000  Pipe  and  Can 


THE  YEAR  THAT'S   AWA' 

Here's  to  the  year  that's  awa'! 

We  will  drink  it  in  strong  and  in  sma'; 
And  here's  to  ilk  bonnie  young  lassie  we  lo'ed, 

While  swift  flew  the  year  that's  awa'. 

Here's  to  the  sodger  who  bled, 

And  the  sailor  who  bravely  did  fa'; 
Their  fame  is  alive  though  their  spirits  are  fled 

On  the  wings  of  the  year  that's  awa'. 

Here's  to  the  friends  we  can  trust 

When  storms  of  adversity  blaw; 
May  they  live  in  our  songs  and  be  nearest  our  hearts, 

Nor  depart  like  the  year  that's  awa'. 

John  Dunlop  [1755-1820] 


JOHN  BARLEYCORN 

There  were  three  kings  into  the  east. 
Three  kings  both  great  and  high; 

And  they  hae  sworn  a  solemn  oath 
John  Barleycorn  should  die. 

They  took  a  plough  and  ploughed  him  down, 

Put  clods  upon  his  head; 
And  they  hae  sworn  a  solemn  oath 

John  Barleycorn  was  dead. 

But  the  cheerful  spring  came  kindly  on, 

And  showers  began  to  fall: 
John  Barleycorn  got  up  again, 

And  sore  surprised  them  all.  '^^  '^"^ 

The  sultry  suns  of  summer  came. 
And  he  grew  thick  and  strong; 
His  head  weel  armed  wi'  pointed  spears, 
^     That  no  one  should  him  wfong. 


John   Barleycorn  2001 

The  sober  autumn  entered  mild, 

When  he  grew  wan  and  pale; 
His  bending  joints  and  drooping  head 

Showed  he  began  to  fail. 

His  color  sickened  more  and  more, 

He  faded  into  age; 
And  then  his  enemies  began 

To  show  their  deadly  rage. 

They've  ta 'en  a  weapon,  long  and  sharp, 

And  cut  him  by  the  knee; 
Then  tied  him  fast  upon  a  cart, 

Like  a  rogue  for  forgerie. 

They  laid  him  down  upon  his  back, 

And  cudgelled  him  full  sore; 
They  hung  him  up  before  the  storm, 

And  turned  him  o'er  and  o'er. 

They  filled  up  a  darksome  pit 

With  water  to  the  brim: 
They  heaved  in  John  Barleycorn, 

There  let  him  sink  or  swim. 

They  laid  him  out  upon  the  floor, 

To  work  him  further  woe: 
And  still,  as  signs  of  life  appeared, 

They  tossed  him  to  and  fro. 

They  wasted  o'er  a  scorching  flame 

The  marrow  of  his  bones; 
But  a  miller  used  him  worst  of  all, 

For  he  crushed  him  'tween  two  stones. 

And  they  hae  ta'en  his  very  heart's  blood, 

And  drank  it  round  and  round, 
And  still  the  more  and  more  they  drank, 

Their  joy  did  more  abound. 


2002  Pipe    ^^^    C^^ 

John  Barleycorn  was  a  hero  bold,  ,-  oHT 

Of  noble  enterprise; 
For  if  you  do  but  taste  his  blood,         [1 

'Twill  make  your  courage  rise. 

'Twill  make  a  man  forget  his  woe; 

'Twill  heighten  all  his  joy: 
'Twill  make  the  widow's  heart  to  sing, 

Though  the  tear  were  in  her  eye. 

Then  let  us  toast  John  Barleycorn, 

Each  man  a  glass  in  hand; 
And  may  his  great  posterity 

Ne'er  fail  in  old  Scotland! 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


"FILL  THE  BUMPER  FAIR" 

Fill  the  bumper  fair! 

Every  drop  we  sprinkle 
O'er  the  brow  of  Care 

Smooths  away  a  wrinkle. 
Wit's  electric  flame 

Ne'er  so  swiftly  passes 
As  when  through  the  frame 

It  shoots  from  brimming  glasses. 
Fill  the  lumper  fair! 

Evcrv  drop  we  sprinkle 
O'er  the  brow  of  Care 

Smooths  away  a  wrinkle. 
f] 
Sages  can,  they  say, 

Grasp  the  lightning's  pinions. 
And  bring  down  its  ray 

From  the  starred  dominions:— 
So  we,  Sages,  sit, 

And,  'mid  bumpers  bright'ning, 
From  the  Heaven  of  Wit 

Draw  down  all  its  lightning. 


2003 


"  Wreathe  the   Bowl  '* 

Wouldst  thou  know  what  first      :f-. 

Made  our  souls  inherit 
This  ennobhng  thirst 

From  wine's  celestial  spirit? 
It  chanced  upon  that  day, 

When,  as  bards  inform  us, 
Prometheus  stole  away 

The  living  fires  that  warm  us: 

The  careless  Youth,  when  up 

To  Glory's  fount  aspiring, 
Took  nor  urn  nor  cup 

To  hide  the  pilfered  fire  in. — 
But,  oh  his  joy,  when,  round 

The  halls  of  Heaven  spying, 
Among  the  stars  he  found 

A  bowl  of  Bacchus  lying! 


Some  drops  were  in  that  bowl. 

Remains  of  last  night's  pleasure, 
With  which  the  Sparks  of  Soul 

Mixed  their  burning  treasure. 
Hence  the  goblet's  shower 

Hath  such  spells  to  win  us; 
Hence  its  mighty  power 

O'er  the  flame  within  us. 
Fill  the  bumper  fair  I 

Every  drop  we  sprinkle 
O'er  the  brow  of  Care 

Sviooths  away  a  wrinkle. 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 


"WREATHE  THE  BOWL" 

Wreathe  the  bowl 
With  flowers  of  soul, 
The  brightest  Wit  can  find  us; 
We'll  take  a  flight 
Towards  heaven  to-night, 


2004  Pipe  and  Can 

And  leave  dull  earth  behind  us! 
Should  Love  amid 
The  wreaths  be  hid 

That  Joy,  the  enchanter,  brings  us, 
No  danger  fear 
While  wine  is  near— 

We'll  drown  him  if  he  stings  us. 
Then,  wreathe  the  bowl 
With  flowers  of  soul, 

The  brightest  Wit  can  find  us; 
We'll  take  a  flight 
Towards  heaven  to-night. 

And  leave  duU  earth  behind  usl 

'Twas  nectar  fed 

Of  old,  'tis  said, 
Their  Junos,  Joves,  Apollos; 

And  man  may  brew 

His  nectar  too; 
The  rich  receipt's  as  follows: — 

Take  wine  like  this; 

Let  looks  of  bliss 
Around  it  well  be  blended ; 

Then  bring  Wit's  beam 

To  warm  the  stream, 
And  there's  your  nectar  splendid! 

So  wreathe  the  bowl 

With  flowers  of  soul, 
The  brightest  Wit  can  And  us; 

We'll  take  a  flight 

Towards  heaven  to-night, 
And  leave  dull  earth  behind  us! 

Say,  why  did  Time 
His  glass  sublime 

Fill  up  with  sands  unsightly, 
When  wine,  he  knew. 
Runs  brisker  through, 

And  sparkles  far  more  brightly? 
Oh,  lend  it  us. 
And,  smiHng  thus. 


Saint   Peray  2005 

The  glass  in  two  we'd  sever, 

Make  pleasure  glide 

In  double  tide, 
And  fill  both  ends  forever! 

Then  wreathe  the  bowl 

With  flowers  of  soul, 
The  brightest  Wit  can  find  us; 

We'll  take  a  flight 

Towards  heaven  to-night, 
And  leave  dull  earth  behind  us! 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 

SAINT  PERAY 

When  to  any  saint  I  pray,  , .  [ 

It  shall  be  to  Saint  Peray. 
He  alone,  of  all  the  brood. 
Ever  did  me  any  good: 
Many  I  have  tried  that  are 
Humbugs  in  the  calendar. 

On  the  Atlantic,  faint  and  sick, 
Once  I  prayed  Saint  Dominick: 
He  was  holy,  sure,  and  wise; — 
Was  't  not  he  that  did  devise 
Auto  da  Fes  and  rosaries? — ■ 
But  for  one  in  my  condition 
This  good  saint  was  no  physician. 

Next,  in  pleasant  Normandie, 
I  made  a  prayer  to  Saint  Denis, 
In  the  great  cathedral,  where 

All  the  ancient  kings  repose; 
But,  how  I  was  swindled  there 

At  the  "Golden  Fleece," — he  knows! 

In  my  wanderings,  vague  and  various, 

Reaching  Naples — as  I  lay 

Watching  \'csuvius  from  the  bay, 
I  besought  Saint  Januarius. 
But  I  was  a  fool  to  try  him; 


20o6  Pipe  and   Can 

Naught  I  said  could  liquefy  him; 
And  I  swear  he  did  me  wrong, 
Keeping  me  shut  up  so  long 
In  that  pest-house,  with  obscene 
Jews  and  Greeks  and  things  unclean — 
What  need  had  I  of  quarantine? 

In  Sicily  at  least  a  score, — 
In  Spain  about  as  many  more, — 
And  in  Rome  almost  as  many 
,     ,  As  the  loves  of  Don  Giovanni, 

Did  I  pray  to — sans  reply; 
Devil  take  the  tribe! — said  I. 

Worn  with  travel,  tired  and  lame. 
To  Assisi's  walls  I  came:  '  ■  '^ 

Sad  and  full  of  homesick  fancies,  '' 
I  addressed  me  to  Saint  Francis:    ' -^ 
But  the  beggar  never  did 
Anything  as  he  was  bid. 
Never  gave  me  aught — but  fleas,^^^ 
Plenty. had  I  at  Assise.  , ,, 

But  in  Provence,  near  Vaucluse,      0 
Hard  by  the  Rhone,  I  found  a  Saint 

Gifted  with  a  wondrous  juice, 
Potent  for  the  worst  complaint. 

'Twas  at  Avignon  that  first — 
In  the  witching  time  of  thirst — 
To  my  brain  the  knowledge  came  -^ 
Of  this  blessed  Catholic's  name; 
Forty  miles  of  dust  that  day 
Made  me  welcome  Saint  Pcray. 

Though  till  then  I  had  not  heard  .j<i 
Aught  about  him,  ere  a  third 
Of  a  litre  passed  my  lips, 
All  saints  else  were  in  eclipse. 
For  his  gentle  spirit  glided 

With  such  magic  into  mine. 
That  met  bought  such  bliss  as  I  did  ^ 

Poet  never  drew  from  wine.      '^' 


"  Sparkling  and   Bright  "  2007 

Rest  he  gave  me  and  refection, —  ~\z  +;/T 

Chastened  hopes,  calm  retrospection, — 

Softened  images  of  sorrow. 

Bright  forebodings  for  the  morrow, — ■  ; 

Charity  for  what  is  past, — 

Faith  in  something  good  at  last. 

Now,  why  should  any  almanack 
fto-The  name  of  this  good  creature  lack? 
Or  wherefore  should  the  breviary 
Omit  a  saint  so  sage  and  merry? 
The  Pope  himself  should  grant  a  day 
Especially  to  Saint  Peray. 
But,  since  no  day  hath  been  appointed, 
On  purpose,  by  the  Lord's  anointed,  1. 
Let  us  not  wait — we'll  do  him  right; 
Send  round  your  bottles,  Hal — and  set  your  night. 

Thomas  William  Parsons  [1819-1892] 


SPARKLING  AND   BRIGHT 

Sparkling  and  bright  in  liquid  light. 
Does  the  wine  our  goblets  gleam  in ; 
With  hue  as  red  as  the  rosy  bed 

Which  a  bee  would  choose  to  dream  in. 
Then  fill  to-night,  with  hearts  as  light, 

To  loves  as  gay  and  fleeting 
As  bubbles  that  swim  on  the  beaker's  brim, 
And  break  on  the  lips  while  meeting. 

Oh!  if  Mirth  might  arrest  the  flight 

Of  Time  through  Life's  dominions. 
We  here  a  while  would  now  beguile 
The  graybeard  of  his  pinions. 

To  drink  to-night,  with  hearts  as  light, 

To  loves  as  gay  and  fleeting 
As  bubbles  that  sivim  on  the  beaker's  brim, 
And  break  on  the  lips  while  meeting. 


2oo8  Pipe  and  Can 


But  since  Delight  can't  tempt  the  wight, 

Nor  fond  Regret  delay  him, 
Nor  Love  himself  can  hold  the  elf, 

Nor  sober  Friendship  stay  him,  1 

We'll  drink  to-night,  with  hearts  as  light,    ' 

To  loves  as  gay  and  fleeting 
As  bubbles  that  swim  on  the  beaker's  brim, 
And  break  on  the  lips  while  meeting. 

Charles  Fenno  Hojjman  [1806-1884] 
■iw  lO 

THE  MAHOGANY  TREE 


Christmas  is  here: 

Winds  whistle  shrill. 

Icy  and  chill, 

fq  fiO 

Little  care  we: 

:    -f.,    1 

Little  we  fear 

Weather  without, 

Sheltered  about 

The  Mahogany  Tree. 

Once  on  the  boughs 
Birds  of  rare  plume 
Sang,  in  its  bloom ; 
Night-birds  are  we: 
Here  we  carouse. 
Singing  like  them. 
Perched  round  the  stem 
Of  the  jolly  old  tree. 

Here  let  us  sport, 
Boys,  as  we  sit; 
Laughter  and  wit 
Flashing  so  free. 
Life  is  but  short — 
When  we  are  gone, 
Let  them  sing  on 
Round  the  old  tree,    ■ 

Evenings  we  knew, 
Happy  as  this; 


Todlin'   Hame 


2009 


Faces  we  miss, 
Pleasant  to  see. 
Kind  hearts  and  true. 
Gentle  and  just, 
Peace  to  your  dust! 
We  sing  round  the  tree. 

Care,  like  a  dun, 
Lurks  at  the  gate: 
Let  the  dog  wait; 
Happy  we'll  be! 
Drink,  every  one; 
Pile  up  the  coals, 
Fill  the  red  bowls 
Round  the  old  tree! 

Drain  we  the  cup. — 

Friend,  art  afraid? 

Spirits  are  laid  /^ 

In  the  Red  Sea. 

Mantle  it  up; 

Emjity  it  yet; 

Let  us  forget, 

Round  the  old  tree. 

Sorrows,  begone! 

Life  and  its  ills, 

Duns  and  their  bills, 

Bid  we  to  flee. 

Come  with  the  dawn, 

Blue-devil  sprite,  \ 

Leave  us  to-night 

Round  the  old  tree. 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 


TODLIN'   HAME 

When  I  ha'e  a  saxpence  under  my  thoom. 
Then  I  get  credit  in  ilka  toun; 
But  aye  when  I'm  puir  they  bid  me  gang  by. 
Oh,  poverty  parts  gude  company! 


20I0  Pipe  and  Can 

Todlin'  hame,  todlin'  hame, 
Couldna'  my  love  come  todlin'  hame? 

Fair  fa'  the  gudewife,  and  send  her  gude  sale; 

She  gi'es  us  white  bannocks  to  relish  her  ale; 

Syne,  if  that  her  tippeny  chance  to  be  sma', 

We  tak'  a  gude  scour  o't,  and  ca't  awa. 
Todhn'  hame,  todlin'  hame, 
As  round  as  a  neep  come  todhn'  hame. 

My  kimmer  and  I  lay  down  to  sleep, 

Wi'  twa  pint-stoups  at  our  bed's  feet; 

And  aye  when  we  wakened,  we  drank  them  dry. 

What  think  ye  o'  my  wee  kimmer  and  I? 
Todlin'  butt,  and  todlin'  ben, 
Sae  round  as  my  love  comes  todhn'  hame. 

Leeze  me  on  liquor,  my  todlin'  dow, 
Ye're  aye  gude-humored  when  weetin'  your  mou'! 
When  sober  sae  sour,  ye'U  fecht  wi'  a  flea, 
That  'tis  a  blithe  nicht  to  the  bairns  and  me, 
When,  todlin'  hame,  todlin'  hame. 
When,  round  as  a  neep,  ye  come  todlin'  hame. 

Unknown 

THE   CRUISKEEN  LAWN 

Let  the  farmer  praise  his  grounds, 
Let  the  huntsman  praise  his  hounds. 

The  shepherd  his  dew-scented  lawn; 
But  I,  more  blest  than  they. 
Spend  each  happy  night  and  day 

With  my  charming  little  cruiskeen  lawn,  lawn,  lawn, 

My  charming  little  cruiskeen  lawn. 

Gra  machree  ma  cruiskeen, 
Slainte  geal  mavourneen, 

's  gra  machree  a  cooleen  bawn. 
Gra  machree  ma  cruiskeen, 
Slainte  geal  mavourneen, 
Gra  machree  a  cooleen  bawn,  bawn^  bawn, 

's  gra  machree  a  cooleen  bawn.   .^q  jq 


Give   Me  the  Old  201 1 

Immortal  and  divine, 

Great  Bacchus,  god  of  wine,  '.T 

Create  me  by  adoption  your  son;        .'T 
In  hope  that  you'll  comply. 
My  glass  shall  ne'er  run  dry, 

Nor  my  smiling  little  cruiskeen  lawn. 

fi 
And  when  grim  death  appears. 

In  a  few  but  pleasant  years, 

To  tell  me  that  my  glass  has  run; 
I'll  say.  Begone,  you  knave. 
For  bold  Bacchus  gave  me  leave 

To  take  another  cruiskeen  lawn. 

Then  fill  your  glasses  high, 
Let's  not  part  with  lips  a-dry, 

Though  the  lark  now  proclaims  it  is  dawn; 
And  since  we  can't  remain, 
May  we  shortly  meet  again. 

To  fill  another  cruiskeen  lawn. 


Unknown 


GIVE   IVIE  THE  OLD 

'J 

Old  wine  to  drink!  "^ 

Ay,  give  the  slippery  juice 
That  drippeth  from  the  grape  thrown  loose 

Within  the  tun; 
Plucked  from  beneath  the  cliff  i" 

Of  sunny-sided  Tencriffe, 
And  ripened  'neath  the  blink 

Of  India's  sun! 

Peat  whiskey  hot, 
Tempered  with  weU-boilcd  water!     >^- 
These  make  the  long  night  shorter,—*  1  li'^ 

Forgetting  not 
Good  stout  old  English  porter. 

Old  wood  to  burn!  // 

Ay,  bring  the  hiU-side  beech 
From  where  the  owlets  meet  and  screech, 


20I2  i/Pipe  and  Can 

And  ravens  croak;  nrl 

The  crackling  pine,  and  cedar  sweet; 
Bring  too  a  clump  of  fragrant  peat, 
Dug  'neath  the  fern; 

The  knotted  oak, 

A  fagot  too,  perhap, 
Whose  bright  flame,  dancing,  winking, 
Shall  light  us  at  our  drinking; 

WhUe  the  oozing  sap 
Shall  make  sweet  music  to  our  thinking. 

Old  books  to  read! 
Ay,  bring  those  nodes  of  wit. 
The  brazen-clasped,  the  vellum  writ, 

Time-honored  tomes! 
The  same  my  sire  scanned  before, 
The  same  my  grandsire  thumbed  o'er,    ^ 
The  same  his  sire  from  college  bore, 
The  well-earned  meed 
«^o«A«\':       O^  Oxford's  domes: 

Old  Homer  blind, 
Old  Horace,  rake  Anacreon,  by 
Old  Tully,  Plautus,  Terence  lie; 
Mort  Arthur's  olden  minstrelsie, 
Quaint  Burton,  quainter  Spenser,  ay! 
And  Gervase  Markham's  venerie — 

Nor  leave  behind 
The  Holye  Book  by  which  we  live  and  die. 

Old  friends  to  talk!  bunaqri  bnA 

Ay,  bring  those  chosen  few,  • .  i   .  i  .■  > 
The  wise,  the  courtly,  and  the  true, 

So  rarely  found;  i>ii:/r 

Him  for  my  wine,  him  for  my  stud,     ..-irfT 
Him  for  my  easel,  distich,  bud 

In  mountain-walk!  .i-u^.  nuw) 

Bring  Walter  good, 
With  soulful  Fred,  and  learned  Will,' 
And  thee,  my  alter  ego  (dearer  still 
.da-jFor  every  mood).  '■^4w  "loi i 


The  Spirit  of  Wine  2013 

These  add  a  bouquet  to  my  wine! 
These  add  a  sparkle  to  my  pine! 

If  these  I  tine, 
Can  books,  or  fire,  or  wine  be  good? 

Robert  Hinckley  Messinger  [1811-1874] 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  WINE 

The  Spirit  of  Wine 
Sang  in  my  glass,  and  I  listened 
With  love  to  his  odorous  music, 
His  flushed  and  magnificent  song. 

— "I  am  health,  I  am  heart,  I  am  life! 
For  I  give  for  the  asking 
The  fire  of  my  father,  the  Sun, 
And  the  strength  of  my  mother,  the  Earth. 
Inspiration  in  essence, 
I  am  wisdom  and  wit  to  the  wise, 
His  visible  muse  to  the  poet. 
The  soul  of  desire  to  the  lover. 
The  genius  of  laughter  to  all. 

"Come,  lean  on  me,  ye  that  are  weary! 

Rise,  ye  faint-hearted  and  doubting! 

Haste,  ye  that  lag  by  the  way! 

I  am  Pride,  the  consoler; 

Valor  and  Hope  are  my  henchmen; 

I  am  the  Angel  of  Rest. 

"I  am  life,  I  am  wealth,  I  am  fame: 
For  I  captain  an  army 
Of  shining  and  generous  dreams; 
And  mine,  too,  all  mine,  are  the  keys 
Of  that  secret  spiritual  shrine, 
Where,  his  work-a-daj-'  soul  put  by, 
Shut  in  with  his  saint  of  saints — 
With  his  radiant  and  conquering  self — 
Man  worships,  and  talks,  and  is  glad. 


20I4  tj:    Pipe  and  Can 

"Come,  sit  with  me,  ye  that  are  lonely, 

Ye  that  are  paid  with  disdain, 

Ye  that  are  chained,  and  would  soar! 

I  am  beauty  and  love ;  -^ 

I  am  friendship,  the  comforter; 

I  am  that  which  forgives  and  forgets." — 

The  Spirit  of  Wine 
Sang  in  my  heart,  and  I  triumphed 
In  the,  savor  and  scent  of  his  music, 
His  magnetic  and  mastering  song. 

WiUiam  Ernest  Henley  [1840-1903] 

"DAY  AND  NIGHT  MY  THOUGHTS  INCLINE' 

Day  and  night  my  thoughts  incline 
To  the  blandishinents  of  wine: 
Jars  were  made  to  drain,  I  think, 
Wine,  I  know,  was  made  to  drink. 

When  I  die,  (the  day  be  far!) 
Should  the  potters  miake  a  jar 
Out  of  this  poor  clay  of  mine, 
Let  the  jar  be  lilled  with  wine! 

Richard  Henry  Stoddard  [1825-1903] 

FALSTAFF'S  SONG 

Where's  he  that  died  o'  Wednesday? 

What  place  on  earth  hath  he? 
A  tailor's  yard  beneath,  I  wot, 

Where  worms  approaching  be; 
For  the  wight  that  died  o'  Wednesday, 

Just  laid  the  light  below,  ''•  ' 

Is  dead  as  the  varlet  turned  to  elay^  '^  ^ 

A  score  of  years  ago.  '"'''"'^  briA 

■:   lO 
Where's  he  that  died  o'  Sabba'  day?rr/^ 

Good  Lord,  I'd  not  be  he! 

The  best  of  days  is  foul  enough 

From  this  world's  fare  to  flee; 


The   Maltworm's   Madrigal  2015 

And  the  saint  that  died  o'  Sabba'  day, 

With  his  grave  turf  yet  to  grow, 
Is  dead  as  the  sinner  brought  to  pray 

A  hundred  years  ago. 

Where's  he  that  died  o'  yesterday? 

What  better  chance  hath  he 
To  cHnk  the  can  and  toss  the  pot 

When  this  night's  juniiets  be? 
For  the  lad  that  died  o'  yesterday 

Is  just  as  dead — ho!  ho! — 
As  the  whoreson  knave  men  laid  away 

A  thousand  years  ago. 

Edmund  Clarence  Stcdman  [1833-1908] 


THE  MALTWORM'S   MADRIGAL 

I  DRINK  of  the  Ale  of  Southwark,  I  drink  of  the  Ale  of 

Chepe; 
At  noon  I  dream  on  the  settle;  at  night  I  cannot  sleep; 
For  my  love,  my  love  it  groweth;  I  waste  me  all  the  day; 
And  when  I  see  sweet  Alison,  I  know  not  what  to  say. 

The  sparrow  when  he  spieth  his  Dear  upon  the  tree. 
He  beateth-to  his  little  wing;  he  chirketh  lustily; 
But  when  I  see  sweet  Alison,  the  words  begin  to  fail; 
I  wot  that  I  shall  die  of  Love— an  I  die  not  of  Ale. 

Her  lips  are  like  the  muscadel;  her  brows  are  black  as  ink; 
Her  eyes  are  bright  as  beryl  stones  that  in  the  tankard  wink; 
But  when  she  sees  me  coming,  she  shrilleth  out — "Te-Hee! 
Fye  on  thy  ruddy  nose.  Cousin,  what  lackest  thou  of  me? 

"Fye  on  thy  ruddy  nose.  Cousin!  Why  be  thine  eyes  so 
small?  ! 

Why  go  thy  legs  tap-lappetty  like  men  that  fear  to  fall? 

Why  is  thy  leathern  doublet  besmeared  with  stain  and  spot? 

Co  to.  Thou  art  no  man  (she  saith) — thoa  art  a  Pottle- 
pot!"  hJjiXJffliV/ 


2oi6  Pipe  and  Can 

"No  man,"  i' faith.  "No  man!"  she  saith.  And  "Pottle- 
pot"  thereto! 

"Thou  sleepest  like  our  dog  all  day;  thou  drink'st  as  fishes 
do." 

I  would  that  I  were  Tibb  the  dog;  he  wags  at  her  his  tail; 

Or  would  that  I  were  fish,  in  truth,  and  all  the  sea  were  Ale! 

So  I  drink  of  the  Ale  of  Southwark,  I  drink  of  the  Ale  of 

Chepe; 
All  day  I  dream  in  the  sunlight;  I  dream  and  eke  I  weep, 
But  little  lore  of  loving  can  any  flagon  teach, 
For  when  my  tongue  is  loosed  most,  then  most  I  lose  my 

speech. 


(80Q1 


Austin  Dohson  [1840- 

THE  POWER   OF  MALT 

,"\  t  ,  Why,  if  'tis  dancing  you  would  be. 
There's  brisker  pipes  than  poetry. 
Say,  for  what  were  hop-yards  meant, 
Or  why  was  Burton  built  on  Trent? 
'  '      Oh,  many  a  peer  of  England  brews 
Livelier  liquor  than  the  Muse, 
'  •'     ' '  And  malt  does  more  than  Milton  can 
To  justify  God's  Vv'ays  to  man. 
Ale,  man,  ale's  the  stuflf  to  drink 
For  fellows  whom  it  hurts  to  think: 
"       Look  into  the  pewter  pot 

''  To  see  the  world  as  the  world's  not. 

Alfred  Edward  Housman  [iSsg- 

;>l  ; 

'''"'"  '■  A   STEIN   SONG  -'  '"'^'^ 

laaH-d'J  n  iijQ. 

From  "  Spring  "  _ 

lie  ^^{i 
Give  a  rouse,  then,  in  the  Maytime 

For  a  life  that  knows  no  fear!  ,!t  no  ^^ 

Turn  night-time  into  daytime  '■    aa 

With  the  sunlight  of  good  cheer!  ,  nYlf 

•Joqc  Jjii:  For  it's  always  fair  weather  /_iij  ^i  ^ft  ■ 

-oliJoT       When  good  fellows  get  together,  'T     a,<.  ■ 

With  a  stein  on  the  table  and  a  good  song  ringing  clear. 


The   Kavanagh  2017 

\Vhen  the  wind  comes  up  from  Cuba, 

And  the  birds  are  on  the  wing, 
And  our  hearts  are  patting  juba 
To  the  banjo  of  the  spring, 

Then  it's  no  wonder  whether 
The  boys  will  get  together. 
With  a  stein  on  the  table  and  a  cheer  for  everything. 

For  we're  all  frank-and-tw-enty 

When  the  spring  is  in  the  air; 
And  we've  faith  and  hope  a-plenty, 
And  we've  life  and  love  to  spare; 
And  it's  birds  of  a  feather 
When  we  all  get  together. 
With  a  stein  on  the  table  and  a  heart  without  a  care. 

For  we  know  the  world  is  glorious, 

And  the  goal  a  golden  thing, 
And  that  God  is  not  censorious 

When  his  children  have  their  fling; 
And  life  slips  its  tether 
When  the  boys  get  together. 
With  a  stein  on  the  table  in  the  fellowship  of  spring. 

Richard  Hovey  [i 864-1  goo] 


THE  KAVANAGH 

A  STONE  jug  and  a  pewter  mug. 
And  a  table  set  for  three! 
A  jug  and  a  mug  at  every  place, 
And  a  biscuit  or  two  with  Brie! 
Three  stone  jugs  of  Cruiskeen  Lawn, 
And  a  cheese  like  crusted  foam ! 
The  Kavanagh  receives  to-night! 
McMurrough  is  at  home! 

We  three  and  the  barlcy-bree! 
And  a  health  to  the  one  away, 
Who  drifts  down  careless  Italy, 
God's  wanderer  and  estray! 


2oi8  Pipe  and  Can 

For  friends  are  more  than  Arno's  store 
Of  garnered  charm,  and  he 
Were  bhther  with  us  here  the  night 
Than  Titian  bids  him  be. 

Throw  ope  the  window  to  the  stars, 
And  let  the  warm  night  in! 
Who  knows  what  revelry  in  Mars 
May  rhyme  with  rouse  akin? 
Fill  up  and  drain  the  loving  cup 
And  leave  no  drop  to  waste! 
The  moon  looks  in  to  see  what's  up — • 
Begad,  she'd  like  a  taste! 

What  odds  if  Leinster's  kingly  roll 

Be  now  an  idle  thing? 

The  world  is  his  who  takes  his  toll, 

A  vagrant  or  a  king. 

What  though  the  crown  be  melted  down,  -. 

And  the  heir  a  gypsy  roam? 

The  Kavanagh  receives  to-night! 

McMurrough  is  at  home! 

We  three  and  the  barley-bree! 

And  the  moonlight  on  the  floor! 

Who  were  a  man  to  do  with  less? 

What  emperor  has  more? 

Three  stone  jugs  of  Cruiskeen  Lawn, 

And  three  stout  hearts  to  drain 

A  slanter  to  the  truth  in  the  heart  of  youth 

And  the  joy  of  the  love  of  men. 

Richard  Hovey  [1864-1900] 


GLINTS  O'  SUNSHINE 

SONG 

From  "  Love's  Labor's  Lost" 
I — SPRING 

When  daisies  pied,  and  violets  blue, 
And  lady-smocks  all  silver-white, 

And  cuckoo-buds  of  yellow  hue, 

Do  paint  the  meadows  with  delight, 

The  cuckoo  then,  on  every  tree, 

Mocks  married  men;  for  thus  sings  he, 
Cuckoo; 

Cuckoo,  cuckoo,  — ■  O  word  of  fear, 

Unpleasing  to  a  married  ear! 

When  shepherds  pipe  on  oaten  straws, 
And  merry  larks  are  ploughmen's  clocks, 

When  turtles  tread,  and  rooks,  and  daws. 
And  maidens  bleach  their  summer  smocks, 

The  cuckoo  then,  on  every  tree, 

Mocks  married  men;  for  thus  sings  he, 
Cuckoo ; 

Cuckoo,  cuckoo,  —  O  word  of  fear, 

Unpleasing  to  a  married  ear! 

II  —  WINTER 

When  icicles  hang  by  the  wall. 

And  Dick  the  shepherd  blows  his  nail, 
And  Tom  bears  logs  into  the  hall, 

And  milk  comes  frozen  home  in  pail, 
When  blood  is  nipped,  and  ways  be  foul, 
Then  nightly  sings  the  staring  owl, 

Tu-who; 
Tu-whit,  tu-who, — a  merry  note. 
While  greasy  Joan  doth  keel  the  pot. 
2019 


2020  Glints  o'  Sunshine 

When  all  aloud  the  v/ind  doth  blow, 

And  coughing  drowns  the  parson's  saw, 
And  birds  sit  brooding  in  the  snow, 

And  Marian's  nose  looks  red  .and  raw, 
When  roasted  crabs  hiss  in  the  bov/1. 
Then  nightly  sings  the  staring  owl, 

Tu-who ; 
Tu-whit,  tu-who, — a  merry  note, 
While  greasy  Joan  doth  keel  the  pwt. 

William  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 


THE  WIDOW 

The  widow  can  bake,  and  the  widow  can  brew, 
The  widow  can  shape,  an'  the  widow  can  sew, 
An'  mony  braw  things  the  widow  can  do; 

Then  have  at  the  v/idow,  my  laddie. 
Wi'  courage  attack  her  baith  early  an'  late; 
To  kiss  her  an'  clap  her  ye  maunna  be  blate: 
Speak  weel,  an'  do  better:  for  that's  the  best  gate 

To  win  a  young  widow,  my  laddie. 

The  widow  she's  youthfu',  an'  never  ae  hair 
The  waur  o'  the  wearing,  an'  has  a  good  skair 
O'  everything  lovely;  she's  witty  an'  fair, 

An'  has  a  rich  jointure,  my  laddie. 
What  could  ye  wish  better,  your  pleasure  to  crown, 
Than  a  widow,  the  bonniest  toast  in  the  town, 
Wi'  naithing  but  draw  in  your  stool  and  sit  down. 

An'  sport  wi'  the  widow,  my  laddie. 

Then  till  her,  an'  kill  her  wi'  courtesy  dead. 
Though  stark  love  an'  kindness  be  a'  ye  can  plead; 
Be  heartsome  an'  airy,  an'  hope  to  succeed 

Wi'  a  bonny  gay  widow,  my  laddiel^rn  baA 
Strike  iron  while  it's  het,  if  ye'd  have  it  tb  wald;" 
For  fortune  ay  favors  the  active  an'  bauld. 
But  ruins  the  wooer  that's  thoughtless  an'  cauld, 

Unfit  for  the  widow,  my  laddie. 

Allan  Ramsay  [1686-175} 


Cautionary  Verses  to   Youth        2021 

v.oili..,  SNEEZING 

What  a  moment,  what  a  doubt! 
All  my  nose  is  inside  out,  — 
All  my  thrilling,  tickling  caustic, 

Pyramid  rhinocerostic,  , 

91J.       Wants  to  sneeze  and  cannot  do  it !  j. 

How  it  yearns  me,  thrills  me,  stings  me, 
How  with  rapturous  torment  wrings  me! 

Now  says,  "Sneeze,  you  fool, — get  through  it." 
Shee — shee — oh!  'tis  most  del-ishi — 
Ishi — ishi — most  del-ishi ! 
(Hang  it,  I  shall  sneeze  till  spring!) 
Snuff  is  a  delicious  thing. 

'Leigh  Hunt  [1784-1850] 


i3- 


CAUTIONARY  VERSES  TO  YOUTH  OF  BOTH  SEXES 

My  little  dears,  who  learn  to  read,  pray  early  learn  to  shun 
That  very  silly  thing  indeed  which  people  call  a  pun; 
Read  Entick's  rules,  and  'twill  be  found  how  simple  an 

offence 
It  is  to  make  the  self-same  sound  afford  a  double  sense. 

For  instance,  ale  m.ay  make  you  ail,  your  aunt  an  ant  may 

kill. 
You  in  a  vale  may  buy  a  veil,  and  Bill  may  pay  the  bill. 
Or  if  to  France  your  bark  you  steer,  at  Dover,  it  may  be 
A  peer  appears  upon  the  pier,  who,  blind,  still  goes  to  sea. 

Thus  one  might  say,  when  to  a  treat  good  friends  accept  our 

greeting, 
'Tis  meet  that  men  who  meet  to  eat  should  eat  their  meat 

when  meeting. 
Brawn  on  the  board's  no  bore  indeed,  although  from  boar 

prepared ; 
Nor  can  the  fowl,  on  which  we  feed,  foul  feeding  be  declared. 

Thus  .one  ripe  fruit  may  be  a  pear,  and  yet  be  pared  again, 
And  still  be  one,  which  seemeth  rare  until  we  do  explain. 


202  2  Glints  o'  Sunshine         ) 

It  therefore  should  be  all  your  aim  to  speak  with  ample  care: 
For  who,  however  fond  of  game,  would  choose  to  swallow 
hair? 

A  fat  mah's  gait  may  make  us  smile,  who  have  no  gate  to 

close : 
The  farmer  sitting  on  his  stile  no  stylish  person  knows: 
Perfumers  men  of  scents  must  be;  some  Scilly  men  are 

bright ; 
A  brown  man  oft  deep  read  we  see,  a  l)lack  a  wicked  wight. 

Most  wealthy  men  good  manors  have,  however  vulgar  they; 
And  actors  still  the  harder  slave,  the  oftener  they  play; 
So  poets  can't  the  baize  obtain,  unless  their  tailors  choose; 
While  grooms  and  coachmen,  not  in  vain,  each  evening  seek 
the  ]\Iews. 

The  dyer  who  by  dyeing  lives,  a  dire  life  maintains; 

The  glazier,  it  is  known,  receives  his  profits  from  his  panes: 

By  gardeners  thyme  is  tied,  'tis  true,  when  spring  is  in  its 

prime; 
But  time  or  tide  won't  wait  for  you,  if  you  are  tied  for  time. 

Then  novv^  you  see,  my  little  dears,  the  way  to  make  a  pun; 
A  trick  which  you,  through  coming  years,  should  sedulously 

shun: 
The  fault  admits  of  no  defence;  for  wheresoe'er  'tis  found, 
You  sacrifice  for  sound  the  sense:  the  sense  is  never  sound. 

So  let  your  words  and  actions  too,  one  single  meaning  prove, 
And,  just  in  all  you  say  or  do,  you'll  gain  esteem  and  love: 
In  mirth  and  play  no  harm  you'll  know,  when  duty's  task 

is  done; 
But  parents  ne'er  should  let  you  go  unpunished  for  a  pun. 
Theodore  Edward  Hook  [i  788-1 841] 


A   CREDO 

For  the  sole  edification 
Of  this  decent  congregation, 
Goodly  people,  by  your  grant 
1  will  sing  a  holy  chant  — 


I 


The   Lay  of  the  Levite  2023 

1  will  sing  a  holy  chant. 
If  the  ditty  sound  but  oddly, 
'Twas  a  father,  wise  and  godlj% 

Sang  it  so  long  ago — 
Then  sing  as  Martin  Luther  sang. 
As  Doctor  Martin  Luther  sang: 
"Who  loves  not  wine,  woman,  and  song, 
He  is  a  fool  his  whole  life  long! " 

He,  by  custom  patriarchal. 
Loved  to  see  the  beaker  sparkle; 
And  he  thought  the  wine  improved, 
Tasted  by  the  lips  he  loved — 

By  the  kindly  lips  he  loved. 
Friends,  I  wish  this  custom  pious 
Duly  were  observed  by  us. 

To  combine  love,  song,  wine. 
And  sing  as  Martin  Luther  sang, 
As  Doctor  Martin  Luther  sang: 
"Who  loves  not  wine,  woman,  and  song, 
He  is  a  fool  his  whole  life  long!" 

Vv''ho  refuses  this  our  Credo, 
And  who  will  not  sing  as  we  do. 
Were  he  holy  as  John  Knox, 
I'd  pronounce  him  heterodox! 

I'd  pronounce  him  heterodox. 
And  from  out  this  congregation, 
With  a  solemn  commination. 

Banish  cjuick  the  heretic, 
Who  will  not  sing  as  Luther  sang. 
As  Doctor  Martin  Luther  sang: 
"Who  loves  not  wine,  woman,  and  song, 
He  is  a  fool  his  whole  life  long! " 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 

THE  LAY  OF  THE  LEVITE 

There  is  a  sound  that's  dear  to  me, 

It  haunts  me  in  my  sleep; 
I  wake,  and,  if  I  hear  it  not, 

I  cannot  choose  but  weep. 


2024  Glints  o'  Sunshine 

Above  the  roaring  of  the  wind, 

Above  the  river's  flow, 
Methinks  I  hear  the  mystic  cry 

Of  "Clo!— oldClo!" 

The  exile's  song,  it  thrills  among 

The  dweUings  of  the  free; 
Its  sound  is  strange  to  Enghsh  ears, 

But  'tis  not  strange  to  me; 
For  it  hath  shook  the  tented  field 

In  ages  long  ago, 
And  hosts  have  quailed  before  the  cry 

Of  "Clo!— old  Clo!" 

O,  lose  it  not!  forsake  it  not. 

And  let  no  time  efface 
The  memory  of  that  solemn  sound, 

The  watchword  of  our  race; 
For  not  by  dark  and  eagle  eye. 

The  Hebrew  shall  ye  know. 
So  well  as  by  the  plaintive  cry 

Of  "Clo!— old  Clo!" 

Even  now,  perchance,  by  Jordan's  banks. 

Or  Sidon's  sunny  walls, 
Where,  dial-like,  to  portion  time 

The  palm-tree's  shadow  falls. 
The  pilgrims,  wending  on  their  way. 

Will  linger  as  they  go, 
And  listen  to  the  distant  cry 

Of  "Clo!— old  Clo!" 

William  Edmotidstounc  Aytoun  [1813-1865] 

EARLY  RISING 

"God  bless  the  man  who  first  invented  sleep!" 
So  Sancho  Panza  said,  and  so  say  I: 

And  bless  him,  also,  that  he  didn't  keep 
His  great  discovery  to  himself;  nor  try 

To  make  it — as  the  lucky  fellow  might — 

A  close  monopoly  by  patent-right! 


Early   Rising  2025 

Yes;  bless  the  man  who  first  invented  sleep 

(I  really  can't  avoid  the  iteration) ; 
But  blast  the  man,  with  curses  loud  and  deep, 

Whate'er  the  rascal's  name,  or  age,  or  station, 
Who  first  invented,  and  went  round  advising, 
That  artificial  cut-off, — Early  Rising! 

"Rise  with  the  lark,  and  with  the  lark  to  bed," 
Observes  some  solemn,  sentimental  owl; 

Maxims  like  these  are  very  cheaply  said: 
But,  ere  you  make  yourself  a  fool  or  fowl, 

Pray,  just  inquire  about  his  rise  and  fall, 

And  whether  larks  have  any  beds  at  all! 

The  time  for  honest  folks  to  be  abed  I  ] 

Is  in  the  morning,  if  I  reason  right; 
And  he  who  cannot  keep  his  precious  head 

Upon  his  pillow  till  it's  fairly  light, 
And  so  enjoy  his  forty  morning  winks, 
Is  up  to  knavery,  or  else — he  drinks! 

Thomson,  who  sang  about  the  "Seasons,"  said 
It  was  a  glorious  thing  to  rise  in  season; 

But  then  he  said  it — lying — in  his  bed, 
At  ten  o'clock,  a.  m., — the  very  reason 

He  wrote  so  charmingly.     The  simple  fact  is, 

His  preaching  wasn't  sanctioned  by  his  practice 


riJiW 


'Tis,  doubtless,  well  to  be  sometimes  awake, — 
Awake  to  duty,  and  awake  to  truth, — 

But  when,  alas!  a  nice  review  we  take 

Of  our  best  deeds  and  days,  we  find,  in  sooth. 

The  hours  that  leave  the  slightest  cause  to  weep 

Are  those  we  passed  in  childhood,  or  asleep! 

'Tis  beautiful  to  leave  the  world  awhile 
For  the  soft  visions  of  the  gentle  night; 

And  free,  at  last,  from  mortal  care  or  guile, 
To  live  as  only  in  the  angels'  sight, 

In  sleep's  sweet  realm  so  cozily  shut  in, 

Where,  at  the  wofst,  we  only  dream  of  sin! 


2026  Glints  o'   Sunshine 

So  let  us  sleep  and  give  the  Maker  praise. 

I  like  the  lad  who,  when  his  father  thought 
To  clip  his  morning  nap  by  hackneyed  phrase 

Of  vagrant  worm  by  early  songster  caught, 
Cried,  "Served  him  right! — it's  not  at  all  surprising; 
The  worm  was  punished,  sir,  for  early  rising!" 

Jolm  Godfrey  Saxc  [1816-1887] 


EL   CAPITAN-GENERAL 

There  was  a  captain-general  who  ruled  in  Vera  Cruz, 
And  what  we  used  to  hear  of  him  was  always  evil  news: 
He  was  a  pirate  on  the  sea — a  robber  on  the  shore, 
The  Senor  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador. 

There  was  a  Yankee  skipper  who  round  about  did  roam; 
His  name  was  Stephen  Folger,  and  Nantucket  was  his  home: 
And  having  gone  to  Vera  Cruz,  he  had  been  skinned  full  sore 
By  the  Senor  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador. 

But  having  got  away  ahve,  though  all  his  cash  was  gone, 
He  said,  "If  there  is  vengeance,  I  will  surely  try  it  on! 
And  I  do  wish  I  may  be  damned  if  I  don't  clear  the  score 
With  Seiior  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador!" 

He  shipped  a  crew  of  seventy  men — well-armed  men  were 

they. 
And  sixty  of  them  in  the  hold  he  darkly  stowed  away; 
And,  sailing  back  to  Vera  Cruz,  was  sighted  from  the  shore 
By  the  Senor  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador. 

With  twenty-five  soldados  he  came  on  board  so  pleased. 
And  said,  "Maldi/o  Yankee — again  your  ship  is  seized. 
How  many  sailors  have  you  got?"    Said  Folger,  "Ten — no 

more," 
To  the  Captain  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador. 

"But  come  into  my  cabin  and  take  a  glass  of  wine. 
I  do  suppose,  as  usual,  I'll  have  to  pay  a  fine: 


El  Capitan-General  202 "7 

I  have  got  some  old  Madeira,  and  we'll  talk  the  matter  o'er — 
My  Captain  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador." 

And  as  over  that  Madeira  the  captain-general  boozed, 
It  seemed  to  him  as  if  his  head  was  getting  quite  confused; 
For  it  happened  that  some  morphine  had  travelled  from 

"the  store" 
To  the  glass  of  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador. 

"What  is  it  makes  the  vessel  roll?     What  sounds  are  these 

I  hear? 
It  seems  as  if  the  rising  waves  were  beating  on  my  ear!" — 
"Oh,  it  is  the  breaking  of  the  surf — just  that  and  nothing 

more, 
My  Captain  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador! " 

The  governor  was  in  a  sleep  which  muddled  all  his  brains; 
The  seventy  men  had  got  his  gang  and  put  them  all  in  chains; 
And  when  he  woke  the  following  day  he  could  not  see  the 

shore. 
For  he  was  out  on  the  blue  water — the  Don  San  Salvador. 

"Now   do   you  see   that   yard-arm — and   understand  the 

thing?" 
Said  Captain  Folger.     "For  all  from  that  yard-arm  you 

shall  swing. 
Or  forty  thousand  dollars  you  shall  pay  me  from  your  store, 
My  Captain  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador." 

The  Capitano  took  a  pen — the  order  he  did  sign — 
"O  Senor  Yankee!  but  you  charge  amazing  high  for  wine!" 
But  'twas  not  till  the  draft  was  paid  they  let  him  go  ashore, 
El  Seiior  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador. 

The  greatest  sharp  some  day  will  find  another  sharper  wit; 
It  always  makes  the  Devil  laugh  to  see  a  biter  bit; 
It  takes  two  Spaniards  any  day  to  come  a  Yankee  o'er — 
Even  two  like  Don  Alonzo  Estaban  San  Salvador. 

Charles  Godfrey  Lclaiid  [1824-1903] 


202  8  Glints  o'  Sunshine 


THE    LEGEND    OF    HEINZ    VON    STEIN 

Out  rode  from  his  wild,  dark  castle 

The  terrible  Heinz  von  Stein;  ■ 

He  came  to  the  door  of  a  tavern,  -  •?  Jl 

And  gazed  on  the  swinging  sign. 

He  sat  himself  down  at  a  table, 

And  growled  for  a  bottle  of  wine; 
Up  came  with  a  flask  and  a  corkscrew 

A  maiden  of  beauty  divine. 

Then,  seized  with  a  deep  love-longing, 

He  uttered,  "O  damosel  mine, 
Suppose  you  just  give  a  few  kisses 

To  the  valorous  Rittcr  von  Stein!" 

But  she  answered,  "The  kissing  business 

Is  entirely  out  of  my  line; 
And  I  certainly  will  not  begin  it  -    ■ 

On  a  countenance  ugly  as  thine!" 

Oh,  then  the  bold  knight  was  angry, 

And  cursed  both  coarse  and  fine; 
And  asked,  "How  much  is  the  swindle 

For  your  sour  and  nasty  wine?  " 

And  fiercely  he  rode  to  the  castle, 

And  sat  himself  down  to  dine; 
And  this  is  the  dreadful  legend 

Of  the  terrible  Heinz  von  Stein. 

Charles  Godfrey  Leland  [1824-1903] 


HALLOWE'EN 

Of  a'  the  festivals  we  hear, 

Frae  Handsel-Monday  till  New  Year, 

There's  few  in  Scotland  held  mair  dear 

For  mirth,  I  ween. 
Or  yet  can  boast  o'  better  cheer, 

Than  Hallowe'en. 


Hallowe'en 

Langsyne  indeed,  as  now  in  climes 
Where  priests  for  siller  pardon  crimes, 
The  kintry  'round  in  Popish  rhymes 

Did  pray  and  graen; 
But  customs  vary  \vi'  the  times 

At  Hallowe'en. 

Ranged  round  a  bleczing  ingleside, 
Where  nowther  cauld  nor  hunger  bide, 
The  farmer's  house,  wi'  secret  pride, 

Will  a'  convene; 
For  that  day's  wark  is  thrown  aside 

At  Hallowe'en. 

Placed  at  their  head  the  gudewife  sits,      i , 
And  deals  round  apples,  pears,  and  nits; 
Syne  tells  her  guests,  how,  at  sic  bits 

Where  she  has  been, 
Bogle's  ha'e  gart  folk  tyne  their  wits 

At  Hallowe'en. 

Grieved,  she  recounts  how,  by  mischance, 
Puir  pussy's  forced  a'  night  to  prance 
Wi'  fairies,  wha  in  thousands  dance 

Upon  the  green, 
Or  sail  wi'  witches  owre  to  France 

At  Hallowe'en. 

Syne,  issued  frae  the  gardy-chair. 
For  that's  the  seat  of  empire  there. 
To  co'er  the  table  wi'  what's  rare, 

Commands  are  gi'en; 
That  a'  fu'  daintily  may  fare 

At  Hallowe'en. 

And  when  they've  toomed  ilk  heapit  plate, 
And  a'  things  are  laid  out  o'  gate, 
To  ken  their  matrimonial  mate. 

The  youngsters  keen 
Search  a'  the  dark  decrees  o'  fate 

At  Hallowe'en. 


2029 


?.030  Glints  o'  Sunshine 

A'  things  prepared  in  order  due, 

Gosh  guide's!  what  fearfu'  pranks  ensue! 

Some  i'  the  kihi-pat  thraw  a  clew, 

At  whilk,  bedene. 
Their  sweetTiearts  by  the  far  end  pu' 

At  Hallowe'en. 

Ithers,  wi'  some  uncanny  gift, 
In  an  auld  barn  a  riddle  lift. 
Where,  thrice  pretending  corn  to  sift, 

Wi'  charms  between, 
Their  joy  appears,  as  white  as  drift, 

At  Hallowe'en. 

But  'twere  a  langsome  tale  to  tell 
The  gates  o'  ilka  charm  and  spell; 
Ance,  gaen  to  saw  hampseed  himsel', 

Puir  Jock  Maclean, 
Plump  in  a  filthy  peat-pot  fell 

At  Hallowe'en. 

Half  filled  wi'  fear,  and  droukit  weel, 
He  frae  the  mire  dught  hardly  speel; 
But  frae  that  time  the  silly  chiel 

Did  never  grien 
To  cast  his  cantrips  wi'  the  Deil 

At  Hallowe'en. 

O  Scotland!  famed  for  scenes  like  this, 
That  thy  sons  walk  where  wisdom  is, 
Till  death  in  everlasting  bliss 

Shall  steek  their  e'en. 
Will  ever  be  the  constant  wish 
of 

Jockie  Mein. 

John  Mayne  [1759-183^] 

YAW,  DOT   IS   SO! 

Yaw,  dot  is  so!  yaw,  dot  is  so! 
"Dis  vorldt  vas  all  a  fleeting  show!" 

I  shmokes  mine  pipe, 

I  t  rinks  mine  bier, 


Two   Hundred  Years  Ago  2031 

Und  efry  day  to  vork  I  go; 
"Dis  vorldt  vas  all  a  fleeting  show;" 
Yaw,  dot  is  so! 

Yaw,  dot  is  so!  yaw,  dot  is  so! 

I  don't  got  mooch  down  here  below. 

I  eadt  und  trink, 

I  vork  und  sleep, 
Und  find  out,  as  I  oldter  grow, 
I  haf  a  hardter  row  to  hoe; 

Yaw,  dot  is  so! 

Yaw,  dot  is  so!  yaw,  dot  is  so! 

Dis  vorldt  don't  gife  me  half  a  show; 

Somedings  to  vear. 

Some  food  to  eadt; 
Yot  else?     Shust  vait  a  minude,  dough; 
Katrina,  und  der  poys!  oho! 

Yaw,  dot  is  so! 

Yaw,  dot  is  so!  yaw,  dot  is  so! 

Dis  vorldt  don't'  been  a  fleeting  show. 

I  haf  mine  frau, 

I  haf  mine  poys 
To  sheer  me,  daily,  as  I  go; 
Dot's  pest  as  anydings  I  know; 

Yaw,  dot  is  so! 

Charles  Follcn  Adams  [1842- 


TWO  HUNDRED   YEARS   AGO 

Two  honder  year  ago  de  worl'  is  purty  slow. 

Even  tolk  upon  dis  countree  's  not  so  smart. 
Den  who  is  travel  roun'  an'  look  out  dc  pleasan'  groun' 

For  geev'  de  Yankee  peop'  a  leetle  start? 
I'll  tole  you  who  dey  were,  de  beeg,  rough  voyageurs, 

Wit'  deir  cousin  w'at  you  call  coureurs  de  bois, 
Dat's  iightin'  all  de  tam,  an'  never  care  a  dam, 

An'  ev'ry  wan  dem  feller  he's  come  from  Canadaw 
Bapteme! 

He's  comin'  all  de  way  from  Canadaw. 


2032  Glints  o'  Sunshine 

But  He  watch  dem,  le  bon  Dieu,  for  He's  got  some  work  to 
do, 

An'  He  won't  trust  ev'rybody,  no  siree! 
Only  full-blood  Canadien,  lak  Marquette  an'  Hennepin, 

An'  w'at  you  t'ink  of  Louis  Verandrye? 
On  church  of  Bonsecours!  makin'  ready  for  dc  tour, 

See  dem  down  upon  de  knee,  all  prayin'  dere — 
Wit'  de  paddle  on  dc  han'  ev'ry  good  Canadien  man, 

An'  affer  dey  be  finish,  hooraw  for  anyw'ere. 
Yass,  sir! 

Dey're  ready  now  for  goin'  anyw'ere. 

De  nort'  win'  know  dem  well,  an'  de  prairie  grass  can  tell 

How  offen  it  is  trample  by  de  ole  tarn  botte  sauvage — 
An'  gray  wolf  on  hees  den  kip  very  quiet,  w'en 

He  hear  dem  boy  a'  singin'  upon  de  long  portage, 
An'  de  night  would  fin'  dem  lie  wit'  deir  faces  on  de  sky. 

An'  de  breeze  would  come  an'  w'isper  on  deir  ear 
'Bout  de  wife  an'  sweetheart  dere  on  Soreal  an'  Trois  Rivieres 

Dey  may  never  Icev  to  see  anoder  year. 
Dat's  true, 

Dey  may  never  leev  to  kiss  anoder  year. 

An'  you'll  know  de  place  dey  go,  from  de  canyon  down  below, 

Or  de  mountain  wit'  hees  nose  above  dc  cloud, 
De  lak  among  de  hill,  w'cre  de  grizzly  drink  hees  fill, 

Or  de  rapid  on  de  reever  roarin'  loud. 
Ax  de  wil'  deer  if  de  flash  of  de  ole  Tree  Reever  sash 

He  don't  see  it  on  de  woods  of  Illinois, 
An'  de  musk-ox  as  he  go,  w'ere  de  camp-fire  melt  de  snow, 

De  smell  he  still  remember  of  tabac  Canadien! 
Ha!  Ha! 

It's  hard  forgetlin'  smell  of  tabac  Canadien! 

So,  ma  frien',  de  Yankee  man,  he  mus'  try  an'  understan', 
W'en  he  holler  for  dat  flag  de  Star  an'  Stripe, 

If  he's  little  win'  still  lef  an'  no  danger  hurt  hese'f, 
Den  he  belter  geev  anoder  cheer,  ba  cripe! 

For  de  flag  of  la  belle  France,  dat  show  dc  way  across 
From  Louisbourg  to  Florida  an'  back.     ;  'mmoo  a'sH 


Wreck  of  the  "Julie    Pkinte  "       2033 

So  raise  it  ev'ryw'ere,  lak'  de  oie  tarn  voyageurs, 
Wen  you  hear  of  de  la  Salle  an'  Cadillac — 

Hooraw ! 
For  de  flag  of  de  la  Salle  an'  Cadillac. 

William  Henry  Drmnmond  [18S4-1Q07I 


WRECK  OF  THE   '7ULIE  PLANTE" 

On  wan  dark  night  on  Lac  St.  Pierre, 

De  win'  she  blow,  blow,  blow, 
An'  de  crew  of  de  wood  scow  "Julie  Plante" 

Got  scar't  an'  run  below; 
For  de  win'  she  blow  lak  hurricane, 

Bimeb}'^  she  blow  some  more, 
An'  de  scow  bus'  up  on  Lac  St.  Pierre, 

Wan  arpent  from  de  shore. 

De  Captinne  walk  on  de  fronte  deck, 

An'  walk  de  hin'  deck,  too — • 
He  call  de  crew  from  up  de  hole 

.  He  call  de  cook  also. 
De  cook  she's  name  was  Rosie, 

She  come  from  Montreal, 
Was  chambre  maid  on  lumber  barge. 

On  de  Grande  Lachine  Canal. 

De  win'  she  blow  from  nor' — eas' — wes' — 

De  sout'  win'  she  blow,  too, 
W'en  Rosie  cry,  "  Mon  cher  Captinne, 

Mon  cher,  w'at  I  shall  do?" 
Den  de  Captinne  t'row  de  big  ankerre. 

But  still  de  scow  she  dreef, 
De  crew  he  can't  pass  on  de  shore, 

Becos'  he  los'  hees  skeef. 

De  night  was  dark,  lak'  one  black  cat, 

De  wave  run  high  an'  fas', 
W'en  de  Captinne  tak'  de  Rosie  girl 

An'  tie  her  to  de  mas'. 


2034  Glints  o'  Sunshine 

Den  he  also  tak'  de  life  preserve, 

An'  jomp  off  on  de  lak', 
An'  say,  "Good  by,  ma  Rosie  dear, 

I  go  drown  for  your  sak'." 

Nex'  mornin'  very  early, 

'Bout  ha'f-pas'  two — t'ree — four — 
De  Captinne,  scow,  an'  de  poor  Rosie 

Was  corpses  on  de  shore; 
For  de  win'  she  blow  lak'  hurricane 

Bimeby  she  blow  some  more, 
An'  de  scow  bus'  up  on  Lac  St.  Pierre, 

Wan  arpent  from  de  shore. 

MORAL 

Now,  all  good  wood  scow  sailor  man 

Tak'  warning  by  dat  storm, 
An'  go  an'  marry  some  nice  French  girl 

An'  leev  on  wan  beeg  farm; 
De  win'  can  blow  lak'  hurricane, 

An'  s'pose  she  blow  some  more, 
You  can't  get  drown  on  Lac  St.  Pierre, 

So  long  you  stay  on  shore. 

William  Henry  Dnunmond  [1854-1007] 


HUMPTY   DUMPTY 

"  Ilumpty  Diimpty  sat  on  a  wall; 

Humply  Dumply  had  a  great  jail: 

Not  all  the  kmg  s  horses  nor  all  the  king's  men 

Could  set  Humply  Dumpty  up  again.'' 

Full  many  a  project  that  never  was  hatched 

Falls  down,  and  gets  shattered  beyond  being  patched; 

And  luckily,  too!  for  if  all  came  to  chickens, 

Then  things  without  feathers  might  go  to  the  dickens. 

If  each  restless  unit  that  moves  among  men 
Might  climb  to  a  place  with  the  privileged  "ten," 
Pray  tell  us  where  all  the  commotion  would  stop! 
Must  the  whole  pan  of  milk,  forsooth,  rise  to  the  top? 


Strictly   Germ-Proof  ~^3S 

rf  always  the  statesman  attained  to  his  hopes, 

And  grasped  the  great  helm,  who  would  stand  by  the  ropes? 

Oi  if  all  dainty  fingers  their  duties  might  choose, 

Who  would  wash  up  the  dishes,  and  polish  the  shoes? 

Suppose  every  aspirant  writing  a  book 
Contrived  to  get  published,  by  hook  or  by  crook; 
Geologists  then  of  a  later  creation 
Would  be  startled,  I  fancy,  to  find  a  formation 
Proving  how  the  poor  world  did  most  woefully  sink 
Beneath  mountains  of  paper,  and  oceans  of  ink! 

Or  even  suppose  all  the  women  were  married; 

By  whom  would  superfluous  babies  be  carried? 

Where  would  be  the  good  aunts  that  should  knit  all  the 

stockings? 
Or  nurses,  to  do  up  the  singings  and  rockings? 
Wise  spinsters,  to  lay  down  their  wonderful  rules. 
And  with  theories  rare  to  enlighten  the  fools, — 
Or  to  look  after  orphans,  and  primary  schools? 

No!  Failure's  a  part  of  the  infinite  plan; 
Who  finds  that  he  can't,  must  give  way  to  who  can; 
And  as  one  and  another  drops  out  of  the  race. 
Each  stumbles  at  last  to  his  suitable  place. 

So  the  great  scheme  works  on, — though,  like  eggs  from  the 

wall, 
Little  single  designs  to  such  ruin  may  fall, 
That  not  all  the  world's  might,  of  its  horses  or  men. 
Could  set  their  crushed  hopes  at  the  summit  again. 

Adeline  D.  T.  Whiiney  [1824-1906] 

STRICTLY  GERM-PROOF 

The  Antiseptic  Baby  and  the  Prophylactic  Pup 
Were  playing  in  the  garden  when  the  Bunny  gamboled  up; 
They  looked   upon   the   Creature  with   a  loathing  undis- 
guised;— 
It  wasn't  Disinfected  and  it  wasn't  Sterilized. 


2036  Glints  o'   Sunshine 

They  said  it  was  a  Microbe  and  a  Plotbed  of  Disease; 
They  steamed  it  in  a  vapor  of  a  thousand-odd  degrees;    ^^ 
They  froze  it  in  a  freezer  that  was  cold  as  Banished  Hope;  > 
And  washed  it  in  permanganate  with  carbolated  soap.       ,7 

In  sulphrueted  hydrogen  they  steeped  its  wiggly  ears; 
They  trimmed  its  frisky  whiskers  with  a  pair  of  hard-boiled 

shears; 
They  donned  their  rubber  mittens  and  they  took  it  by  the 

hand  ,^ 

11 

And  'lected  it  a  member  of  the  Fumigated  Band. 

There's  not  a  Micrococcus  in  the  garden  where  they  play; 
They  bathe  in  pure  iodoform  a  dozen  times  a  day; 
And  each  imbibes  his  rations  from  a  Hygienic  Cup — 
The  Bunny  and  the  Baby  and  the  Prophylactic  Pup. 

Arthur  Guiierman  [1871- ' 

CAVE  SEDEM! 

■A  oi  1O 
Beware  the  deadly  Sitting  habit,- 
Or,  if  you  sit,  be  like  the  rabbit. 
Who  keepeth  ever  on  the  jump 
By  springs  concealed  beneath  his  rump. 

A  little  ginger  'neath  the  tail 

Will  oft  for  lack  of  brains  avail;  .,rfj-  ^g 

Eschew  the  dull  and  slothful  Seat, 

And  move  about  with  willing  feet! 

Man  was  not  made  to  sit  a-trance, 
And  press,  and  press,  and  press  his  pants; 
But  rather,  with  an  open  mind. 
To  circulate  among  his  kind. 

And  so,  my  son,  avoid  the  snare 
Which  lurks  within  a  cushioned  chair; 
To  run  like  hell,  it  has  been  found, 
Both  feet  must  be  upon  the  ground. 

Theodore  F.  Mac  Manns  [18 


Revival   Hymn  2037 


REVIVAL  HYMN 

From  "  Uncle  Remus  " 

Oh,  whar  shill  we  go  w'en  de  great  day  comes, 

Wid  de  blowin'  er  de  trumpits  en  de  bangin'  er  de  drums? 

How  many  po'  sinners'll  be  kotched  out  late 

En  fine  no  latch  ter  de  golden  gate? 

No  use  fer  ter  wait  twel  ter-morrer! 

De  sun  mustn't  set  on  yo'  sorrer, 

Sin's  es  sharp  ez  a  bamboo-brier — 

Oh,  Lord!  fetch  the  mo'ners  up  higher! 

W'en  de  nashuns  er  de  earf  is  a-stan'in'  all  aroun'. 
Who's  a  gwine  ter  be  choosen  fer  ter  w'ar  de  glory-crown? 
Who's  gwine  fer  ter  stan'  stiff-kneed  en  bol'. 
En  answer  to  der  name  at  de  callin'  er  de  roll? 

You  better  come  now  ef  you  comin' — 

Ole  Satun  is  loose  en  a  bummin' — 

De  wheels  er  distruckshun  is  a  hummin' — 

Oh,  come  'long,  sinner,  ef  you  comin'! 

De  song  er  salvashun  is  a  mighty  sweet  song, 
En  de  Pairidise  win'  blow  fur  en  blow  strong. 
En  Aberham's  bosom,  hit's  saft  en  hit's  wide. 
En  right  dar's  de  place  whar  de  sinners  oughter  hide! 

Oh,  you  nee'nter  be  a  stoppin'  en  a  lookin'; 

Ef  you  fool  wid  ole  Satun  you'll  git  took  in; 

You'll  hang  on  de  aidge  en  get  shook  in, 

Ef  you  keep  on  a  stoppin'  en  a  lookin'. 

De  time  is  right  now,  en  dish  yer's  de  place — 
Let  de  sun  er  salvashun  shine  squar'  in  yo'  face; 
Fight  de  battles  er  de  Lord,  fight  soon  en  fight  late. 
En  you'll  allers  fine  a  latch  ter  de  golden  gate. 

No  use  fer  ter  v/ait  twel  ter-morrer, 

De  sun  mustn't  set  on  yo'  sorrer — 

Sin's  es  sharp  cz  a  bamboo-brier, 

Ax  de  Lord  fer  ter  fetch  you  up  higher! 

Joel  Chandler  Harris  [1848-1908J 


2038  Glints  o'   Sunshine 

THE   POWER  OF   PRAYER 

THE  FIRST  STEAMBOAT  UP  THE  ALABAMA 

You,  Dinah!    Come  and  set  me  whar  de  ribber-roads  does 

meet. 
De  Lord,  He  made  dese  black-jack  roots  to  twis'  into  a  seat. 
Umph,  dar!    De  Lord  have  mussy  on  dis  blin'  ole  nigger's 

feet. 

It  pear  to  me  dis  mornin'  I  kin  smell  de  fust  o'  June, 
I  'clar,  I  b'lieve  dat  mockin'-bird  could  play  de  fiddle  soon! 
Dem  yonder  town-bells  sounds  like  dey  was  ringin'  in  de 
moon. 

Well,  ef  dis  nigger  is  been  blin'  for  fo'ty  years  or  mo', 

Dese  ears  dey  sees  de  world,  like  th'u'  de  cracks  dat's  in  de 

do'; 
For  de  Lord  has  built  dis  cabin  wid  de  winders  hind  and  'fo'. 

I  know  my  front  ones  is  stopped  up,  and  things  is  sort  o' 

dim; 
But  den,  th'u'  dcm  temptations  vain  won't  leak  in  on  ole 

Jim! 
De  back  ones  shows  me  earth  enough,  aldo'  dey's  mons'ous 

slim. 

And  as  for  Hebben — bless  de  Lord,  and  praise  His  holy  name! 
Dat  shines  in  all  de  co'ners  o'  dis  cabin  jes'  de  same 
As  ef  dat  cabin  hadn't  nar  a  plank  upon  de  frame! 

Who  call  me?    Listen  down  the  ribber,  Dinah!    Don't  you 

hyar 
Somebody  hoU'in'  "Hoo,  Jim,  hoo?'"    My  Sarah  died  las' 

y'ar; 
Is  dat  black  angel  done  come  back  to  call  ole  Jim  from  hyar? 

My  stars!  dat  can't  be  Sarah — shuh,  jes'  listen,  Dinah,  now  ! 
What  kin  be  comin'  up  dat  bend,  a-makin'  sich  a  row? 
Fus'  bellerin',  like  a  pa  win'  bull,  den  squealin'  like  a  sow! 


The    Power  of   Prayer  2039 

De  Lord  'a'  massy  sakes  alive!  jcs'  hear — Kcr-ivooj !  Kcr- 

woof ! 
De  Debbie's  comin'  round  dat  bend — he's  comin',  shuh  enuff , 
A-splashin'  up  de  water  wid  his  tail  and  wid  his  hoof! 

I'se  pow'ful  skeered;  but  neversomeless  I  ain't  gwine  run 

away ; 
I'm  gwine  to  stan'  stiff-legged  for  de  Lord  dis  blessed  day; 
You  screech,  and  howl,  and  swish  de  water,  Satan!    Let  us 

pray: 

0  hebhcnly  Mahs'r,  what  Thou  wiliest  dat  tnus'  bejes'  so, 
And  cf  Thou  hast  bespoke  de  word,  some  nigger's  boun'  to  go. 
Den,  Lord,  please  take  ale  Jim,  and  Icf  young  Dinah  hyar  be- 
low ! 

Sense  Dinah,  sense  her,  Mahs'r;  for  she's  sich  a  little  chile, 

She  hardly  jes'  begin  to  scramble  up  the  home-yard  stile; 

But  dis  old  traveller's  feet  been  tired  dis  many  an'  many  a  mile. 

I'se  wufless  as  de  rotten  pole  0'  las'  year's  fodder-stack; 

De  rheumatiz  done  bit  my  bones:  you  hyar  'em  crack  and  crack  ? 

1  can't  sit  down  'dout  griintin'  like  'twas  breakin'  0'  my  back. 

What  use  de  wheel  when  hub  and  spokes  is  warped  and  split 

and  rotten  ? 
What  use  dis  dried  up  cotton-stalk  ivhen  Life  done  picked  my 

cotton  ? 
I'se  like  a  word,  dat  somebody  done  said,  and  den  forgotten. 

But  Dinah  !  Shuh  !  dat  gal  jes'  like  dis  little  hick'ry-lree, 
De  sap  'sjis  risin  in  her;  she  do  grow  owdaciouslee — 
Lord,  ef  you's  clarin'  de  underbrush,  don't  cut  her  down — cut 
me  ! 

I  would  not  proud  presume — but  yet  I'll  boldly  make  reques', 
Sence  Jacob  had  dat  wastlin'  match,  I,  too,  gwine  do  my  bes'; 
When  Jacob  got  all  underholt,  de  Lord  He  answered.  Yes  ! 

And  what  for  waste  de  wittles  now,  and  th'ow  away  de  bread  ? 
Jcs'  for  to  strength  dese  idle  hands  to  scratch  dis  ole  bald  head  ? 
Tink  of  dc  'conomy,  Mahs'r,  cf  dis  ole  Jim  was  dead  ! 


2040  Glints  o'   Sunshine 

Stop;  ef  I  don't  believe  de  Debbie's  gone  on  up  de  stream! 
Jes'  now  he  squealed  down  dar:  —  hush;  dat's  a  mighty 

weakly  scream! 
Yes,  sir,  he's  gone,  he's  gone;  —  he  snort  'way  off,  like  in  a 

dream! 

0  glory,  hallelujah  to  de  Lord  dat  reigns  on  high! 

De  Debbie's  fa'rly  skeered  to  def ;  he  done  gone  flyin'  by; 

1  know'd  he  could'n'  stan'  dat  pra'r,  I  felt  my  Mahs'r  nigh! 

You,  Dinah,  ain't  you'  shamed  now  dat  you  didn't  trust  to 

grace? 
I  heerd  you  thrashin'  th'u'  de  bushes  when  he  showed  his 

face! 
You  fool,  you  t'ink  de  Debbie  couldn't  beat  you  in  a  race? 

I  tell  you,  Dinah,  jes'  as  sure  as  you  is  standin'  dar, 

When  folks  start  prayin',  answer-angels  drops  down  th'u' 

de  a'r; 
Yea,  Dinah,  whar  'ould  you  be  now,  exceptin'  fur  dat  pra'r? 

Sidney  and  Clifford  Lanier 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR 

You,  Nebuchadnezzah,  whoa,  sah! 
Whar  is  you  tryin'  to 'go,  sah? 
I'd  hab  you  fur  to  know,  sah, 

Vs  a-holdin'  ob  de  lines. 
You  better  stop  dat  prancin', 
You's  paw'ful  fond  ob  dancin'. 
But  I'll  bet  my  yeah's  advancin' 

Dat  I'll  cure  you  ob  yo'  shines. 

Look  heah,  mule!    Better  min'  out; 
Fus'  t'ing  you  know  you'll  fin'  out 
How  quick  I'll  w'ar  dis  line  out 

On  yo'  ugly  stubbo'n  back; 
You  needn't  try  to  steal  up 
An'  lif  dat  precious  heel  up; 
You's  got  to  plough  dis  fiel'  up. 

You  has,  sah,  fur  a  fac'. 


Kentucky    Philosophy  2041 

Dar,  dat's  de  way  to  do  it! 
He's  comin'  right  down  to  it; 
Jes'  watch  him  ploughin'  troo  it! 

Dis  nigger  ain't  no  fool. 
Some  folks  dey  would  'a'  beat  him: 
Now,  dat  would  only  heat  him; 
I  know  jes'  how  to  treat  him: 

You  mus'  reason  wid  a  mule. 

He  minds  me  like  a  nigger. 
If  he  wuz  only  bigger 
He'd  fotch  a  mighty  figger, 

He  would,  I  tdl  you!    Yes,  sah! 
See  how  he  keeps  a-clickin'! 
He's  as  gentle  as  a  chicken, 
And  nebber  thinks  o'  kickin' — 

Whoa,  dar !  N ebuchadnezzah  I 


Is  dis  heah  me,  or  not  me? 
Or  is  de  debbil  got  me? 
Wuz  dat  a  cannon  shot  me? 

Hab  I  laid  heah  more'n  a  week? 
Dat  mule  do  kick  amazin' — 
De  beast  was  sp'iled  in  raisin'! 
By  now  I  'spect  he's  grazin' 

On  de  odder  side  de  creek. 

Irwin  Russell  [1853-1879] 


KENTUCKY  PHILOSOPHY 

You  Wi'yum,  come  'ere,  suh,  dis  minute.    Wut  dat  you  got 

under  dat  box? 
I  don't  want  no  foolin' — you  hear  me?    Wut  you  say?    Ain't 

nu'h'n  but  rocks? 
'Peahs  ter  me  you's  owdashus  pertickler.  S'posin'  dey's  uv  a 

new  kine. 
I'll  des  take  a  look  at  dem  rocks."   Hi  yi!  does  you  think  dat 

I's  bline? 


2042  Glints   o'   Sunshine 

I  calls  dat  a  plain  watermillion,  you  scamp,  en  I  knows 

whah  it  growed; 
It  come  fum  de  Jimmerson  cawn  fiel',  dah  on  t'er  side  er  de 

road. 
You  stole  it,  you  rascal — you  stole  it!    I  watched  you  fum 

down  in  de  lot. 
En  time  I  gits  th'ough  wid  you,  nigger,  you  won't  eb'n  be  a 

grease  spot ! 

ril  fix  you.   Mirandy!  Mirandy!  go  cut  me  a  hick'ry — make 

'ase! 
En  cut  me  de  toughes'  an  keenes'  you  c'n  fine  anywhah  on 

de  place. 
I'll  I'arn  you,  Mr.  Wi'yum  Joe  Vetters,  ter  steal  en  ter  lie, 

you  young  sinner, 
Disgracin'  yo'  ole  Christian  mammy,  en  makin'  her  leave 

cookin'  dinner! 

Now  ain't  you  ashamed  er  yo'se'f,  suh?    I  is.    I's  ashamed 

you's  my  son! 
En  de  holy  accorjun  angel  he's  ashamed  er  wut  3'ou  has 

done; 
En  he  done  tuk  it  down  up  yander  in  coal-black,  blood-red 

letters — 
"One  watermillion  stoled  by  Wi'yum  Josephus  Vetters." 

En  wut  you  s'posin'  Brer  Bascom,  yo'  teacher  at  Sunday 

school, 
'Ud  say  ef  he  knowed  how  you's  broke  de  good  Lawd's  Gol'n 

Rule? 
Boy,  whah's  de  raisin'  I  give  you?    Is  you  boun'  fuh  ter  be  a 

black  viUiun? 
I's  s'prised  dat  a  chile  er  yo'  mammy  'ud  steal  any  man's 

watermilUon. 

En  I's  now  gwiner  cut  it  right  open,  en  you  shain't  have 

narry  bite, 
Fuh  a  boy  who'll  steal  watermillions — en  dat  in  de  day's 

broad  light — 


Angelina  2043 

Ain't — Lawdy!  it's  green!  Mirandy!  Mi-ran-dy!  come  on 

wi'  dat  switch! 
Well,  Stealin'  a  g-r-e-e-n  watermillion !  who  ever  heerd  tell 

er  des  sich? 

Cain't  tell  w'en  dey's  ripe?    W'y,  you  thump  'um,  en  w'en 

dey  go  pank  dey  is  green ; 
But  when  dey  go  punk,  now  you  mine  me,  dey's  ripe — en 

dat's  des  wut  I  mean. 
E 1  nex'  time  you  hooks  watermillions — yoii  heered  me,  you 

ign'ant  young  hunk, 
Ef  you  don't  want  a  lickin'  all  over,  be  sho  dat  dey  allers 

go  "punk!" 
^"-  Harrison  Robertson  [1856- 

A  PLANTATION  DITTY 

De  gray  owl  sing  fum  de  chimbly  top: 

"  Who — who — is — you-00?  " 
En  I  say:  "Good  Lawd,  hit's  des  po'  me, 
En  I  ain't  quite  ready  fer  de  Jasper  Sea; 
I'm  po'  en  sinful,  en  you  'lowed  I'd  be; 

Oh,  wait,  good  Lawd,  'twell  ter-morrer!" 

De  gray  owl  sing  fum  de  cypress  tree: 

"Who — who — is — you-oo?  " 
En  I  say:  "Good  Lawd,  ef  you  look  you'll  see 
Hit  ain't  nobody  but  des  po'  me. 
En  I  like  ter  stay  'twell  my  time  is  free; 

Oh,  wait,  good  Lawd,  'twell  ter-morrer!" 
Frank  Lebby  Slanlon  [1857- 

ANGELINA 

When  de  fiddle  gits  to  singin'  out  a  ol'  Vahginny  reel, 
An'  you  'mence  to  feel  a  ticklin'  in  yo'  toe  an'  in  yo'  heel; 
Ef  you  t'ink  you  got  'uligion  an'  you  wants  to  keep  it,  too, 
You  jes'  bettah  tek  a  hint  an'  git  yo'self  clean  out  o'  view. 
Casede  time  is  mighty  temptin'  when  de  chune  is  in  de  swing, 
Fu'  a  darky,  saint  or  sinner  man,  to  cut  de  pigeon-wing. 
An'  you  couldn't  he'p  f'om  dancin'  ef  yo'  feet  was  boun'  wif 

twine, 
When  Angelina  Johnson  comes  a-swingin'  down  de  line. 


2044  Glints  o'   Sunshine 

Don't  you  know  Miss  Angelina?    She's  de  da'lin'  of  de  place. 
W'y,  day  ain't  no  high-toned  lady  wif  sich  mannahs  an' 

sich  grace. 
She  kin  move  across  de  cabin,  wif  its  planks  all  rough  an' 

wo', 
Jes'  de  same's  ef  she  was  dancin'  on  ol'  mistus'  ball-room  flo'. 
Fact  is,  you  do'  see  no  cabin — evaht'ing  you  see  look  grand,. 
An'  dat  one  ol'  squeaky  iiddle  soun'  to  you  jes'  lak  a  ban'; 
Cotton  britches  look  lak  broadclof  an'  a  linsey  dress  look  fine, 
When  Angelina  Johnson  comes  a-swingin'  down  de  line. 

Some  folks  say  dat  dancin's  sinful,  an'  de  blessed  Lawd,  dey 

say, 
Gwine  to  punish  us  fu'  steppin'  w'en  we  hyeah  de  music 

play. 
But  I  tell  you  I  don'  b'lievc  it,  fu'  de  Lawd  is  wise  and  good, 
An'  he  made  de  banjo's  metal  an'  he  made  de  fiddle's  wood, 
An'  he  made  de  music  in  dem,  so  I  don'  quite  t'ink  he'll  keer 
Ef  our  feet  keeps  time  a  little  to  de  melodies  we  hyeah. 
W'y,  dey's  somep'n  downright  holy  in  de  way  our  faces 

shine, 
When  Angelina  Johnson  comes  a-swingin'  down  de  line. 

Angelina  steps  so  gentle,  Angelina  bows  so  low. 

An'  she  lif  huh  sku't  so  dainty  dat  huh  shoetop  skacely 

show: 
An'  dem  teef  o'  huh'n  a-shinin',  ez  she  tek  you  by  de  han' — 
Go  'way,  people,  d'  ain't  anothah  sich  a  lady  in  de  Ian'! 
When  she's  movin'  thoo  de  figgers  er  a-dancin'  by  huhse'f. 
Folks  jes'  Stan'  stock-still  a-sta'in',  an'  dey  mos'  nigh  hoi's 

dey  bref ; 
An'  de  young  mens,  dey's  a-sayin',  "I's  gwine  mek  dat 

damsel  mine," 
When  Angelina  Johnson  comes  a-swingin'  down  de  line. 
Paul  Laurence  Dunbar  [1872-1906] 

LAY  OF  ANCIENT  ROME 

Oh,  the  Roman  was  a  rogue. 

He  erat  was,  you  bettum; 
He  ran  his  automobilis 

And  smoked  his  cigarettum; 


The   Wisdom  of  Folly  2045 

He  wore  a  diamond  studibus 

And  elegant  cravattum, 
A  maxima  cum  laude  shirt, 

And  such  a  styUsh  hattum! 

He  loved  the  luscious  hic-hasc-hoc, 

And  bet  on  games  and  equi ; 
At  times  he  won;  at  others,  though, 

He  got  it  in  the  ncqui; 
He  winked  (quo  usque  tandem?) 

At  puellas  on  the  P'orum, 
And  sometimes  even  made 

Those  goo-goo  oculorum! 

He  frequently  was  seen 

At  combats  gladiatorial, 
And  ate  enough  to  feed 

Ten  boarders  at  Memorial; 
He  often  went  on  sprees 

And  said,  on  starting  homus, 
"Hie  labor — opus  est, 

Oh,  where's  my  hie — hie — domus?" 

Although  he  lived  in  Rome — 

Of  all  the  arts  the  middle — 
He  was  (excuse  the  phrase) 

A  horrid  individ'l; 
Ah!  what  a  different  thing 

Was  the  homo  (dativ^e,  hominy) 
Of  far  away  B.  C. 

From  us  of  Anno  Domini. 

Thomas  Ybarra   [iSSo- 

THE  WISDOM   OF   FOLLY 

The  cynics  say  that  every  rose 
Is  guarded  by  a  thorn  that  grows 

To  spoil  our  posies: 
But  I  no  pleasure  therefore  lack; 
I  keep  my  hands  behind  my  back 

When  smelling  roses. 


2046  Glints  o'   Sunshine 


'Tis  proved  that  Sodom's  appletarts 
Have  ashes  as  component  parts 

For  those  that  steal  them: 
My  soul  no  disillusion  seeks; 
I  love  my  apples'  rosy  cheeks, 

But  never  peel  them. 

Though  outwardly  a  gloomy  shroud, 
The  inner  half  of  every  cloud 

Is  bright  and  shining: 
I  therefore  turn  my  clouds  about 
And  always  wear  them  inside  out 

To  show  the  lining. 

Our  idols'  feet  are  made  of  clay; 
So  stony-hearted  critics  say 

With  scornful  mockings: 
My  images  are  deified 
Because  I  keep  them  well  supplied 

With  shoes  and  stockings. 

My  tnodiis  operandi  this — 

To  take  no  heed  of  what's  amiss; 

And  not  a  bad  one: 
Because  as  Shakespeare  used  to  say 
A  merry  heart  goes  twice  the  way 

That  tires  a  sad  one. 

Ellen  ThorneycrojL  Foioler  [i873- 


THE   POST  THAT   FITTED 

Though  tangled  and  twisted  the  course  of  true  love. 

This  ditty  explains 
No  tangle's  so  tangled  it  cannot  improve 

If  the  l.over  has  brains. 

Ere  the  steamer  bore  him  Eastward,  Sleary  was  engaged  to 

marry 
An  attractive  girl  at  Tunbridge,  whom  he  called  "my  httle 

Carrie." 
Sleary's  pay  was  very  modest ;  Sleary  was  the  other  way. 
Who  can  cook  a  two-plate  dinner  on  eight  paltry  dibs  a  day? 


The   Post  That   Fitted  -O47 

Long  he  pondered  o'er  the  question  in  his  scantly  furnished 

quarters — 
Then  proposed  to  Minnie  Boffkin,  eldest  of  Judge  Boffkin's 

daughters. 
Certainly  an  impecunious  Subaltern  was  not  a  catch, 
But  the  Boffkins  knew  that  Minnie  mightn't  make  another 

match. 

So  they  recognized  the  business,  and,  to  feed  and  clothe  the 

bride, 
Got  him  made  a  Something  Something  somewhere  on  the 

Bombay  side, 
Anyhow,  the  billet  carried  pay  enough  for  him  to  marry — 
As  the  artless  Sleary  put  it:  "Just  the  thing  for  me  and 

Carrie." 

Did  he,  therefore,  jilt   Miss  Boffkin — impulse  of  a  baser 

mind? 
No!    He  started  epileptic  fits  of  an  appalling  kind. 
(Of  his  modus  operandi  only  this  much  I  could  gather: — 
"Pears'  shaving  sticks  will  give  you  little  taste  and  lots  of 

lather.") 

Frequently  in  public  places  his  affliction  used  to  smite 
Sleary  with  distressing  vigor — always  in  the  Boft'kins'  sight. 
Ere  a  week  was  over,  Minnie  weepingly  returned  his  ring, 
Told  him  his  "unhappy  weakness"  stopped  all  thought  of 
marrying. 

Sleary  bore  the  .information  with  a  chastened  holy  joy, — 

Epileptic  fits  don't  matter  in  Political  employ, — 

Wired  three  short  words  to  Carrie — took  his  ticket,  packed 

his  kit — 
Bade  farewell  to  Minnie  Boffkin  in  one  last, long,  lingering  fit. 

Four  weeks  later,  Carrie  Sleary  read — and  laughed  until  she 

wept — 
Mrs.  Boffkin's  warning  letter  on  the  "wretched  epilept." 
Year  by  year,  in  pious  patience,  vengeful  Mrs.  Boffkin  sits 
Waiting  for  the  Sleary  bal)ies  to  develop  Sleary's  fits. 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 


JUST  NONSENSE 

NO! 

No  sun — no  moon! 

No  morn — no  noon — 

No  dawn— no  dusk— no  proper  time  of  day- 
No  sky — no  earthly  view- 
No  distance  looking  blue- 
No  road— no  street— no  "t'other  side  the  way"— 

No  end  to  any  Row — 

No  indications  where  the  Crescents  go— 

No  top  to  any  steeple — 

No  recognitions  of  f amihar  people —  . 

No  courtesies  for  showing  'em — 

No  knowing  'em!   . 

No  travelling  at  all— no  locomotion, 
No  inkhng  of  the  way— no  notion— 

"No  go" — by  land  or  ocean — 

No  mail — no  post — 

No  news  from  any  foreign  coast- 
No  park — no  ring— no  afternoon  gentiUty— 

No  company — no  nobility- 
No  warmth,  no  cheerfulness,  no  healthful  ease, 
No  comfortable  feel  in  any  member- 
No  shade,  no  shine,  no  butterflies,  no  bees, 
No  fruits,  no  flowers,  no  leaves,  no  birds, 
November! 

Thomas  Hood  [179Q-184S] 

TO  MINERVA 

FROM   THE   GREEK 

My  temples  throb,  my  pulses  boil, 

I'm  sick  of  Song,  and  Ode,  and  Ballad— 

So,  Thyrsis,  take  the  Midnight  Oil, 
And  pour  it  on  a  lobster  salad. 
2048 


A  Tragic  Story  -O49 

My  brain  is  dull,  my  sight  is  foul, 
I  cannot  write  a  verse,  or  read, — 

Then,  Pallas,  lake  away  thine  Owl, 
.\nd  let  us  have  a  lark  instead. 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 

THE   ALPHABET 

A  IS  an  Angel  of  blushing  eighteen; 
B  is  the  Ball  where  the  Angel  was  seen; 
C  is  the  Chaperon,  who  cheated  at  cards; 
D  is  the  Deuxtemps  with  Frank  of  the  Guards; 
E  is  the  Eye,  killing  slowly  but  surely; 
F  is  the  Fan  whence  it  peeped  so  demurely; 
G  is  the  Glove  of  superlative  kid; 
H  is  the  Hand  which  it  spitefully  hid; 
I  is  the  Ice  which  the  fair  one  demanded; 
J  is  the  Juvenile  that  dainty,  who  handed ; 
K  is  the  Kerchief,  a  rare  work  of  art; 
L  is  the  Lace  which  composed  the  chief  part; 
M  is  the  old  Maid  who  watched  the  chits  dance; 
N  is  the  Nose  she  turned  up  at  each  glance; 
O  is  the  Olga  (just  then  in  its  prime) ; 
P  is  the  Partner  who  wouldn't  keep  time; 
Q  is  a  Quadrille  put  instead  of  the  Lancers; 
R  is  the  Remonstrances  made  by  the  dancers; 
S  is  the  Supper  where  all  went  in  pairs; 
T  is  the  Twaddle  they  talked  on  the  stairs; 
U  is  the  Uncle  who  "thought  we'd  be  gain'"; 

V  is  the  Voice  which  his  niece  replied  "No"  in; 
W  is  the  Waiter  who  sat  up  till  eight; 

X  is  the  exit,  not  rigidly  straight; 

Y  is  the  Yawning  fit  caused  by  the  Ball; 
Z  stands  for  Zero,  or  nothing  at  all. 

Charles  Stuart  Calvcrlcy  [1831-1884] 

A  TRAGIC   STORY 

There  lived  a  sage  in  days  of  yore. 
And  he  a  handsome  pigtail  wore; 
But  wondered  much,  and  sorrowed  more, 
Because  it  hung  behind  him. 


2050  Just   Nonsense 

He  mused  upon  this  curious  case, 
And  swore  he'd  change  the  pigtail's  place, 
And  have  it  hanging  at  his  face, 
Not  dangling  there  behind  him. 

Says  he,  "The  mystery  I've  found, — 
I'll  turn  me  round," — he  turned  him  round; 
But  still  it  hung  behind  him. 

Then  round  and  round,  and  out  and  in, 
All  day  the  puzzled  sage  did  spin; 
In  vain — it  mattered  not  a  pin, — 
The  pigtail  hung  behind  him. 

And  right,  and  left,  and  round  about, 
And  up,  and  down,  and  in,  and  out 
He  turned;  but  still  the  pigtail  stout 
Hung  steadily  behind  him. 

And  though  his  efforts  never  slack. 
And  though  he  twist,  and  twirl,  and  tack, 
Alas!  still  faithful  to  his  back. 
The  pigtail  hangs  behind  him. 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 


THE  JUMBLIES 

They  went  to  sea  in  a  sieve,  they  did; 

In  a  sieve  they  went  to  sea; 
In  spite  of  all  their  friends  could  say. 
On  a  winter's  morn,  on  a  stormy  day. 

In  a  sieve  they  went  to  sea. 
And  when  the  sieve  turned  round  and  round. 
And  every  one  cried,  "You'll  all  be  drowned!" 
They  called  aloud,  "Our  sieve  ain't  big; 
But  we  don't  care  a  button;  we  don't  care  a  fig: 
In  a  sieve  we'll  go  to  sea!" 
Far  and  few,  far  and  few. 

Are  the  lands  where  the  Jumblies  live: 
Their  heads  are  green,  and  their  hands  are  blue; 
And  they  went  to  sea  in  a  sieve. 


The  Jumblies  2051 

They  sailed  away  in  a  sieve,  they  did, 

In  a  sieve  they  sailed  so  fast, 
With  only  a  beautiful  pea-green  veil 
Tied  with  a  ribbon,  by  way  of  a  sail, 

To  a  small  tobacco-pipe  mast. 
And  every  one  said  who  saw  them  go, 
"Oh!  won't  they  be  soon  upset,  you  know? 
For  the  sky  is  dark,  and  the  voyage  is  long; 
And,  happen  what  may,  it's  extremely  wrong 

In  a  sieve  to  sail  so  fast.." 

The  water  it  soon  came  in,  it  did; 

The  water  it  soon  came  in: 
So,  to  keep  them  dry,  they  wrapped  their  feet 
In  a  pinky  paper  all  folded  neat: 

And  they  fastened  it  down  with  a  pin. 
And  they  passed  the  night  in  a  crockery-jar; 
And  each  of  them  said,  "How  wise  we  are! 
Though  the  sky  be  dark,  and  the  voyage  be  long 
Yet  we  never  can  think  we  were  rash  or  wrong, 

While  round  in  our  sieve  we  spin." 

And  all  night  long  they  sailed  away; 

And,  when  the  sun  went  down, 
They  whistled  and  warbled  a  moon}'  song 
To  the  echoing  sound  of  a  coppery  gong, 

In  the  shade  of  the  mountains  brown, 
"O  Timballoo!     How  happy  we  are 
When  we  live  in  a  sieve  and  a  crockery- jar! 
And  all  night  long,  in  the  moonUght  pale, 
We  sail  away  with  a  pea-green  sail 

In  the  shade  of  the  mountains  brown." 

They  sailed  to  the  Western  Sea,  they  did, — 

To  a  land  all  covered  with  trees: 
And  they  bought  an  owl,  and  a  useful  cart, 
And  a  pound  of  rice,  and  a  cranberry-tart. 

And  a  hive  of  silvery  bees; 
And  they  bought  a  pig,  and  some  green  jackdaws, 
And  a  lovely  monkey  with  lollipop  paws, 


2052  Just  Non&ensc 

And  forty  bottles  of  ring-bo-ree, 
And  no  end  of  Stilton  cheese: 

And  in  twenty  years  they  all  came  back, — 

In  twenty  years  or  more ; 
And  every  one  said,  "How  tall  they've  grown! 
For  they've  been  to  the  Lakes,  and  the  Torrible  Zone, 

And  the  hills  of  the  Chankly  Bore." 
And  they  drank  their  health,  and  gave  them  a  feast 
Of  dumplings  made  of  beautiful  yeast;  j 

And  every  one  said,  "If  we  only  live. 
We,  too,  will  go  to  sea  in  a  sieve,  j  p 

To  the  hills  of  the  Chankly  Bore." 
Far  and  few,  far  and  few. 

Are  the  lands  where  the  Jumblies  live: 
Their  heads  are  green,  and  their  hands  are  blue; 
And  they  went  to  sea  in  a  sieve. 

Edward  Lear  [1812-1888] 


THE  OWL  AND   THE   PUSSY-CAT 

The  Owl  and  the  Pussy-cat  went  to  sea 

In  a  beautiful  pea-green  boat: 
They  took  some  honey,  and  plenty  of  money 

Wrapped  up  in  a  five-pound  note. 
The  Owl  looked  up  to  the  stars  above, 

And  sang  to  a  small  guitar, 
"O  lovely  Pussy,  O  Pussy,  my  love, 

What  a  beautiful  Pussy  you  are. 
You  are, 
You  are! 

What  a  beautiful  Pussy  you  are!" 

Pussy  said  to  the  Owl,  "You  elegant  fowl, 

How  charmingly  sweet  you  sing! 
Oh!  let  us  be  married;  too  long  we  have  tarried: 

But  what  shall  we  do  for  a  ring?" 
They  sailed  away,  for  a  year  and  a  day, 

To  the  land  where  the  bong-tree  grows; 
And  there  in  a  wood  a  Piggy-wig  stood. 


The  Pobble  Who    Has   No   Toes      2053 

With  a  ring  at  the  end  of  his  nose, 

His  nose, 

His  nose, 
With  a  ring  at  the  end  of  his  nose. 

"Dear  Pig,  are  you  wiUing  to  sell  for  one  shilling 

Your  ring?"    Said  the  Piggy,  "I  will." 
So  they  took  it  away,  and  were  married  ne.xt  day 

By  the  Turkey  who  lives  on  the  hill. 
They  dined  on  mince  and  slices  of  quince, 
Which  they  ate  with  a  runcible  spoon ; 
And  hand  in  hand,  on  the  edge  of  the  sand, 
They  danced  by  the  light  of  the  moon, 
The  moon, 
The  moon, 
They  danced  by  the  light  of  the  moon. 

Edward  Lear  [1812-1888] 

THE  POBBLE  WHO  HAS  NO  TOES 

The  Pobble  who  has  no  toes 

Had  once  as  many  as  we; 
When  they  said,  "Some  day  you  may  lose  them  all;" 

He  replied,  "Fish  fiddle-de-dee!" 
And  his  Aunt  Jobiska  made  him  drink 
Lavender  water  tinged  with  pink, 
For  she  said,  "The  World  in  general  knows 
There's  nothing  so  good  for  a  Pobble's  toes!" 

The  Pobble  who  has  no  toes 

Swam  across  the  Bristol  Channel; 
But  before  he  set  out  he  wrapped  his  nose 

In  a  piece  of  scarlet  flannel. 
For  his  Aunt  Jobiska  said,  "No  harm 
Can  come  to  his  toes  if  his  nose  is  warm; 
And  it's  perfectly  known  that  a  Pobble's  toes 
Are  safe, — provided  he  minds  his  nose." 

The  Pobble  swam  fast  and  well, 

And  when  boats  or  ships  came  near  him, 

He  tinkledy-binkledy-winkled  a  bell, 
So  that  all  the  world  could  hear  him. 


2054  Just   Nonsense 

And  all  the  Sailors  and  Admirals  cried, 
When  they  saw  him  nearing  the  further  side, — • 
"He  has  gone  to  fish,  for  his  Aunt  Jobiska's 
Runcible  Cat  with  crimson  whiskers!" 

But  before  he  touched  the  shore, — • 

The  shore  of  the  Bristol  Channel, — 
A  sea-green  Porpoise  carried  away 

His  v/rapper  of  scarlet  flannel. 
And  when  he  came  to  observe  his  feet, 
Formerly  garnished  with  toes  so  neat. 
His  face  at  once  became  forlorn 
On  perceiving  that  all  his  toes  were  gone! 

And  nobody  ever  knew, 

From  that  dark  day  to  the  present, 
Whoso  had  taken  the  Pobble's  toes. 

In  a  manner  so  far  from  pleasant. 
Whether  the  shrimps  or  crawfish  gray, 
Or  crafty  Mermaids  stole  them  away — 
Nobody  knew ;  and  nobody  knows 
"  n  How  the  Pobble  was  robbed  of  his  twice  five  toes! 

The  Pobble  who  has  no  toes 

Was  placed  in  a  friendly  Bark, 
And  they  rowed  liim  back,  and  carried  him  up 

To  his  Aunt  Jobiska's  Park. 
And  she  made  him  a'feast,  at  his  earnest  wish, 
Of  eggs  and  buttercups  fried  with  fish;  )  •>?:  !' 

And  she  said,  "It's  a  fact  the  whole  world  knows, 
That  Pobbles  are  happier  without  their  toes." 

Edward  Lear  [1812-18 


THE  COURTSHIP  OF  THE  YONGHY- 
BONGHY-BO 

On  the  Coast  of  Coromandcl 
Where  the  early  pumpkins  blow. 

In  the  middle  of  the  woods 
Lived  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 


The  Courtship  ^055 

Two  old  chairs,  and  half  a  candle,        ! 

One  old  jug  without  a  handle, — 

These  were  all  his  worldly  goods: 
In  the  middle  of  the  woods, 
These  were  all  the  worldly  goods, 

Of  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6, 

Of  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 

Once,  among  the  Bong-trees  walking 
Where  the  early  pumpkins  blow, 

To  a  little  heap  of  stones 
Came  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 
There  he  heard  a  Lady  talking 
To  some  milk-white  Hens  of  Dorking, — ■ 
'"Tis  the  Lady  Jingly  Jones! 
On  that  little  heap  of  stones 
Sits  the  Lady  Jingly  Jones!" 
Said  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 

"Lady  Jingly!  Lady  Jingly! 

Sitting  where  the  pumpkins  blow, 

Will  you  come  and  be  my  wife?" 
Said  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 
"I  am  tired  of  living  singly, — 
On  this  coast  so  wild  and  shingly, — 
I'm  a- weary  of  my  life; 
If  you'll  come  and  be  my  wife, 
Quite  serene  would  be  my  life!" 
Said  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 

"On  this  Coast  of  Coromandel, 
Shrimps  and  water-cresses  grow, 

Prawns  are  plentiful  and  cheap," 
Said  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 
"  You  shall  have  my  chairs  and  candle 
And  my  jug  without  a  handle! 
Gaze  upon  the  rolling  deep 
(Fish  is  plentiful  and  cheap); 
As  the  sea,  my  love  is  deep!" 
Said  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 


2056  J"st  Nonsense 

Lady  Jingly  answered  sadly, 
And  her  tears  began  to  flow, — 

"Your  proposal  comes  too  late, 
Mr.  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6! 
I  would  be  your  wife  most  gladly!" 
(Here  she  twirled  her  fingers  madly,) 
"But  in  England  I've  a  mate! 
Yes!  you've  asked  me  far  too  late, 
For  in  England  I've  a  mate, 
Mr.  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 

"Mr.  Jones — (his  name  is  Handel,— 
Handel  Jones,  Esquire,  &  Co.) 

Dorking  fowls  delights  to  send, 
Mr.  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6! 
Keep,  oh!  keep  your  chairs  and  candle. 
And  your  jug  without  a  handle, — 
I  can  merely  be  your  friend! 
— Should  my  Jones  more  Dorkings  send, 
I  will  give  you  three,  my  friend! 
Mr.  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 

"Though  you've  such  a  tiny  body, 
And  your  head  so  large  doth  grow, — 
Though  your  hat  may  blow  away, 
Mr.  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6! 
Though  you're  such  a  Hoddy  Doddy, — 
Yet  I  wish  that  I  could  modi- 
fy the  words  I  needs  must  say! 
Will  you  please  to  go  away? 
That  is  all  I  have  to  say, 
Mr.  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6!" 

Down  the  slippery  slopes  of  Myrtle, 
Where  the  early  pumpkins  blow, 

To  the  calm  and  silent  sea 
Fled  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 
There,  beyond  the  Bay  of  Gurtle, 
Lay  a  large  and  lively  Turtle;^ 


Nonsense   Verses  ^^57 

"You're  the  Cove,"  he  said,  "for  me; 
On  your  back  beyond  the  sea, 
Turtle,  you  shall  carry  me!" 
Said  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 

Through  the  silent-roaring  ocean 
Did  the  Turtle  swiftly  go; 

Holding  fast  upon  his  ^hell 
Rode  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 
With  a  sad  primeval  motion 
Towards  the  sunset  isles  of  Boshen 
Still  the  Turtle  bore  him  well. 
Holding  fast  upon  his  shell, 
"Lady  Jingly  Jones,  farewell!" 
Sang  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 

From  the  Coast  of  Coromandel, 
Did  that  Lady  never  go; 

On  that  heap  of  stones  she  moans 
For  the  Y'onghy-Bonghy-B6. 
On  that  Coast  of  Coromandel, 
In  his  jug  without  a  handle, 

Still  she  weeps  and  daily  mourns; 
On  that  little  heap  of  stones 
To  her  Dorking  Hens  she  moans 
For  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6, 
For  the  Yonghy-Bonghy-B6. 

Edward  Lear  [i 8 12-1888] 

NONSENSE  VERSES 

There  was  an  Old  Man  with  a  beard, 
Who  said,  "It  is  just  what  I  feared! 

Two  Owls  and  a  Hen, 

Four  Larks  and  a  Wren, 
Have  all  built  their  nests  in  my  beard!" 

There  was  an  Old  Man  in  a  tree. 
Who  was  horribly  bored  by  a  bee; 

When  they  said,  "Does  it  buzz?" 

He  replied,  "Yes,  it  does! 
It's  a  regular  brute  of  a  bee!" 


2058  Just  Nonsense 

There  was  an  Old  Man  in  a  boat, 
Who  said,  "I'm  afloat!  I'm  afloat!" 

When  they  said,  "No,  you  ain't!" 

He  was  ready  to  faint, 
That  unhappy  Old  Man  in  a  boat. 

There  was  an  Old  Man  with  a  poker, 
Who  painted  his  face  with  red  ochre; 

When  they  said,  "You're  a  Guy!" 

He  made  no  reply, 
But  knocked  them  all  down  with  his  poker. 

There  was  an  Old  Man  who  said,  "Hush! 
I  perceive  a  young  bird  in  this  bush!" 

When  they  said,  "Is  it  small?" 

He  replied,  "Not  at  all! 
It  is  four  times  as  big  as  the  bush!" 

Edward  Lear  [181 2- 1{ 


THE  TURTLE  AND  FLAMINGO 

A  LIVELY  young  turtle  lived  down  by  the  banks 
Of  a  dark  rolling  stream  called  the  Jingo, 
And  one  summer  day,  as  he  went  out  to  play, 
Fell  in  love  with  a  charming  flamingo — 
An  enormously  genteel  flamingo! 
An  expansively  crimson  flamingo! 
A  beautiful,  bouncing  flamingo! 

Spake  the  turtle  in  tones  like  a  delicate  wheeze: 

"To  the  water  I've  oft  seen  you  in  go, 

And  your  form  has  impressed  itself  deep  on  my  shell. 

You  perfectly  modeled  flamingo! 

You  tremendously  'A  i'  flamingo! 

You  inex-pres-5/-ble  flamingo !  ,  j 

"  To  be  sure  I'm  a  turtle,  and  you  are  a  belle. 

And  my  language  is  not  your  fine  lingo; 

But  smile  on  me,  tall  one,  and  be  my  bright  flame. 

You  miraculous,  wondrous  flamingo! 

You  blazingly  beauteous  flamingo! 


Jabberwocky  2059 

You  turtle-absorbing  flamingo! 

You  inflammably  gorgeous  flamingo!" 

Then  the  proud  bird  blushed  redder  than  ever  before, 

And  that  was  quite  un-ncc-es-5rt-ry, 

And  she  stood  on  one  leg  and  looked  out  of  one  eye, 

The  position  of  things  for  to  vary, — 

This  aquatical,  musing  flamingo! 

This  dreamy,  uncertain  flamingo! 

This  embarrassing,  harassing  flamingo! 

Then  she  cried  to  the  quadruped,  greatly  amazed: 

"Why  your  passion  toward  mc  do  you  hurtle? 

I'm  an  ornithological  wonder  of  grace, 

And  you're  an  illogical  turtle, — 

A  waddling,  impossible  turtle! 

A  low-minded,  grass-eating  turtle! 

A  highly  improbable  turtle!" 

Then  the  turtle  sneaked  off  with  his  nose  to  the  ground,, 

z\nd  never  more  looked  at  the  lasses; 

And  falling  asleep,  while  indulging  his  grief, 

Was  gobbled  up  whole  by  Agassiz, — 

The  peripatetic  Agassiz! 

The  turtle-dissecting  Agassiz! 

The  illustrious,  industrious  Agassiz! 

Go  with  me  to  Cambridge  some  cool,  pleasant  day, 

And  the  skeleton  lover  I'll  show  you: 

He's  in  a  hard  case,  but  he'fl  look  in  your  face, 

Pretending  (the  rogue!)  he  don't  know  you! 

Oh,  the  deeply  deceptive  young  turtle! 

The  double-faced,  glassy-cased  turtle! 

The  green,  but  a  very  woc^-turtle! 

James  Thomas  fields  [181 6-1 881] 

JABBERWOCKY 

'TwAS  brillig,  and  the  slithy  toves 
Did  gyre  and  gimble  in  the  wabe; 

All  mimsy  were  the  borogoves, 
And  the  mome  raths  outgrabe. 


2o6o  Just   Nonsense 

"Beware  the  Jabberwock,  my  son! 

The  jaws  that  bite,  the  claws  that  catch! 
Beware  the  Jubjub  bird,  and  shun 

The  frumious  Bandersnatch!" 

He  took  his  vorpal  sword  in  hand: 

Long  time  the  manxome  foe  he  sought. — 

So  rested  he  by  the  Tumtum  tree, 
And  stood  awhile  in  thought. 

And  as  in  ufi&sh  thought  he  stood. 
The  Jabberwock,  with  eyes  of  flame. 

Came  whiffling  through  the  tulgey  wood, 
And  burbled  as  it  came ! 

One,  two!     One,  two!     And  through  and  through 
The  vorpal  blade  went  snicker-snack! 

He  left  it  dead,  and  with  its  head 
He  went  galumphing  back. 

"And  hast  thou  slain  the  Jabberwock? 

Come  to  my  arms,  my  beamish  boy! 
O  frabjous  day !     Callooh!     Callay!" 

He  chortled  in  his  joy. 

'Twas  brillig,  and  the  slithy  toves 

Did  gyre  and  gimble  in  the  wabe; 
All  mimsy  were  the  borogoves, 

And  the  mome  raths  outgrabe. 

Lewis  Carroll  [1832-189J 


THE   GARDENER'S   SONG 

From  "  Sylvie  and  Bruno  " 

He  thought  he  saw  an  Elephant, 
That  practised  on  a  fife: 

He  looked  again,  and  found  it  was 
A  letter  from  his  wife. 

"At  length  I  realize,"  he  said, 
"The  bitterness  of  life!" 


The  Gardener's  Song  2061 

He  thought  he  saw  a  Buffalo 

Upon  the  chimney-piece: 
He  looked  again,  and  found  it  was 

His  Sister's  Husband's  Niece. 
"  Unless  you  leave  this  house,"  he  said, 

"I'll  send  for  the  Police!" 

He  thought  he  saw  a  Rattlesnake 

That  questioned  him  in  Greek: 
He  looked  again,  and  found  it  was 

The  Middle  of  Next  Week. 
"The  one  thing  I  regret,"  he  said, 

"Is  that  it  cannot  speak!" 

He  thought  he  saw  a  Banker's  Clerk 

Descending  from  the  'bus: 
He  looked  again,  and  found  it  was 

A  Hippopotamus. 
"If  this  should  stay  to  dine,"  he  said, 

"There  won't  be  much  for  us!" 

He  thought  he  saw  a  Kangaroo 

That  worked  a  coffee-mill: 
He  looked  again,  and  found  it  was 

A  Vegetable-Pill. 
"Were  I  to  swallow  this,"  he  said, 

"I  should  be  very  ill!" 

He  thought  he  saw  a  Coach-and-Four 

That  stood  beside  his  bed: 
He  looked  again,  and  found  it  was 

A  Bear  without  a  Head. 
"  Poor  thing,"  he  said,  "  poor  silly  thing! 

It's  waiting  to  be  fed ! " 

He  thought  he  saw  an  Albatross 

That  fluttered  round  the  lamp: 
He  looked  again,  and  found  it  was 

A  Penny-Postage-Stamp. 
"You'd  best  be  getting  home,"  he  said: 

"The  nights  are  very  damp!" 


2o62  P.'   J^^^  Nonsense 


He  thought  he  saw  a  Garden  Door 

That  opened  with  a  key: 
He  looked  again,  and  found  it  v/as 

A  Double-Rule-of-Three : 
"And  all  its  mystery,"  he  said, 

"Is  clear  as  day  to  me!" 

Lcivis  Carroll  [i832-i{ 


THE  WALRUS  AND  THE  CARPENTER 

From  "  Through  the  Looking-Glass  " 

The  sun  was  shining  on  the  sea, 
Shining  with  all  his  might: 

He  did  his  very  best  to  make 

The  billows  smooth  and  bright-- 

And  this  was  odd,  because  it  was 
The  middle  of  the  night. 

The  moon  was  shining  sulkily, 
Because  she  thought  the  sun 

Had  got  no  business  to  be  there 
After  the  day  was  donc^ 

"It's  very  rude  of  him,"  she  said, 

'*-"To  corre  and  spoil  the  fun!" 

The  sea  was  wet  as  wet  could  be, 
The  sands  were  dry  as  dry. 

You  could  not  see  a  cloud,  because 
No  cloud  was  in  the  sky: 

No  birds  were  flying  overhead—    , 


S/!l 


There  were  no  birds  to  .fly. 

■-■uljifj//  c 


The  Walrus  and  the  Carpenter 
Were  walking  close  at  hand: 

They  wept  like  anything  to  see  oil 
Such  quantities  of  sand; 

"If  this  were  only  cleared  away," 
They  said,  "it  would  be  grand!" 


The  Walrus  and  the  Carpenter     2063 

"If  seven  maids  willi  seven  mops 

Swept  it  for  half  a  year, 
Do  you  suppose,"  the  Walrus  said, 

"That  they  could  get  it  clear?" 
"I  doubt  it,"  said  the  Carpenter, 

And  shed  a  bitter  tear. 

"O  Oysters,  come  and  walk  with  us!" 

The  Walrus  did  beseech. 
"A  pleasant  talk,  a  pleasant  walk, 

Along  the  briny  beach : 
We  cannot  do  with  more  than  four, 

To  give  a  hand  to  each." 

The  eldest  Oyster  looked  at  him, 

But  never  a  word  he  said: 
The  eldest  Oyster  winked  his  eye. 

And  shook  his  heavy  head — 
Meaning  to  say  he  did  not  choose 

To  leave  the  oyster-bed. 

But  four  young  Oysters  hurried  up. 

All  eager  for  the  treat : 
Their  coats  were  brushed,  their  faces  washed. 

Their  shoes  were  clean  and  neat — 
And  this  was  odd,  because,  you  know. 

They  hadn't  any  feet. 

Four  other  Oysters  followed  them, 

And  yet  another  four; 
And  thick  and  fast  they  came  at  last, 

And  more,  and  more,  and  more  — 
All  hopping  through  the  frothy  waves. 

And  scrambling  to  the  shore. 

The  Walrus  and  the  Carpenter 

Walked  on  a  mile  or  so, 
And  then  they  rested  on  a  rock 

Conveniently  low: 
And  all  the  little  Oysters  stood 

And  waited  in  a  row. 


2064  Just  Nonsense 

"The  time  has  come,"  the  Walrus  said, 

"To  talk  of  many  things: 
Of  shoes — and  ships — and  sealing-wax — ■■ 

Of  cabbages — and  kings — 
And  why  the  sea  is  boiling  hot — ■ 

And  whether  pigs  have  wings." 

"But  wait  a  bit,"  the  Oysters  cried, 
"Before  we  have  our  chat; 

For  some  of  us  are  out  of  breath. 
And  all  of  us  are  fat!" 

"No  hurry!"  said  the  Carpenter. 
They  thanked  him  much  for  that. 

"A  loaf  of  bread,"  the  Walrus  said, 
.  "Is  what  we  chiefly  need: 
Pepper  and  vinegar  besides 

Are  very  good  indeed — 
Now,  if  you're  ready.  Oysters  dear, 

We  can  begin  to  feed." 

"But  not  on  us!"  the  Oysters  cried. 

Turning  a  little  blue. 
• ,[;:"  After  such  kindness,  that  would  be 

A  dismal  thing  to  do ! " 
"The  night  is  fine,"  the  Walrus  said, 

"Do  you  admire  the  view? 

"It  was  so  kind  of  you  to  come! 

And  you  are  very  nice!" 
The  Carpenter  said  nothing  but 

"Cut  us  another  shce. 
I  wish  you  were  not  quite  so  deaf — 

I've  had  to  ask  you  twice!" 

"It  seems  a  shame,"  the  Walrus  said, 
"To  play  them  such  a  trick, 

After  we've  brought  them  out  so  far, 
And  made  them  trot  so  quick!" 

The  Carpenter  said  nothing  but 
"The  butter's  spread  too  thick!" 


Songs  Without  Sense  2065 

"I  weep  for  you,"  the  Walrus  said: 

"I  deeply  sympathize." 
With  sobs  and  tears  he  sorted  out 

Those  of  the  largest  size, 
Holding  his  pocket-handkerchief 

Before  his  streaming  eyes. 

"O  Oysters,"  said  the  Carpenter, 

"You've  had  a  pleasant  run! 
Shall  we  be  trotting  home  again?" 

But  answer  came  there  none — 
And  this  was  scarcely  odd,  because 

They'd  eaten  every  one. 

Lewis  Carroll  [1832-1898] 


SONGS  WITHOUT  SENSE 

For  the  Parlor  and  Piano 
I. — THE   PERSONIFIED    SENTIMENTAL 

Affection's  charm  no  longer  gilds 

The  idol  of  the  shrine ; 
But  cold  Oblivion  seeks  to  fill 

Regret's  ambrosial  wine. 
Though  Friendship's  ofTering  buried  lies 

'Neath  cold  Aversion's  snow. 
Regard  and  Faith  will  ever  bloom 

Perpetually  below. 

I  see  thee  whirl  in  marble  halls, 

In  Pleasure's  giddy  train; 
Remorse  is  never  on  that  brow. 

Nor  Sorrow's  mark  of  pain. 
Deceit  has  marked  thee  for  her  own; 

Inconstancy  the  same; 
And  Ruin  wildly  sheds  its  gleam 

Athwart  thy  path  of  shame. 


2o66  Just   Nonsense 

II. — THE  HOMELY   PATHETIC 

The  dews  are  heavy  on  my  brow; 

My  breath  comes  hard  and  low; 
Yet,  mother  dear,  grant  one  request, 

Before  your  boy  must  go. 
Oh!  lift  me  ere  my  spirit  sinks, 

And  ere  my  senses  fail: 
Place  me  once  more,  O  mother  dear! 

Astride  the  old  fence-rail. 

The  old  fence-rail,  the  old  fence-rail! 

How  oft  these  youthful  legs, 
With  Alice'  and  Ben  Bolt's,  were  hung 
[.:.,..,  Across  those  wooden  pegs. 

'Twas  there  the  nauseating  smoke 

Of  my  first  pipe  arose: 

0  mother  dear!  these  agonies 
Are  far  less  keen  than  those. 

1  know  where  lies  the  hazel  dell. 

Where  simple  Nellie  sleeps; 
I  know  the  cot  of  Nellie  Moore,       , 

And  where  the  willow  weeps. 
I  know  the  brook-side  and  the  mill,' 

But  all  their  pathos  fails 
Beside  the  days  when  once  I  sat 

Astride  the  old  fence-rails. 

III. — SWISS   AIR 

I'm  a  gay  tra,  la,  la. 
With  my  fal,  lal,  la,  la, 

And  my  bright 

And  my  light -'^  I 

Tra,  la,  le.        (Repeat) 

Then  laugh,  ha,  ha,  ha, 
And  ring,  ting,  hng,  ling, 
And  sing  fal,  la,  la. 

La,  la,  le.         (Repeat) 

Bret  Harte  [1839-1902] 


The   Lovers  2067 

THE  LOVERS 

Sally  Salter,  she  was  a  young  teacher  who  taught, 

And  her  friend,  Charley  Church,  was  a  preacher  who  praught, 

Though  his  enemies  called  him  a  screecher  who  scraught. 

His  heart,  when  he  saw  her,  kept  sinking  and  sunk, 
And  his  eye,  meeting  hers,  began  winking,  and  wunk; 
While  she,  in  her  turn,  kept  thinking,  and  thunk. 

He  hastened  to  woo  her,  and  sweetly  he  wooed, 
For  his  love  grew  until  to  a  mountain  it  grewed, 
And  what  he  was  longing  to  do  then  he  docd. 

In  secret  he  wanted  to  speak,  and  he  spoke. 

To  seek  with  his  lips  what  his  heart  long  had  soke; 

So  he  managed  to  let  the  truth  leak,  and  it  loke. 

He  asked  her  to  ride  to  the  church,  and  they  rode; 

They  so  sweetly  did  glide  that  they  both  thought  they  glode, 

And  they  came  to  the  place  to  be  tied,  and  were  toed. 

Then  homeward,  he  said,  let  us  drive,  and  they  drove, 
And  as  soon  as  they  wished  to  arrive,  they  arrove, 
For  whatever  he  couldn't  contrive,  she  controve. 

The  kiss  he  was  dying  to  steal,  then  he  stole; 

At  the  feet  where  he  wanted  to  kneel  then  he  knole; 

And  he  said,  "I  feel  better  than  ever  I  fole." 

So  they  to  each  other  kept  clinging,  and  clung. 
While  Time  his  swift  circuit  was  winging,  and  wung; 
And  this  was  the  thing  he  was  bringing,  and  brung: 

The  man  Sally  wanted  to  catch,  and  had  caught; 

That  she  wanted  from  others  to  snatch,  and  had  snaught; 

Was  the  one  that  she  now  liked  to  scratch,  and  she  scraught. 

And  Charley's  warm  love  began  freezing,  and  froze. 

While  he  took  to  teazing,  and  cruelly  toze 

The  girl  he  had  wished  to  be  squeezing,  and  squoze. 


2o68  Just  Nonsense 

"Wretch!"  he  cried,  when  she  threatened  to  leave  him,  and 

left, 
"How  could  you  deceive  me,  as  you  have  deceft?" 
And  she  answered,  "I  promised  to  cleave,  and  I've  cleft." 

PhmbeCary  (?)  [1824-1871] 


THE   TWINS 

In  form  and  feature,  face  and  limb, 

I  grew  so  like  my  brother. 
That  folks  got  taking  me  for  him, 

And  each  for  one  another. 
It  puzzled  all  our  kith  and  kin. 

It  reached  a  fearful  pitch; 
For  one  of  us  was  born  a  twin. 

Yet  not  a  soul  knew  which. 

One  day,  to  make  the  matter  worse, 

Before  our  names  were  fixed. 
As  we  were  being  washed  by  nurse, 

We  got  completely  mixed; 
And  thus,  you  see,  by  fate's  decree, 

Or  rather  nurse's  whim. 
My  brother  John  got  christened  me. 

And  I  got  christened  him. 


ilvv  •io'- 


?gid  srlT 

'•  -^h  ik 
This  fatal  likeness  even  dogged  ,     . 

My  footsteps  when  at  school, 
And  I  was  always  getting  flogged,  j  v-m]]  o?. 

For  John  turned  out  a  fool. 
I  put  this  question,  fruitlessly. 

To  every  one  I  knew, 
"What  would  you  do,  if  you  were  me. 

To  prove  that  you  were  you?" 

Our  close  resemblance  turned  the  tide 

Of  my  domestic  life, 
For  somehow,  my  intended  bride 

Became  my  brother's  wife. 


A  Threnody  2069 

In  fact,  year  after  jear  the  same 

Absurd  mistakes  went  on, 
And  when  I  died,  the  neighbors  came '"" 

And  buried  brother  John. 

Henry  Sambrooke  Leigh  [1837-1883] 

A   THRENODY 

The  Ahkoond  of  Swat  is  dead — London  Papers 

What,  what,  what, 

What's  the  news  from  Swat? 

Sad  news, 

Bad  news, 
Comes  by  the  cable  led 
Through  the  Indian  Ocean's  bed. 
Through  the  Persian  Gulf,  the  Red 
Sea  and  the  Med- 
iterranean— he's  dead; 
The  Ahkoond  is  dead ! 

For  the  Ahkoond  I  mourn, 

Who  wouldn't? 
He  strove  to  disregard  the  message  stern, 

But  he  Ahkoodn't. 
Dead,  dead,  dead; 

(Sorrow,  Swats!) 
Swats  wha  hae  wi'  Ahkoond  bled, 
Swats  whom  he  hath  often  led 
Onward  to  a  gory  bed, 

Or  to  victory, 

As  the  case  might  be, 
Sorrow,  Swats! 
Tears  shed, 

Shed  tears  like  water. 
Your  great  Ahkoond  is  dead! 

That  Swats  the  matter! 

Mourn,  city  of  Swat! 

Your  great  Ahkoond  is  not. 

But  lain  'mid  worms  to  rot. 

His  mortal  part  alone,  his  soul  was  caught 


aoyo  Just  Nonsense 

(Because  he  was  a  good  Ahkoond) 

Up  to  the  bosom  of  Mahound. 
Though  earthy  walls  his  frame  surround 
(Forever  hallowed  be  the  ground !) 
And  sceptics  mock  the  lowly  mound 
And  say  "He's  now  of  no  Ahkoond!" 

His  soul  is  in  the  skies, — 
The  azure  skies  that  bend  above  his  loved 
Metropolis  of  Swat. 

He  sees  with  larger,  other  eyes. 

Athwart  all  earthly  mysteries — • 
He  knows  what's  Swat. 

Let  Swat  bury  the  great  Ahkoond 

With  a  noise  of  mourning  and  of  lamentation! 
Let  Swat  bury  the  great  Ahkoond 
With  the  noise  of  the  mourning 
Of  the  Swattish  nation! 
Fallen  is  at  length 
Its  tower  of  strength, 
Its  sun  is  dimmed  ere  it  had  nooned; 
Dead  lies  the  great  Ahkoond, 
The  great  Ahkoond  of  Swat 
Is  not! 

George  Thomas  Lanigan  [1845-ii 

THE  FASTIDIOUS   SERPENT 

There  was  a  snake  that  dwelt  in  Skyc, 

Over  the  misty  sea,  oh; 
He  lived  upon  nothing  but  gooseberry-pie 

For  breakfast,  dinner,  and  tea,  oh. 

Now  gooseberr)^-pie — as  is  very  well  known — 

Over  the  misty  sea,  oh, 
Is  not  to  be  found  under  every  stone, 

Nor  yet  upon  every  tree,  oh. 

And  being  so  ill  to  please  with  his  meat, 

Over  the  misty  sea,  oh, 
The  snake  had  sometimes  nothing  to  eat. 

And  an  angry  snake  was  he,  oh. 


Mr.   Finney's  Turnip  2071 

Then  he'd  flick  his  tongue  and  his  head  he'd  shake, 

Over  the  misty  sea,  oh, 
Crying,  "Gooseberry-pie!    For  goodness'  sake 

Some  gooseberry-pie  for  me,  oh!" 

And  if  gooseberry-pie  was  not  to  be  had. 

Over  the  misty  sea,  oh. 
He'd  twine  and  twist  Hke  an  eel  gone  mad, 

Or  a  worm  just  stung  by  a  bee,  oh. 

But  though  he  might  shout  and  wriggle  about, 

Over  the  misty  sea,  oh, 
The  snake  had  often  to  go  without 

His  breakfast,  dinner,  and  tea,  oh. 

Henry  Johnstone  [1S44- 


MY  RECOLLECTEST  THOUGHTS 

My  recollectest  thoughts  are  those 

Which  I  remember  yet; 
And  bearing  on,  as  you'd  suppose. 

The  things  I  don't  forget. 

But  my  resemblcst  thoughts  are  less 

Alike  than  they  should  be; 
A  state  of  things,  as  you'll  confess, 

You  very  seldom  see. 

And  yet  the  mos  est  thought  I  love 

Is  what  no  one  believes— 
That  I'm  the  sole  survivor  of 

The  famous  Forty  Thieves! 

Charles  Edward  Carryl  [1S41- 

MR.  FINNEY'S  TURNIP 

Mr.  Finney  had  a  turnip 
And  it  grew  behind  the  barn; 

And  it  grew  and  it  grew. 

And  that  turnip  did  no  harm. 


2072  '■'     Just  Nonsense;/ 

There  it  grew  and  it  grew 
Till  it  could  grow  no  longer; 

Then  his  daughter  Lizzie  picked  it 
And  put  it  in  the  cellar. 

There  it  lay  and  it  lay 

Till  it  began  to  rot; 
And  his  daughter  Susie  took  it 

And  put  it  in  the  pot. 

And  they  boiled  it  and  boiled  it  .;;,^!'^  -j^jt 
As  long  as  they  were  able; 

And  then  his  daughters  took  it 
And  put  it  on  the  table. 

Mr.  Finney  and  his  wife 

They  sat  them  down  to  sup; 

And  they  ate  and  they  ate 
And  they  ate  that  turnip  up. 


Unknown 


THE   SIEGE   OF  BELGRADE 

An  Austrian  army,  awfully  arrayed, 

Boldly  by  battery  besieged  Belgrade; 

Cossack  commanders  cannonading  come, 

Dealing  destruction's  devastating  doom. 

Every  endeavor  engineers  essay 

For  fame,  for  fortune,— fighting  furious  fray: 

Generals  'gainst  generals  grapple— gracious  God 

How  honors  Heaven  heroic  hardihood! 

Infuriate,  indiscriminate  in  ill. 

Kindred  kill  kinsmen— kinsmen  kindred  kill! 

Labor  low  levels  loftiest,  longest  lines; 

Men  march  'mid  mounds,  'mid  moles,  'mid  murderous  mines. 

Now  noisy,  noxious  numbers  notice  naught 

Of  outward  obstacles  opposing  ought : 

Toor  patriots,  partly  purchased,  partly  pressed. 

Quite  quailing,. quaking,  quickly  quarter  quest. 


Ellen   M'Jones   Aberdeen  2073 

Reason  returns,  religious  right  redounds, 

Suwarrow  stops  such  sanguinary  sounds: 

Truce  to  thee,  Turkey — triumph  to  thy  train!    '• 

Unjust,  unwise,  unmerciful  Ukraine!  'Go    rl  luU 

Vanish  vain  victory!  vanish  victory  vain! 

Wiry  wish  we  warfare?    Wherefore  welcome  were 

Xerxes,  Ximenes,  Xanthus,  Xavierc? 

Yield,  yield,  ye  youths!  ye  yeomen,  yield  your  yell! 

Zeno's,  Zarpatus',  Zoroaster's  zeal. 

All,  all  arouse!  all  against  arms  appeal! 

Unknown 

ELLEN  M'JONES  ABERDEEN 

]\Iacphairson  Clonglockf.tty  Angus  M'Clan 

Was  the  son  of  an  elderly  laboring  man. 

You've  guessed  him  a  Scotchman,  shrewd  reader,  at  sight, 

And  p'r'aps  altogether,  shrewd  reader,  you're  right. 

From  the  bonnie  blue  Forth  to  the  lovely  Deeside, 
Round  by  Dingwall  and  Wrath  to  the  mouth  of  the  Clyde, 
There  wasn't  a  child,  or  woman,  or  man 
Who  could  pipe  with  Clonglocketty  Angus  M'Clan. 

No  other  could  wake  such  detestable  groans. 

With  reed  and  with  chanter — with  bag  and  with  drones: 

All  day  and  all  night  he  delighted  the  chiels 

With  sniggering  pibrochs  and  jigget}'  reels. 

He'd  clamber  a  mountain  and  squat  on  the  ground, 
And  the  neighboring  maidens  would  gather  around 
To  list  to  his  pipes  and  to  gaze  in  his  een, 
Especially  Ellen  M 'Jones  Aberdeen. 

All  loved  their  M'Clan,  save  a  Sassenach  brute, 
Who  came  to  the  Highlands  to  fish  and  to  shoot; 
He  dressed  himself  up  in  a  Highlander  way. 
Though  his  name  it  was  Pattison  Corby  Torbay. 

Torbay  had  incurred  a  good  deal  of  expense 
To  make  him  a  Scotchman  in  every  sense; 
But  this  is  a  matter,  you'll  readily  own. 
That  isn't  a  question  of  tailors  alone. 


2074  i^^^  Nonsense fjgjf 3 

A  Sassenach  chief  may  be  bonily  built, 
He  may  purchase  a  sporran,  a  bonnet,  and  kilt; 
Stick  a  skean  in  his  hose — wear  an  acre  of  stripes — 
But  he  cannot  assume  an  affection  for  pipes. 

Clonglocketty's  pipings  all  night  and  all  day 
Quite  frenzied  poor  Pattison  Corby  Torbay: 
The  girls  were  amused  at  his  singular  spleen, 
Especially  Ellen  M 'Jones  Aberdeen. 

"Macphairson  Clonglocketty  Angus,  my  lad. 
With  pibrochs  and  reels  you  are  driving  me  mad. 
If  you  really  must  play  on  that  cursed  affair. 
My  goodness!  play  something  resembling  an  air." 

Boiled  over  the  blood  of  Macphairson  M'Clan — 
The  Clan  of  Clonglocketty  rose  as  one  man: 
For  all  were  enraged  at  the  insult,  I  ween! — 
Especially  Ellen  M 'Jones  Aberdeen. 

"Let's  show,"  said  M'Clan,  "to  this  Sassenach  loon 
That  the  bagpipes  can  play  him  a  regular  tune. 
Let's  see,"  said  M'Clan,  as  he  thoughtfully  sat, 
"  '  In  My  Cottage'  is  easy — I'll  practice  at  that." 

He  blew  at  his  "Cottage,"  and  blew  with  a  will, 
For  a  year,  seven  months,  and  a  fortnight,  until 
(You'll  hardly  believe  it)  M'Clan,  I  declare, 
Elicited  something  resembling  an  air. 

It  was  wild — it  was  fitful — as  wild  as  the  breeze — 
It  wandered  about  into  several  keys; 
It  was  jerky,  spasmodic,  and  harsh,  I'm  aware. 
But  still  it  distinctly  suggested  an  air. 

The  Sassenach  screamed  and  the  Sassenach  danced. 
He  shrieked  in  his  agony,  bellowed  and  pranced; 
And  the  maidens  who  gathered  rejoiced  at  the  scene. 
Especially  Ellen  M 'Jones  Aberdeen. 

"Hech  gather,  hech  gather,  hech  gather  around: 
And  fill  a'  ycr  lugs  wi'  the  exquisite  sound. 


2075 


To  the  Terrestrial   Globe 

An  air  frae  the  bagpipes — beat  that  if  ye  can! 
Hurrah  for  Clonglocketty  Angus  M'Clan!" 

The  fame  of  his  piping  spread  over  the  land; 
Respectable  widows  proposed  for  his  hand, 
And  maidens  came  flocking  to  sit  on  the  green, 
Especially  Ellen  M'Jones  Aberdeen. 

One  morning  the  fidgety  Sassenach  swore 
He'd  stand  it  no  longer — he  drew  his  claymore, 
And  (this  was,  I  think,  in  extremely  bad  taste), 
Divided  Clonglocketty  close  to  the  waist. 

Oh!  loud  were  the  wailings  for  Angus  M'Clan, 
Oh!  deep  was  the  grief  for  that  excellent  man. 
The  maids  stood  aghast  at  the  horrible  scene. 
Especially  Ellen  M'Jones  Aberdeen. 

It  sorrowed  poor  Pattison  Corby  Torbay 

To  find  them  "take  on"  in  this  serious  way. 

He  pitied  the  poor  little  lluttering  birds, 

And  solaced  their  souls  with  the  following  words: — 

"Oh,  maidens,"  said  Pattison,  touching  his  hat, 
"Don't  blubber,  my  dears,  for  a  fellow  like  that; 
Observe,  I'm  a  very  superior  man, 
A  much  better  fellow  than  Angus  M'Clan." 

They  smiled  when  he  winked  and  addressed  them  as  "dears, 
And  they  all  of  them  vowed,  as  they  dried  up  their  tears, 
A  pleasanter  gentleman  never  was  seen — 
Especially  Ellen  M'Jones  Aberdeen. 

William  Schwenck  Gilbert  [1S36-1911] 

TO  THE   TERRESTRIAL   GLOBE 

BY  A  MISERABLE  W'RETCH 

Roll  on,  thou  ball,  roll  on! 
Through  pathless  realms  of  Space 

Roll  on! 
What  though  I'm  in  a  sorry  case? 


2076  Just  Nonsense 

What  though  I  cannot  meet  my  bills?  ■   ^"'^ 

What  though  I  suffer  toothache's  ills? 
What  though  I  swallow  countless  pills? 
Never  you  mind! 
Roll  on! 

Roll  on,  thou  ball,  roll  on! 
Through  seas  of  inky  air 

Roll  on! 
It's  true  I've  got  no  shirts  to  wear; 
It's  true  my  butcher's  bill  is  due; 
It's  true  my  prospects  all  look  blue — 
But  don't  let  that  unsettle  you!  '  '   ■ 

Never  you  mind ! 

Roll  on.     (//  rolls  on) 
William  Schwenck  Gilbtrt  [1836-19 11] 


HIS   HEART  WAS  TRUE  TO  POLL 

I'll  sing  you  a  song,  not  very  long, 

But  the  story  somewhat  new, 
Of  William  Kidd,  who,  whatever  he  did, 

To  his  Poll  was  always  true. 
He  sailed  away  in  a  gallant  ship 
From  the  port  of  old  Bristol, 
And  the  last  words  he  uttered, 
As  his  handkercher  he  fluttered, 
Were,  "My  heart  is  true  to  Poll." 

His  heart  was  true  to  Poll, 
His  heart  was  true  to  Poll. 

It's  no  matter  what  you  do, 

If  your  heart  be  only  true: 
And  his  heart  was  true  to  Poll. 

'Twas  a  wreck.    Willirt?w,  on  shore  he  swam. 

And  looked  about  for  an  inn; 
When  a  noble  savage  lady,  of  a  color  rather  shady, 

Came  up  with  a  kind  of  grin: 


Red   Riding  Hood  2077 


"Oh,  marry  me,  and  a  king  you'll  be, 
And  in  a  palace  loll ; 
Or  we'll  eat  you  willy-nilly." 
So  he  gave  his  hand,  did  Billy, 
But  his  heart  was  true  to  Poll. 

Away  a  twelvemonth  sped,  and  a  happy  life  he  led 

As  the  King  of  the  Kikeryboos; 
His  paint  was  red  and  yellow,  and  he  used  a  big  umbrella, 
And  he  wore  a  pair  of  overshoes; 
He'd  corals  and  knives,  and  twenty-six  wives, 
Whose  beauties  I  cannot  here  extol: 
One  day  they  all  revolted, 

So  he  back  to  Bristol  bolted,  -7 

For  his  heart  was  true  to  Poll. 

Francis  Cowley  Burnand  [183  7- 1917] 


RED   RIDING   HOOD 

Most  worthy  of  praise  were  the  virtuous  ways 

Of  Little  Red  Riding  Hood's  ma, 
And  no  one  was  ever  more  cautious  and  clever 

Than  Little  Red  Riding  Hood's  pa. 
They  never  misled,  for  they  meant  what  they  said, 

And  frequently  said  what  they  meant: 
They  were  careful  to  show  her  the  way  she  should  go. 

And  the  way  that  they  showed  her  she  went. 
For  obedience  she  was  effusively  thanked. 
And  for  anything  else  she  was  carefully  spanked. 

It  thus  isn't  strange  that  Red  Riding  Hood's  range 

Of  virtues  so  steadily  grew. 
That  soon  she  won  prizes  of  various  sizes, 

And  golden  encomiums  too. 
As  a  general  rule  she  was  head  of  her  school, 

And  at  six  was  so  notably  smart 
That  they  gave  her  a  check  for  reciting  The  Wreck 

Of  the  Hesperus  wholly  by  heart. 

And  you  all  will  applaud  her  the  more,  I  am  sure, 
When  I  add  that  the  money  she  gave  to  the  poor. 


2078  Just  Nonsense 

At  eleven  this  lass  had  a  Sunday-school  class,         , ,  .^^  ^q' 

At  twelve  wrote  a  volume  of  verse,  nt  b/i/» 

At  fourteen  was  yearning  for  glory,  and  learning 

To  be  a  professional  nurse. 
To  a  glorious  height  the  young  paragon  might 

Have  climbed,  if  not  nipped  in  the  bud, 
But  the  following  year  struck  her  smiHng  career 

With  a  dull  and  a  sickening  thud! 

(I  have  shed  a  great  tear  at  the  thought  of  her  pain, 
And  must  copy  my  manuscript  over  again!) 

Not  dreaming  of  harm,  one  day  on  her  arm 

A  basket  she  hung.    It  was  filled 
With  drinks  made  of  spices,  and  jellies,  and  ices, 

And  chicken-wings,  carefully  grilled. 
And  a  savory  stew,  and  a  novel  or  two 

She  persuaded  a  neighbor  to  loan. 
And  a  Japanese  fan,  and  a  hot-water  can. 

And  a  bottle  of  eau  de  cologne. 

And  the  rest  of  the  things  that  your  family  fill 
Your  room  with  whenever  you  chance  to  be  ill. 

She  expected  to  find  her  decrepit  but  kind 

Old  grandmother  waiting  her  call, 
Exceedingly  ill.    Oh,  that  face  on  the  pillow 

Did  not  look  familiar  at  all! 
With  a  whitening  cheek  she  started  to  speak. 

But  her  peril  she  instantly  saw: 
Her  grandma  had  lied  and  she'd  tackled  instead 

Four  merciless  paws  and  a  maw! 

When  the  neighbors  came  running  the  wolf  to  subdue, 
He  was  licking  his  chops — and  Red  Riding  Hood's,  too! 

At  this  terrible  tale  some  readers  will  pale. 

And  others  with  horror  grow  dumb, 
And  yet  it  was  better,  I  fear,  he  should  get  her: — 

Just  think  what  she  might  have  become! 
For  an  infant  so  keen  might  in  future  have  been 

A  woman  of  awful  renown. 
Who  carried  on  fights  for  her  feminine  rights, 

As  the  Mayor  of  an  Arkansas  town, 


A  Nautical   Ballad  2079 

Or  she  might  have  continued  the  sins  of  her  'teens 
And  come  to  write  verse  for  the  Big  Magazines! 

The  moral:  There's  nothing  much  glummer 

Than  children  whose  talents  appal. 
One  much  prefers  those  that  are  dumber. 

And  as  for  the  paragons  small — 
If  a  swallow  cannot  make  a  summer, 

It  can  bring  on  a  summary  fall! 

Guy  ]Vctii!orc  Carry!  [1S73-1Q04] 


A  NAUTICAL  BALLAD 

A  CAPITAL  ship  for  an  ocean  trip 

Was  the  "Walloping  Window-blind," 
No  gale  that  blew  dismayed  her  crew 

Or  troubled  the  captain's  mind. 
The  man  at  the  wheel  was  taught  to  feel 

Contempt  for  the  wildest  blow, 
And  it  often  appeared,  when  the  weather  had  cleared, 

That  he'd  been  in  his  bunk  below. 

The  boatswain's  mate  was  very  sedate. 

Yet  fond  of  amusement,  too; 
And  he  played  hop-scotch  with  the  starboard  watch 

While  the  captain  tickled  the  crew. 
And  the  gunner  wc  had  was  apparently  mad. 

For  he  sat  on  the  after  rail. 
And  fired  salutes  with  the  captain's  boots. 

In  the  teeth  of  the  booming  gale. 

The  captain  sat  in  a  commodore's  hat 

And  dined  in  a  royal  way 
On  toasted  pigs  and  pickles  and  figs 

And  gummery  bread  each  day. 
But  the  cook  was  Dutch  and  behaved  as  such; 
.     For  the  food  that  he  gave  the  crew 
Was  a  number  of  tons  of  hot-cross  buns 

Chopped  up  with  sugar  and  glue. 


2o8o  Just  Nonsense 

And  we  all  felt  ill  as  mariners  will 

On  a  diet  that's  cheap  and  rude; 
And  we  shivered  and  shook  as  we  dipped  the  cook 

In  a  tub  of  his  gluesome  food. 
Then  nautical  pride  we  laid  aside, 

And  we  cast  the  vessel  ashore 
On  the  Gulliby  Isles,  where  the  Poohpooh  smiles. 

And  the  Anagazanders  roar. 

Composed  of  sand  was  that  favored  land, 

And  trimmed  with  cinnamon  straws; 
And  pink  and  blue  was  the  pleasing  hue 

Of  the  Tickletoeteaser's  claws. 
And  we  sat  on  the  edge  of  a  sandy  ledge 

And  shot  at  the  whistling  bee; 
And  the  Binnacle-bats  wore  water-proof  hats, 

As  they  danced  in  the  sounding  sea. 

On  rubagub  bark,  from  dawn  to  dark, 

We  fed,  till  we  all  had  grown 
Uncommonly  shrunk — when  a  Chinese  junk 

Came  by  from  the  torriby  zone. 
She  was  stubby  and  square,  but  we  didn't  much  care. 

And  we  cheerily  put  to  sea; 
And  we  left  the  crew  of  the  junk  to  chew 

The  bark  of  the  rubagub  tree. 

Charles  Edward  Carry!  [1841- 

THE  PLAINT  OF  THE   CAMEL 

"Canary-birds  feed  on  sugar  and  seed. 

Parrots  have  crackers  to  crunch; 
And  as  for  the  poodles,  they  tell  me  the  noodles 
Have  chickens  and  cream  for  their  lunch. 
But  there's  never  a  question 
About  MY  digestion — 
ANYTHING  does  for  me! 

"Cats,  you're  aware,  can  repose  in  a  chair, 

Chickens  can  roost  upon  rails; 
Puppies  are  able  to  sleep  in  a  stable, 

And  oysters  can  slumber  in  pails. 


The   Frog 


208I 


But  no  one  supposes 
A  poor  Camel  dozes — 
ANY  PLACE  does  for  me! 

"Lambs  are  enclosed  where  it's  never  exposed, 

Coops  are  constructed  for  hens; 
Kittens  are  treated  to  houses  well  heated, 
And  pigs  are  protected  by  pens.  " 

But  a  Camel  comes  handy 
Wherever  it's  sandy — 
ANYWHERE  does  for  me! 

"People  would  laugh  if  you  rode  a  giraffe, 

Or  mounted  the  back  of  an  ox; 
It's  nobody's  habit  to  ride  on  a  rabbit, 
Or  try  to  bcstraddle  a  fox. 
But  as  for  a  Camel,  he's 
Ridden  by  families — 
ANY  LOAD  does  for  me! 

"A  snake  is  as  round  as  a  hole  in  the  ground, 

And  weasels  are  wavy  and  sleek; 
And  no  alligator  could  ever  be  straighter 
Than  lizards  that  live  in  a  creek, 
But  a  Camel's  all  lumpy 
And  bumpy  and  humpy — 
ANY  SHAPE  does  for  me!" 

Charles  Edward  Carryl  [1841- 

THE  FROG 

Be  kind  and  tender  to  the  Frog, 

And  do  not  call  him  names, 
As  "Slimy-skin,"  or  "Polly-wog," 

Or  likewise,  "Uncle  James," 
Or  "Gape-a-grin,"  or  "Toad-gone-wrong," 

Or  "Billy  Bandy-knees:" 
The  Frog  is  justly  sensitive 

To  epithets  like  these. 

No  animal  will  more  repay 
A  treatment  kind  and  fair. 


2o82  J^s^   Nonsense 

At  least  so  lonely  people  say 
Who  keep  a  frog  (and,  by  the  way, 
They  are  extremely  rare). 

Hilaire  Belloc  [1870- 

SAGE   COUNSEL 

The  lion  is  the  beast  to  fight: 

He  leaps  along  the  plain, 
And  if  you  run  with  all  your  might. 
He  runs  with  all  his  mane. 
I'm  glad  I'm  not  a  Hottentot, 
But  if  I  were,  with  outward  cal-lum 
I'd  either  faint  upon  the  spot 
,    Or  hie  me  up  a  leafy  pal-lum. 

The  chamois  is  the  beast  to  hunt: 

He's  fleeter  than  the  wind, 
And  when  the  chamois  is  in  front 
The  hunter  is  behind. 

The  Tyrolese  make  famous  cheese 
And  hunt  the  chamois  o'er  the  chaz-zums; 
I'd  choose  the  former,  if  you  please, 
For  precipices  give  me  spaz-zums. 

The  polar  bear  will  make  a  rug 

Almost  as  white  as  snow: 
But  if  he  gets  you  in  his  hug, 
He  rarely  lets  you  go. 

And  polar  ice  looks  very  nice. 
With  all  the  colors  of  a  prissum: 
But,  if  you'll  follow  my  advice. 
Stay  home  and  learn  your  catechissum. 
Arthur  Qitiller-Coiich  [1863- 

CHILD'S  NATURAL  HISTORY 

GEESE 

Ev-ER-Y  child  who  has  the  use 
Of  his  sen-ses  knows  a  goose. 
Sees  them  un-der-neath  the  tree 
Gath-er  round  the  goose-girl's  knee, 


Child's  Natural   History  2083 

While  she  reads  them  by  the  hour 
From  the  works  of  Scho-pen-hau-er. 
How  pa-ticnt-ly  the  geese  at-tend! 
But  do  they  re-al-ly  com-pre-hend 
What  Scho-pen-hau-er's  driv-ing  at? 
Oh,  not  at  all;  but  what  of  that? 
Nei-ther  do  I;  nei-ther  does  she; 
And,  for  that  mat-ter,  nor  does  he. 

A   SEAL 

See,  Chil-drcn,  the  Fiir-bear-ing  Seal; 
Ob-scrve  his  mis-di-rcct-ed  zeal; 
He  dines  with  most  ab-ste-mi-ous  care 
On  Fish,  Ice  Water  and  Fresh  Air 
A-void-ing  cond-i-ments  or  spice 
For  fear  his  fur  should  not  be  nice 
And  fine  and  soft  and  smooth  and  meet 
For  Broad- way  or  for  Re-gent  Street. 
And  yet  some-how  I  often  feel 
(Though  for  the  kind  Fur-bear-ing  Seal 
I  harbor  a  Rc-spcct  Pro-found) 
He  runs  Fur-bear-ancc  in  the  ground. 


This  is  the  Yak,  so  ncg-Ii-gce; 
His  coif-fure's  like  a  stack  of  hay; 
He  lives  so  far  from  Any-where, 
I  fear  the  Yak  neg-lects  his  hair. 
And  thinks,  since  there  is  none  to  see. 
What  mat-ter  how  un-kempt  he  be: 
How  would  he  feel  if  he  but  knew 
That  in  this  Pic-ture-book  I  drew 
Flis  Phys-i-og-no-my  un-shorn, 
For  chil-dren  to  de-ride  and  scorn? 

THE   MON-GOOS 

This,  Children,  is  the  famed  Mon-goos. 
He  has  an  ap-pc-tite  ab-struse: 
Strange  to  re-late,  this  crea-ture  takes 
A  cu-ri-ous  joy  in  cat-iug  snakes — 


2084  Just  Nonsense 

All  kinds — though,  it  must  be  con-fessed, 

He  likes  the  poi-son-ous  ones  the  best. 

From  him  we  learn  how  ve-ry  small 

A  thing  can  bring  a-bout  a  Fall. 

O  Mon-goos,  where  were  you  that  day 

When  Mistress  Eve  was  led  a-stray? 

If  you'd  but  seen  the  ser-pent  first, 

Our  parents  would  not  have  been  cursed, 

And  so  there  would  be  no  ex-cuse 

For  Milton,  but  for  you — Mon-goos! 

Oliver  Herford  [1863- 


IN  FOREIGN  PARTS 

When  I  lived  in  Singapore, 
It  was  something  of  a  bore 
To  receive  the  bulky  Begums  who  came  trundling  to  my 

door ; 
They  kept  getting  into  tangles 
With  their  bingle-bongle-bangles. 
And  the  tiger  used  to  bite  them  as  he  sat  upon  the  floor. 

When  I  lived  in  Timbuctoo, 

Almost  everyone  I  knew 

Used  to  play  upon  the  sackbut,  singing  "  toodle-doodle-doo," 

And  they  made  ecstatic  ballads. 

And  consumed  seductive  salads. 

Made  of  chicory  and  hickory  and  other  things  that  grew. 

When  I  lived  at  Rotterdam, 

I  possessed  a  spotted  ram. 

Who  would  never  feed  on  anything  but  hollyhocks  and  ham; 

But  one  day  he  butted  down 

All  the  magnates  of  the  town. 

So  they  slew  him,  though  I  knew  him  to  be  gentle  as  a  lamb. 

But! 

When  I  got  to  Kandahar, 

It  was  very,  very  far, 


The   Purple  Cow  2085 

And  the  people  came  and  said  to  me,  "How  very  plain  you 

are!" 
So  I  sailed  across  the  foam, 
And  I  toddle- waddled  home, 

And  no  more  I'll  go  a-rovering  beyond  the  harbor  bar. 

Laura  E.  Richards  [1850- 

A  MOSQUITO  TRIOLET 

He  presented  his  bill, 

And  I  could  not  evade  it. 
In  valley,  on  hill, 
He  presented  his  bill, 
With  stinging  ill-will; 

So  with  blood,  sir,  I  paid  it. 
He  presented  his  bill, 

And  I  could  not  evade  it. 

Aristine  Anderson  [18 

A  GRAIN  OF  S.\LT 

Of  all  the  wimming  doubly  blest 
The  sailor's  wife's  the  happiest, 
For  all  she  does  is  stay  to  home 
And  knit  and  darn — and  let  'im  roam. 

Of  all  the  husbands  on  the  earth 
The  sailor  has  the  finest  berth, 
B'or  in  'is  cabin  he  can  sit 
And  sail  and  sail — and  let  'er  knit. 

Wallace  Iriinn  [1875- 

THE  PURPLE  COW 

Reflections  on  a  Mythic  Beast, 
Who's  Quite  Remarkable,  at  Least. 

I  NEVER  saw  a  Purple  Cow; 

I  never  Hope  to  See  One; 
But  I  can  Tell  you,  Anyhow, 

I'd  rather  See  than  Be  One. 


2o86  Just  Nonsense 

CINQ  ANS  APRES 

(Confession:  and  a  portrait,  Too, 

Upon  a  Background  that  I  Rue!)  ^  ^; 

Ah,  yes,  I  wrote  the  "Purple  Cow"—  ^.lA 

I'm  sorry,  now,  I  Wrote  it!  ■•'  <^ii  i-»"A 

But  I  can  Tell  you,  Anyhow, 
I'll  Kill  you  if  you  Quote  it! 

GelcU  Burgess  [1866- 


NONSENSE  VERSES 

The  Window  has  Four  httle  Panes: 

But  One  have  I: 
The  Window-Pancs  are  in  its  Sash, — 

I  wonder  why! 

My  Feet  they  haul  me  'round  the  House: 

They  hoist  me  up  the  Stairs: 
I  only  have  to  steer  them  and 

They  ride  me  everywheres. 

Remarkable  truly,  is  Art! 
See— EUiptical  wheels  on  a  Cart! 

It  looks  very  fair 

In  the  Picture  up  there: 
But  imagine  the  Ride  when  you  start! 

I'd  rather  have  Fingers  than  Toes: 
I'd  rather  have  Eyes  than  a  Nose: 

And  as  for  my  hair, 

I'm  glad  it's  all  there, 
I'll  be  awfully  sad  when  it  goes! 

I  wish  that  my  Room  had  a  Floor; 
I  don't  so  much  care  for  a  Door, 

But  this  walking  around 

Without  touching  the  ground 
Is  getting  to  be  quite  a  bore! 

GeleM  Bur  cess  [1866- 


Home  2087 


VERS  NONSENSIQUES 

•    I  AM  gai.     I  am  poet.     I  dvell 
bi£7/qL'  Rupert  Street,  at  the  fifth.     I  am  sveU. 
And  I  sing  tralala 
And  I  love  my  mamma, 
And  the  Enghsh,  I  speaks  him  quite  veil! 

"Cassez-vous,  cassez-vous,  cassez-vous, 
O  mer,  sur  vos  froids  gris  cailloux!" 

Ainsi  tradusit  Laure 

Au  profit  d'Isadore 
(Bon  jeune  homme,  et  son  future  epoux.) 

II  existe  une  espinstere  a  Tours 
Un  peu  vite,  et  qui  portait  toujours 

Un  ulster  peau-de-phoque, 

Un  chapeau  biliqoque, 
Et  des  nicreboquers  en  velours. 

Un  marin  naufrage  (de  Doncastre) 
Pour  priere,  au  milieu  du  desastre 

Repetait  a  genoux 

Ces  mots  simples  et  doux : — 
"Scintellez,  scintellez,  petit  astre!" 

George  du  Maurier  [1834-1896] 

HOME 

A  MELANCHOLY  little  man  was  seated  on  the  ground ; 
He  showed  supreme  indifference  to  everything  around. 
"Why  do  you  not  run  home,"  I  cried,  "and  tumble  into 

bed?" 
He  looked  at  me  expressively,  and  presently  he  said: 

"One  rubber  plant  can  never  make  a  home, 
Not  even  when  combined  with  brush  and  comb, 

And  spoon,  and  fork,  and  knife, 

And  graphophone,  and  wife. 
No!    Something  more  is  needed  for  a  home."    ' ' 


2o88  Just  Nonsense 

I  said:  "What  does  your  dwelling  lack?  The  pretty  hearth- 
side  tone? 

The  note  of  domesticity?"    He  gave  a  fearful  groan. 

"Alas!"  he  cried,  while  from  his  seat  he  slowly  upward 
bobbed 

And  seized  his  hat,  "a  flat's  a  flat!"  Together  then  we 
sobbed : 

"One  rubber  plant  can  never  make  a  home; 
One  day  did  not  suffice  for  building  Rome.    . 

One  gas-log  and  a  cat 

Can't  civilize  a  flat. 
No!    Something  more  is  needed  for  a  home." 

Unknown 


FOUR  LIMERICKS 

A  CANNER,  exceedingly  canny, 

One  morning  remarked  to  his  granny, 

"A  canner  can  can 

Anything  that  he  can; 
But  a  canner  can't  can  a  can,  can  he?" 

A  BRIGHT  little  maid  of  St.  Thomas 
One  day  found  a  suit  of  pajamas; 

Said  the  maiden,  "Well,  well. 

What  these  are,  I  can't  tell. 
But  I'm  certain  the  garments  ain't  mama's." 

A  TUTOR  who  tooted  a  flute 

Tried  to  teach  two  young  foolers  to  toot. 

Said  the  two  to  the  tutor,  jo^  ob  vi 

"Is  it  harder  to  toot,  or  "Sbod 

To  tutor  two  tooters  to  toot?"  ,  ]r,  ba^jlot! 

There  was  a  young  fellow  named  Tait, 
Who  dined  with  his  girl  at  S:o8; 

As  Tait  did  not  state, 

I  cannot  relate  ;     - 

What  Tait  and  his  tete-a-tete  ate  at  8:08. 

Carolyn  Wells  [18    - 


More  Limericks  2089 


MORE  LIMERICKS 

There  was  an  old  man  of  Tarentum, 

Who  gnashed  his  false  teeth  till  he  bent  'em: 

And  when  asked  for  the  cost 

Of  what  he  had  lost, 
Said,  "I  really  can't  tell,  for  I  rent  'cm!" 

A  LADY  there  was  of  Antigua, 

Who  said  to  her  spouse,  "What  a  pig  you  are!" 

He  answered,  "My  queen, 

Is  it  manners  j^ou  mean, 
Or  do  you  refer  to  my  figure?  " 

The  poor  benighted  Hindoo, 
He  does  the  best  he  kinddo; 

He  sticks  to  caste 

From  first  to  last; 
For  pants  he  makes  his  skindoo. 

There  were  three  young  women  of  l^irmingham,  ■ 
And  I  know  a  sad  story  concerning  'em: 

They  stuck  needles  and  pins 

In  the  reverend  shins 
Of  the  Bishop  engaged  in  confirming  'em. 

There  was  a  young  lady  of  Niger 
Who  smiled  as  she  rode  on  a  tiger; 

They  returned  from  the  ride 

With  the  lady  inside. 
And  the  smile  on  the  face  of  the  tiger. 

There  was  a  young  lady  of  Wilts, 
Who  walked  up  to  Scotland  on  stilts; 

When  they  said  it  was  shocking 

To  show  so  much  stocking, 
She  answered:  "Then  what  about  kilts?" 

There  was  a  young  girl  of  Lahore, 
The  same  shape  behind  as  before. 

As  no  one  knew  where 

To  offer  a  chair. 
She  had  to  sit  down  on  the  floor. 

Cosmo  MonkhoHsc  [1840-1901] 


2090  Just  Nonsense 

In  good  looks  I  am  not  a  star. 
There  are  others  more  lovely  by  far. 

But  my  face — I  don't  mind  it, 

Because  I'm  behind  it — 
It's  the  people  in  front  that  I  jar. 

There  was  a  small  boy  of  Quebec, 
Who  was  buried  in  snow  to  his  neck; 

When  they  said,  "Are  you  friz?" 

He  replied,  "Yes,  I  is — 
But  we  don't  call  this  cold  in  Quebec." 

Ritdyard  Kipling  [1865- 

There  was  a  young  man  so  benighted 
He  didn't  know  when  he  was  slighted, 

But  went  to  the  party 

And  ate  just  as  heartj^ 
As  if  he'd  been  duly  invited! 

There  was  an  old  man  of  Nantucket 
Who  kept  all  his  cash  in  a  bucket; 

But  his  daughter,  named  Nan, 

Ran  away  with  a  man — 
And  as  for  the  bucket,  Nantucket. 


OLD  FAVORITES 

AN  ELEGY  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  A  MAD  DOG 

From  "  The  Vicar  of  Wakefield  " 

Good  people  all,  of  every  sort, 

Give  ear  unto  my  song; 
And  if  you  find  it  wondrous  short, — 

It  cannot  hold  you  long. 

In  Islington  there  was  a  man 
Of  whom  the  world  might  say, 

That  still  a  godly  race  he  ran, — 
Whene'er  he  went  to  pray. 

A  kind  and  gentle  heart  he  had, 

To  comfort  friends  and  foes: 
The  naked  every  day  he  clad, — 

When  he  put  on  his  clothes. 

And  in  that  town  a  dog  was  found, 

As  many  dogs  there  be, 
Both  mongrel,  puppy,  whelp,  and  hound. 

And  curs  of  low  degree. 

This  dog  and  man  at  first  were  friends; 

But  when  a  pique  began, 
The  dog,  to  gain  some  private  ends, 

Went  mad,  and  bit  the  man. 

Around  from  all  the  neighboring  streets 

The  wondering  neighbors  ran. 
And  swore  the  dog  had  losts  his  wits, 

To  bite  so  good  a  man.  '■ 

2091 


2092  Old   Favorites 

The  wound  it  seemed  both  sore  and  sad 

To  every  Christian  eye: 
And  while  they  swore  the  dog  was  mad, 

They  swore  the  man  would  die. 

But  soon  a  wonder  came  to  light, 

That  showed  the  rogues  they  lied: — 

, ,,-  -,    The  man  recovered  of  the  bite, 
iJQCi   ^  -^A 

The  dog  it  was  that  died.  ""  ' 

Oliver  Goldsmith  [1728-1774] 


AN  ELEGY 

ON  THAT  GLORY  OF  HER  SEX,  MRS.  MARY  BLAIZE 

'^GooD  people  all,  with  one  accord, 
Lament  for  Madam  Blaize, 
Who  never  wanted  a  good  word — :  i  l 
From  those  who  spoke  her  praise. 

The  needy  seldom  passed  her  door, 

And  always  found  her  kind; 
She  freely  lent  to  all  the  poor — 

Who  left  a  pledge  behind. 

She  strove  the  neighborhood  to  please 
With  manners  wondrous  winning; 

And  never  followed  wicked  ways — 
Unless  when  she  was  sinning. 

At  qhurch,  in  silks  and  satins  newri  ;• 
With  hoop  of  monstrous  size. 

She  never  slumbered  in  her  pew — 
But  when  she  shut  her  eyes. 

Her  love  was  sought,  I  do  aver, 

By  twenty  beaux  and  more; 
The  King  himself  has  followed  her — 

When  she  has  walked  before. 


John   Gilpin  2093 

But  now,  her  wealth  and  finery  fled, 

Her  hangers-on  cut  short  all; 
The  doctors  found,  when  she  was  dead —     '  ■ 

Her  last  disorder  mortal.  '' 

Let  us  lament,  in  sorrow  sore. 

For  Kent  Street  well  may  say, 
That  had  she  lived  a  twelvemonth  more — ■ 

She  had  not  died  to-day. 

Oliver  Goldsmith  [i 728-1 774] 


THE   DIVERTING   HISTORY   OF   JOHN    GILPIN 

SHOWING  HOW  HE  WENT  FARTHER  THAN  HE  INTENDED  AND 
CAME    SAFE   HOME   AGAIN 

John  Gilpin  was  a  citizen 

Of  credit  and  renown, 
A  train-band  captain  eke  was  he 

Of  famous  London  town. 

John  Gilpin's  spouse  said  to  her  dear, 
"Though  wedded  we  have  been 

These  twice  ten  tedious  years,  yet  we 
No  holiday  have  seen. 

"To-morrow  is  our  wedding-day, 

And  we  will  then  repair 
Unto  the  Bell  at  Edmonton, 

All  in  a  chaise  and  pair. 

"My  sister,  and  my  sister's  child, 

Mj'self,  and  children  three, 
Will  fill  the  chaise;  so  you  must  ride 

On  horseback  after  we." 

He  soon  replied,  "I  do  admire 

Of  womankind  but  one. 
And  you  are  she,  my  dearest  dear. 

Therefore  it  shall  be  done. 


2094  O^d   Favorites 

"I  am  a  linen-draper  bold, 

As  all  the  world  doth  know, 
And  my  good  friend  the  calender 

Will  lend  his  horse  to  go." 

Quoth  Mrs.  Gilpin^  "That's  well  said; 

And  for  that  wine  is  dear, 
We  will  be  furnished  with  our  own, 

Which  is  both  bright  and  clear." 

John  Gilpin  kissed  his  loving  wife; 

O'er  joyed  was  he  lo  find, 
That  though  on  pleasure  she  was  bent, 

She  had  a  frugal  mind. 

The  morning  came,  the  chaise  was  brought, 

But  yet  was  not  allowed 
To  drive  up  to  the  door,  lest  all 

Should  say  that  she  was  proud. 

So  three  doors  off  the  chaise  was  stayed, 

Where  they  did  all  get  in;    . 
Six  precious  souls,  and  all  agog 

To  dash  through  thick  and  thin. 

'     Smack  went  the  whip,  round  went  the  wheels, 
Were  never  folk  so  glad. 
The  stones  did  rattle  underneath, 
As  if  Cheapside  were  mad. 

John  Gilpin  at  his  horse's  side 

Seized  fast  the  flowing  mane, 
And  up  he  got,  in  haste  to  ride, 

But  soon  came  down  again; 

For  saddle-tree  scarce  reached  had  he, 

His  journey  to  begin, 
When,  turning  round  his  head,  he  saw 

Three  customers  come  in. 


John   Gilpin  ^^95 


So  down  he  came;  for  less  of  time, 

Although  it  grieved  him  sore, 
Yet  loss  of  pence,  full  well  he  knew, 

Would  trouble  him  much  more. 

'Twas  long  before  the  customers 

Were  suited  to  their  mind. 
When  Betty  screaming  came  downstairs, 

"The  wine  is  left  behind!" 

"Good  lack!"  quoth  he — "yet  bring  it  me, 

My  leathern  belt  likewise, 
In  which  I  bear  my  trusty  sword, 

When  I  do  exercise." 

Now  Mistress  Gilpin  (careful  soul!) 

Had  two  stone  bottles  found, 
To  hold  the  liquor  that  she  loved. 

And  keep  it  safe  and  sound. 

Each  bottle  had  a  curling  ear. 
Through  which  the  belt  he  drew. 

And  hung  a  bottle  on  each  side. 
To  make  his  balance  true. 

Then  over  all,  that  he  might  be 
Equipped  from  top  to  toe, 

His  long  red  cloak,  well  brushed  and  neat- 
He  manfully  did  throw. 

Now  see  him  mounted  once  again 

Upon  his  nimble  steed. 
Full  slowly  pacing  o'er  the  stones, 

With  caution  and  good  heed. 

But  finding  soon  a  smoother  road 

Beneath  his  well-shod  feet, 
The  snorting  beast  began  to  trot, 

Which  galled  him  in  his  seat. 


2096  Old   Favorites 

So,  "Fair  and  softly,"  John  he  cried, 

But  John  he  cried  in  vain; 
That  trot  become  a  gallop  soon, 

In  spite  of  curb  and  rein. 

So  stooping  down,  as  needs  he  must 

Who  cannot  sit  upright, 
He  grasped  the  mane  with  both  his  hands, 

And  eke  with  all  his  might. 

His  horse,  who  never  in  that  sort 

Had  handled  been  before, 
What  thing  upon  his  back  had  got 

Did  wonder  more  and  more. 

Away  went  Gilpin,  neck  or  naught; 

Away  went  hat  and  wig: 
He  little  dreamt,  when  he  set  out. 

Of  running  such  a  rig. 

The  wind  did  blow,  the  cloak  did  fly, 

Like  streamer  long  and  gay, 
Till,  loop  and  button  failing  both. 

At  last  it  flew  away. 

Then  might  all  people  well  discern 

The  bottles  he  had  slung; 
A  bottle  swinging  at  each  side. 

As  hath  been  said  or  sung. 

The  dogs  did  bark,  the  children  screamed, 

Up  flew  the  windows  all; 
And  every  soul  cried  out,  "Well  done!" 

As  loud  as  he  could  bawl. 

Away  went  Gilpin — who  but  he? 

His  fame  soon  spread  around; 
"He  carries  weight!"    "He  rides  a  race!" 

'"Tis  for  a  thousand  pound!" 


John   Gilpin  2097 


And  still,  as  fast  as  he  drew  near, 

'Twas  wonderful  to  view, 
How  in  a  trice  the  turnpike-men 

Their  gates  wide  open  threw. 

And  now,  as  he  went  bowing  down 

His  reeking  head  full  low, 
The  bottles  twain  behind  his  back 

Were  shattered  at  a  blow. 

Down  ran  the  wine  into  the  road. 

Most  piteous  to  be  seen, 
Which  made  his  horse's  flanks  to  smoke 

As  they  had  basted  been. 

But  still  he  seemed  to  carry  weight, 

With  leathern  girdle  braced; 
For  all  might  see  the  bottle-necks 

Still  dangling  at  his  waist. 

Thus  all  through  merry  Islington 

These  gambols  he  did  play. 
Until  he  came  unto  the  Wash 

Of  Edmonton  so  gay; 

And  there  he  threw  the  Wash  about 

On  both  sides  of  the  way, 
Just  like  unto  a  trundling  mop, 

Or  a  wild  goose  at  play. 

At  Edmonton  his  loving  wife 

From  the  balcony  spied 
Her  tender  husband,  wondering  much 

To  see  how  he  did  ride. 

"Stop,  stop,  John  Gilpin! — Here's  the  house!" 

They  all  at  once  did  cry; 
"The  dinner  waits,  and  we  are  tired;" — 

Said  Gilpin— "So  am  I." 


2098  Old  Favorites 

But  yet  his  horse  was  not  a  whit 

Indined  to  tarry  there! 
For  why? — his  owner  had  a  house 

Full  ten  miles  off,  at  Ware, 

So  Uke  an  arrow  swift  he  flew, 

Shot  by  an  archer  strong; 
So  did  he  fly — which  brings  me  to 

The  middle  of  my  song. 

Away  went  Gilpin,  out  of  breath. 

And  sore  against  his  will, 
TiU  at  his  friend  the  calender's 

His  horse  at  last  stood  still. 

The  calender,  amazed  to  see 

His  neighbor  in  such  trim, 
Laid  down  his  pipe,  flew  to  the  gate, 

And  thus  accosted  him: 

"What  news?  what  news?  your  tidings  tell; 

TeU  me  you  must  and  shall — 
Say  why  bareheaded  you  are  come, 

Or  why  you  come  at  all?" 

Now  Gilpin  had  a  pleasant  wit 

And  loved  a  timely  joke; 
And  thus  unto  the  calender 

In  merry  guise  he  spoke: 

"I  came  because  your  horse  would  come, 

And,  if  I  well  forbode. 
My  hat  and  wig  will  soon  be  here.— 

They  are  upon  the  road."     'if-'jaa  ol 

The  calender,  right  glad  to  find 

His  friend  in  merry  pin, 
Returned  him  not  a  single  word 

But  to  the  house  went  in; 


John  Gilpin  2099 

Whence  straight  he  came  with  hat  and  wig; 

A  wig  that  flowed  behind, 
A  hat  not  much  the  worse  for  wear, 

Each  comely  in  its  kind. 

He  held  them  up,  and  in  his  turn 

Thus  showed  his  ready  wit, 
"My  head  is  twice  as  big  as  yours, 

They  therefore  needs  must  fit. 

"But  let  me  scrape  the  dirt  away 

That  hangs  upon  your  face; 
And  stop  and  eat,  for  well  you  may 

Be  in  a  hungry  case." 

Said  John,  "It  is  my  wedding-day, 

And  all  the  world  would  stare, 
If  wife  should  dine  at  Edmonton, 

And  I  should  dine  at  Ware." 

So  turning  to  his  horse,  he  said, 

"I  am  in  haste  to  dine; 
'Twas  for  your  pleasure  you  came  here, 

You  shall  go  back  for  mine." 

Ah,  luckless  speech,  and  bootless  boast! 

For  which  he  paid  full  dear; 
For,  while  he  spake,  a  braying  ass 

Did  sing  most  loud  and  clear; 

Whereat  his  horse  did  snort,  as  he 

Had  heard  a  lion  roar, 
And  galloped  off  with  all  his  might. 

As  he  had  done  before. 

Away  went  Gilpin,  and  away 

Went  Gilpin's  hat  and  wig: 
Fie  lost  them  sooner  than  at  first; 

For  why? — they  were  too  Ijig. 


2IOO 


Old   Favorites 

Now  Mistress  Gilpin,  when  she  saw 

Her  husband  posting  down  , 
Into  the  country  far  away, 

She  pulled  out  half-a-crown; 

And  thus  unto  the  youth  she  said 

That  drove  them  to  the  Bell, 
"This  shall  be  yours,  when  you  bring  back 

My  husband  safe  and  well." 

The  youth  did  ride,  and  soon  did  meet 

John  coming  back  amain : 
Whom  in  a  trice  he  tried  to  stop, 

By  catching  at  his  rein; 

But  not  performing  what  he  meant, 

And  gladly  would  have  done. 
The  frighted  steed  he  frighted  more, 

And  made  him  faster  run. 

Away  went  Gilpin,  and  away 

Went  postboy  at  his  heels, 
The  postboy's  horse  right  glad  to  miss 

The  lumbering  of  the  wheels. 

Six  gentlemen  upon  the  road, 

Thus  seeing  Gilpin  fly. 
With  postboy  scampering  in  the  rear, 

They  raised  the  hue  and  cry: 

"Stop  thief!  stop  thief!— a  highwayman!" 

Not  one  of  them  was  mute; 
And  all  and  each  that  passed  that  way 

Did  join  in  the  pursuit. 

And  now  the  turnpike  gates  again 

Flew  open  in  short  space; 
The  toll-men  thinking,  as  before. 

That  Gilpin  rode  a  race. 


The  Razor-Seller  2101 

And  so  he  did,  and  won  it  too, 

For  he  got  first  to  town; 
Nor  stopped  till  where  he  had  got  up 

He  did  again  get  down. 

Now  let  us  sing,  Long  live  the  king! 

And  Gilpin,  long  live  he! 
And  when  he  next  doth  ride  abroad 

May  I  be  there  to  see! 

William  Cow  per  [  1 7  3 1  - 1 800] 


THE   RAZOR-SELLER 

A  FELLOW  in  a  market-town. 

Most  musical,  cried  "Razors!"  up  and  down, 

And  offered  twelve  for  eighteen  pence; 
Which  certainly  seemed  wondrous  cheap, 
And,  for  the  money,  quite  a  heap. 

As  every  man  should  buy,  with  cash  and  sense. 

A  country  bumpkin  the  great  offer  heard, — 
Poor  Hodge,  who  suffered  by  a  thick  black  beard, 

That  seemed  a  shoe-brush  stuck  beneath  his  nose ; 
With  cheerfulness  the  eighteen  pence  he  paid, 
And  proudly  to  himself  in  whispers  said, 

"This  rascal  stole  the  razors,  I  suppose! 

"No  matter  if  the  fellow  be  a  knave, 
Provided  that  the  razors  shave; 

It  sartinly  will  be  a  monstrous  prize." 
So  home  the  clown,  with  his  good  fortune,  went. 
Smiling,  in  heart  and  soul  content. 

And  quickly  soaped  himself  to  ears  and  eyes. 

Being  well  lathered  from  a  dish  or  tub, 
Hodge  now  began  with  grinning  pain  to  grub, 

Just  like  a  hedger  cutting  furze; 
'Twas  a  vile  razor! — then  the  rest  he  tried, — 
All  were  impostors.    "Ah!"  Hodge  sighed, 

"I  wish  my  eighteen  pence  were  in  my  purse." 


2T02  Old   Favorites 

In  vain,  to  chase  his  beard,  and  bring  the  graces, 

He  cut,  and  dug,  and  winced,  and  stamped,  and  swore; 

Brought   blood,  and  danced,  blasphemed,  and  made  wry 
faces, 
And  cursed  each  razor's  body  o'er  and  o'er: 

His  muzzle,  formed  of  opposition  stuff, 
Firm  as  a  Foxite,  would  not  lose  its  ruff; 

So  kept  it, — laughing  at  the  steel  and  suds. 
Hodge,  in  a  passion,  stretched  his  angry  jaws. 
Vowing  the  direst  vengeance,  with  clenched  claws, 

On  the  vile  cheat  that  sold  the  goods. 
"Razors!  a  base,  confounded  dog!  ; 

Not  fit  to  scrape  a  hog!" 

Hodge  sought  the  fellow, — found  him, — and  begun: 
"P'rhaps,  Master  Razor-rogue,  to  you  'tis  fun 

That  people  flay  themselves  out  of  their  Uves. 
You  rascal!  for  an  hour  have  I  been  grubbing. 
Giving  my  whiskers  here  a  scrubbing, 

With  razors  just  like  oyster-knives. 
Sirrah!  I  tell  you  you're  a  knave, 
To  cry  up  razors  that  can't  shave!" 

"Friend,"  quoth  the  razor-man,  "I'm  not  a  knave; 

As  for  the  razors  you  have  bought. 

Upon  my  soul,  I  never  thought 
That  they  would  shave." 

"Not  think  they'd  shave!  "  quoth  Hodge,  with  wondering 
eyes. 

And  voice  not  much  unlike  an  Indian  yell; 
"What  were  they  made  for,  then,  you  dog?"  he  cries. 

"Made,"  quoth  the  fellow,  with  a  smile, — •  "to  sell." 

John  V/olcot  [ 1 738-1819] 


THE  THREE  WARNINGS 

The  tree  of  deepest  root  is  found 
Least  willing  still  to  quit  the  ground:    . 
'Twas  therefore  said  by  ancient  sages. 
That  love  of  life  increased  with  years 


The  Three  Warnings  -'OJ 

So  much,  that  in  our  later  stages, 

When  pains  grow  sharp,  and  sickness  rages, 

The  greatest  love  of  life  appears. 
This  great  affection  to  believe. 
Which  all  confess,  but  few  perceive, — 
If  old  assertions  can't  prevail, — 
Be  pleased  to  hear  a  modern  tale. 

When  sports  went  round,  and  all  were  gay, 
On  neighbor  Dodson's  wedding-day. 
Death  called  aside  the  jocund  groom  '1^ 

With  him  into  another  room,  ' 

And  looking  grave — ^"You  must,"  says  he,  ' 
"Quit  your  sweet  bride,  and  come  with  me." 
"With  you!  and  quit  my  Susan's  side! 
With  you!"  the  hapless  husband  cried; 
"Young  as  I  am,  'tis  monstrous  hard! 
Besides,  in  truth,  I'm  not  prepared: 
My  thoughts  on  other  matters  go; 
This  is  my  wedding-day,  you  know." 

What  more  he  urged,  I  have  not  heard. 
His  reasons  could  not  well  be  stronger; 

So  Death  the  poor  dehnquent  spared, 
And  left  to  live  a  little  longer. 
Yet  calling  up  a  serious  look — 
His  hour-glass  trembled  while  he  spoke — 
"Neighbor,"  he  said,  "farewell!  No  more 
Shall  Death  disturb  your  mirthful  hour; 
And  farther,  to  avoid  all  blame 
Of  cruelty  upon  my  name. 
To  give  you  time  for  preparation, 
And  fit  you  for  your  future  station, 
Three  several  warnings  you  shall  have, 
Before  you're  summoned  to  the  grave. 
Willing  for  once  I'll  quit  my  prey. 

And  grant  a  kind  reprieve, 
In  hopes  you'll  have  no  more  to  say, 
But,  when  I  call  again  this  way,  ^    ■i 

Well-pleased  the  world  will  leave."  '  '>  I 

To  these  conditions  both  consented, 
And  parted  perfectly  contented.  ^ 


2I04  Old  Favorites   '  ■ 

What  next  the  hero  of  our  tale  befell, 
How  long  he  lived,  how  wise,  how  well. 
How  roundly  he  pursued  his  course, 
And  smoked  his  pipe,  and  stroked  his  horse 

The  willing  Muse  shall  tell. 
He  chaffered  then,  he  bought,  he  sold. 
Nor  once  perceived  his  growing  old. 

Nor  thought  of  Death  as  near; 
His  friends  not  false,  his  wife  no  shrew, 
Many  his  gains,  his  children  few. 

He  passed  his  hours  in  peace. 
But  while  he  viewed  his  wealth  increase, 
While  thus  along  Life's  dusty  road 
The  beaten  track  content  he  trod, 
Old  Time,  whose  haste  no  mortal  spares, 
Uncalled,  unheeded,  unawares, 

Brought  on  his  eightieth  year. 
And  now,  one  night,  in  musing  mood 

As  all  alone  he  sat. 
The  unwelcome  messenger  of  Fate 

Once  more  before  him  stood. 
Half  killed  with  anger  and  surprise, 
"So  soon  returned!"  old  Dodson  cried. 
"So  soon,  d'  ye  call  it?"  Death  repUes. 
"Surely,  my  friend,  you're  but  in  jest! 

Since  I  was  here  before 
'Tis  six-and-thirty  years  at  least, 

And  you  are  now  fourscore." 

"So  much  the  worse,"  the  clown  rejoined,  ■. 
"To  spare  the  aged  would  be  kind:  ■<[' 

However,  see  your  search  be  legal; 
And  your  authority — is  't  regal? 
Else  you  are  come  on  a  fool's  errand. 
With  but  a  secretary's  warrant. 
Besides,  you  promised  me  Three  Warnings, 
Which  I  have  looked  for  nights  and  mornings; 
But  for  that  loss  of  time  and  ease, 
I  can  recover  damages." 

"I  know,"  cries  Death,  "that  at  the  best 
I  seldom  am  a  welcome  guest; 


The  Sailor's   Consolation  2105 

But  don't  be  captious,  friend,  at  least: 
I  little  thought  you'd  still  be  able 
To  stump  about  your  farm  and  stable; 
Your  years  have  run  to  a  great  length; 
I  wish  you  joy,  though,  of  your  strength!" 

"Hold,"  says  the  farmer,  "not  so  fast! 
I  have  been  lame  these  four  years  past." 

"And  no  great  wonder,"  Death  replies: 
"However,  you  still  keep  your  eyes; 
And  sure,  to  see  one's  loves  and  friends, 
For  legs  and  arms  would  make  amends." 

"Perhaps,"  says  Dodson,  "so  it  might, 
But  latterly  I've  lost  my  sight." 

"This  is  a  shocking  tale,  'tis  true, 
But  still  there's  comfort  left  for  you: 
Each  strives  your  sadness  to  amuse; 
I  warrant  you  hear  all  the  news." 

"There's  none,"  cries  he;  "and  if  there  were, 
I'm  grown  so  deaf  I  could  not  hear." 
"Nay,  then,"  the  spectre  stern  rejoined, 

"These  are  unwarrantable  yearnings; 
If  you  are  lame,  and  deaf,  and  bHnd, 

You've  had  your  three  sufticient  warnings. 
So,  come  along,  no  more  we'll  part." 
He  said,  and  touched  him  with  his  dart. 
And  now  old  Dodson,  turning  pale, 
Yields  to  his  fate — so  ends  my  tale. 

Hester  Thrale  Piozzi  [1741-1821] 


THE   SAILOR'S   CONSOLATION 

One  night  came  on  a  hurricane. 

The  sea  was  mountains  rolling. 
When  Barney  Buntline  turned  his  quid. 

And  said  to  Billy  Bowling: 
"A  strong  nor'wester's  blowing,  Bill; 

Hark!  don't  ye  hear  it  roar,  now? 
Lord  help  'em,  how  I  pities  them 

Unhappy  folks  on  shore  now! 


2io6  Old   Favorites 

"Foolhardy  chaps  who  hve  in  towns,       .i 

What  danger  they  are  all  in, 
And  now  lie  quaking  in  their  beds, 

For  fear  the  roof  should  fall  in; 
Poor  creatures!  how  they  envies  us, 

And  wishes,  I've  a  notion, 
For  our  good  luck,  in  such  a  storm, 

To  be  upon  the  ocean! 

"And  as  for  them  who're  out  all  day 

On  business  from  their  houses, 
And  late  at  night  are  coming  home, 

To  cheer  their  babes  and  spouses, — 
While  you  and  I,  Bill,  on  the  deck 

Are  comfortably  lying, 
My  eyes!  what  tiles  and  chimney-pots 

About  their  heads  are  flying! 

"And  very  often  have  we  heard 

How  men  are  killed  and  undone 
By  overturns  of  carriages. 

By  thieves,  and  fires  in  London; 
We  know  what  risks  all  landsmen  run, 

From  noblemen  to  tailors; 
Then,  Bill,  let  us  thank  Providence 

That  you  and  I  are  sailors." 

Charles  Dibdin  [1745-1814] 


TAM   O'   SHANTER 

When  chapman  billies  leave  the  street, 
And  drouthy  neibors,  neibors  meet, 
As  market-days  are  wearing  late, 
And  folk  begin  to  tak  the  gate; 
While  we  sit  bousing  at  the  nappy, 
And  gettin'  fou  and  unco  happy, 
We  think  na  on  the  lang  Scots  miles, 
The  mosses,  waters,  slaps,  and  stiles, 
That  lie  between  us  and  our  hame, 
Whare  sits  our  sulky  sullen  dame, 


Tarn  o'   Shanter  2107 

Gathering  her  brows  Hke  gathering  storm, 
Nursing  her  wrath  to  keep  it  warm. 

This  truth  fand  honest  Tarn  o'  Shanter, 
As  he  frae  Ayr  ae  night  did  canter 
(Auld  Ayr,  wham  ne'er  a  town  surpasses, 
For  honest  men  and  bonnie  lasses). 

O  Tam!  hadst  thou  but  been  sae  w'ise. 

As  ta'en  thy  ain  wife  Kate's  advice! 

She  tauld  thee  weel  thou  wast  a  skellum, 

A  blethering,  blustering,  drunken  blellum; 

That  frae  November  till  October, 

Ae  market-day  thou  wast  na  sober; 

That  ilka  mclder,  wi'  the  miller, 

Thou  sat  as  lang  as  thou  had  siller; 

That  every  naig  was  ca'd  a  shoe  on, 

The  smith  and  thee  gat  roaring  fou  on; 

That  at  the  Lord's  house,  even  on  Sunday, 

Thou  drank  wi'  Kirkton  Jean  till  Monday. 

She  prophesied  that,  late  or  soon, 

Thou  would  be  found  deep  drowned  in  Doon; 

Or  catched  wi'  warlocks  i'  the  mirk. 

By  Alloway's  auld  haunted  kirk. 

Ah,  gentle  dames!  it  gars  me  greet. 
To  think  how  monie  counsels  sweet, 
How  monie  lengthened,  sage  advices, 
The  husband  frae  the  wife  despises! 

But  to  our  tale: — Ae  market-night, 
Tam  had  got  planted  unco  right, 
Fast  by  an  ingle,  bleczing  finely, 
Wi'  reaming  swats,  that  drank  divinely; 
And  at  his  elbow,  Souter  Johnny, 
•His  ancient,  trusty,  drouthy  crony; 
Tam  lo'ed  him  like  a  vera  brither; — 
They  had  been  fou  for  weeks  thegither! 

The  night  drave  on  wi'  sangs  and  clatter; 
And  aye  the  ale  was  growing  better; 


2io8  Old  Favorites 

The  landlady  and  Tarn  grew  gracious, 
Wi'  favors  secret,  sweet,  and  precious: 
The  Souter  tauld  his  queerest  stories; 
The  landlord's  laugh  was  ready  chorus: 
The  storm  without  might  rair  and  rustle, — 
Tam  did  na  mind  the  storm  a  whistle. 

Care,  mad  to  see  a  man  sae  happy. 
E'en  drowned  himself  amang  the  nappy! 
As  bees  flee  hame  wi'  lades  o'  treasure, 
The  minutes  winged  their  way  wi'  pleasure: 
Kings  may  be  blessed,  but  Tam  was  glorious, 
Q'er  a'  the  ills  o'  life  victorious! 

But  pleasures  are  like  poppies  spread, — 

You  seize  the  flower,  its  bloom  is  shed: 

Or  like  the  snowfall  in  the  river, — 

A  moment  white — then  melts  forever; 

Or  like  the  borealis  race, 

That  flit  ere  you  can  point  their  place; 

Or  like  the  rainbow's  lovely  form. 

Evanishing  amid  the  storm. 

Nae  man  can  tether  time  or  tide; 

The  hour  approaches  Tam  maun  ride; 

That  hour,  o'  night's  black  arch  the  key-stane, 

That  dreary  hour  he  mounts  his  beast  in; 

And  sic  a  night  he  taks  the  road  in. 

As  ne'er  poor  sinner  was  abroad  in. 

The  wind  blew  as  'twad  blawn  its  last; 
The  rattling  showers  rose  on  the  blast ; 
The  speedy  gleams  the  darkness  swaUowed; 
Loud,  deep,  and  lang,  the  thunder  bellowed:/ 
That  night,  a  child  might  understand. 
The  Deil  had  business  on  his  hand. 

Weel  mounted  on  his  gray  mare,  Meg, 
(A  better  never  hfted  leg,) 
Tam  skelpit  on  through  dub  and  mire. 
Despising  wind,  and  rain,  and  fire; 


Tarn  o'  Shanter 

Whiles  holding  fast  his  guid  blue  bonnet; 
Whiles  crooning  o'er  some  auld  Scots  sonnet; 
Whiles  glowering  round  \vi'  prudent  cares, 
Lest  bogles  catch  him  unawares; — 
Kirk-Alloway  was  drawing  nigh, 
Whare  ghaists  and  houlets  nightly  cry. 

By  this  time  he  was  cross  the  ford, 
Whare  in  the  snaw  the  chapman  smoored; 
And  past  the  birks  and  meikle  stane, 
Whare  drunken  Charlie  brak's  neckbane; 
And  through  the  whins,  and  by  the  cairn, 
Whare  hunters  fand  the  murdered  bairn ; 
And  near  the  thorn,  aboon  the  well, 
Whare  Mungo's  mither  hanged  hersel. 
Before  him  Doon  pours  all  his  floods; 
The  doubling  storm  roars  through  the  woods ; 
The  lightnings  flash  from  pole  to  pole; 
Near  and  more  near  the  thunders  roll; 
When,  glimmering  through  the  groaning  trees, 
Kirk-AUoway  seemed  in  a  bleeze; 
Through  ilka  bore  the  beams  were  glancing, 
And  loud  resounded  mirth  and  dancing. 

Inspiring  bold  John  Barleycorn, 

What  dangers  thou  canst  make  us  scorn! 

Wi'  tippenny,  we  fear  nae  evil; 

Wi'  usquebae,  we'll  face  the  Devil! 

The  swats  sae  reamed  in  Tammie's  noddle^ 

Fair  play,  he  cared  na  deUs  a  boddle. 

But  Maggie  stood  right  sair  astonished, 

Till,  by  the  heel  and  hand  admonished, 

She  ventured  forward  on  the  hght; 

And,  wow!  Tam  saw  an  unco  sight! 

Warlocks  and  witches  in  a  dance; 

Nae  cotillion  brent  new  frae  France, 

But  hornpipes,  jigs,  strathspeys,  and  reels, 

Put  life  and  mettle  in  their  heels. 

A  winnock-bunker  in  the  east. 

There  sat  auld  Nick,  in  shape  o'  beast; 


2109 


21  lo  Old  Favorites 

A  towzie  tyke,  black,  grim,  and  large,  rf  ■■'■^''■^ff 

To  gie  them  music  was  his  charge: 

He  screwed  the  pipes  and  gart  them  skirl, 

Till  roof  and  rafters  a'  did  dirl, 

Coffins  stood  round,  like  open  presses, 

That  shawed  the  dead  in  their  last  dresses; 

And  by  some  devilish  cantrip  slight. 

Each  in  its  cauld  hand  held  a  light : 

By  which  heroic  Tam  was  able 

To  note  upon  the  haly  table, 

A  murderer's  banes  in  gibbet  aims; 

Twa  span-lang,  wee,  unchristened  bairns; 

A  thief,  new-cutted  frae  a  rape, 

Wi'  liis  last  gasp  his  gab  did  gape; 

Five  tomahawks,  wi'  bluid  red-rusted; 

Five  scimitars,  wi'  murder  crusted; 

A  garter,  which  a  babe  had  strangled; 

A  knife,  a  father's  throat  had  mangled. 

Whom  his  ain  son  o'  life  bereft, — 

The  gray  hairs  yet  stack  to  the  heft; 

Wi'  mair  o'  horrible  and  awfu', 

Which  even  to  name  wad  be  unlawfu'. 

As  Tammie  glowered,  amazed  and  curious. 

The  mirth  and  fun  grew  fast  and  furious  : 

The  piper  loud  and  louder  blew; 

The  dancers  quick  and  quicker  flew; 

They  reeled,  they  set,  they  crossed,  they  cleekit, 

Till  ilka  carline  swat  and  reekit. 

And  coost  her  duddies  to  the  wark. 

And  linket  at  it  in  her  sark! 

Now  Tam,  O  Tam!  had  thae  been  queans, 
A'  plump  and  strappin'  in  their  teens; 
Their  sarks,  instead  o'  creeshie  flannen, 
Been  snaw- white  seventeen-hunder  linen! 
Thir  breeks  o'  mine,  my  only  pair, 
That  ance  were  plush  o'  guid  blue  hair, 
I. wad  hae  gi'en  them  off  my  hurdles. 
For  ae  blink  o'  the  bonnie  burdies! 


Tarn  o'   Shanter  21  ii 

But  withered  beldams,  auld  and  droll, 
Rigwoodie  hags,  wad  spean  a  foal, 
Louping  and  flinging  on  a  crummock, 
I  wonder  didna  turn  thy  stomach. 

But  Tam  kenned  what  was  what  fu'  brawlie; 
There  was  ae  winsome  wench  and  walie, 
That  night  enlisted  in  the  core, 
(Lang  after  kenned  on  Carrick  shore; 
For  monie  a  beast  to  dead  she  shot. 
And  perished  monie  a  bonnie  boat, 
And  shook  baith  meikle  com  and  bear, 
And  kept  the  country-side  in  fear.) 
Her  cutty-sark,  o'  Paisley  harn. 
That,  while  a  lassie,  she  had  worn, 
In  longitude  though  sorely  scanty, 
It  was  her  best,  and  she  was  vauntie. 
Ah!  little  kenned  thy  reverend  grannie, 
That  sark  she  coft  for  her  wee  Nannie, 
Wi'  two  pund  Scots,  ('twas  a'  her  riches,) 
Wad  ever  graced  a  dance  o'  witches! 

But  here  my  Muse  her  wing  maun  cour; 

Sic  flights  are  far  beyond  her  power; 

To  sing  how  Nannie  lap  and  flang 

(A  souple  jade  she  was,  and  Strang), 

And  how  Tam  stood,  like  ane  bewitched, 

And  thought  his  very  e'en  enriched; 

Even  Satan  glowered,  and  fidged  fu'  fain, 

And  botched  and  blew  wi'  might  and  main: 

Till  first  ae  caper,  syne  anither, 

Tam  tint  his  reason  a'  thegither, 

And  roars  out,  "VVeel  done,  Culty-sark!" 

And  in  an  instant  all  was  dark; 

And  scarcely  had  he  Maggie  rallied, 

When  out  the  hellish  legion  sallied. 

As  bees  bizz  out  wi'  angry  fyke. 

When  plundering  herds  assail  their  byke; 

As  open  pussie's  mortal  foes, 

When,  pop!  she  starts  before  their  nose; 


21 12  Old  Favorites 

As  eager  runs  the  market-crowd, 

When,  "Catch  the  thief!"  resounds  aloud; 

So  Maggie  runs,  the  witches  follow, 

Wi'  monie  an  eldritch  screech  and  hollow. 

Ah,  Tarn!  ah.  Tarn!  thou'U  get  thy  fairin'! 
In  heU  they'll  roast  thee  like  a  herrin'l 
In  vain  thy  Kate  awaits  thy  comin'  I 
Kate  soon  will  be  a  woefu'  woman! 
Now,  do  thy  speedy  utmost,  Meg, 
And  win  the  key-stane  o'  the  brig; 
There  at  them  thou  thy  tail  may  toss; 
A  running  stream  they  dare  na  cross. 
But  ere  the  key-stane  she  could  make, 
The  iient  a  tail  she  had  to  shake! 
For  Nannie,  far  before  the  rest, 
Hard  upon  noble  Maggie  pressed; 
And  flew  at  Tam  wi'  furious  ettle; 
But  little  wist  she  Maggie's  mettle! 
Ae  spring  brought  off  her  master  hale, 
But  left  behind  her  ain  gray  tail; 
The  carhne  caught  her  by  the  rump. 
And  left  poor  Maggie  scarce  a  stump. 

Now,  wha  this  tale  o'  truth  shall  read, 
Ilk  man  and  mother's  son,  tak  heed! 
Whene'er  to  drink  you  are  inclined, 
Or  cutty-sarks  run  in  your  mind, 
Think,  ye  may  buy  the  joys  owre  dear: — 
Remember  Tam  o'  Shanter's  mare. 

Robert  Burns  [i7sg-i7g6] 


GLUGGITY   GLUG 

From  "The  Myrtle  and  the  Vine  " 

A  JOLLY  fat  friar  loved  hquor  good  store. 
And  he  had  drunk  stoutly  at  supper; 

He  mounted  his  horse  in  the  night  at  the  door, 
And  sat  with  his  face  to  the  crupper: 


The  Laird  o'   Cockpen  21 13 

"Some  rogue,"  quoth  the  friar,  "quite  dead  to  remorse, 

Some  thief,  whom  a  halter  will  throttle, 
Some  scoundrel  has  cut  off  the  head  of  my  horse, 

While  I  was  enagged  at  the  bottle, 

Which  went  gluggity,  gluggity— glug— glug— glug." 

The  tail  of  the  steed  pointed  south  on  the  dale, 

'Twas  the  friar's  road  home,  straight  and  level; 
But,  when  spurred,  a  horse  foUows  his  nose,  not  his  tail, 

So  he  scampered  due  north,  like  a  devil: 
"This  new  mode  of  docking,"  the  friar  then  said, 

"I  perceive  doesn't  make  a  horse  trot  ill; 
And  'tis  cheap, — -for  he  never  can  eat  off  his  head 

While  I  am  engaged  at  the  bottle, 

Which  goes  gluggity,  gluggity— glug— glug— glug." 

The  steed  made  a  stop, — in  a  pond  he  had  got. 

He  was  rather  for  drinking  than  grazing; 
Quoth  the  friar,  "'Tis  strange  headless  horses  should  trot. 

But  to  drink  with  their  tails  is  amazing!" 
Turning  round  to  see  whence  this  phenomenon  rose. 

In  the  pond  fell  this  son  of  a  pottle; 
Quoth  he,  "The  head's  found,  for  I'm  under  his  nose, — 

I  wish  I  were  over  a  bottle, 

Which  goes  gluggity,  gluggity— glug— glug— glug!" 
George  Colman  the  Younger  [1762-1836] 


THE  LAIRD   O'    COCKPEN 

The  Laird  o'  Cockpen,  he's  proud  and  he's  great; 
His  mind  is  ta'en  up  wi'  things  o'  the  State; 
He  wanted  a  wife,  his  braw  house  to  keep; 
But  favor  wi'  wooin'  was  fashous  to  seek. 

Doun  by  the  dyke-side  a  lady  did  dwell. 
At  his  table-head  he  thought  she'd  look  well, — 
M'Clish's  ae  daughter  o'  Claverse-ha'  Lee, 
A  penniless  lass  wi'  a  lang  pedigree. 

His  wig  was  well-pouthered,  as  guid  as  when  new, 
His  waistcoat  was  white,  his  coat  it  was  blue; 


21 14  Old   Favorites 

He  put  on  a  ring,  a  sword,  and  cocked  hat,— 
And  wha  could  refuse  the  Laird  wi'  a'  that! 

He  took  the  gray  mare,  and  rade  cannily, 

And  rapped  at  the  yett  o'  Claverse-ha'  Lee; 

"  Gae  tell  Mistress  Jean  to  come  speedily  ben, — 

She's  wanted  to  speak  wi'  the  Laird  o'  Cockpen."  ^ 

Mistress  Jean  she  was  makin'  the  elder-flower  wine. 
"And  what  brings  the  Laird  at  sic  a  like  time?  " 
She  put  aff  her  apron,  and  on  her  silk  goun. 
Her  mutch  wi'  red  ribbons,  and  gaed  awa'  doun. 

And  when  she  cam'  ben,  he  bowed  fu'  low;  ^    rrfW 

And  what  was  his  errand  he  soon  let  her  know.  -   •-.,, 
Amazed  was  the  Laird  when  the  lady  said,  "Na," 
And  wi'  a  laigh  curtsie  she  turned  awa'.        •  i-;  ailT 

Dumfoundered  he  was,  but  nae  sigh  did  he  gi'e^  j^  diouO 
He  mounted  his  mare,  and  rade  cannily;  ,  ^  .a 

And  aften  he  thought,  as  he  gaed  through  the  glen,    ]^^„'r 
"She's  daft  to  refuse  the  Laird  o'  Cockpen!" 

And  now  that  the  Laird  his  exit  had  made, 

Mistress  Jean  she  reflected  on  what  she  had  said; 

.  .  '•■  .''ij 

"Oh,  for  ane  I'll  get  better,  it's  waur  I'll  get  ten, — ■ 

I  was  daft  to  refuse  the  Laird  o'  Cockpen." 

Neist  time  that  the  Laird  and  the  Lady  were  seen. 
They  were  gaun  arm-in-arm  to  the  kirk  on  the  green; 
Now  she  sits  in  the  ha'  like  a  weel-tappit  hen,    ' 
But  as  yet  there's  nae  chickens  appeared  at  Cockpen. 
The  first  seven  stanzas  by  Carolina  Nairne  [1766-1845] 
Tlic  last  tivo  by  Susan  Ferricr  [1782-1854] 


THE   WELL   OF   ST.    KEYNE 

A  Well  there  is  in  the  west  country. 
And  a  clearer  one  never  was  seen ; 

There  is  not  a  wife  in  the  west  country 
But  has  heard  of  the  Well  of  St.  Keyne. 


The   Well   of  St.    Keyne  21 15 

An  oak  and  an  elm  tree  stand  beside,       '"^  ■'''  T^'' 

And  behind  doth  an  ash-tree  grow, 
And  a  willow  from  the  bank  above 

Droops  to  the  water  below. 

A  traveller  came  to  the  Well  of  St.  Keyne; 

Joyfully  he  drew  nigh; 
For  from  cock-crow  he  had  been  travelling, 

And  there  was  not  a  cloud  in  the  sky. 

He  drank  of  the  water  so  cool  and  clear, 

For  thirsty  and  hot  was  he, 
And  he  sat  down  upon  the  bank, 

Under  the  willow-tree. 

There  came  a  man  from  the  house  hard  by, 

At  the  Well  to  fill  his  pail. 
On  the  Well-side  he  rested  it. 

And  bade  the  Stranger  hail. 

"Now,  art  thou  a  bachelor,  Stranger?"  quoth  he, 

"For,  an  if  thou  hast  a  wife, 
The  happiest  draught  thou  hast  drank  this  day 

That  ever  thou  didst  in  Ihy  life. 

"Or  has  thy  good  woman,  if  one  thou  hast. 

Ever  here  in  Cornwall  been? 
For,  an  if  she  have,  I'll  venture  nty  life 

She  has  drunk  of  the  Well  of  St.  Keyne." 

"I  have  left  a  good  woman  who  never  was  here," 

The  Stranger  he  made  reply; 
"But  that  my  draught  should  be  better  for  that, 

I  pray  you  answer  me  why." 

"St.  Keyne,"  quoth  the  Cornish-man,  "many  a.  time 

Drank  of  this  crystal  Well; 
And,  before  the  angel  summoned  her. 

She  laid  on  the  water  a  spell, — 


21 16  Old  Favorites 

"If  the  Husband,  of  this  gifted  Well 

Shall  drink  before  his  Wife, 
A  happy  man  henceforth  is  he, 

For  he  shall  be  Master  for  life ; — 

"But,  if  the  Wife  should  drink  of  it  first, 

Heaven  help  the  Husband  then!" — 
The  Stranger  stooped  to  the  Well  of  St.  Keyne, 

And  drank  of  the  water  again. 

"You  drank  of  the  Well,  I  warrant,  betimes?" 

He  to  the  Cornish-man  said; 
But  the  Cornish-man  smiled  as  the  Stranger  spake, 

And  sheepishly  shook  his  head: — 

"I  hastened,  as  soon  as  the  wedding  was  done, 

And  left  my  Wife  in  the  porch; 
But  i'  faith,  she  had  been  wiser  than  me, 

For  she  took  a  bottle  to  church." 

Robert  SoiUhcy  [1774-1843] 


ADDRESS  TO  A  MUMMY 

And  thou  hast  walked  about  (how  strange  a  story!) 
In  Thebes's  streets  three  thousand  years  ago, 
When  the  Memnonium  was  in  all  its  glory. 
And  time  had  not  begun  to  overthrow 

Those  temples,  palaces,  and  piles  stupendous 
Of  which  the  very  ruins  are  tremendous. 

Speak !  for  thou  long  enough  hast  acted  dummy. 

Thou  hast  a  tongue, — come,  let  us  hear  its  tune; 

Thou'rt  standing  on  thy  legs,  above  ground,  mummy! 

Revisiting  the  glimpses  of  the  moon, — 
Not  hke  thin  ghosts  or  disembodied  creatures. 
But  with  thy  bones  and  flesh,  and  limbs  and  features. 

Tell  us — for  doubtless  thou  canst  recollect — 
To  whom  should  we  assign  the  Sphinx's  fame? 
Was  Cheops  or  Cephrenes  architect 
Of  either  pyramid  that  bears  his  name? 


Address  to  a   Mummy  21  ly 

Is  Pompe}''s  Pillar  really  a  misnomer? 

Had  Thebes  a  hundred  gates,  as  sung  by  Homer? 

Perhaps  thou  wert  a  Mason,  and  forbidden 

By  oath  to  tell  the  secrets  of  thy  trade, — 

Then  say  what  secret  melody  was  hidden 

In  Memnon's  statue,  which  at  sunrise  played? 
Perhaps  thou  wert  a  Priest, — if  so,  my  struggles 
Are  vain,  for  priestcraft  never  owns  its  juggles. 

Perhaps  that  very  hand,  now  pinioned  flat, 
Has  hob-a-nobbed  with  Pharaoh,  glass  to  glass; 
Or  dropped  a  halfpenny  in  Homer's  hat; 
Or  doffed  thine  own  to  let  Queen  Dido  pass; 

Or  held,  by  Solomon's  own  invitation, 

A  torch  at  the  great  temple's  dedication. 

I  need  not  ask  thee  if  that  hand,  when  armed, 
Has  any  Roman  soldier  mauled  and  knuckled; 
For  thou  wert  dead  and  buried  and  embalmed 
Ere  Romulus  and  Remus  had  been  suckled: 

Antiquity  appears  to  have  begun 

Long  after  thy  primeval  race  was  run. 

Thou  couldst  develop — if  that  withered  tongue 
Might  tell  us  what  those  sightless  orbs  have  seen — 
How  the  world  looked  when  it  was  fresh  and  young. 
And  the  great  deluge  still  had  left  it  green; 

Or  was  it  then  so  old  that  history's  pages 

Contained  no  record  of  its  early  ages? 

Still  silent!  incommunicative  elf! 

Art  sworn  to  secrec}-?  then  keep  thy  vows; 

But  prithee  tell  us  something  of  thyself, — 

Reveal  the  secrets  of  thy  prison-house; 

Since  in  the  world  of  spirits  thou  hast  slumbered, 

What  hast  thou  seen,  what  strange  adventures  numbered? 

Since  first  thy  form  was  in  this  bo.x  e.xtended. 

We  have,  above  ground,  seen  some  strange  mutations: 

The  Roman  empire  has  begun  and  ended. 

New  worlds  have  risen,  we  have  lost  old  nations; 


21 1 8  Old   Favorites 

And  countless  kings  have  into  dust  been  humbled, 
While  not  a  fragment  of  thy  flesh  has  crumbled. 

Didst  thou  hear  not  the  pother  o'er  thy  head, 
When  the  great  Persian  conqueror,  Cambyses, 
Marched  armies  o'er  thy  tomb  with  thundering  tread, — 
O'erthrew  Osiris,  Orus,  Apis,  Isis; 

And  shook  the  pyramids  with  fear  and  wonder, 

When  the  gigantic  Memnon  fell  asunder? 

If  the  tomb's  secrets  may  not  be  confessed, 
The  nature  of  thy  private  life  unfold: 
A  heart  has  throbbed  beneath  that  leathern  breast, 
And  tears  adown  that  dusty  cheek  have  rolled; 

Have  children  climbed  those  knees,  and  kissed  that  face? 

What  was  thy  name  and  station,  age  and  race? 

Statue  of  flesh, — Immortal  of  the  dead! 

Imperishable  type  of  evanescence! 

Posthumous  man, — who  quit'st  thy  narrow  bed. 

And  standest  undecayed  within  our  presence! 

Thou  wilt  hear  nothing  till  the  Judgment  morning. 
When  the  great  trump  shall  thrill  thee  with  its  warning. 

Why  should  this  worthless  tegument  endure, 

If  its  undying  guest  be  lost  for  ever? 

O,  let  us  keep  the  soul  embalmed  and  pure 

In  living  virtue,  that  when  both  must  sever. 
Although  corruption  may  our  frame  consume, 
The  immortal  spirit  in  the  skies  may  bloom! 

Horace  Smith  [1779-1849] 


JOHN   GRUMLIE 

John  Grumlie  swore  by  the  light  o'  the  moon 
And  the  green  leaves  on  the  tree, 

That  he  could  do  more  work  in  a  day 
Than  his  wife  could  do  in  thrpe. 


John   Griimlie  2119 

His  wife  rose  up  in  the  morning 

Wi'  cares  and  troubles  enow — 
John  GrumHe  bide  at  hame,  John, 

And  I'll  go  haud  the  plow. 

First  ye  maun  dress  your  children  fair, 

And  put  them  a'  in  their  gear; 
And  ye  maun  turn  the  malt,  John, 

Or  else  ye '11  spoil  the  beer; 
And  ye  maun  reel  the  tweel,  John, 

That  I  span  yesterday; 
And  ye  maun  ca'  in  the  hens,  John, 

Else  they'll  all  lay  away. 

O  he  did  dress  his  children  fair, 

And  put  them  a'  in  their  gear; 
But  he  forgot  to  turn  the  malt. 

And  so  he  spoiled  the  beer: 
And  he  sang  loud  as  he  reeled  the  tweel 

That  his  wife  span  yesterday; 
But  he  forgot  to  put  up  the  hens. 

And  the  hens  all  layed  away. 

The  hawket  crummie  loot  down  nae  milk; 

He  kirned,  nor  butter  gat; 
And  a'  gade  wrang,  and  naught  gade  right; 

He  danced  wi'  rage,  and  grat; 
Then  up  he  ran  to  the  head  o'  the  knowe 

Wi'  mony  a  wave  and  shout — 
She  heard  him  as  she  heard  him  not, 

And  steered  the  stots  about. 

John  Grumlie's  wife  cam  hame  at  e'en, 

A  weary  wife  and  sad, 
And  burst  into  a  laughter  loud. 

And  laughed  as  she'd  been  mad: 
While  John  Grumlie  swore  by  the  light  0'  the  moon 

And  the  green  leaves  on  the  tree, 
If  my  wife  should  na  win  a  penny  a  day 

She's  aye  her  will  for  me. 

A/liin  Cwniiiigham  [1784-1842] 


2I20  Old   Favorites 


THE  NEEDLE 

The  gay  belles  of  fashion  may  boast  of  excelling 

In  waltz  or  cotillion,  at  whist  or  quadrille; 
And  seek  admiration  by  vauntingly  telling 

Of  drawing,  and  painting,  and  musical  skill; 
But  give  me  the  fair  one,  in  country  or  city. 

Whose  home  and  its  duties  are  dear  to  her  heart. 
Who  cheerfully  warbles  some  rustical  ditty. 

While  plying  the  needle  with  exquisite  art: 
The  bright  little  needle — the  swift-flying  needle, 

The  needle  directed  by  beauty  and  art. 

If  Love  have  a  potent,  a  magical  token, 

A  talisman,  ever  resistless  and  true — 
A  charm  that  is  never  evaded  or  broken, 

A  witchery  certain  the  heart  to  subdue — 
'Tis  this — and  his  armory  never  has  furnished 

So  keen  and  unerring,  or  polished  a  dart; 
Let  Beauty  direct  it,  so  pointed  and  burnished, 

And,  oh!  it  is  certain  of  touching  the  heart: 
The  bright  little  needle — the  swift-flying  needle. 

The  needle  directed  by  beauty  and  art. 

Be  wise,  then,  ye  maidens,  nor  seek  admiration 

By  dressing  for  conquest,  and  flirting  with  all; 
You  never,  whate'er  be  your  fortune  or  station, 

Appear  half  so  lovely  at  rout  or  at  ball, 
As  gayly  convened  at  a  work-covered  table, 

Each  cheerfuUy  active  and  playing  her  part. 
Beguiling  the  task  with  a  song  or  a  fable, 

And  plying  the  needle  with  exquisite  art: 
The  bright  little  needle — the  swift-flying  needle, 

The  needle  directed  by  beauty  and  art. 

Samuel  Woodworlh  [1785-1842] 

MISADVENTURES  AT  MARGATE 

Mr.  Simpkinson  {loquitur) 

LwAS  in  Margate  last  July,  I  walked  upon  the  pier, 

I  saw  a  little  vulgar  Boy, — I  said,  "What  make  you  here? 


Misadventures  at   Margate  21 21 

The  gloom  upon  your  youthful  cheek  speaks  anything  but 

joy;" 

Again  I  said,  "What  make  you  here,  you  little  vulgar  Boy?  " 

He  frowned,  that  little  vulgar  Boy, — he  deemed  I  meant  to 

scofif, — 
And  when  the  little  heart  is  big,  a  little  "sets  it  off." 
He  put  his  finger  in  his  mouth,  his  little  bosom  rose, — 
He  had  no  little  handkerchief  to  wipe  his  little  nose! 

"Hark!  don't  you  hear,  m}'  little  man? — it's  striking  nine," 
I  said,  t/i  ui'd 

"An  hour  when  all  good  little  boys  and  girls  should  be  in  bed. 

Run  home  and  get  your  supper,  else  your  Ma  will  scold, — 
Ofie! 

It's  very  wrong  indeed  for  little  boys  to  stand  and  cry ! " 

The  tear-drop  in  his  little  eye  again  began  to  spring, 

His  bosom  throbbed  with  agony, — he  cried  like  anything! 

I  stooped,  and  thus  amidst  his  sobs  I  heard  him  murmur, — -j 

"Ah! 
I  have  n't  got  no  supper!  and  I  have  n't  got  no  Ma! 

"My  father,  he  is  on  the  seas, — my  mother's  dead  and  gone! 
And  I  am  here,  on  this  here  pier,  to  roam  the  world  alone; 
I  have  not  had,  this  livelong  day,  one  drop  to  cheer  my  heart. 
Nor  'brown'  to  buy  a  bit  of  bread  with, — let  alone  a  tart. 

"If  there's  a  soul  will  give  me  food,  or  find  me  in  employ, 
By  day  or  night,  then  blow  me  tight! "  (he  was  a  vulgar  Boy;) 
"And  now  I'm  here,  from  this  here  pier  it  is  my  fixed  intent 
To  jump,  as  Mister  Levi  did  from  ofi"  the  Monument! " 

"Cheer  up!  cheer  up!  my  Httle  man, — cheer  up!"  I  kindly 

said, 
"You  are  a  naughty  boy  to  take  such  things  into  your  head; 
If  you  should  jump  from  off  the  pier,  you'd  surely  break  your 

legs. 
Perhaps  your  neck, — then  Bogey'd  have  you,  sure  as  eggs 

are  eggs !  ■.— !  aooJ  * 


2122  Old  Favorites 

"Come  home  with  me,  my  httle  man,  come  home  with  me 

and  sup! 
My  landlady  is  Mrs.  Jones, — we  must  not  keep  her  up, — 
There's  roast  potatoes  at  the  fire, — enough  for  me  and  you, — 
Come  home,  you  little  vulgar  Boy, — I  lodge  at  Number  2."    . 

I  took  him  home  to  Number  2,  the  house  beside  "The  Foy." 
I  bad  him  wipe  his  dirty  shoes, — that  little  vulgar  Boy, — 
And  then  I  said  to  Mistress  Jones,  the  kindest  of  her  sex,         \ 
" Pray  be  so  good  as  go  and  fetch  a  pint  of  double  X! " 

But  Mrs.  Jones  was  rather  cross,  she  made  a  little  noise, 
She  said  she  "did  not  like  to  wait  on  little  vulgar  Boys." 
She  with  her  apron  wiped  the  plates,  and,  as  she  rubbed  the 

delf. 
Said  I  might  "go  to  Jericho,  and  fetch  my  beer  myself! " 

I  did  not  go  to  Jericho, — I  went  to  Mr.  Cobb, — 
I  changed  a  shilling  (which  in  town  the  people  call  a  Bob) — 
It  was  not  so  much  for  myself  as  for  that  vulgar  child, — 
And  I  said,  "A  pint  of  double  X,  and  please  to  draw  it 
mild!" 

When  I  came  back  I  gazed  about, — I  gazed  on  stool  and 

chair, — 
I  could  not  see  my  little  friend, — because  he  was  not  there! 
I  peeped  beneath  the  table-cloth,  beneath  the  sofa,  too, — 
I  said,  "You  little  vulgar  Boy!  why,  what's  become  of  you?  " 

I  could  not  see  my  table-spoons. — I  looked,  but  could  not  see 
The  little  fiddle-patterned  ones  I  use  when  I'm  at  tea; 
I  could  not  see  my  sugar-tongs,  my  silver  watch, — oh,  dear! 
I  know  'twas  on  the  mantel-piece  when  I  went  out  for  beer. 

I  could  not  see  my  mackintosh, — it  was  not  to  be  seen! 
Nor  yet  my  best  white  beaver  hat,  broad-brimmed  and  lined 

with  green; 
My  carpet-bag, — my  cruet-stand,  that  holds  my  sauce  and 

soy,— 
M.v  roast  potatoes !— all  are  gone! — and  so's  that  vulgar  Boy! 


Misadventures  at   Margate  -123 

I  rang  the  bell  for  Mrs.  Jones,  for  she  was  down  below, 
"Oh,  Mrs.  Jones,  whal  do  you  think? — ain't  this  a  pretty 

go? 
That  horrid  little  vulgar  Boy  whom  I  brought  here  to-night 
He's  stolen  my  things  and  run  away!"     Says  she,  "And 

sarve  you  right!" 

Next  morning  I  was  up  betimes, —  I  sent  the  Crier  round, 
All  with  his  bell  and  gold-laced  hat,  to  say  I'd  give  a  pound 
To  find  that  little  vulgar  Boy,  who'd  gone  and  used  me  so; 
But  when  the  Crier  cried,  "O  Yes!"  the  people  cried,  "O 
No!" 

I  went  to  "  Jarvis'  Landing-place,"  the  glory  of  the  town, 
There  was  a  common  sailor-man  a  walking  up  and  down ; 
I  told  my  tale, — he  seemed  to  think  I'd  not  been  treated  well, 
And  called  me  "Poor  old  Buffer  " — what  that  means  I  can- 
not tell. 

That  sailor-man,  he  said  he'd  seen  that  morning  on  the  shore 

A  son  of — something — 'twas  a  name  I'd  never  heard  be- 
fore,— 

A  little  "gallows-looking  chap," — dear  me,  what  could  he 
mean? — 

With  a  "carpet-swab"  and  "mucking-togs,"  and  a  hat 
turned  up  with  green. 

He  spoke  about  his  "precious  eyes,"  and  said  he'd  seen  him 

"sheer,"  — 
It's  very  odd  that  sailor-men  should  talk  so  very  queer; 
And  then  he  hitched  his  trousers  up,  as  is,  I'm  told,  their 

use, — 
It's  very  odd  that  sailor-men  should  wear  those  things  so 

loose. 

I  did  not  understand  him  well,  but  think  he  meant  to  say 
He'd  seen  that  little  vulgar  Boy,  that  morning,  swim  away 
In  Captain  Large 's  Royal  George,  about  an  hour  before. 
And  they  were  now,  as  he  supposed,  "somewheres"  about 
the  Nore. 


2  124  Old   Favorites 

A  landsman  said,  "I  twig  the  chap, — he's  been  upon  the  C 
Mill,—  ^iA  ,r[0 

And  'cause  he  gammons  so  the  flats,  ve  calls  him  Veeping 
Bill!" 

He  said  "he'd  done  me  werry  brown,"  and  "nicely  stowed 
the  swag," — 

That's  French,  I  fancy,  for  a  hat,  or  else  a  carpet-bag. 

I  went  and  told  the  constable  my  property  to  track; 
He  asked  me  if  "I  did  not  wish  that  I  might  get  it  back?" 
I  answered,  "To  be  sure  I  do! — it's  what  I'm  come  about." 
He  smiled  and  said,  "Sir,  does  your  mother  know  that  you 
are  out?  " 

Not  knowing  what  to  do,  I  thought  I'd  hasten  back  to  town, 
And  beg  our  own  Lord  Mayor  to  catch  the  Boy  who'd  "done 

me  brown." 
His  Lordship  very  kindly  said  he'd  try  and  find  him  out. 
But  he  "rather  thought  that  there  were  several  vulgar  boys 

about." 

He  sent  for  Mr.  Whithair  then,  and  I  described  "the  swag," 
My  mackintosh,  my  sugar-tongs,  my  spoons,  and  carpet-bag; 
He  promised  that  the  New  Police  should  all  their  powers 

employ, 
But  never  to  this  hour  have  I  beheld  that  vulgar  Boy! 

MORAL 

Remember,  then,  that  when  a  boy  I've  heard  my  Grandma 

tell,  yiovji'] 

"Be  warned  in  time  by  others'  harm,  and  you  shall  do 

FULL   well!" 

Don't  link  yourself  with  vulgar  folks,  who've  got  no  fixed 

abode, 
Tell  lies,  use  naughty  words,  and  say  they  "  wish  they  may  be 

blowed!" 

Don't  take  too  much  of  double  X ! — and  don't  at  night  go  out 
To  fetch  your  beer  yourself,  but  make  the  pot-boy  bring  your 
stout! 


•^'The  Captain  Stood  on  the  Carronade"    2125 

And  when  you  go  to  Margate  next,  just  stop  and  ring  the  bell, 
Give  my  respects  to  Mrs.  Jones,  and  say  I'm  pretty  well! 
Richard  Harris  Bar  ham  [178  8- 1845] 


"THE  CAPTAIN  STOOD  ON  THE  CARRONADE" 

The  Captain  stood  on  the  Carronade — "First  lieutenant," 

says  he, 
"Send  all  my  merry  men  aft  here,  for  they  must  list  to  me: 
I  haven't  the  gift  of  the  gab,  my  sons,  because  I'm  bred  to 

the  sea; 
That  ship  there  is  a  Frenchman,  who  means  to  fight  with  we. 
Odds  blood,  hammer  and  tongs,  long  as  I've  been  to  sea, 
I've  fought  'gainst  every  odds — but  I've  gained  the  vic- 
tory. 

"That  ship  there  is  a  Frenchman,  and  if  we  don't  take  she, 
'Tis  a  thousand  bullets  to  one,  that  she  will  capture  we; 
I  haven't  the  gift  of  the  gab,  my  boys;  so  each  man  to  his 

gun; 
If  she's  not  mine  in  half  an  hour,  I'll  flog  each  mother's  son. 
Odds  bobs,  hammer  and  tongs,  long  as  I've  been  to  sea, 
I've  fought  'gainst  every  odds — and  I've  gained  the  vic- 
tory." 

We  fought  for  twenty  minutes,  when  the  Frenchman  had 

enough ; 
"I  little  thought,"  said  he,  "that  your  men  were  of  such 


stuff;" 


>'■>;[  (f 


The  Captain  took  the  Frenchman's  sword,  a  low  bow  made 

to  he; 
"I  haven't  the  gift  of  the  gab,  monsieur,  but  pohte  I  wish 
to  be. 
Odds  bobs,  hammer  and  tongs,  long  as  I've  been  to  sea, 
I've  fought  'gainst  every  odds — and  I've  gained  the  vic- 
tory." 

Our  Captain  sent  for  all  of  us;  "My  merry  men,"  said  he, 
"I  haven't  the  gift  of  the  gab,  my  lads,  but  yet  I  thankful  be; 


2126  Old   Favorites  1  =»HT 

You've  done  your  duty  handsomely,  each  man  stood  to  his 
gun;  J 

If  you  hadn't,  you  villains,  as  sure  as  day,  I'd  have  flogged 
each  mother's  son. 
Odds  bobs,  hammer  and  tongs,  as  long  as  I'm  at  sea, 
I'll  fight  'gainst  every  odds — and  I'll  gain  the  victory." 
Frederick  Marryat  [1792-1848] 


FAITHLESS  NELLY   GRAY 

A   PATHETIC  BALLAD 

Ben  Battle  was  a  soldier  bold, 

And  used  to  war's  alarms; 
But  a  cannon-ball  took  off  his  legs, 

So  he  laid  down  his  arms! 

Now  as  they  bore  him  off  the  field, 

Said  he,  "Let  others  shoot. 
For  here  I  leave  my  second  leg,  ,  . 

And  the  Forty-second  Foot!" 

The  army-surgeons  made  him  limbs: 

Said  he,  "They're  only  pegs; 
But  there's  as  wooden  members  quite 

As  represent  my  legs!" 

Now  Ben  he  loved  a  pretty  maid. 

Her  name  was  Nelly  Gray; 
So  he  went  to  pay  her  his  devours 

When  he'd  devoured  his  pay! 

But  when  he  called  on  Nelly  Gray, 

She  made  him  quite  a  scoff; 
And  when  she  saw  his  wooden  legs, 

Began  to  take  them  off! 

"O  Nelly  Gray!  O  Nelly  Gray! 

Is  this  your  love  so  warm? 
The  love  that  loves  a  scarlet  coat,  . 

Should  be  more  uniform!"  ■)  jlig  gH: 


Faithless  Nelly    Gray  -.127 

She  said,  "I  loved  a  soldier  once, 

For  he  was  blithe  and  brave; 
But  I  will  never  have  a  man 

With  both  feet  in  the  grave! 

"Before  you  had  those  timber  toes, 

Your  love  I  did  allow, 
But  then,  you  know,  you  stand  upon 

Another  footing  now!" 

"O  Nelly  Gray!  O  Nelly  Gray! 

For  all  your  jeering  speeches. 
At  duty's  call  I  left  my  legs 

In  Badajoz's  breaches !" 

"Why,  then,"  said  she,  "you've  lost  the  feet 

Of  legs  in  war's  alarms. 
And  now  you  cannot  wear  your  shoes 

Upon  your  feats  of  arms!" 

"Oh,  false  and  fickle  Nelly  Gray, 

I  know  why  you  refuse: — 
Though  I've  no  feel ,  some  other  man 

Is  standing  in  my  shoes! 

"I  wish  I  ne'er  had  seen  your  face; 

But  now  a  long  farewell! 
For  you  will  be  my  death: — alas! 

You  will  not  be  my  Nell ! " 

Now  when  he  went  from  Nelly  Gray, 

His  heart  so  heavy  got. 
And  life  was  such  a  burthen  grown, 

It  made  him  take  a  knot ! 

So  round  his  melancholy  neck 

A  rope  he  did  entwine, 
And,  for  his  second  time  in  life, 

Enhsted  in  the  Line ! 


Old   Favorites 

One  end  he  tied  around  a  beam, 

And  then  removed  his  pegs, 
And,  as  his  legs  were  off, — of  course 

He  soon  was  off  his  legs! 

And  there  he  hung  till  he  was  dead 

As  any  nail  in  town, — 
For  though  distress  had  cut  him  up, 

It  could  not  cut  him  down! 

A  dozen  men  sat  on  his  corpse. 

To  find  out  why  he  died — 
And  they  buried  Ben  at  four  cross-roads. 

With  a  stake  in  his  inside ! 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 


FAITHLESS   SALLY  BROWN 

Young  Ben  he  was  a  nice  young  man, 

A  carpenter  by  trade; 
And  he  fell  in  love  with  Sally  Brown, 

That  was  a  lady's  maid. 

But  as  they  fetched  a  walk  one  day, 

They  met  a  press-gang  crew; 

And  Sally  she  did  faint  away. 

Whilst  Ben  he  was  brought  to. 

on  I  ffgi^/-  ■  ' 

The  boatswain  swore  with  wicked  words 

Enough  to  shock  a  saint. 
That,  though  she  did  seem  in  a  fit, 

'Twas  nothing  but  a  feint. 

"Come,  girl,"  said  he,  "hold  up  your  head- 

He'll  be  as  good  as  me; 
For  when  your  swain  is  in  our  boat 

A  boatswain  he  will  be." 

So  when  they'd  made  their  game  of  her, 

And  taken  off  her  elf. 
She  roused,  and  found  she  only  was 

A  coming  to  herself. 


Faithless  Sally   Brown  2129 

"And  is  he  gone,  and  is  he  gone?'' 

She  cried,  and  wept  outright; 
"Then  I  will  to  the  water-side, 

And  see  him  out  of  sight." 

A  waterman  came  up  to  her;  r 

"Now,  young  woman,"  said  he, 
"If  you  weep  on  so,  you  will  make 

Eye-water  in  the  sea." 

"Alas!  they've  taken  my  beau,  Ben, 

To  sail  with  old  Benbow;" 
And  her  woe  began  to  run  afresh,         f 

As  if  she'd  said.  Gee  woe! 

Says  he,  "They've  only  taken  him 

To  the  tender- ship,  you  see." 
"The  tender-ship,"  cried  Sally  Brown, 

"What  a  hardship  that  must  be! 

"O,  would  I  were  a  mermaid  now, 

For  then  I'd  follow  him! 
But  0,  I'm  not  a  fish-woman, 

And  so  I  cannot  swim. 

"Alas!  I  was  not  born  beneath 

The  Virgin  and  the  Scales, 
So  I  must  curse  my  cruel  stars, 

And  walk  about  in  Wales." 

Now  Ben  had  sailed  to  many  a  place 

That's  underneath  the  world; 
But  in  two  years  the  ship  came  home, 

And  all  her  sails  were  furled. 

jii  i 
But  when  he  called  on  Sally  Brown,  f 

To  see  how  she  got  on. 

He  found  she'd  got  another  Ben,  ,,,    .,-^  ,    . 

Whose  Christian  name  was  John. 


2130  Old   Favorites 

"O  Sally  Brown!  O  Sally  Brown! 

How  could  you  serve  me  so? 
I've  met  with  many  a  breeze  before,  \ 

But  never  such  a  blow!" 

Then,  reading  on  his  'bacco  box, 

He  heaved  a  heavy  sigh, 
And  then  began  to  eye  his  pipe, 

And  then  to  pipe- his  eye. 

And  then  he  tried  to  sing,  "All's  Well!" 

But  could  not,  though  he  tried; 
His  head  was  turned, — and  so  he  chewed 

His  pigtail  till  he  died. 

His  death,  which  happened  in  his  berth, 

At  forty-odd  befell; 
They  went  and  told  the  sexton,  and 

The  sexton  tolled  the  bell. 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 


"PLEASE  TO  RING  THE   BELLE" 

I'll  tell  you  a  story  that's  not  in  Tom  Moore: 
Young  Love  likes  to  knock  at  a  pretty  girl's  door: 
So  he  called  upon  Lucy — 'twas  just  ten  o'clock — 
Like  a  spruce  single  man,  with  a  smart  double  knock. 

Now  a  hand-maid,  whatever  her  fingers  be  at. 
Will  run  like  a  puss  when  she  hears  a  rat-tat: 
So  Lucy  ran  up^ — and  in  two  seconds  more 
Had  questioned  the  stranger  and  answered  the  door. 

The  meeting  was  bliss,  but  the  parting  was  woe; 
For  the  moment  will  come  when  such  comers  must  go. 
So  she  kissed  him,  and  whispered — poor  innocent  thing — 
"The  next  time  you  come,  love,  pray  come  with  a  ring." 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 


Old  Grimes  2 131 


OLD   GRIMES 

Old  Grimes  is  dead;  that  good  old  man 

We  never  shall  see  more: 
He  used  to  wear  a  long  black  coat, 

All  buttoned  down  before. 

His  heart  was  open  as  the  day, 

His  feelings  all  were  true; 
His  hair  was  some  inclined  to  gray — 

He  wore  it  in  a  queue. 

Whene'er  he  heard  the  voice  of  pain, 

His  breast  with  pity  burned; 
The  large,  round  head  upon  his  cane 

From  ivory  was  turned. 

Kind  words  he  ever  had  for  all; 

He  knew  no  base  design: 
His  eyes  were  dark  and  rather  small, 

His  nose  was  aquiline. 

He  lived  at  peace  with  all  mankind. 

In  friendship  he  was  true; 
His  coat  had  pocket-holes  behind, 

His  pantaloons  were  blue. 

Unharmed,  the  sin  which  earth  pollutes 

He  passed  securely  o'er, 
And  never  wore  a  pair  of  boots 

For  thirty  years  or  more. 

But  good  old  Grimes  is  now  at  rest, 
Nor  fears  misfortune's  frown: 

He  wore  a  double-breasted  vest — 
The  stripes  ran  up  and  down. 

He  modest  merit  sought  to  find. 

And  pay  it  its  desert: 
He  had  no  malice  in  his  mind, 

No  ruffles  on  his  shirt. 


1132  Old   Favorites 

His  neighbors  he  did  not  abuse — 

Was  sociable  and  gay: 
He  wore  large  buckles  on  his  shoes, 

And  changed  them  every  day. 

His  knowledge,  hid  from  public  gaze, 
He  did  not  bring  to  view,  ''^'  ^^ 

Nor  made  a  noise,  town-meeting  days, 
As  many  people  do. 

His  worldly  goods  he  never  threw 
In  trust  to  fortune's  chances, 

But  lived  (as  all  his  brothers  do) 
In  easy  circumstances. 

Thus  undisturbed  by  anxious  cares, 

His  peaceful  moments  ran; 
And  everybody  said  he  was 

A  fine  old  gentleman. 

Albert  Gorton  Greene  [i 802-1  i 


THE  ANNUITY 

I  GAED  to  spend  a  week  in  Fife — 

An  unco  week  it  proved  to  be — 
For  there  I  met  a  waesome  wife 

Lamentin'  her  viduity. 
Her  grief  brak  out  sae  fierce  and  fell, 
I  thought  her  heart  wad  burst  the  shell. 
And, — I  was  sae  left  tae  mysel, — 

I  sell't  her  an  annuity. 

• '  T 
The  bargain  lookit  fair  eneugh — 

She  just  was  turned  o'  saxty-three; 
I  couldna  guessed  she'd  prove  sae  teugh, 

By  human  ingenuity. 
But  years  have  come,  and  years  have  gane, 
And  there  she's  yet  as  stieve  's  a  stane — 
The  limmer's  growin'  young  again, 

Since  she  got  her  annuity. 


The  Annuity  2133 

She's  crined  awa'  to  bane  and  skin,       ',  »i(3 

But  that,  it  seems,  is  naught  to  me;         A 

She's  hke  to  Hve — although  she's  in  jl 

The  last  stage  o'  tenuity.  i 

She  munches  wi'  her  wizened  gums. 
An'  stumps  about  on  legs  o'  thrums;         ij  I 
But  comes,  as  sure  as  Christmas  comes,    1 
To  ca'  for  her  annuity.  i.'}T 

She  jokes  her  joke,  an'  cracks  her  crack, 

As  spunkie  as  a  growin'  flea — 
An'  there  she  sits  upon  my  back,  1  ;l 

A  Hvin'  perpetuity. 
She  hurkles  by  her  ingle  side. 
An'  toasts  an'  toasts  her  wrunkled  hide- 
Lord  kens  how  lang  she  yet  may  bide 

To  ca'  for  her  annuity. 

I  read  the  tables  drawn  wi'  care 

For  an  insurance  company; 
Her  chance  o'  life  was  stated  there, 

Wi'  perfect  perspicuity. 
But  tables  here  or  tables  there, 
She's  lived  ten  years  beyond  her  share, 
An's  like  to  live  a  dizzen  mair, 

To  ca'  for  her  annuity. 

I  got  the  loun  that  drew  the  deed — 

We  spelled  it  o'er  right  carefully;— 
In  vain  he  yerked  his  souple  head,  i 

To  find  an  ambiguity:  , 

It's  dated — tested — a'  complete — 
The  proper  stamp — nae  word  delete — 
And  diligence,  as  on  decreet. 

May  pass  for  her  annuity. 

Last  Yule  she  had  a  fearfu'  hoast, — 
I  thought  a  kink  might  set  me  free; 

I  led  her  out,  'mang  snaw  and  frost, 
Wi'  constant  assiduity. 


2  134  Old   Favorites 

But  deil  ma'  care — the  blast  gaed  by,  ''^ 

And  missed  the  auld  anatomy — 
It  just  cost  me  a  tooth,  forbye 

Discharging  her  annuity. 

an  'id'd 
I  thought  that  grief  might  gar  her  quit^-'iA 

Her  only  son  was  lost  at  sea —  'I 

But  aff  her  wits  behoved  to  flit, 

An'  leave  her  in  fatuity! 
She  threeps,  an'  threeps,  he's  livin'  yet, 
For  a'  the  tellin'  she  can  get; 
But  catch  the  doited  runt  forget 

To  ca'  for  her  annuity! 

If  there's  a  sough  o'  cholera, 

Or  typhus, — wha  sae  gleg  as  she? 
She  buys  up  baths,  an'  drugs,  an'  a', 

In  siccan  superfluity! 
She  doesna  need — she's  fever  proof — 
The  pest  gaed  owre  her  very  roof — 
She  tauld  me  sae — ^an'  then  her  loof 
Held  out  for  her  annuity. 

Ae  day  she  fell,  her  arm  she  brak — 
A  compound  fracture  as  could  be — 

Nae  leech  the  cure  wad  undertak, 
Whate'er  was  the  gratuity. 

It's  cured!    She  handles  't  like  a  flail — 

It  does  as  weel  in  bits  as  hale — 

But  I'm  a  broken  man  mysel 
^i'  her  and  her  annuity. 

Her  broozled  flesh  and  broken  banes 
Are  weel  as  flesh  and  banes  can  be; 

She  beats  the  tades  that  live  in  stanes, 
An'  fatten  in  vacuity! 

They  die  when  they're  exposed  to  air. 

They  canna  thole  the  atmosphere— 

But  her!  expose  her  ony where, 
She  lives  for  her  annuity. 


The  Annuity  "^^35 

If  mortal  means  could  nick  her  thread, 
Sma'  crime  it  wad  appear  to  me;  i^rl 

Ca'  t  murder — or  ca'  t  homicide — 
I'd  justify  't — an'  do  it  tae. 

But  how  to  fell  a  withered  wife 

That's  carved  out  o'  the  tree  of  life — 

The  timmer  limmer  dares  the  knife 
To  settle  her  annuity. 

I'd  try  a  shot — but  whar's  the  mark? 

Her  vital  parts  are  hid  frae  me; 
Her  backbone  wanders  through  her  sark 

In  an  unkenned  corkscrewity. 
She's  palsified,  an'  shakes  her  head 
Sae  fast  about,  ye  scarce  can  see  't; 
It's  past  the  power  o'  steel  or  lead 

To  settle  her  annuity. 

She  might  be  drowned;  but  go  she'll  not 

Within  a  mile  o'  loch  or  sea; 
Or  hanged — if  cord  could  grip  a  throat 

O'  siccan  exiguity. 
It's  fitter  far  to  hang  the  rope — 
It  draws  out  like  a  telescope; 
'Twad  tak'  a  dreadfu'  length  o'  drop 

To  settle  her  annuity. 

Will  poison  do  't?    It  has  been  tried, 

But,  bc't  in  hash  or  fricassee, 
That's  just  the  dish  she  can't  abide. 

Whatever  kind  o'  goiit  it  hae. 
It's  needless  to  assail  her  doubts, — ■ 
She  gangs  by  instinct,  like  the  brutes, — 
An'  only  eats  an'  drinks  what  suits 

Hersel  an'  her  annuity. 

The  Bible  says  the  age  o'  man 

Threescore  and  ten,  perchance,  may  be;iJ 
She's  ninety-four.    Let  them  wha  can, 

Explain  the  incongruity. 


2136    1  Old   Favorites 

She  should  hae  lived  afore  the  flood — 

She's  come  o'  patriarchal  blood,iiT)  'atn'i 

She's  some  auld  Pagan,  mummified 

Alive  for  her  annuity. 

■ri  Jud 
She's  been  embalmed  inside  and  oot^^,  .f-p 

She's  sauted  to  the  last  degree — •  p 

There's  pickle  in  her  very  snooti^j.^^  ,_i 

Sae  caper-like  an'  cruety. 
Lot's  wife  was  fresh  compared  to  her — 
They've  kyanized  the  useless  knir, — ■ 
She  canna  decompose— nae  mair 

Than  her  accursed  annuity. 

:j 
The  water-drap  wears  out  the  rock, 

As  this  eternal  jaud  wears  me; 
I  could  withstand  the  single  shock, 

But  not  the  continuity. 
It's  pay  me  here,  an'  pay  me  there, 
An'  pay  me,  pay  me,  evermair — 
I'll  gang  demented  wi'  despair — 

I'm  charged  for  her  annuity! 

George  Outram  [1805-1856] 


THE   SMACK  IN   SCHOOL 

A  DISTRICT  school,  not  far  away, 

Mid  Berkshire's  hills,  one  winter's  day, 

Was  humming  with  its  wonted  noise 

Of  threescore  mingled  girls  and  boys; 

Some  few  upon  their  tasks  intent, 

But  more  on  furtive  mischief  bent. 

The  while  the  master's  downward  look 

Was  fastened  on  a  copy-book; 

When  suddenly,  behind  his  back, 

Rose  sharp  and  clear  a  rousing  smack. 

As  'twere  a  battery  of  bliss 

Let  off  in  one  tremendous  kiss! 

"What's  that?"  the  startled  master  cries; 

"That,  thir,"  a  little  imp  replies, 


"The  Pope  He  Leads  a  Happy  Life"     2137 

"Wath  William  WiHith,  if  you  pleathe,— 

I  thaw  him  kith  Thuthanna  Peathe!" 

With  frown  to  make  a  statue  thrill, 

The  master  thundered,  "Hither,  Will!" 

Like  wretch  o'ertaken  in  his  track, 

With  stolen  chattels  on  his  back. 

Will  hung  his  head  in  fear  and  shame, 

And  to  the  awful  presence  came, — 

A  great,  green,  bashful  simpleton, 

The  butt  of  all  good-natured  fun. 

With  smi]e  suppressed,  and  birch  upraised, 

The  threatener  faltered, — "I'm  amazed 

That  you,  my  biggest  pupil,  should 

Be  guilty  of  an  act  so  rude! 

Before  the  whole  set  school  to  boot — 

What  evil  genius  put  you  to't?" 

"  'Twas  she  herself,  sir,"  sobbed  the  lad, 

"I  did  not  mean  to  be  so  bad; 

But  when  Susannah  shook  her  curls, 

And  whispered,  I  was  'fraid  of  girls 

And  dursn't  kiss  a  baby's  doll, 

I  couldn't  stand  it,  sir,  at  all. 

But  up  and  kissed  her  on  the  spot! 

I  know — boo-hoo — I  ought  to  not. 

But,  somehow,  from  her  looks — boo-hoo— 

I  thought  she  kind  o'  wished  me  to!" 

William  Pill  Palmer  [i  805-1 884] 

"THE   POPE   HE  LEADS  A  HAPPY  LIFE" 

From  "  Harry  Lorrequer  " 

The  Pope  he  leads  a  happy  life, 
He  fears  not  married  care  nor  strife. 
He  drinks  the  best  of  Rhenish  wine, — 
I  would  the  Pope's  gay  lot  were  mine. 

But  yet  all  happy's  not  his  life. 
He  has  no  maid,  nor  blooming  wife; 
Nor  child  has  he  to  raise  his  hope — 
I  would  not  wish  to  be  the  Pope. 


2138     ^J  Yq<f    Old  Favorite^  3qo4  ariT " 

The  Sultan  better  pleases  me,       >  ■■ 
His  is  a  life  of  jollity;  ; )  \ 

He's  wives  as  many  as  he  will —    '.' 
I  would  the  Sultan's  throne  then  fill. 

But  even  he's  a  wretched  man,     '):| 
He  must  obey  the  Alcoran; 
He  dare  not  drink  one  drop  of  wine — 
I  would  not  change  his  lot  for  mine. 

So  here  I  take  my  lowly  stand, 
,.vja       j,j|  drink  my  own,  my  native  land; 
-'      I'll  kiss  my  maiden  fair  and  fine,'  i 
And  drink  the  best  of  Rhenish  wine. 

And  when  my  maiden  kisses  me, . 
I'll  think  that  I  the  Sultan  be; 
J        And  when  my  cheery  glass  I  tope, 
I'll  fancy  then  I  am  the  Pope. 

Charles  Lever  [1806-1872] 


THE  HEIGHT  OF  THE  RIDICULOUS 

I  WROTE  some  lines  once  on  a  time 

In  wondrous  merry  mood, 
And  thought,  as  usual,  men  would  say 

They  were  exceeding  good. 

They  were  so  queer,  so  very  queer, 

I  laughed  as  I  would  die; 
Albeit,  in  the  general  way, 

A  sober  man  am  I. 

I  called  my  servant,  and  he  came; 

How  kind  it  was  of  him. 
To  mind  a  slender  man  like  me. 

He  of  the  mighty  hmb! 

"These  to  the  printer,"  I  exclaimed, 
And,  in  my  humorous  way, 

I  added  (as  a  trifling  jest), 

"There'll  be  the  devil  to  pay." 


The   Ballad   of  the   Oysterman      2139 

gnin  He  took  the  paper,  and  I  watched, 

And  saw  him  peep  within;  saiJa 

irfgil.  At  the  first  line  he  read,  his  face      r[  <jj  [^^^ 

Was  all  upon  the  grin.  riBsIa 

— ni  j^HO 

Ui'ii^i_  He  read  the  next;  the  grin  grew  broad,   ,  j^jQ 

And  shot  from  ear  to  ear; 
'^-f"    '  He  read  the  third;  a  chuckling  noise>loq?i  iuO 

I  now  began  to  hear.       .  '  "'noJfi§uBb 

■-■■'- r;T'" 

P^  '''  The  fourth;  he  broke  into  a  roar;  nA'' 

The  fifth;  his  waistband  split; 
S""""'  '  The  sixth;  he  burst  five  buttons  off, 

And  tumbled  in  a  fit. 

■"^  Ten  days  and  nights,  with  sleepless  eye,   ^"^ 

I  watched  that  wretched  man, 
And  since,  I  never  dare  to  write        ,  .  ' 

As  funny  as  1  can.  ...     ^^ 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [1800-1894] 


THE  BALLAD  OF  THE  OYSTERMAN 

It  was  a  tall  young  oysterman  lived  by  the  river-side. 
His  shop  was  just  upon  the  bank,  his  boat  was  on  the  tide; 
The  daughter  of  a  fisherman,  that  was  so  straight  and  slim, 
Lived  over  on  the  other  bank,  right  opposite  to  him. 

It  was  the  pensive  oysterman  that  saw  a  lovely  maid. 
Upon  a  moonlight  evening,  a-sitting  in  the  shade; 
He  saw  her  wave  a  handkerchief,  as  much  as  if  to  say, 
"I'm  wide  awake,  young  oysterman,  and  all  the  folks  away." 

Then  up  arose  the  oysterman,  and  to  himself  said  he, 

"I  guess  I'll  leave  the  skiff  at  home,  for  fear  that  folks  should 

see; 
I  read  it  in  the  story-book,  that,  for  to  kiss  his  dear, 
Leander   swam    the    Hellespont, — and    I    will    swim    this 

here." 


Q  2I40      mi3.l2v-  Old  Favorites 

And  he  has  leaped  into  the  waves,  and  crossed  the  shining 
stream,  iIia'  qj-jqauu  ,'/iv.  jmiA 

And  he  has  clambered  up' 'the  bank','  all' in  the  moonlight 

gleam ; 
Oh,  there  are  kisses  sweet  as  dew,  and  words  as  soft  as  rain — ■ 
But  they  have  heard  her  father's  step,  and  in  he  leaps  again! 

Out  spoke  the  ancient  fisherman:  "Oh,  what  was  that,  my 

daughter?" 
"  'Twas  nothing  but  a  pebble,  sir,  I  threw  into  the  water." 
"And  what  is  that,  pray  tell  me,  love,  that  paddles  off  so 

fast?" 
"It's  nothing  but  a  porpoise,  sir,  that's  been  a  swimming 

past." 

Out  spoke  the  ancient  fisherman:  "Now  bring  me  my  har- 
poon! 
I'll  get  into  my  fishing-boat,  and  fix  the  fellow  soon." 
Down  fell  that  pretty  innocent,  as  falls  a  snow-white  lamb; 
,  Her  hair  drooped  round  her  pallid  cheeks,  like  seaweed  on  a 
clam. 

Alas  for  those  two  loving  ones!  she  waked  not  from  hei 

swound, 
And  he  was  taken  with  the  cramp,  and  in  the  waves  wai 

drowned; 
But  Fate  has  metamorphosed  them,  in  pity  of  their  woe, 
' ''  And  now  they  keep  an  oyster-shop  for  mermaids  down  below* 
Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [1800-1894] 


LITTLE   BILLEE 

There  were  three  sailors  of  Bristol  city. 
Who  took  a  boat  and  went  to  sea. 
But  first  with  beef  and  captain's  biscuits 
r  ;  And  pickled  pork  they  loaded  she. 

There  was  gorging  Jack  and  guzzling  Jimmy, 
And  the  youngest  he  was  little  Billee.  -  "  ' 

aini    ni         Now  when  they  got  as  far  as  the  Equator "^^^^-^ 
They'd  nothing  left  but  one  split  pea.       ''' 


The  Jackdaw  of  Rheims  2 141 

Says  gorging  Jack  to  guzzling  Jimmy,      ''  <^'"'f 
"I  am  extremely  hungaree." 
To  gorging  Jack  says  guzzling  Jimmy, 
"We've  nothing  left,  us  must  eat  we." 

Says  gorging  Jack  to  guzzling  Jimmy,  , ,  . 

"With  one  another  we  shouldn't  agree! 
There's  little  Bill,  he's  young  and  tender, 
We're  old  and  tough,  so  let's  eat  he." 

"Oh!  Billy,  we're  going  to  kill  and  cat  you, 
So  undo  the  button  of  your  chemie."  [  j> 

When  Bill  received  this  information 
He  used  his  pocket  handkerchie. 

"  First  let  me  say  my  catechism. 
Which  my  poor  mammy  taught  to  me." 
"Make  haste,  make  haste,"  says  guzzling  Jimmy, 
While  Jack  pulled  out  his  snickersnee. 

So  Billy  went  up  to  the  main-top  gallant  mast. 
And  down  he  fell  on  his  bended  knee. 
He  scarce  had  come  to  the  twelfth  commandment 
When  up  he  jumps.    "There's  land  I  see: 

"Jerusalem  and  Madagascar, 
And  North  and  South  Amerikee: 
There's  the  British  "flag  a-riding  at  anchor. 
With  Admiral  Napier,  K.  C.  B." 

So  when  they  got  aboard  of  the  Admiral's, 
He  hanged  fat  Jack  and  flogged  Jimmee: 
But  as  for  little  Bill  he  made  him 
The  Captain  of  a  Seventy-three. 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 


THE  JACKDAW  OF  RHEUMS 

The  Jackdaw  sat  on  the  Cardinal's  chair: 
Bishop  and  abbot  and  prior  were  there; 
Many  a  monk,  and  many  a  friar, 
Many  a  knight,  and  many  a  squire, 


2142  Old   Favoritesj  i" 

With  a  great  many  more  of  lesser  degree, — 

In  sooth,  a  goodly  company; 

And  they  served  the  Lord -primate  on  bended  knee. 

Never,  I  ween,  u  .Ibf  tinirfiorr  -r/- 

Was  a  prouder  seen, 
•  Read  of  in  books,  or  dreamt  of  in  dreams, 
Than  the  Cardinal  Lord  Archbishop  of  Rheims! 

In  and  out 

Through  the  motley  rout, 
That  little  Jackdaw  kept  hopping  about; 

Here  and  there 

Like  a  dog  in  a  fair,  ''-^^  ^aa 

Over  comfits  and  cates,  ,     .       .- 

And  dishes  and  plates, 
Cowl  and  cope,  and  rochet  and  pall,  -  ,, 

Mitre  and  crosier,  he  hopped  upon  all! 

With  a  saucy  air. 

He  perched  on  the  chair 
Where,  in  state,  the  great  Lord  Cardinal  sat, 
In  the  great  Lord  Cardinal's  great  red  hat; 

And  he  peered  in  the  face 

Of  his  Lordship's  Grace, 
With  a  satisfied  look,  as  if  he  would  say, 
"We  two  are  the  greatest  folks  here  to-day!" 

And  the  priests,  with  awe. 

As  such  freaks  they  saw. 
Said,  "The  Devil  must  be  in  that  little  Jackdaw!" 

The  feast  was  over,  the  board  was  cleared, 
The  flawns  and  the  custards  had  all  disappeared. 
And  six  little  Singing-boys, — dear  little  souls! 
In  nice  clean  faces,  and  nice  white  stoles, — 

Came  in  order  due. 

Two  by  two. 
Marching  that  grand  refectory  through. 
A  nice  little  boy  held  a  golden  ewer, 
Embossed  and  filled  with  water,  as  pure 
As  any  that  flows  between  Rheims  and  Namur 


The  Jackdaw  of  Rheims  2143 

Which  a  nice  Httle  boy  stood  ready  to  catch       ,(j 
In  a  fine  golden  hand-basin  made  to  match.      ,\'£- 
Two  nice  Httle  boys,  rather  more  grown,  [j  5^/^ 

Carried  lavender-water  and  eau-de-Cologne;       ,  gjnoS 
And  a  nice  little  boy  had  a  nice  cake  of  soap, 
Worthy  of  washing  the  hands  of  the  Pope. 

One  little  boy  more  ^ 

A  napkin  bore, 
Of  the  best  white  diaper,  fringed  with  pinkj  ^-^'^^  ^ 
And  a  Cardinal's  hat  marked  in  "permanent  ink.' 

The  great  Lord  Cardinal  turns  at  the  sight 
Of  these  nice  little  boys  dressed  all  in  white: 

From  his  finger  he  draws 
; ;    i  His  costly  turquoise; 
And,  not  thinking  at  all  about  httle  Jackdaws, 

Deposits  it  straight 

By  the  side  of  his  plate, 
While  the  nice  little  boys  .on  his  Eminence  wait; 
Till,  when  nobody's  dreaming  of  any  such  thing, 
That  little  Jackdaw  hops  off  with  the  ring! 


There's  a  cry  and  a  shout, 

And  a  deuce  of  a  rout, 
And  nobody  seems  to  know  what  they're  about,.  3^'p 
But  the  monks  have  their  pockets  all  turned  inside  out; 

The  friars  are  kneeling, 

And  hunting,  and  feeling 
The  carpet,  the  floor,  and  the  walls,  and  the  ceiling. 

The  Cardinal  drew 

Off  each  plum-colored  shoe. 
And  left  his  red  stockings  exposed  to  the  view; 

He  peeps,  and  he  feels 

In  the  toes  and  the  heels; 
They  turn  up  the  dishes, — they  turn  up  the  plates, — 
They  take  up  the  poker  and  poke  out  the  grates, 

— They  turn  up  the  rugs, 

They  examine  the  mugs: 


121^4-       enibri'    Old   Favorites:] 

But  no! — no  such  thing;  .  fi'rfjuW 

They  can't  find  the  ring!  .dbJog  ani  a  nl 

And  the  Abbot  declared  that,  "when  nobody-  twigged  it, 
Some  rascal  or  other  had  popped  in  and  prigged  it!" 

'in  K  DuA 

The  Cardinal  rose  with  a  dignified  look, 

He  called  for  his  candle,  his  bell,  and  his  book: 

In  holy  anger,  and  pious  grief,    /    ',','''^ 

He  solemnly  cursed  that  rascally  thief.'    '    ''  ^\ 
He  cursed  him  at  board,  he  cursed  him  in  bed,  '*"  " 
From  the  sole  of  his  foot  to  the  crown  of  his  head! 
He  cursed  him  in  sleeping,  that  every  night 
He  should  dream  of  the  devil,  and  wake  in  a  fright; 
He  cursed  him  in  eating,  he  cursed  him  in  drinking, 
He  cursed  him  in  coughing,  in  sneezing,  in  winking; 
He  cursed  him  in  sitting,  in  standing,  in  lying;    .a/-. 
He  cursed  him  in  walking,  in  riding,  in  flying; 
He  cursed  him  in  living,  he  cursed  him  in  dying! 

Never  was  heard  such  a  terrible  curse!  n  // 

But  what  gave  rise  MiT 

To  no  little  surprise. 

Nobody  seemed  one  penny  the  worse! 

The  day  was  gone, 

The  night  came  on, 
The  monks  and  the  friars  they  searched  till  dawn; 

When  the  sacristan  saw. 

On  crumpled  claw 
Come  limping  a  poor  little  lame  Jackdaw. 

No  longer  gay. 

As  on  yesterday; 
His  feathers  all  seemed  to  be  turned  the  wrong  way; 
His  pinions  drooped — he  could  hardly  stand. 
His  head  was  as  bald  as  the  palm  of  your  hand; 

His  eye  so  dim, 
■"-■■  So  wasted  each  limb,  liT 

That,  heedless  of  grammar,  they  all  cried,  "that's  him! 
That's  the  scamp  that  has  done  this  scandalous  thing! 
That's  the  thief  that  has  got  my  Lord  Cardinal's  Ring!" 


The  Jackdaw  of  Rheims  2145 

The  poor  little  Jackdaw, 

When  the  monks  he  saw, 
Feebly  gave  vent  to  the  ghost  of  a  caw; 
And  turned  his  bald  head,  as  much  as  to  say, 
"Pray,  be  so  good  as  to  walk  this  way!" 

Slower  and  slower 

He  limped  on  before. 
Till  they  came  to  the  back  of  the  belfry-door, 

Where  the  first  thing  they  saw,  (.r 

Midst  the  sticks  and  the  straw, 
Was  the  ring,  in  the  nest  of  that  little  Jackdaw. 

Then  the  great  Lord  Cardinal  called  for  his  book, 
And  ofT  that  terrible  curse  he  took; 

The  mute  expression 

Served  in  lieu  of  confession, 
And,  being  thus  coupled  with  full  restitution, 
The  Jackdaw  got  plenary  absolution! 

— When  those  words  were  heard, 

That  poor  little  bird 
Was  so  changed  in  a  moment,  'twas  really  absurd. 

He  grew  sleek  and  fat; 

In  addition  to  that, 
A  fresh  crop  of  feathers  came  thick  as  a  mat. 

His  tail  waggled  more 

Even  than  before; 
But  no  longer  it  wagged  with  an  impudent  air. 
No  longer  he  perched  on  the  Cardinal's  chair. 

He  hopped  now  about 

With  a  gait  devout ; 
At  matins,  at  vespers,  he  never  was  out; 
And,  so  far  from  any  more  pilfering  deeds. 
He  always  seemed  telling  the  Confessor's  beads. 
If  any  one  lied,  or  if  any  one  swore. 
Or  slumbered  in  pra3'er-time,  and  happened  to  snore. 

That  good  Jackdaw 

Would  give  a  great  "Caw!" 
As  much  as  to  say,  "Don't  do  so  any  more!" 
While  many  remarked,  as  his  manners  they  saw. 
That  they  "never  had  known  such  a  pious  Jackdaw!" 


2146  Old   Favorites       siiT 

He  long  lived  the  pride 'rfvhf^J  "Ftirf  Tonrr  ^HT. 

Of  that  countryside, 
And  at  last  in  the  odor  of  sanctity  died; 

When,  as  words  were  too  faint 

His  merits  to  paint,  1" 

The  Conclave  determined  to  make  him  a  Saint; 
And  on  newly-made  Saints  and  Popes,  as  you  know, 
It's  the  custom,  at  Rome,  new  names  to  bestow,        [iT 
So  they  canonized  him  by  the  name  of  Jem  Crow! 

Richard  Harris  Barham  [i 788-1845] 


THE  ALARMED   SKIPPER 

Many  a  long,  long  year  ago,  :i/. 

Nantucket  skippers  had  a  plan 
Of  finding  out,  though  "lying  low," 

How  near  New  York  their  schooners  ran.  -lA 

:a 

They  greased  the  lead  before  it  fell, 

And  then  by  sounding,  through  the  night, 

Knowing  the  soil  that  stuck  so  well, 

They  always  guessed  their  reckoning  right. 

A  skipper  gray,  whose  eyes  were  dim. 

Could  teU,  by  tasting,  just  the  spot;  '  ^ 

And  so  below  he  'd  "douse  the  glim," — - 

After,  of  course,  his  "something  hot." 

Snug  in  his  berth,  at  eight  o'clock. 

This  ancient  skipper  might  be  found; 
No  matter  how  his  craft  would  rock. 

He  slept, — for  skippers'  naps  are  sound. 

The  watch  on  deck  would  now  and  then  <yz  .hats. 

Run  down  and  wake  him,  with  the  lead; 

He'd  up  and  taste,  and  tell  the  men  '■ 

How  many  miles  they  went  ahead.  '^^^^  ""^ 


vv 


One  night  'twas  Jotham  Marden's  watch, 
A  curious  wag — the  peddler's  son; 

And  so  he  mused  (the  wanton  wretch!) 
"To-night  I'll  have  a  grain  of  fun. 


The  Puzzled   Census  Taker        2147 

"We're  all  a  set  of  stupid  fools,  ' " 

To  think  the  skipper  knows,  by  tasting, 

What  ground  he's  on;  Nantucket  schools 

Don't  teach  such  stuff,  with  ail  their  basting!" 

And  so  he  took  the  well-greased  lead, 

And  rubbed  it  o'er  a  box  of  earth 
That  stood  on  deck — a  parsnip-bed, — 

And  then  he  sought  the  skipper's  berth. 

"Where  are  we  now,  sir?     Please  to  taste." 
The  skipper  yawned,  put  out  his  tongue, 

Opened  his  eyes  in  w^ondrous  haste. 
And  then  upon  the  floor  he  sprung. 

The  skipper  stormed,  and  tore  his  hair, 

Hauled  on  his  boots,  and  roared  to  Harden, 

"Nantucket's  sunk,  and  here  we  are 

Right  over  old  Marm  Hackett's  garden ! " 

James  Thomas  Fields  [181 6-1 881] 


THE  PUZZLED   CENSUS  TAKER 

"Got  any  boys?"  the  Marshal  said 
To  a  lady  from  over  the  Rhine; 

And  the  lady  shook  her  flaxen  head. 
And  civilly  answered,  "Nein!" 

"Got  any  girls?"  the  Marshal  said 
To  the  lady  from  over  the  Rhine; 

And  again  the  lady  shook  her  head. 
And  civilly  answered,  "Neiii!" 

"But  some  are  dead?"  the  Marshal  said 
To  the  lady  from  over  the  Rhine; 

And  again  the  lady  shook  her  head. 
And  civilly  answered,  "Nein!" 

"Husband  of  course?"  the  Marshal  said 
To  the  lady  from  over  the  Rhine; 

And  again  she  shook  her  flaxen  head, 
And  civilly  answered,  "Nein!" 


2148  Old   Favorites        I  srlT 

"The  devil  you  have!"  the  Marshal  said 

To  the  lady  from  over  the  Rhine; 
And  again  she  shook  her  flaxen  head, 

And  civilly  answered,  ^'Neml" 

"Now  what  do  you  mean  by  shaking  your  head, 

And  always  answering  'Nine'?" 
"Ich  kann  nicht  Englisch!"  civilly  said 

The  lady  from  over  the  Rhine. 

John  Godfrey  Saxe  [1816-1887] 


PYRAMUS  AND   THISBE 

This  tragical  tale,  which,  they  say,  is  a  true  one, 

Is  old;  but  the  manner  is  wholly  a  new  one. 

One  Ovid,  a  writer  of  some  reputation, 

Has  told  it  before  in  a  tedious  narration; 

In  a  style,  to  be  sure,  of  remarkable  fullness, 

But  which  nobody  reads  on  account  of  its  dullness. 

Young  Peter  Pyramus, — I  call  him  Peter, 

Not  for  the  sake  of  the  rhyme  or  the  meter, 

But  merely  to  make  the  name  completer, — 

For  Peter  lived  in  the  olden  times, 

And  in  one  of  the  worst  of  pagan  climes 

That  flourish  now  in  classical  fame, 

Long  before  either  noble  or  boor 

Had  such  a  thing  as  a  Christian  name, — 

Young  Peter,  then,  was  a  nice  young  beau 

As  any  young  lady  would  wish  to  know; 

In  years,  I  ween,  he  was  rather  green,  ^„,„^  u-H" 

That  is  to  say,  he  was  just  eighteen, — 

A  trifle  too  short,  and  a  shaving  too  lean, 

But  "a  nice  young  man"  as  e^er  was  seen, 

And  fit  to  dance  with  a  May-day  queen! 

Now  Peter  loved  a  beautiful  girl 
As  ever  ensnared  the  heart  of  an  earl 
In  the  magical  trap  of  an  auburn  curl, — 


Py ramus  and  Thisbe  2H9 

A  little  Miss  Thisbe,  who  lived  next  door 

(They  slept,  in  fact,  on  the  very  same  floor, 

With  a  wall  between  them,  and  nothing  more, — 

Those  double  dwellings  were  common  of  yore), 

And  they  loved  each  other,  the  legends  say, 

In  that  very  beautiful,  bountiful  way. 

That  every  young  maid  and  every  young  blade 

Are  wont  to  do  before  they  grow  staid. 

And  learn  to  love  by  the  laws  of  trade. 

But  (alack-a-day,  for  the  girl  and  the  boy!) 

A  little  impediment  checked  their  joy, 

And  gave  them,  awhile,  the  deepest  annoy. — 

For  some  good  reason,  which  history  cloaks. 

The  match  didn't  happen  to  please  the  old  folks! 

So  Thisbe's  father  and  Peter's  mother 

Began  the  young  couple  to  worry  and  bother. 

And  tried  their  innocent  passion  to  smother 

By  keeping  the  lovers  from  seeing  each  other! 

But  who  ever  heard  of  a  marriage  deterred 

Or  even  deferred 

By  any  contrivance  so  very  absurd 

As  scolding  the  boy,  and  caging  his  bird? 

Now,  Peter,  who  wasn't  discouraged  at  all 

By  obstacles  such  as  the  timid  appal. 

Contrived  to  discover  a  hole  in  the  wall. 

Which  wasn't  so  thick  but  removing  a  brick 

Made  a  passage, — though  rather  provokingly  small. 

Through  this  little  chink  the  lover  could  greet  her. 

And  secrecy  made  their  courting  the  sweeter, 

While  Peter  kissed  Thisbe,  and  Thisbe  kissed  Peter,  -/ 

For  kisses,  like  folks  with  diminutive  souls,  .j 

Will  manage  to  creep  through  the  smallest  of  holes! 

'Twas  here  that  the  lovers,  intent  upon  love,'rrr,^  v^ro'f' 

Laid  a  nice  little  plot  to  meet  at  a  spot 

Near  a  mulberry-tree  in  a  neighboring  grove; 

For  the  plan  was  all  laid  by  the  youth  and  the  maid,     p 


2150  Old   Favorites 

Whose  hearts,  it  would  seem,  were  uncommonly  bold  ones, 
To  run  off  and  get  married  in  spite  of  the  old  ones. 


In  the  shadows  of  evening,  as  still  as  a  mouse, 
The  beautiful  maiden  slipped  out  of  the  house, 
The  mulberry-tree  impatient  to  find; 
While  Peter,  the  vigilant  matrons  to  blind. 
Strolled  leisurely  out  some  minutes  behind. 

While  waiting  alone  by  the  trysting-tree, 
A  terrible  lion  as  e'er  you  set  eye  on 
Came  roaring  along  quite  horrid  to  see. 
And  caused  the  young  maiden  in  terror  to  fiee; 
(A  lion's  a  creature  whose  regular  trade  is 
Blood, — and  "a  terrible  thing  among  ladies,") 
And,  losing  her  veil  as  she  ran  from  the  wood, 
The  monster  bedabbled  it  over  with  blood. 

Now  Peter,  arriving,  and  seeing  the  veil 
All  covered  o'er  and  reeking  with  gore. 
Turned,  all  of  a  sudden,  exceedingly  pale. 
And  sat  himself  down  to  weep  and  to  wail; 
For,  soon  as  he  saw  the  garment,  poor  Peter 
Made  up  his  mind  in  very  short  meter 
That  Thisbe  was  dead,  and  the  lion  had  eat  her! 
So  breathing  a  prayer,  he  determined  to  share 
The  fate  of  his  darling,  "the  loved  and  the  lost," 
And  fell  on  his  dagger,  and  gave  up  the  ghost ! 

Now  Thisbe  returning,  and  viewing  her  beau 
Lying  dead  by  her  veil  (which  she  happened  to  know), 
She  guessed  in  a  moment,  the  cause  of  his  erring, 
And,  seizing  the  knife,  that  had  taken  his  life. 
In  less  than  a  jiffy  was  dead  as  a  herring! 

MORAL 

Young  gentlemen:  Pray  recollect,  if  you  please. 
Not  to  make  assignations  near  mulberry-trees; 
Should  your  mistress  be  missing,  it  shows  a  weak  head 
To  be  stabbing  yourself,  till  you  know  she  is  dead. 


// 


My   Familiar  2 151 

Young  ladies:  You  shouldn't  go  strolling  about 
When  your  anxious  mammas  don't  know  you  are  out; 
And  remember  that  accidents  often  befall 
From  kissing  young  fellows  through  holes  in  the  wall. 
John  Godfrey  Saxe  [i 8 16-1887] 


MY  FAMILIAR 

Ecce  iterum  Crispinus  I 

Again  I  hear  that  creaking  step! — 
He's  rapping  at  the  door! — 

Too  well  I  know  the  boding  sound 
That  ushers  in  a  bore. 

I  do  not  tremble  when  I  meet 

[If 
The  stoutest  of  my  foes, 

But  Heaven  defend  me  from  the  friend 

Who  comes — but  never  goes! 

He  drops  into  my  easy  chair, 

And  asks  about  the  news, 
He  peers  into  my  manuscript, 

And  gives  his  candid  views; 
He  teUs  me  where  he  likes  the  line, 

And  where  he's  forced  to  grieve; 
He  takes  the  strangest  liberties, — 

But  never  takes  his  leave! 

He  reads  my  daily  paper  through 

Before  I've  seen  a  word; 
He  scans  the  lyric  (that  I  wrote), 

And  thinks  it  quite  absurd; 
He  calmly  smokes  my  last  cigar, 

And  coolly  asks  for  more ; 
He  opens  everything  he  sees — 

Except  the  entry  door! 

He  talks  about  his  fragile  health, 

And  tells  me  of  the  pains 
He  suffers  from  a  score  of  ills 

Of  which  he  ne'er  complains; 


2152  Old   Favorites 

And  how  he  struggled  once  with  Death  ,  . 

To  keep  the  fiend  at  bay;  ,fj 

On  themes  hke  those  away  he  goes — 

But  never  goes  away! 

i  -  .,      . 

He  tells  me  of  the  carping  words 

Some  shallow  critic  wrote; 
And  every  precious  paragraph 

Familiarly  can  quote; 
He  thinks  the  writer  did  me  wrong; 

He'd  like  to  run  him  through! 
He  says  a  thousand  pleasant  things — 

But  never  says,  "Adieu!" 

Whene'er  he  comes — that  dreadful  man— 

Disguise  it  as  I  may, 
I  know  that,  like  an  autumn  rain, 

He'll  last  throughout  the  "day. 
In  vain  I  speak  of  urgent  tasks; 

In  vain  I  scowl  and  pout; 
A  frown  is  no  extinguisher — 

It  does  not  put  him  out! 

I  mean  to  take  the  knocker  off, 

Putxrape  upon  the  door, 
Or  hint  to  John  that  I  am  gone 

To  stay  a  month  or  more. 
I  do  not  tremble  when  I  meet 

The  stoutest  of  my  foes, 
But  Heaven  defend  me  from  the  friend 

Who  never,  never  goes! 

John  Godfrey  Saxe  [18 16-1887] 


HANS  BREITMANN'S   PARTY. 

Hans  Breitmann  gife  a  barty, 

Dey  had  biano-blayin; 
I  felled  in  lofe  mit  a  Merican  frau, 

Her  name  was  Madilda  Yane. 


Hans   Breitmann's    Party  '^^53 

She  hat  haar  as  prown  ash  a  pretzel, 

Her  eyes  vas  himmel-plue, 
Und  ven  dey  looket  indo  mine, 

Dey  shpht  mine  heart  in  two. 

Hans  Breitmann  gife  a  barty, 

I  vent  dere  you'll  pe  pound. 
I  valsct  mit  Madilda  Yane 

Und  vent  shpinnen  round  und  rou'ad. 
De  pootiest  Frauelein  in  de  House, 

She  vayed  'pout  dwo  hoondred  pound, 
Und  efery  dime  she  give  a  shoomp 

She  make  de  vindows  sound. 

Hans  Breitmann  gife  a  barty, 

I  dells  you  it  cost  him  dear. 
Dey  rolled  in  more  ash  sefen  kecks 

Of  foost-rate  Lager  Beer. 
Und  venefer  dey  knocks  de  shpicket  in 

De  Deutschers  gifes  a  cheer. 
I  dinks  dat  so  vine  a  barty 

Nefer  coom  to  a  het  dis  year. 

Hans  Breitmann  gife  a  barty; 

Dere  all  vas  Souse  und  Brouse, 
Ven  de  sooper  coomed  in,  de  gompany 

Did  make  demselfs  to  house; 
Dey  ate  das  Brot  und  Gensy  broost, 

Dc  Bratwurst  und  Braten  fine, 
Und  vash  der  Abendessen  down 

Mit  four  parrels  of  Neckarwein. 

Hans  Breitmann  gife  a  barty; 

We  all  cot  troonk  ash  bigs. 
I  poot  mine  mout  to  a  parrel  of  bier, 

Und  emptied  it  oop  mit  a  schwigs. 
Und  denn  I  gissed  Madilda  Yane 

Und  she  shlog  me  on  dc  kop, 
Und  de  gompany  fited  mit  daple-lecks 

Dill  de  coonshtable  made  oos  shtop. 


2154  O'd   Favorites 

Hans  Breitmann  gife  a  barty — 

Where  ish  dat  barty  now? 
Where  ish  de  lofely  golden  cloud 

Dat  float  on  de  moundains'  prow? 
Where  ish  de  himmelstrahlende  Stern — 

De  shtar  of  de  shpirit's  light? 
All  goned  afay  mit  de  Lager  Beer — 

Afay  in  de  Ewigkeit! 

Charles  Godfrey  Leland  [i 824-1 903] 


"NOTHING  TO  WEAR" 

AN   EPISODE   or   CITY   LIPE 

Miss  Flora  McFlimsey,  of  Madison  Square, 

Has  made  three  separate  journeys  to  Paris, 

And  her  father  assures  me,  each  time  she  was  there, 

That  she  and  her  friend  Mrs.  Harris 

(Not  the  lady  whose  name  is  so  famous  in  history. 

But  plain  Mrs.  H.,  without  romance  or  mystery) 

Spent  six  consecutive  weeks  without  stopping 

In  one  continuous  round  of  shopping, — 

Shopping  alone,  and  shopping  together, 

At  all  hours  of  the  day,  and  in  all  sorts  of  weather, — 

For  all  manner  of  things  that  a  woman  can  put 

On  the  crown  of  her  head  or  the  sole  of  her  foot, 

Or  wrap  round  her  shoulders,  or  lit  round  her  waist. 

Or  that  can  be  sewed  on,  or  pinned  on,  or  laced. 

Or  tied  on  with  a  string,  or  stitched  on  with  a  bow, 

In  front  or  behind,  above  or  below; 

For  bonnets,  mantillas,  capes,  collars,  and  shawls; 

Dresses  for  breakfasts  and  dinners  and  balls; 

Dresses  to  sit  in  and  stand  in  and  walk  in; 

Dresses  to  dance  in  and  llirt  in  and  talk  in; 

Dresses  in  which  to  do  nothing  at  all; 

Dresses  for  winter,  spring,  summer,  and  fall; 

All  of  them  different  in  color  and  pattern, 

Silk,  muslin,  and  lace,  crape,  velvet,  and  satin, 

Brocade,  and  broadcloth,  and  other  material, 

Quite  as  expensive  and  much  more  ethereal; 


"Nothing  to   Wear"  "^^55 

In  short,  for  all  things  that  could  ever  be  thought  of, 
Or  milliner,  modiste,  or  tradesman  be  bought  of, 

P>om  ten-thousand-francs  robes  to  twenty-sous  frills; 
In  all  quarters  of  Paris,  and  to  every  store, 
While  McFlimsey  irt  vain  stormed,  scolded,  and  swore. 

They  footed  the  streets,  and  he  footed  the  bills. 

The  last  trip,  their  goods  shipped  by  the  steamer  Arago, 
Formed,  McFlimsey  declares,  the  bulk  of  her  cargo, 
Not  to  mention  a  quantity  kept  from  the  rest, 
SulTicient  to  fill  the  largest-sized  chest, 
Which  did  not  appear  on  the  ship's  manifest. 
But  for  which  the  ladies  themselves  manifested 
Such  particular  interest,  that  they  invested 
Their  own  proper  persons  in  layers  and  rows 
Of  muslins,  embroideries,  worked  under-clothcs. 
Gloves,  handkerchiefs,  scarfs,  and  such  trifles  as  those; 
Then,  wrapped  in  great  shawls,  like  Circassian  beauties, 
Gave  good-hy  to  the  ship,  and  go-by  to  the  duties. 
Her  relations  at  home  all  marvelled,  no  doubt, 
Miss  Flora  had  grown  so  enormously  stout 

For  an  actual  belle  and  a  possible  bride; 
But  the  miracle  ceased  when  she  turned  inside  out. 

And  the  truth  came  to  light,  and  the  dry-goods  beside. 
Which,  in  spite  of  collector  and  custom-house  sentry. 
Had  entered  the  port  without  any  entry. 

And  yet,  though  scarce  three  months  have  passed  since  the 

day 
This  merchandise  went,  on  twelve  carts,  up  Broadway, 
This  same  Miss  McFlimsey,  of  Madison  Square, 
The  last  time  we  met  was  in  utter  despair, 
Because  she  had  nothing  whatever  to  wear! 

(IT 
Nothing  to  wear!    Now,  as  this  is  a  true  ditty, 

I  do  not  assert — this,  you  know,  is  between  us — 
That  she's  in  a  state  of  absolute  nudity. 

Like  Powers'  Greek  Slave,  or  the  Medici  Venus;, 
But  I  do  mean  to  say,  I  have  heard  her  declareilia  orlj  AiVfJ 


2156  '     Old   Favorites 

When,  at  the  same  moment,  she  had  on  a  dress  nl 

Which  cost  five  hundred  dollars,  and  not  a  cent  less    ( if) 
And  jewelry  worth  ten  times  more,  I  should  guess,  .,,,•[ 
That  she  had  not  a  thing  in  the  wide  world  to  wearltp  |jj>  nl 

i/I  slid// 
I  should  mention  just  here,  that  out  of  Miss  Flora's  .,  ,117^ 
Two  hundred  and  fifty  or  sixty  adorers, 
I  had  just  been  selected  as  he  who  should  throw  all 
The  rest  in  the  shade,  by  the  gracious  bestowal 
On  myself,  after  twenty  or  thirty  rejections, 
Of  those  fossil  remains  which  she  called  her  "affections," 
And  that  rather  decayed,  but  well-known  work  of  art,    .  . 
Which  Miss  Flora  persisted  in  styhng  "her  heart."  ,   „ 

So  we  were  engaged.    Our  troth  had  been  plighted,  ,, 

Not  by  moonbeam  or  starbeam,  by  fountain  or  grove, 
But  in  a  front  parlor,  most  brilliantly  lighted. 
Beneath  the  gas-fixtures  we  whispered  our  love. 
Without  any  romance  or  raptures  or  sighs. 
Without  any  tears  in  Miss  Flora's  blue  eyes. 
Or  blushes,  or  transports,  or  such  silly  actions. 
It  was  one  of  the  quietest  business  transactions. 
With  a  very  small  sprinkling  of  sentiment,  if  any, 
And  a  very  large  diamond  imported  by  Tiffany. 
On  her  virginal  lips  while  I  printed  a  kiss, 
She  exclaimed,  as  a  sort  of  parenthesis, 
And  by  way  of  putting  me  quite  at  my  ease, 
"You  know,  I'm  to  polka  as  much  as  I  please. 
And  flirt  when  I  like,— now,  stop,  don't  you  speak,— 
And  you  must  not  come  here  more  than  twice  in  the  week, 
Or  talk  to  me  either  at  party  or  ball, 
But  always  be  ready  to  come  when  I  call; 
So  don't  prose  to  me  about  duty  and  stuff. 
If  we  don't  break  this  off,  there  will  be  time  enough'"'   "'  "^ 
For  that  sort  of  thing;  but  the  bargain  must  be         'JaunDafi 
That,  as  long  as  I  choose,  I  am,  perfectly  free. 
For  this  is  a  sort  of  engagement,  you  see,  ohihtoM 

Which  is  binding  on  you  but  not  binding  on  me."   ^n  ofa  I 

Well,  having  thus  wooed  Miss  McFlimsey  and  gained  her, 
With  the  silks,  crinolines,  and  hoops  that  contained  her,i;a 


"Nothing  to  Wear"  ^^57 

I  had,  as  I  thought,  a  contingent  remainder 

At  least  in  the  property,  and  the  best  right 

To  appear  as  its  escort  by  day  and  by  night ; 

And  it  being  the  week  of  the  Stuckups'  grand  ball,^ 

Their  cards  had  been  out  for  a  fortnight  or  so, 

And  set  all  the  Avenue  on  the  tiptoe, — 
I  considered  it  only  my  duty  to  call, 

And  see  if  Miss  Flora  intended  to  go. 
I  found  her, — as  ladies  are  apt  to  be  found, 
When  the  time  intervening  between  the  first  sound 
Of  the  bell  and  the  visitor's  entry  is  shorter 
Than  usual, — I  found — I  won't  say,  I  caught  her, — 
Intent  on  the  pier-gfass,  undoubtedly  meaning 
To  see  if  perhaps  it  didn't  need  cleaning. 
She  turned  as  I  entered, — "Why,  Harry,  you  sinner, 
I  thought  that  you  went  to  the  Flashers'  to  dinner!" 
"So  I  did,"  I  replied;  "but  the  dinner  is  swallowed 

And  digested,  I  trust,  for  'tis  now  nine  and  more, 
So  being  relieved  from  that  duty,  I  followed 

Inclination,  which  led  me,  you  see,  to  your  door; 
And  now  will  your  ladyship  so  condescend 
As  just  to  inform  me  if  you  intend 
Your  beauty  and  graces  and  presence  to  lend 
(All  of  which,  when  I  own,  I  hope  no  one  will  borrow) 
To  the  Stuckups',  whose  party,  you  know,  is  to-morrow?'' 

The  fair  Flora  looked  up  with  a  pitiful  air, 
And  answered  quite  promptly,  "Why,  Harry,  mon  cher, 
I  should  like  above  all  things  to  go  with  you  there; 
But  really  and  truly — I've  nothing  to  wear." 

"Nothing  to  wear!  go  just  as  you  arc; 

Wear  the  dress  you  have  on,  and  you'll  be  by  far, 

I  engage,  the  most  bright  and  particular  star 

On  the  Stuckup  horizon  " — I  stopped — for  her  eye, 
Notwithstanding  this  dehcate  onset  of  flattery. 
Opened  on  me  at  once  a  most  terrible  battery 

Of  scorn  and  amazement.    She  made  no  reply, 
But  gave  a  slight  turn  to  the  end  of  her  nose 

(That  pure  Grecian  feature),  as  much  as  to  say, 


2158  Old   Favorites 

"How  absurd  that  any  sane  man  should  suppose  •  r 

That  a  lady  would  go  to  a  ball  in  the  clothes, 
No  matter  how  fine,  that  she  wears  every  day!" 

So  I  ventured  again:  "Wear  your  crimson  brocade,"  .^. 
(Second  turn-up  of  nose) — "That's  too  dark  by  a  shade." 
"Your  blue  silk" — "That's  too  heavy."  "Your  pink" — 

"That's  too  light." 
"Wear  tulle  over  satin" — "I  can't  endure  white." 
"Your  rose-colored,  then,  the  best  of  the  batch" — 
"I  haven't  a  thread  of  point  lace  to  match." 
"Your   brown    moire    antique" — "Yes,    and    look    like    a 

Quaker." 
"The  pearl-colored" — "I  would,  but  that  plaguey  dress- 
maker 
Has  had  it  a  week."    "Then  that  exquisite  lilac 
In  which  you  would  melt  the  heart  of  a  Shylock." 
(Here  the  nose  took  again  the  same  elevation) — 
"I  wouldn't  wear  that  for  the  whole  of  creation." 

"Why  not?    It's  my  fancy,  there's  nothing  could  strike 
it 
As  more  comme  il fauV — "Yes,  blit,  dear  me!  that  lean 

Sophronia  Stuckup  has  got  one  just  like  it, 
And  I  won't  appear  dressed  like  a  chit  of  sixteen." 
"Then  that  splendid  purple,  that  sweet  Mazarine, 
That  superb  point  d'aignillc,  that  imperial  green, 
That  zephyr-like  tarlatan,  that  rich  grenadine" — 
"Not  one  of  all  which  is  fit  to  be  seen," 
Said  the  lady,  becoming  excited  and  flushed. 
"Then  wear,"  I  exclaimed,  in  a  tone  which  quite  crushed 

Opposition,  "that  gorgeous  toilette  which  you  sported 
In  Paris  last  spring,  at  the  grand  presentation. 
When   you   quite    turned    the    head  of   the  head  of  the 
nation ; 

And  by  all  the  grand  court  were  so  very  much  courted." 

The  end  of  the  nose  was  portentously  tipped  up. 
And  both  the  bright  eyes  shot  forth  indignation, 
As  she  burst  upon  me  with  the  fierce  exclamation, 
"I  have  worn  it. three  times  at  the  least  calculation. 

And  that  and  the  most  of  my  dresses  are  ripped  up!" 


"  Nothine  to  Wear 


2159 


Here  I  ripped  oul  something,  perhaps  ralher  rash, 

Quite  innocent,  though;  but,  to  use  an  expression 
More  striking  than  classic,  it  "settled  my  hash," 

And  proved  very  soon  the  last  act  of  our  session. 
"Fiddlesticks,  it  is,  sir?    I  wonder  the  cciHng 
Doesn't  fall  down  and  crush  you— oh!  you  men  have  no 

feeling; 
You  selfish,  unnatural,  iUiberal  creatures. 
Who  set  yourselves  up  as  patterns  and  preachers. 
Your  silly  pretense, — why,  what  a  mere  guess  it  is! 
Pray,  what  do  you  knov;  of  a  woman's  necessities! 
I  have  told  you  and  shown  you  I've  nothing  to  wear, 
And  it's  perfectly  plain  you  not  only  don't  care, 
But  you  do  not  beheve  me"  (here  the  nose  went  still 

higher) . 
"I  suppose,  if  you  dared,  you  would  call  me  a  liar. 
Our  engagement  is  ended,  sir — 3'cs,  on  the  spot; 
You're  a  brute  and  a  monster,  and — I  don't  know  what." 
I  mildly  suggested  the  words — Hottentot, 
Pickpocket,  and  cannibal,  Tartar,  and  thief, 
As  gentle  expletives  which  might  give  relief; 
But  this  only  proved  as  spark  to  the  powder, 
And  the  storm  I  had  raised  came  faster  and  louder; 
It  blew  and  it  rained,  thundered,  lightened,  and  hailed 
Interjections,  verbs,  pronouns,  till  language  quite  failed 
To  express  the  abusive,  and  then  its  arrears 
Were  brought  up  all  at  once  by  a  torrent  of  tears. 
And  my  last  faint,  despairing  attempt  at  an  obs- 
Ervation  was  lost  in  a  tempest  of  sobs. 

Well,  I  felt  for  the  lady,  and  felt  for  my  hat,  too, 
Improvised  on  the  crown  of  the  latter  a  tattoo, 
In  lieu  of  expressing  the  feelings  which  lay 
Quite  too  deep  for  words,  as  Wordsworth  would  say; 
Then,  without  going  through  the  form  of  a  bow, 
Found  myself  in  the  entry — I  hardly  knew  how, — • 
On  doorstep  and  sidewalk,  past  lamp-post  and  square, 
At  home  and  up  stairs,  in  my  own  easy-chair; 

Poked  my  feet  into  slippers,  my  fire  into  blaze, 
And  said  to  myself,  as  I  lit  my  cigar, 


2j6o  Old  Favorites 

Supposing  a  man  had  the  wealth  of  the  Czar 

Of  the  Russias  to  boot,  for  the  rest  of  his  days, 
On  the  whole,  do  you  think  he  would  have  much  to  spare, 
If  he  married  a  woman  with  nothing  to  wear? 

Since    that    night,    taking    pains    that    it    should  not   be 

bruited 
Abroad  in  society,  I've  instituted 
A  course  of  inquiry,  extensive  and  thorough, 
On  this  vital  subject,  and  find,  to  my  horror. 
That  the  fair  Flora's  case  is  by  no  means  surprising, 

But  that  there  exists  the  greatest  distress 
In  our  female  community,  solely  arising 

From  this  unsupplied  destitution  of  dress, 
Whose  unfortunate  victims  are  filling  the  air 
With  the  pitiful  wail  of  "Nothing  to  wear." 
Researches  in  some  of  the  "Upper  Ten"  districts 
Reveal  the  most  painful  a,nd  startling  statistics, 
Of  which  let  me  mention  only  a  few: 
In  one  single  house,  on  Fifth  Avenue, 
Three  young  ladies  were  found,  all  below  twenty-two. 
Who  have  been  three  whole  weeks  without  anything  new 
In  the  way  of  flounced  silks,  and,  thus  left  in  the  lurch, 
Are  unable  to  go  to  ball,  concert,  or  church. 
In  another  large  mansion,  near  the  same  place, 
Was  found  a  deplorable,  heartrending  case 
Of  entire  destitution  of  Brussels  point  lace. 
In  a  neighboring  block  there  was  found,  in  three  calls, 
Total  want,  long  continued,  of  camcl's-hair  shawls; 
And  a  suffering  family,  whose  case  exhibits 
The  most  pressing  need  of  real  ermine  tippets; 
One  deserving  young  lady  almost  unable 
To  survive  for  the  want  of  a  new  Russian  sable; 
Another  confined  to  the  house,  when  it's  windier 
Than  usual,  because  her  shawl  isn't  India. 
Still  another,  whose  tortures  have  been  most  terrific 
Ever  since  the  sad  loss  of  the  steamer  Pacific, 
In  w^hich  were  engulfed,  not  friend  or  relation 
(For  whose  fate  she  perhaps  might  have  found  consolation 
Or  borne  it,  at  least,  with  serene  resignation), 


"Nothing  to   Wear"  2161 

But  the  choicest  assortment  of  French  sleeves  and  collars 

Ever  sent  out  from  Paris,  worth  thousands  of  dollars, 

And  all  as  to  style  most  recherche  and  rare, 

The  want  of  which  leaves  her  with  nothing  to  wear, 

And  renders  her  life  so  drear  and  dyspeptic 

That  she's  quite  a  recluse,  and  almost  a  sceptic; 

For  she  touchingly  says  that  this  sort  of  grief 

Cannot  find  in  Religion  the  slightest  relief. 

And  Philosophy  has  not  a  maxim  to  spare 

For  the  victims  of  such  overwhelming  despair. 

But  the  saddest  by  far  of  all  these  sad  features 

Is  the  cruelty  practised  upon  the  poor  creatures 

By  husbands  and  fathers,  real  Bluebeards  and  Timons, 

Who  resist  the  most  touching  appeals  made  for  diamonds 

By  their  wives  and  their  daughters,  and  leave  them  for 

days 
Unsupplied  with  new  jewelry,  fans,  or  bouquets. 
Even  laugh  at  their  miseries  whenever  they  have  a  chance, 
And  deride  their  demands  as  useless  extravagance; 
One  case  of  a  bride  was  brought  to  my  view, 
Too  sad  for  belief,  but,  alas!  'twas  too  true. 
Whose  husband  refused,  as  savage  as  Charon, 
To  permit  her  to  take  more  than  ten  trunks  to  Sharon. 
The  consequence  was,  that  when  she  got  there. 
At  the  end  of  three  weeks  she  had  nothing  to  wear, 
And  when  she  proposed  to  finish  the  season 

At  Newport,  the  monster  refused  out  and  out, 
For  his  infamous  conduct  alleging  no  reason. 

Except  that  the  waters  were  good  for  his  gout. 
Such  treatment  as  this  was  too  shocking,  of  course, 
And  proceedings  are  now  going  on  for  divorce. 

But  why  harrow  the  feelings  by  lifting  the  curtain 

From  these  scenes  of  woe?    Enough,  it  is  certain. 

Has  here  been  disclosed  to  stir  up  the  pity 

Of  every  benevolent  heart  in  the  city. 

And  spur  up  Humanity  into  a  canter 

To  rush  and  relieve  these  sad  cases  instanter. 

Won't  somebody,  moved  by  this  touching  description. 

Come  forward  to-morrow  and  head  a  subscription? 


2 1 62  Old  Favorites 

Won't  some  kind  philanthropist,  seeing  that  aid  is 
So  needed  at  once  by  these  indigent  ladies, 
Take  charge  of  the  matter?    Or  won't  Peter  Cooper 
The  corner-stone  lay  of  some  spendid  super- 
Structure,  like  that  which  to-day  links  his  name 
In  the  Union  unending  of  honor  and  fame; 
And  found  a  new  charity  just  for  the  care 
Of  these  unhappy  women  with  nothing  to  wear. 
Which,  in  view  of  the  cash  which  would  daily  be  claimed, . 
The  Laying-out  Hospital  well  might  be  named?  y\ 

Won't  Stewart,  or  some  of  our  dry-goods  importers, 
Take  a  contract  for  clothing  our  wives  and  our  daughters? 
Or,  to  furnish  the  cash  to  supply  these  distresses. 
And  life's  pathway  strew  with  shawls,  collars,  and  dress"es. 
Ere  the  want  of  them  makes  it  much  rougher  and  thornier, 
Won't  someone  discover  a  new  California? 

Oh  ladies,  dear  ladies,  the  next  sunny  day 
Please  trundle  your  hoops  just  out  of  Broadway, 
From  its  whirl  and  its  bustle,  its  fashion  and  pride, 
And  the  temples  of  Trade  which  tower  on  each  side, 
To  the  alleys  and  lanes,  where  Misfortune  and  Guilt 
Their  children  have  gathered,  their  city  have  built; 
Where  Hunger  and  Vice,  like  twin  beasts  of  prey. 

Have  hunted  their  victims  to  gloom  and  despair; 
Raise  the  rich,  dainty  dress,  and  the  fine  broidered  skirt, 
Pick  your  delicate  way  through  the  dampness  and  dirt, 

Grope  through  the  dark  dens,  climb  the  rickety  stair 
To  the  garret,  where  wretches,  the  3'oung  and  the  old. 
Half-starved,  and  half-naked,  lie  crouched  from  the  cold. 

See  those  skeleton  limbs,  those  frost-bitten  feet. 
All  bleeding  and  bruised  by  the  stones  of  the  street; 
Hear  the  sharp  cry  of  childhood,  the  deep  groans  that  swell 

From  the  poor  dying  creature  who  writhes  on  the  floor, 
Hear  the  curses  that  sound  like  the  echoes  of  Hell,  , 

As  you  sicken  and  shudder  and  fly  from  the  door; 
Then  home  to  your  wardrobes,  and  say,  if  you  dare, — 
Spoiled  children  of  Fashion, — you've  nothing  to  wear! 

And  oh,  if  perchance  there  should  be  a  sphere 
Where  all  is  made  right  which  so  puzzles  us  here, 


Darius  Green  and  His  Flying-Machine     2163 

Where  the  glare  and  the  glitter  and  tinsel  of  Time 
Fade  and  die  in  the  light  of  that  region  sublime, 
Where  the  soul,  disenchanted  of  flesh  and  of  sense. 
Unscreened  by  its  trappings  and  shows  and  pretence, 
Must  be  clothed  for  the  life  and  the  service  above. 
With  purity,  truth,  faith,  meekness,  and  love; 
O  daughters  of  Earth!  foolish  virgins,  beware! 
Lest  in  that  upper  realm  you  have  nothing  to  wear! 
William  Allen  Bittler  [1825-1902] 


DARIUS   GREEN  AND   HIS   FLYING-MACHINE 

If  ever  there  hved  a  Yankee  lad. 

Wise  or  otherwise,  good  or  bad, 

Who,  seeing  the  birds  fly,  didn't  jump 

With  flapping  arms  from  stake  or  stump. 

Or,  spreading  the  tail  of  his  coat  for  a  sail, 

Take  a  soaring  leap  from  post  or  rail; 

And  wonder  why  he  couldn't  fly. 

And  flap  and  flutter  and  wish  and  try, — 

If  ever  you  knew  a  country  dunce 

Who  didn't  try  that  as  often  as  once, 

AU  I  can  say  is,  that's  a  sign 

He  never  would  do  for  a  hero  of  mine. 

An  aspiring  genius  was  D.  Green: 

The  son  of  a  farmer, — age  fourteen; 

His  body  was  long  and  lank  and  lean, — 

Just  right  for  flying,  as  will  be  seen; 

He  had  two  eyes  as  bright  as  a  bean. 

And  a  freckled  nose  that  grew  between,  • 

A  little  awry; — for  I  must  mention 

That  he  had  riveted  his  attention 

Upon  his  wonderful  invention, 

Twisting  his  tongue  as  he  twisted  the  strings. 

And  working  his  face  as  he  worked  the  wings, 

And  with  every  turn  of  gimlet  and  screw 

Turning  and  screwing  his  mouth  round  too, 

Till  his  nose  seemed  bent  to  catch  the  scent, 


2164  Old  Favorites 

Around  some  corner,  of  new-baked  pies, 
And  his  wrinkled  cheeks  and  his  squinting  eyes 
Grew  puckered  into  a  queer  grimace, 
That  made  him  look  very  droll  in  the  face, 
And  also  very  wise. 

And  wise  he  must  have  been,  to  do  more 
Than  ever  a  genius  did  before, 
Excepting  Daedalus  of  yore 
And  his  son  Icarus,  who  wore 
Upon  their  backs  those  wings  of  wax 
He  had  read  of  in  the  old  almanacs. 
Darius  was  clearly  of  the  opinion. 
That  the  air  was  also  man's  dominion, 
And  that,  with  paddle  or  fin  or  pinion, 
We  soon  or  late  should  navigate 
The  azure  as  now  we  sail  the  sea. 
The  thing  looks  simple  enough  to  me; 

And,  if  you  doubt  it. 
Hear  how  Darius  reasoned  about  it:  '"^ 

"The  birds  can  fly,  an'  why  can't  I? 

Must  we  give  in,"  says  he  with  a  grin, 

"  'T  the  bluebird  an'  phoebe  are  smarter'n  we  be? 

Jest  fold  our  hands,  an'  see  the  swaller 

An'  blackbird  an'  catbird  beat  us  holler? 

Does  the  leetle  chatterin',  sassy  wren. 

No  bigger 'n  my  thumb,  know  more  than  men? 

Jest  show  me  that!  er  prove  't  the  bat 

Hez  got  more  brains  than's  in  my  hat. 

An'  I'll  back  down,  an'  not  till  then!" 

He  argued  further:  "Ner  I  can't  see 
What's  th'  use  o'  wings  to  a  bumble-bee, 
Per  to  git  a  livin'  with,  more'n  to  me; — 
Ain't  m}'  business  importanter'n  his'n  is? 
That  Icarus  was  a  silly  cuss, — 
Him  an'  his  daddy  Daedalus; 
They  might  'a'  knowed  wings  made  o'  wax 
Wouldn't  Stan'  sun-heat  an'  hard  whacks: 
I'll  make  mine  o'  hither,  er  suthin'  er  other." 


Darius  Green  and  His  Flying-Machine     2165 

And  he  said  to  himself,  as  he  tinkered  and  planned: 

"But  I  ain't  goin'  to  show  my  hand 

To  nummies  that  never  can  understand  :  /. 

The  fust  idee  that's  big  an'  grand.  "" 

They'd  'a'  laft  an'  made  fun 

O'  Creation  itself  afore  'twas  done!" 

So  he  kept  his  secret  from  all  the  rest, 

Safely  buttoned  within  his  vest; 

And  in  the  loft  above  the  shed 

Himself  he  locks,  with  thimble  and  thread 

And  wax  and  hammer  and  buckles  and  screws, 

And  all  such  things  as  geniuses  use; — 

Two  bats  for  patterns,  curious  fellows! 

A  charcoal-pot  and  a  pair  of  bellows; 

An  old  hoop-skirt  or  two,  as  well  as 

Some  wire,  and  several  old  umbrellas; 

A  carriage-cover,  for  tail  and  wings; 

A  piece  of  harness;  and  straps  and  strings; 

And  a  big  strong  box,  in  which  he  locks 

These  and  a  hundred  other  things. 

His  grinning  brothers,  Reuben  and  Burke 

And  Nathan  and  Jotham  and  Solomon,  lurk 

Around  the  corner  to  see  him  work, — 

Sitting  cross-legged,  hke  a  Turk, 

Drawing  the  waxed-end  through  with  a  jerk. 

And  boring  the  holes  with  a  comical  quirk 

Of  his  wise  old  head,  and  a  knowing  smirk. 

But  vainly  they  mounted  each  other's  backs, 

And  poked  through  knot-holes  and  pried  through  cracks; 

With  wood  from  the  pile  and  straw  from  the  stacks 

He  plugged  the  knot-holes  and  calked  the  cracks; 

And  a  bucket  of  water,  which  one  w^ould  think 

He  had  brought  up  into  the  loft  to  drink 

When  he  chanced  to  be  dry, 

Stood  always  nigh,  for  Darius  was  sly! 

And,  whenever  at  work  he  happened  to  spy 

At  chink  or  crevice  a  blinking  eye, 

He  let  a  dipper  of  water  fly: 


2 1 66  Old  Favorites  •({ 

"Take  that!  an',  ef  ever  ye  git  a  peep, 

Guess  ye'U  ketch  a  weasel  asleep!" 

And  he  sings  as  he  locks  his  big  strong  box: 

"The  weasel's  head  is  small  an'  trim,  T 

An'  he  is  leetle  an'  long  an'  slim,  !  V 

An'  quick  of  motion  an'  nimble  of  limb,  ' ' 

An',  ef  yeou'll  be  advised  by  me, 

Keep  wide  awake  when  ye're  ketchin'  him!"  .-i 

.:A 

So  day  after  day  jgmrH 

He  stitched  and  tinkered  and  hammered  away,  ,  _^ 

Till  at  last  'twas  done, —  /, 

The  greatest  invention  under  the  sun! 
"An'  now,"  says  Darius,  "hooray  fer  some  fun!" 

'Twas  the  Fourth  of  July,  and  the  weather  was  dry, 

And  not  a  cloud  was  on  all  the  sky, 

Save  a  few  light  fleeces,  which  here  and  there, 

Half  mist,  half  air, 
Like  foam  on  the  ocean  went  floating  by, — 
Just  as  lovely  a  morning  as  ever  was  seen 
For  a  nice  little  trip  in  a  flying-machine. 

Thought  cunning  Darius,  "Now  I  shan't  go 
Along  'ith  the  feUers  to  see  the  show: 
I'll  say  I've  got  sich  a  terrible  cough! 
An'  then,  when  the  folks  'ave  all  gone  off, 
I'll  hev  full  swing  fer  to  try  the  thing. 
An'  practyse  a  little  on  the  wing." 

"Ain't  goin'  to  see  the  celebration?" 
Says  brother  Nate.    "No;  botheration! 
I've  got  sich  a  cold — a  toothache — I — 
My  gracious! — feel's  though  I  should  fly!" 
Said  Joiham,  "'Sho!  guess  ye  better  go." 

But  Darius  said,  "No! 
Shouldn't  wonder  'f  yeou  might  see  me,  though, 
'Long  'bout  noon,  ef  I  git  red 
O'  this  jumpin',  thumpin'  pain  'n  my  head." 
For  all  the  while  to  himself  he  said, — 

"I  tell  ye  what! 


Darius  Green  and  His  Flying-Machine    2167 

I'll  fly  a  few  times  around  the  lot, 

To  see  how  't  seems,  then  soon's  I've  got 

The  hang  o'  the  thing,  ez  likely's  not, 

I'll  astonish  the  nation,  an'  all  creation, 

By  flyin'  over  the  celebration! 

Over  their  heads  I'll  sail  like  an  eagle; 

I'll  balance  myself  on  my  wings  like  a  sea-gull; 

I'll  dance  on  the  chimbleys;  I'U  stan'  on  the  steeple; 

I'll  flop  up  to  winders  an'  scare  the  people! 

I'll  hght  on  the  libbe'ty-pole,  an'  crow; 

An  I'U  say  to  the  gawpin'  fools  below, 

'What  world's  this  'ere  that  I've  come  near?' 

Fer  I'll  make  'em  b'lieve  I'm  a  chap  f'm  the  moon; 

An'  I'U  try  a  race  'ith  their  ol'  baUoon!" 

He  crept  from  his  bed; 
And,  seeing  the  others  were  gone,  he  said, 
"I'm  a-gittin'  over  the  cold  'n  my  head." 

And  away  he  sped. 
To  open  the  wonderful  box  in  -the  shed. 

His  brothers  had  walked  but  a  little  way, 

When  Jotham  to  Nathan  chanced  to  say, 

"What  on  airth  is  he  up  to,  hey?" 

"Don'o',— the'  's  suthin'  er  other  to  pay, 

Er  he  wouldn't  'a'  stayed  to  hum  to-day." 

Says  Burke,  "His  toothache's  all  'n  his  eye! 

He  never'd  miss  a  Fo'th-o'-July, 

Ef  he  hedn't  got  some  machine  to  try." 

Then  Sol,  the  little  one,  spoke:  "By  darn! 

Le's  hurry  back,  an'  hide  'n  the  barn. 

An'  pay  him  fer  tellin'  us  that  yarn!" 

"Agreed!"    Through  the  orchard  they  creep  back, 

Along  by  the  fences,  behind  the  stack. 

And  one  by  one,  through  a  hole  in  the  wall, 

In  under  the  dusty  barn  they  crawl, 

Dressed  in  their  Sunday  garments  all; 

And  a  very  astonishing  sight  was  that. 

When  each  in  his  cobwebbed  coat  and  hat 

Came  up  through  the  floor  like  an  ancient  rat. 


2 1 68  Old  Favorites  .^jheCJ 

And  there  they  hid;  and  Reuben  sHd 
The  fastenings  back,  and  the  door  undid. 

"Keep  dark!"  said  he, 
"While  I  squint  an'  see  what  the'  is  to  see." 

As  knights  of  old  put  on  their  mail, — 
From  head  to  foot  an  iron  suit, 
Iron  jacket  and  iron  boot, 
Iron  breeches,  and  on  the  head 
No  hat,  but  an  iron  pot  instead, 
And  under  the  chin  the  bail, — 
(I  believe  they  called  the  thing  a  helm,)— 
And,  thus  accoutred,  they  took  the  field, 
Sallying  forth  to  overwhelm 
The  dragons  and  pagans  that  plagued  the  realm; 
So  this  modern  knight  prepared  for  flight, 
Put  on  his  wings  and  strapped  them  tight, — 
Jointed  and  jaunty,  strong  and  light, — 
Buckled  them  fast  to  shoulder  and  hip,— 
Ten  feet  they  measured  from  tip  to  tip! 
And  a  helm  had  he,  but  that  he  wore, 
Not  on  his  head,  like  those  of  yore. 
But  more  like  the  helm  of  a  ship. 

"Hush!"  Reuben  said,  "he's  up  in  the  shed! 
He's  opened  the  winder, — I  see  his  head ! 
He  stretches  it  out,  an'  pokes  it  about, 
Lookin'  to  see  'f  the  coast  is  clear, 

An'  nobody  near; — 
Guess  he  don'o'  who's  hid  in  here! 
He's  riggin'  a  spring-board  over  the  sill ! 
Stop  laffin',  Solomon!    Burke,  keep  still! 
He's  a  chmbin'  out  now — Of  all  the  things! 
What's  he  got  on?    I  van,  it's  wings! 
An'  that  t'other  thing?    I  vum,  it's  a  tail! 
An'  there  he  sets  like  a  hawk  on  a  rail ! 
Steppin'  careful,  he  travels  the  length 
Of  his  spring-board,  and  teeters  to  try  its  strength. 
Now  he  stretches  his  wings,  like  a  monstrous  bat; 
Peeks  over  his  shoulder,  this  way  an'  that. 


Darius  Green  and  His  Flying-Machine     2169 

Fer  to  see  'f  the'  's  any  one  passin'  by; 

But  the'  's  on'y  a  ca'f  an'  a  goslin'  nigh. 

They  turn  up  at  him  a  wonderin'  eye, 

To  see — The  dragon!  he's  goin'  to  fly! 

Away  he  goes!    Jimminy!  what  a  jump! 

Flop — flop — an'  plump  to  the  ground  with  a  thump! 

Flutt'rin'  an'  flound'^rin',  all  'n  a  lump!" 

As  a  demon  is  hurled  by  an  angel's  spear, 
Heels  over  head,  to  his  proper  sphere, — 
Heels  over  head,  and  head  over  heels. 
Dizzily  down  the  abyss  he  wheels, — 
So  fell  Darius.    Upon  his  crown. 
In  the  midst  of  the  barn-yard,  he  came  dowoi, 
In  a  wonderful  whirl  of  tangled  strings. 
Broken  braces  and  broken  springs. 
Broken  tail  and  broken  wings, 
Shooting-stars,  and  various  things, — 
Barn-yard  litter  of  straw  and  chaff, 
And  much  that  wasn't  so  sweet  by  half. 
Away  with  a  bellow  fled  the  calf. 
And  what  was  that?    Did  the  gosHng  laugh? 
'Tis  a  merry  roar  from  the  old  barn-door. 
And  he  hears  the  voice  of  Jotham  crying; 
"Say,  D'rius!  how  de  yeou  hke  flyin'?" 

Slowly,  ruefully,  where  he  lay, 

Darius  just  turned  and  looked  that  way, 

As  he  stanched  his  sorrowful  nose  with  his  cuff, 

"Wal,  I  hke  flyin'  well  enough," 

He  said;  "but  the'  ain't  sich  a  thunderin'  sight 

O'  fun  in  't  when  ye  come  to  light." 

I  just  have  room  for  the  ]\Ioral  here: 
And  this  is  the  moral, — Stick  to  your  sphere; 
Or,  if  you  insist,  as  you  have  the  right, 
On  spreading  your  wings  for  a  loftier  flight, 
The  moral  is, — Take  care  how  you  light. 

John  Townsend  Trowbridge  [1827-1016] 


2170  Old   Favorites     ;  naaiO 


THE   SOCIETY  UPON  THE   STANISLAUS 

I  RESIDE  at  Table  Mountain,  and  my  name  is  Truthful  James; 
I  am  not  up  to  small  deceit,  or  any  sinful  games; 
And  I'U  tell  in  simple  language  what  I  know  about  the  row 
That  broke  up  our  Society  upon  the  Stanislow. 

But  first  I  would  remark,  that  it  is  not  a  proper  plan 
For  any  scientific  gent  to  whale  his  fellow-man, 
And,  if  a  member  don't  agree  with  his  peculiar  whim. 
To  lay  for  that  same  member  for  to  "put  a  head  "  on  him. 

Now  nothing  could  be  finer  or  more  beautiful  to  see 
Than  the  first  six  months'  proceedings  of  that  same  Society, 
Till  Brown  of  Calaveras  brought  a  lot  of  fossil  bones 
That  he  found  within  a  tunnel  near  the  tenement  of  Jones. 

Then  Brown  he  read  a  paper,  and  he  reconstructed  there, 
From  those  same  bones,  an  animal  that  was  extremely  rare; 
And  Jones  then  asked  the  Chair  for  a  suspension  of  the  rules. 
Till  he  could  prove  that  those  same  bones  was  one  of  his  lost 
mules. 

Then  Brown  he  smiled  a  bitter  smile,  and  said  he  was  at 

fault,— 
It  seemed  he  had  been  trespassing  on  Jones's  family  vault: 
He  was  a  most  sarcastic  man,  this  quiet  IVIr.  Brown, 
And  on  several  occasions  he  had  cleaned  out  the  town.  , 

Now  I  hold  it  is  not  decent  for  a  scientific  gent 
To  say  another  is  an  ass, — at  least,  to  all  intent; 
Nor  should  the  individual  who  happens  to  be  meant 
Reply  by  heaving  rocks  at  him,  to  any  great  extent. 

Then  Abner  Dean  of  Angel's  raised  a  point  of  order — when 
A  chunk  of  old  red  sandstone  took  him  in  the  abdomen, 
And  he  smiled  a  kind  of  sickly  smile,  and  curled  up  on  the 

floor. 
And  the  subsequent  proceedings  interested  him  no  more. 


Dow's  Flat 


2171 


For,  in  less  time  than  I  write  it,  every  member  did  engage 

In  a  warfare  with  the  remnants  of  a  paleozoic  age; 

And  the  way  they  heaved  those  fossils  in  their  anger  was  a 

sin, 
Till  the  skull  of  an  old  mammoth  caved  the  head  of  Thomp- 


And  this  is  all  I  have  to  say  of  these  improper  games, 

For  I  live  at  Table  IVIountain,  and  my  name  is  Truthful 

James; 
And  I've  told  in  simple  language  what  I  know  about  the  row 
That  broke  up  our  Society  upon  the  Stanislow. 

Bret  Harle  [1839-1002] 


DOW'S  FLAT 

1856 

Dow's  Flat.     That's  its  name: 

And  I  reckon  that  you 
Are  a  stranger?     The  same? 
Well,  I  thought  it  was  true,-^ 
For  thar  isn't  a  man  on  the  river  as  can't  spot  the  place 
at  first  view. 

It  was  called  after  Dow, — 

Which  the  same  was  an  ass; 
And  as  to  the  how 

Thet  the  thing  kem  to  pass, — 
Jest  tie  up  your  boss  to  that  buckeye,  and  sit  ye  down  here 
in  the  grass. 

You  see  this  'yer  Dow 

Hed  the  worst  kind  of  luck; 
He  slipped  up  somehow 

On  each  thing  thet  he  struck. 
Why,  cf  he'd  a-straddled  thet  fence-rail,  the  derned  thing 
'ed  get  up  and  buck. 


ll'JI 


Old   Favorites 


He  mined  on  the  bar  ; /l 

Till  he  couldn't  pay  rates;  n! 

He  was  smashed  by  a  car 

When  he  tunnelled  with  Bates; 
And  right  on  the  top  of  his  trouble  kem  his  wife  and  five 
kids  from  the  States. 

It  was  rough, — mighty  rough; 
But  the  boys  they  stood  by, 
And  they  brought  him  the  stuff 
For  a  house,  on  the  sly; 
And  the  old  woman, — well,  she  did  washing,  and  took  on 
when  no  one  was  nigh. 

But  this  'yer  luck  of  Dow's 

Was  so  powerful  mean 
That  the  spring  near  his  house 
Dried  right  up  on  the  green; 
And  he  sunk  forty  feet  down  for  water,  but  nary  a  drop  to. 
be  seen. 

Then  the  bar  petered  out. 

And  the  boys  wouldn't  stay; 
And  the  chills  got  about," 
And  his  wife  fell  away; 
But  Dow  in  his  well  kept  a  peggin'  in  his  usual  ridikilous 
way. 

One  day, — it  was  June, — 
And  a  year  ago,  jest, — 
This  Dow  kem  at  noon 
To  his  work  like  the  rest, 
With  a  shovel  and  pick  on  his  shoulder,  and  a  derringer  hid 
in  his  breast. 

He  goes  to  the  well. 

And  he  stands  on  the  brink, 
And  stops  for  a  spell 
Jest  to  listen  and  think: 
For  the  sun  in  his  eyes  (jest  like  this,  sir!),  you  see,  kinder 
made  the  cuss  blink. 


Dow's  Flat 


2173 


His  two  ragged  gals 

In  the  gulch  were  at  play, 
And  a  govvnd  that  was  Sal's 
Kinder  flapped  on  a  bay: 
Not  much  for  a  man  to  be  leavin',  but  his  all, — as  I've  heer'd 
the  folks  say. 

And — That's  a  peart  hoss 

Thet  you've  got — ain't  it  now? 
What  might  be  her  cost? 

Eh?     Oh!— Well,  then,  Dow- 
Let's  see, — well,  that  forty-foot  grave  wasn't  his,  sir,  that 
day,  anyhow. 

For  a  blow  of  his  pick 

Sorter  caved  in  the  side, 
And  he  looked  and  turned  sick. 
Then  he  trembled  and  cried. 
For  you  see  the  dern  cuss  had  struck — "Water?" — beg  your 
parding,  young  man, — there  you  lied! 

It  was  gold, — in  the  quartz. 

And  it  ran  all  alike; 
And  I  reckon  five  oughts 

Was  the  worth  of  that  strike; 
And  that  house  with  the  coopilow's  his'n, — which  the  same 
isn't  bad  for  a  Pike. 

Thet's  why  it's  Dow's  Flat; 

And  the  thing  of  it  is 
That  he  kinder  got  that 

Through  sheer  contrairiness: 
For  'twas  water  the  derned  cuss  was  seekin',  and  his  luck 
made  him  certain  to  miss. 

Thet's  so!     Thar's  your  way. 

To  the  left  of  yon  tree; 
But — a — look  h'yur,  say? 
Won't  you  come  up  to  tea? 
No?     Well,  then  the  next  time  you're  passin';  and  ask  after 
Dow, —  and  thet's  me. 

Bret  Ilarte  [1830-1902] 


2  174  Old  Favorites 

PLAIN  LANGUAGE   FROM  TRUTHFUL  JAMES 

TABLE   MOUNTAIN,  1870 

Which  I  wish  to  remark, 

And  my  language  is  plain. 
That  for  ways  that  are  dark 

And  for  tricks  that  are  vain, 
The  heathen  Chinee  is  peculiar: 

Which  the  same  I  would  rise  to  explain. 

Ah  Sin  was  his  name; 

And  I  shall  not  deny, 
In  regard  to  the  same. 

What  that  name  might  imply; 
But  his  smile  it  was  pensive  and  childhke. 

As  I  frequent  remarked  to  Bill  Nye. 

It  was  August  the  third, 

And  quite  soft  was  the  skies; 
Which  it  might  be  inferred 

That  Ah  Sin  was  likewise; 
Yet  he  played  it  that  day  upon  WilHam 

And  me  in  a  way  I  despise. 

Which  we  had  a  small  game, 

And  Ah  Sin  took  a  hand: 
It  was  Euchre.     The  same 

He  did  not  understand; 
But  he  smiled,  as  he  sat  by  the  table, 

With  the  smile  that  was  childlike  and  bland. 

Yet  the  cards  they  were  stocked 
''"       In  a  way  that  I  grieve, 
And  my  feelings  were  shocked 

At  the  state  of  Nye's  sleeve, 
Which  was  stuffed  full  of  aces  and  bowers, 

And  the  same  with  intent  to  deceive. 

But  the  hands  that  were  played 

By  that  heathen  Chinee, 

And  the  points  that  he  made, 

1     !■    Were  quite  frightful  to  see, — • 


The  Retort  2175 

Till  at  last  he  put  down  a  right  bower, 
Which  the  same  Nye  had  dealt  unto  me. 

Then  I  looked  up  at  Nye, 

And  he  gazed  upon  me; 
And  he  rose  with  a  sigh,  l  j- 

And  said,  "Can  this  be? 
We  are  ruined  by  Chinese  cheap  labor," — 

And  he  went  for  that  heathen  Chinee. 

In  the  scene  that  ensued 

I  did  not  take  a  hand. 
But  the  floor  it  was  strewed, 

Like  the  leaves  on  the  strand. 
With  the  cards  that  Ah  Sin  had  been  hiding. 

In  the  game  "he  did  not  understand." 

In  his  sleeves,  which  were  long, 

He  had  twenty- four  packs, — 
Which  was  coming  it  strong, 

Yet  I  state  but  the  facts; 
And  we  found  on  his  nails,  which  were  taper. 

What  is  frequent  in  tapers, — -that's  wax. 

Which  is  why  I  remark. 

And  my  language  is  plain. 
That  for  ways  that  are  dark, 

And  for  tricks  that  are  vain. 
The  heathen  Chinee  is  peculiar, — 

Which  the  same  I  am  free  to  maintain. 

Brcl  Harte  [1830-1002] 

THE  RETORT 

Old  Birch,  who  taught  the  village  school, 
Wedded  a  maid  of  homespun  habit; 

He  was  as  stubborn  as  a  mule, 
And  she  as  playful  as  a  rabbit. 

Poor  Kate  had  scarce  become  a  wife 
Before  her  husband  sought  to  make  her 

The  pink  of  country-polished  life. 
And  prim  and  formal  as  a  Quaker. 


2176  Old   Favorites 

One  day  the  tutor  went  abroad, 
And  simple  Katie  sadly  missed  him; 

When  he  returned,  behind  her  lord 

She  shyly  stole,  and  fondly  kissed  him. 

The  husband's  anger  rose,  and  red 
And  white  his  face  alternate  grew: 

"Less  freedom,  ma'am!"    Kate  sighed  and  said, 
"O,  dear!  I  didn't  know  'twas  you!" 

George  Pope  Morris  [1802-1864] 


THE  FLITCH  OF  DUNMOW 

Come,  Micky  and  Molly  and  dainty  Dolly, 

Come,  Betty  and  bhthesome  Bill; 
Ye  gossips  and  neighbors,  away  with  your  labors! 

Come  to  the  top  of  the  hill. 
For  there  are  Jenny  and  jovial  Joe; 
Jolly  and  jolly,  jolly  they  go, 

Jogging  over  the  hiU. 

By  apple  and  berry,  'tis  twelve  months  merry 

Since  Jenny  and  Joe  were  wed! 
And  never  a  bother  or  quarrelsome  pother 

To  trouble  the  board  or  bed. 
So  Joe  and  Jenny  are  off  to  Dunmow: 
Happy  and  happy,  happy  they  go. 

Young  and  rosy  and  red. 

Oh,  Jenny's  as  pretty  as  doves  in  a  ditty; 

And  Jenny,  her  eyes  are  black; 
And  Joey's  a  fellow  as  merry  and  mellow 

As  ever  shouldered  a  sack. 
So  quick,  good  people,  and  come  to  the  show. 
Merry  and  merry,  merry  they  go, 

Bumping  on  Dobbin's  back. 

They've  pranked  up  old  Dobbin  with  ribbons  and  bobbin, 

And  tethered  his  tail  in  a  string! 
The  fat  flitch  of  bacon  is  not  to  be  taken 

By  many  that  wear  the  ring! 


The   Yarn   of  the  "Nancy    Bell"   2177 

Good  luck,  good  luck,  to  Jenny  and  Joe! 
Jolly  and  jolly,  jolly  they  go. 

Hark!  how  merry  they  sing:  ■- 

"O,  merry,  merry,  merry  are  we, 
Happy  as  birds  that  sing  in  a  tree! 
All  of  the  neighbors  are  merry  to-day, 
Merry  are  we,  and  merry  are  they. 
O  merry  are  we!  for  love,  you  see. 
Fetters  a  heart  and  sets  it  free. 

"O  happy,  happy,  happy  is  life 
For  Joe  (that's  me)  and  Jenny  my  wife! 
All  of  the  neighbors  are  happy,  and  say — 
'Never  were  folk  so  happy  as  they!' 

0  happy  are  we!  for  love,  you  sec, 
Fetters  a  heart  and  sets  it  free. 

"O  jolly,  jolly,  jolly  we  go, 

1  and  my  Jenny,  and  she  and  her  Joe. 
All  of  the  neighbors  are  jolly,  and  sing — 
'She  is  a  queen,  and  he  is  a  king!' 

O  jolly  are  we!  for  love,  you  see, 
Fetters  a  heart  and  sets  it  free." 

James  Carnegie  [1827-1905] 


THE  YARN  OF  THE  "NANCY  BELL" 

'TwAS  on  the  shores  that  round  our  coast 
From  Deal  to  Ramsgate  span, 

That  I  found  alone,  on  a  piece  of  stone, 
An  elderly  naval  man. 

His  hair  was  weedy,  his  beard  was  long, 
And  weedy  and  long  was  he; 

And  I  heard  this  wight  on  the  shore  recite, 
In  a  singular  minor  key: 

"Oh,  I  am  a  cook  and  a  captain  bold, 
And  the  mate  of  the  Nancy  brig. 

And  a  bo'sun  tight,  and  a  midshipmite, 
And  the  crew  of  the  captain's  gig." 


2178  Old   Favorites  i  I 

And  he  shook  his  fists  and  he  tore  his  hair, 

Till  I  really  felt  afraid, 
For  I  couldn't  help  thinking  the  man  had  been  drinking, 

And  so  I  simply  said: 

"Oh,  elderly  man,  it's  little  I  know 

Of  the  duties  of  men  of  the  sea, 
And  I'll  eat  my  hand  if  I  understand 

However  you  can  be 

"At  once  a  cook,  and  a  captain  bold. 

And  the  mate  of  the  Nancy  brig,  ~" 

And  a  bo'sun  tight,  and  a  midshipmite, 

And  the  crew  of  the  captain's  gig." 

Then  he  gave  a  hitch  to  his  trousers,  which 

Is  a  trick  all  seamen  larn. 
And  having  got  rid  of  a  thumping  quid, 

He  spun  this  painful  yarn: 

"'Twas  in  the  good  ship  Nancy  Bell 

That  we  sailed  to  the  Indian  Sea, 
And  there  on  a  reef  we  come  to  grief. 

Which  has  often  occurred  to  me. 

"And  pretty  nigh  all  o'  the  crew  was  drowned 

(There  was  seventy-seven  o'  soul). 
And  only  ten  of  the  Nancy's  men 

Said  'Here!'  to  the  muster-roll. 

"There  was  me,  and  the  cook,  and  the  captain  bold, 

And  the  mate  of  the  Nancy  brig, 
And  the  bo'sun  tight,  and  a  midshipmite. 

And  the  crew  of  the  captain's  gig. 

"For  a  month  we'd  neither  wittles  nor  drink, 

Till  a-hungry  we  did  feel, 
So  we  drawed  a  lot,  and,  accordin',  shot 

The  captain  for  our  meal. 


The  Yarn   of  the  "Nancy   Bell"     2179 

"The  next  lot  fell  to  the  Nancy's  mate, 

And  a  delicate,  dish  he  made; 
Then  our  appetite  with  the  midshipmite 

We  seven  survivors  stayed. 

"And  then  we  murdered  the  bo'sun  tight, 

And  he  much  resembled  pig; 
Then  we  wittled  free,  did  the  cook  and  me, 

On  the  crew  of  the  captain's  gig. 

"Then  only  the  cook  and  me  was  left, 

'And  the  delicate  question,  'Which 
Of  us  two  goes  to  the  kettle?'  arose,  ""^ 

And  we  argued  it  out  as  sich. 

"For  I  loved  that  cook  as  a  brother,  I  did, 

And  the  cook  he  worshipped  me; 
But  we'd  both  be  blowed  if  we'd  either  be  stowed 

In  the  other  chap's  hold,  you  see. 

"'I'll  be  eat  if  you  dines  off  me,'  says  Tom. 

'Yes,  that,'  says  I,  'you'll  be, — 
I'm  boiled  if  I  die,  my  friend,'  quoth  I; 

And  'Exactly  so,'  quoth  he. 

"Says  he:  'Dear  James,  to  murder  me 

Were  a  foolish  thing  to  do,  ; 

For  don't  you  see  that  you  can't  cook  mCyt 
While  I  can — and  will — cook  yon!' 

"So  he  boils  the  water,  and  takes  the  salt 

And  the  pepper  in  portions  true 
(Which  he  never  forgot),  and  some  chopped  shalot. 

And  some  sage  and  parsley  too. 

"'Come  here,'  says  he,  wath  a  proper  pride, 

Which  his  smihng  features  tell, 
*  'Twrll  soothing  be  if  I  let  you  see 

How  extremely  nice  you'll  smeU.' 


2i8o  Old   Favorites 

"And  he  stirred  it  round  and  round  and  round, 
And  he  sniffed  at  the  foaming  froth; 

When  I  ups  with  his  heels,  and  smothers  his  squeals 
In  the  scum  of  the  boiling  broth. 

"And  I  eat  that  cook  in  a  week  or  less, 

And — as  I  eating  be 
The  last  of  his  chops,  why,  I  almost  drops, 

For  a  wessel  in  sight  I  see. 

"And  I  never  iarf,  and  I  never  smile, 

And  I  never  lark  nor  play; 
But  sit  and  croak,  and  a  single  joke 

I  have — which  is  to  say: 

"Oh,  I  am  a  cook  and  a  captain  bold 

And  the  mate  of  the  Nancy  brig, 
iAnd  a  bo'sun  tight,  and  a  midshipmite, 

And  the  crew  of  the  captain's  gig!" 

William  Schwenck  Gilbert  [  1 836-1 91  ij 

CAPTAIN  REECE 

Of  all  the  ships  upon  the  blue. 
No  ship  contained  a  better  crew 
Than  that  of  worthy  Captain  Reece, 
Commanding  of  the  Mantelpiece. 

He  was  adored  by  all  his  men, 
For  worthy  Captain  Reece,  R.  N., 
Did  all  that  lay  within  him  to 
Promote  the  comfort  of  his  crew. 

If  ever  they  were  dull  or  sad, 
Their  captain  danced  to  them  like  mad, 
Or  told,  to  make  the  time  pass  by, 
Droll  legends  of  his  infancy. 

A  feather-bed  had  every  man, 
Warm  slippers  and  hot-water  can, 
Brown  Windsor  from  the  captain's  store, 
A  valet,  too,  to  every  four. 


Captain   Reece  218 1 

Did  they  with  ihirst  in  summer  burn, 
Lo,  seltzogenes  at  every  turn, 
And  on  all  very  sultry  days 
Cream  ices  handed  round  on  trays. 

Then  currant  wine  and  ginger  pops 
Stood  handily  on  all  the  "tops": 
And,  also,  with  amusement  rife, 
A  "Zoetrope,  or  Wheel  of  Life." 

New  volumes  came  across  the  sea 
From  Mister  jMudie's  libraree; 
The  Times  and  Saturday  Review 
Beguiled  the  leisure  of  the  crew. 

Kind-hearted  Captain  Reece,  R.  N.,     ■ 
Was  quite  devoted  to  his  men; 
In  point  of  fact,  good  Captain  Reece 
Beatified  the  Mantelpiece. 

One  summer  eve,  at  half  past  ten. 
He  said  (addressing  all  his  men), 
"Come,  tell  me,  please,  what  I  can  do, 
To  please  and  gratify  my  crew. 

"By  any  reasonable  plan 
I'll  make  you  happy  if  I  can; 
My  own  convenience  count  as  nil; 
It  is  my  duty,  and  I  will." 

Then  up  and  answered  William  Lee 
(The  kindly  captain's  coxswain  he, 
A  nervous,  shy,  low-spoken  man) ; 
lie  cleared  his  throat,  and  thus  began: 

"You  have  a  daughter,  Captain  Reece, 
Ten  female  cousins  and  a  niece, 
A  ma,  if  what  I'm  told  is  true. 
Six  sisters,  and  an  aunt  or  two. 


2 1 82  Old  Favorites 

"Now,  somehow,  sir,  it  seems  to  me, 
More  friendly-like  we  all  shall  be, 
If  you  united  of  'em  to 
Unmarried  members  of  the  crew. 

"If  you'd  ameliorate  our  life, 
Let  each  select  from  them  a  wife; 
And  as  for  nervous  me,  old  pal, 
Give  me  your  own  enchanting  gal!" 

Good  Captain  Reece,  that  worthy  man, 
Debated  on  his  coxswain's  plan: 
"I  quite  agree,"  he  said,  "O  BiU; 
It  is  my  duty,  and  I  will. 

"My  daughter,  that  enchanting  girl, 
Has  just  been  promised  to  an  earl, 
And  all  my  other  familee 
To  peers  of  various  degree. 

"But  what  are  dukes  and  viscounts  to 
The  happiness  of  all  my  crew? 
The  word  I  gave  you  I'll  fulfil; 
It  is  my  duty,  and  I  will. 

"As  you  desire  it  shall  befall, 
I'll  settle  thousands  on  you  all. 
And  I  shall  be,  despite  my  hoard. 
The  only  bachelor  on  board." 

The  boatswain  of  the  Mantelpiece, 
He  blushed  and  spoke  to  Captain  Reece  ° 
"I  beg  your  honor's  leave,"  he  said, 
"If  you  would  wish  to  go  and  wed, 

"I  have  a  widowed  mother  who 
Would  be  the  very  thing  for  you — 
She  long  has  loved  you  from  afar, 
She  washes  for  you.  Captain  R." 


"  'Spacially  Jim  "  2183 

The  captain  saw  the  dame  that  day — 
Addressed  her  in  his  playful  way — 
"And  did  it  want  a  wedding-ring? 
It  was  a  tempting  ickle  sing! 

"Well,  well,  the  chaplain  I  will  seek, 
We'U  all  be  married  this  day  week 
At  yonder  church  upon  the  hill; 
It  is  my  duty,  and  I  will!" 

The  sisters,  cousins,  aunts,  and  niece, 
And  widowed  ma  of  Captain  Reece, 
Attended  there  as  they  were  bid; 
It  was  their  duty,  and  they  did. 

William  Schwenck  Gilbert  [1836-1911] 

"'SPACIALLY  JIM" 

I  wus  mighty  good-lookin'  when  I  wus  young, 

Peert  an'  black-eyed  an'  slim, 
With  fellers  a-courtin'  me  Sunday  nights, 

'Spacially  Jim. 

The  likeUest  one  of  'em  all  wus  he, 

Chpper  an'  han'som'  an'  trim; 
But  I  tossed  up  my  head  an'  made  fun  o'  the  crowd, 

'Spacially  Jim. 

I  said  I  hadn't  no  'pinion  o'  men, 

An'  I  wouldn't  take  stock  in  him! 
But  they  kep'  on  a-comin'  in  spite  o'  my  talk, 

'Spacially  Jim. 

I  got  so  tired  o'  havin'  'em  roun' 

('Spacially  Jim!) 
I  made  up  my  mind  I'd  settle  down 

An'  take  up  with  him. 

So  we  wus  married  one  Sunday  in  church, 

'Twas  crowded  full  to  the  brim; 
'Twas  the  only  way  to  git  rid  of  'em  all, 

'Spacially  Jim. 

Bessie  Morgan  [18    - 


2184  Old  Favorites 


ROBINSON   CRUSOE 

The  night  was  thick  and  hazy, 

When  the  Piccadilly  Daisy 
Carried  down  the  crew  and  captain  in  the  sea; 

And  I  think  the  water  drowned  'em, 

For  they  never,  never  found  'em, 
And  I  know  they  did  n't  come  ashore  with  me. 

Oh!  'twas  very  sad  and  lonely 

When  I  found  myself  the  only 
Population  on  this  cultivated  shore; 

But  I've  made  a  little  tavern 

In  a  rocky  little  cavern, 
And  I  sit  and  watch  for  people  at  the  door. 

I  spent  no  time  in  looking 

For  a  girl  to  do  my  cooking. 
As  I'm  quite  a  clever  hand  at  making  stews; 

But  I  had  that  fellow  Friday 

Just  to  keep  the  tavern  tidy, 
And  to  put  a  Sunday  polish  on  my  shoes. 

I  have  a  little  garden 

That  I'm  cultivating  lard  in. 
As  the  things  I  eat  are  rather  tough  and  dry; 

For  I  live  on  toasted  lizards, 

Prickly  pears,  and  parrot  gizzards, 
And  I'm  really  very  fond  of  beetle-pie. 

The  clothes  I  had  were  furry. 

And  it  made  me  fret  and  worry 
When  I  found  the  moths  were  eating  off  the  hair; 

And  I  had  to  scrape  and  sand  'em. 

And  I  boiled  'em  and  I  tanned  'em, 
Till  I  got  the  fine  morocco  suit  I  wear. 

I  sometimes  seek  diversion 
In  a  family  excursion 


Casey   at  the   Bat  2185 

With  the  few  domestic  animals  you  see; 

And  we  take  along  a  carrot 

As  refreshments  for  the  parrot, 
And  a  little  can  of  jungleberry  tea. 

Then  we  gather  as  we  travel 

Bits  of  moss  and  dirty  gravel, 
And  we  chip  off  little  specimens  of  stone; 

And  we  carry  home  as  prizes 

Funny  bugs  of  handy  sizes, 
Just  to  give  the  day  a  scientific  tone. 

If  the  roads  are  wet  and  muddy, 

We  remain  at  home  and  study, — 
For  the  Goat  is  very  clever  at  a  sum, — 

And  the  Dog,  instead  of  fighting. 

Studies  ornamental  writing, 
While  the  Cat  is  taking  lessons  on  the  drum. 

We  retire  at  eleven. 

And  we  rise  again  at  seven; 
And  I  wish  to  call  attention,  as  I  close. 

To  the  fact  that  all  the  scholars 

Are  correct  about  their  collars. 
And  particular  in  turning  out  their  toes. 

Charles  Edward  Carryl  [1841- 


CASEY   AT  THE  BAT 

The  outlook  wasn't  brilliant  for  the  Mudvillc  nine  that  day; 
The  score  stood  four  to  two,  with  but  one  inning  more  to 

play; 
And  so,  when  Cooney  died  at  first,  and  Burrows  did  the  same, 
A  sickly  silence  fell  upon  the  patrons  of  the  game. 

A  straggling  few  got  up  to  go  in  deep  despair.    The  rest 
Clung  to  the  hope  which  springs  eternal  in  the  human  breast; 
They  thought,  if  only  Casey  could  but  get  a  whack,  at  that. 
They'd  put  up  even  money  now,  with  Casey  at  the  bat. 


2 1 86  Old  Favorites 

But  Flynn  preceded  Casey,  as  did  also  Jimmy  Blake, 
And  the  former  was  a  pudding  and  the  latter  was  a  fake; 
So  upon  that  stricken  multitude  grim  melancholy  sat, 
For  there  seemed  but  little  chance  of  Casey's  getting  to  the 
bat. 

But  Flynn  let  drive  a  single,  to  the  wonderment  of  all, 
And  Blake,  the  much  despised,  tore  the  cover  off  the  ball; 
And  when  the  dust  had  lifted,  and  they  saw  what  had  oc- 
curred, 
There  was  Jimmy  safe  on  second,  and  Flynn  a-hugging  third. 

Then  from  the  gladdened  multitude  vs^ent  up  a  joyous  yell, 
It  bounded  from  the  mountain-top,  and  rattled  in  the  dell; 
It  struck  upon  the  hillside,  and  recoiled  upon  the  flat; 
For  Casey,  mighty  Casey,  was  advancing  to  the  bat. 

There  was  ease  in  Casey's  manner  as  he  stepped  into  his 

place, 
There  was  pride  in  Casey's  bearing,  and  a  smile  on  Casey's 

face; 
And  when,  responding  to  the  cheers,  he  lightly  doffed  his  hat. 
No  stranger  in  the  crowd  could  doubt  'twas  Casey  at  the  bat. 

Ten  thousand  eyes  were  on  him  as  he  rubbed  his  hands  with 

dirt. 
Five  thousand  tongues  applauded  when  he  wiped  them  on 

his  shirt; 
Then  while  the  writhing  pitcher  ground  the  ball  into  his  hip. 
Defiance  gleamed  in  Casey's  eye,  a  sneer  curled  Casey's  lip. 

And  now  the  leather-covered  sphere  came  hurthng  through 
the  air, 

And  Casey  stood  a-watching  it  in  haughty  grandeur  there; 

Close  by  the  sturdy  batsman  the  ball  unheeded  sped. 

"That  ain't  my  style,"  said  Casey.  "Strike  one,"  the  um- 
pire said.  ^'^^'^''' 

From  the  benches,  black  with  people,  there  went  up  a  muffled 

roar, 
Like  the  beating  of  the  storm-waves  on  a  stern  and  distant 

shore; 


At  a  Cowboy  Dance  2187 

"Kill  him!  kill  the  umpire!"  shouted  some  one  on  iho  stand. 
And  it's  likely  they'd  have  killed  him  had  not  Casey  raised 
his  hand. 

With  a  smile  of  Christian  charity  great  Casey's  visage  shone; 
He  stilled  the  rising  tumult;  he  bade  the  game  go  on;- 
He  signalled  to  the  pitcher,  and  once  more  the  spheroid  flew, 
But  Casey  still  ignored  it, and  the  umpire  said," Strike  two." 

"Fraud!"  cried  the  maddened  thousands,  and  the  echo 

answered,  "Fraud!" 
But  a  scornful  look  from  Casey,  and  the  audience  was  awed; 
They  saw  his  face  grow  stern  and  cold,  they  saw  his  muscles 

strain, 
And  they  knew  that  Casey  wouldn't  let  that  ball  go  by  again. 

The  sneer  is  gone  from  Casey's  lips,  his  teeth  are  clenched  in 

hate, 
He  pounds  with  cruel  violence  his  bat  upon  the  plate; 
And  now  the  pitcher  holds  the  ball,  and  now  he  lets  it  go, 
And  now  the  air  is  shattered  by  the  force  of  Casey's  blow. 

Oh!  somewhere  in  this  favored  land  the  sun  is  shining  bright. 
The  band  is  playing  somewhere,  and  somewhere  hearts  are 

light; 
And  somewhere  men  are  laughing,  and  somewhere  children 

shout, 
But  there  is  no  joy  in  Mudville — mighty  Casey  has  struck 

out. 

Ernest  Lawrence  Thayer  [i8     - 

AT  A  COWBOY  DANCE 

Git  yer  little  sage  hens  ready, 

Trot  'em  out  upon  the  floor — 
Line  up  there,  you  cusses!     Steady! 

Lively,  now!     One  couple  more. 
Shorty,  shed  that  old  sombrero; 

Bronco,  douse  that  cigarette; 
Stop  that  cussin',  Casimero, 

'Fore  the  ladies!     Now,  all  set! 


2 1 88  Old   Favorites 

S'lute  yer  ladies,  all  together! 

Ladies  opposite  the  same — 
Hit  the  lumber  with  yer  leathers! 

Balance  all,  an'  swing  yer  dame! 
Bunch  the  heifers  in  the  middle; 

Circle  stags  an'  do-se-do! 
Pay  attention  to  the  fiddle! 

Swing  her  round  an'  off  you  go! 

First  four  forward!     Back  to  places! 

Second  follow — shulSe  back! 
Now  you've  got  it  down  to  cases — 

Swing  'em  till  their  trotters  crack! 
Gents  all  right  a-hcel-and-toein'! 

Swing  'em,  kiss  'em  if  you  kin — 
On  to  next  an'  keep  a-goin' 

Till  you  hit  yer  pards  ag'in! 

-*. 

Gents  to  center;  ladies  round  'em, 

Form  a  basket;  balance  all! 
Whirl  yer  gals  to  where  you  found  'em! 

Promenade  around  the  hall! 
Balance  to  yer  pards  an'  trot  'em 

Round  the  circle  double  quick! 
Grab  an'  kiss  'em  while  you've  got  'em — 

Hold  'em  to  it  if  they  kick! 

Ladies,  left  hand  to  yer  sonnies! 

Alaman!     Grand  right  an'  left! 
Balance  all,  an'  swing  yer  honeys — 

Pick  'em  up  an'  feel  their  heft! 
Promenade  like  skeery  cattle — 

Balance  all  an'  swing  yer  sweets! 
Shake  yer  spurs  an'  make  'em  rattle! 

Keno!    Promenade  to  seats. 

James  Barton  Adams  [1843- 


Behold  the   Deeds  2189 


BEHOLD  THE  DEEDS 

(Bcins    the    Plaint   of  Adolphc    Culpepper    Ferguson,   Salesman    of   Fancy 
Notions,  held  in  durance  of  his  Landlady  for  a  failure  to  connect  on  Saturday 

Night.) 

I  WOULD  that  all  men  my  hard  case  might  know, 

How  grievously  I  suffer  for  no  sin: 
I,  Adolphe  Culpepper  Ferguson,  for  lo! 

I  of  my  landlady  am  locked  in 
For  being  short  on  this  sad  Saturday, 
Nor  having  shekels  of  silver  wherewith  to  pay: 
She  has  turned  and  is  departed  with  my  key; 
Wherefore,  not  even  as  other  boarders  free, 

I  sing,  (as  prisoners  to  their  dungeon-stones 
When  for  ten  days  they  expiate  a  spree) : 

Behold  the  deeds  that  are  done  of  Mrs.  Jones! 

One  night  and  one  day  have  I  wept  my  woe; 

Nor  wot  I,  when  the  morrow  doth  begin. 
If  I  shall  have  to  write  to  Briggs  8{  Co., 

To  pray  them  to  advance  the  requisite  tin 
For  ransom  of  their  salesman,  that  he  may 
Go  forth  as  other  boarders  go  alway — 
As  those  I  hear  now  flocking  from  their  tea, 
Led  by  the  daughter  of  my  landlady 

Piano-ward.    This  day,  for  all  my  moans. 
Dry  bread  and  water  have  been  served  me. 

Behold  the  deeds  that  are  done  of  Mrs.  Jones! 

Miss  Amabel  Jones  is  musical,  and  so 

The  heart  of  the  young  he-boardcr  doth  win, 
Playing  "The  Maiden's  Prayer,"  adagio-^ 

That  fetcheth  him,  as  fetcheth  the  "bunko  skin" 
The  innocent  rustic.    For  my  part,  I  pray 
That  Badarjewska  maid  may  wait  for  aye 
Ere  sits  she  with  a  lover,  as  did  we 
Once  sit  together,  Amabel!    Can  it  be 

That  all  that  arduous  wooing  not  atones 
For  Saturday's  shortness  of  trade  dollars  three? 

Behold  the  deeds  that  are  done  of  Mrs.  Jones! 


2190  Old  Favorites 

Yea!  she  forgets  the  arm  that  was  wont  to  go 

Around  her  waist.    She  wears  a  buckle,  whose  pin 
Galleth  the  crook  of  her  young  man's  elbow. 

/  forget  not,  for  I  that  youth  have  been. 
Smith  was  aforetime  the  Lothario  gay. 
Yet  once,  I  mind  me.  Smith  was  forced  to  stay 
Close  in  his  room.    Not  calm,  as  I,  was  he; 
But  his  noise  brought  no  pleasaunce,  verily. 

Small  ease  he  got  of  playing  on  the  bones- 
Or  hammering  on  the  stove-pipe,  that  I  see. 

Behold  the  deeds  that  are  done  of  Mrs.  Jones! 

Thou,  for  whose  fear  the  figurative  crow 

I  eat,  accursed  be  thou  and  all  thy  kin! 
Thee  will  I  show  up — yea,  up  will  I  show 

Thy  too  thick  buckwheats,  and  thy  tea  too  thin. 
Ay!  here  I  dare  thee,  ready  for  the  fray: 
Thou  dost  not  "keep  a  first-class  house,"  I  say! 
It  dost  not  with  the  advertisements  agree. 
Thou  lodgest  a  Briton  with  a  puggaree. 

And  thou  hast  harbored  Jacobses  and  Cohns, 
Also  a  Mulligan.    Thus  denounce  I  thee! 

Behold  the  deeds  that  are  done  of  Mrs.  Jones! 

ENVOY 

Boarders!  the  worst  I  have  not  told  to  ye: 

She  hath  stolen  my  trousers,  that  I  may  not  flee 

Privily  by  the  window.    Hence  these  groans. 
There  is  no  fleeing  in  a  robe  de  null. 

Behold  the  deeds  that  arc  done  of  Mrs.  Jones! 

Henry  Citylcr  Biinner  [1855 -1896] 

DE  FUST  BANJO 

From  "  Christmas  Night  in  the  Quarters" 

Go  'way,  fiddle!  folks  is  tired  o'  hearin'  you  a-squawkin'. 
Keep  silence  fur  yo'  betters! — don't  you  heah  de  banjo 

talkin? 
About  de  'possum's  tail  she's  gwine  to  lecter — ladies,  listen! 
About  de  ha'r  whut  is  n't  dar,  an'  why  de  ha'r  is  missin'; 


De   Fust  Banjo  2191 

"Dar'sgwine  to  be  a'  oberflow,"  said  Noah,  lookin'  solemn- 
Fur  Noah  tuk  the  "Herald,"  an'  he  read  de  ribber  column— 
An'  so  he  sot  his  hands  to  wuk  a-cl'arin'  timber-patches. 
An'  'lowed  he's  gwine  to  build  a  boat  to  beat  the  steamah 
NatcheZi  uj  -i  ji  s; 

or  Noah  kep'  a-nailin'  an'  a-chippin'  an'  a-sawin'; 

An'  all  de  wicked  neighbors  kep'  a-laughin'  an'  a-pshawin'; 

But  Noah  didn't  min'  'em,  knowin'  whut  wuz  gwine  to 

happen : 
An'  forty  days  an'  forty  nights  de  rain  it  kep'  a-drappin'.' 

Now,  Noah  had  done  cotched  a  lot  ob  ebry  sort  o'  beas'es— 
Ob  all  de  shows  a-trabbelin',  it  beat  'em  all  to  pieces! 
He  had  a  Morgan  colt  an'  sebral  head  o'  Jarsey  cattle — ■ 
An'  druv  'em  'board  de  Ark  as  soon's  he  heered  de  thunder 
rattle. 

Den  sech  anoder  fall  ob  rain! — it  come  so  awful  hebby, 
De  ribber  riz  immejitly,  an'  busted  troo  de  lebbee; 
De  people  all  wuz  drownded  out — 'cep'  Noah  an'  de  critters, 
An'  men  he'd  hired  to  work  de  boat — an'  one  to  mix  de 
bitters. 

De  Ark  she  kep'  a-sailin'  an'  a-sailin'  a»'  a-saihn'; 

De  lion  got  his  dander  up,  an'  like  to  bruk  de  palin'; 

De  sarpints  hissed;  de  painters  yelled;  tel',  whut  wid  all  de 

fussin', 
You   c'u'dn't   hardly  heah   de  mate  a-bossin'    'roun'   an' 

cussin'. 

Now  Ham,  de  only  nigger  whut  wuz  runnin'  on  de  packet. 
Got  lonesome  in  de  barber-shop,  an'  c'u'dn't  stan'  de  racket: 
An'  so,  fur  to  amuse  he-se'f,  he  steamed  some  wood  an' 

bent  it, 
An'  soon  he  had  a  banjo  made — de  fust  dat  wuz  invented. 

He  wet  de  ledder,  stretched  it  on:  made  bridge  an'  screws 

an'  aprin: 
An'  fitted  in  a  proper  neck — 'twuz  berry  long  an'  tap'rin'; 
He  tuk  some  tin,  an'  twisted  him  a  thimble  fur  to  ring  it: 
An'  den  de  mighty  question  riz :  how  wuz  he  gwine  to  string 

it? 


2192  "Old   Favorites 

De  'possum  had  as  fine  a  tail  as  dis  dat  I's  a-singin';      '  '^ 
De  ha'r's  so  long  an'  thick  an'  strong, — des  fit  fur  banjo- 

stringin'; 
Dat  nigger  shaved  'em  off  as  short  as  washday-dinner  graces: 
An'  sorted  ob  'em  by  de  size,  f'om  little  E's  to  basses. 

He  strung  her,  tuned  her,  struck  a  jig, — 'twuz  "Nebber 
min'  de  wedder," —  ,, 

She  soun'  like  forty-lebben  bands  a-playin'  all  togedder: 

Some  went  to  pattin';  some  to  dancin':  Noah  called  de 
figgers; 

An'  Ham  he  sot  an'  knocked  de  tune,  de  happiest  ob  n'ggers! 

Now,  sence  dat  time — it's  mighty  strange — dere's  not  de 
slightes'  showin'  ''it>  "xiA 

Ob  any  ha'r  at  all  upon  de  'possum's  tail  a-growiri'; 

An'  curi's,  too,  dat  nigger's  ways:  his  people  nebber  los' 
'em — 

Fur  whar  you  finds  de  nigger —  dar's  de  banjo  an'  de  'pos- 
sum! 

Irwin  Russell  [1853-1879] 


'■>  j;oY 


PART  V 

POEMS   OF    PATRIOTISM,   HISTORY 
AND  LEGEND 


"HOW  SLEEP  THE  BRAVE" 

How  sleep  the  brave,  who  sink  to  rest 
By  all  their  country's  wishes  blest! 
When  Spring,  with  dewy  fingers  cold, 
Returns  to  deck  their  hallowed  mould, 
She  there  shall  dress  a  sweeter  sod 
Than  Fancy's  feet  have  ever  trod. 

By  fairy  hands  their  knell  is  rung; 
By  forms  unseen  their  dirge  is  sung; 
There  Honor  comes,  a  pilgrim  gray. 
To  bless  the  turf  that  wraps  their  clay; 
And  Freedom  shall  awhile  repair 
To  dwell,  a  weeping  hermit,  there ! 

William  Collins  [1721-1750] 


MY  COUNTRY 

AMERICA 

My  country,  'tis  of  thee, 
Sweet  land  of  liberty, 

Of  thee  I  sing; 
Land  where  my  fathers  died, 
Land  of  the  pilgrims'  pride. 
From  every  mountain-side 

Let  Freedom  ring. 

INIy  native  country,  thee. 
Land  of  the  noble  free, — 

Thy  nam.e  I  love; 
I  love  thy  rocks  and  rills. 
Thy  woods  and  templed  hills; 
My  heart  with  rapture  thrills 

Like  that  above. 

Let  music  swell  the  breeze, 
And  ring  from  all  the  trees 

Sweet  Freedom's  song; 
Let  mortal  tongues  awake. 
Let  all  that  breathe  partake, 
Let  rocks  their  silence  break,— 

The  sound  prolong. 

Our  fathers'  God,  to  Thee, 
Author  of  liberty. 

To  Thee  we  sing; 
Long  may  our  land  be  bright 
With  Freedom's  holy  light; 
Protect  us  by  Thy  might, 
Great  God,  our  King. 

Samuel  Francis  Smith  [1808-1895] 
219s 


2196  My  Country 

THE  STAR-SPANGLED  BANNER 

O  SAY,  can  you  see,  by  the  dawn's  early  light. 

What  so  proudly  we  hailed  at  the  twilight's  last  gleaming? 

Whose  broad  stripes  and  bright  stars,  through  the  perilous 
fight, 
O'er  the  ramparts  we  watched,  were  so  gallantly  stream- 
ing! 

And  the  rockets'  red  glare,  the  bombs  bursting  in  air, 

Gave  proof  through  the  night  that  our  flag  was  still  there: 
O  say,  does  that  star-spangled  banner  yet  wave 
O'er  the  land  of  the  free  and  the  home  of  the  brave? 

On  the  shore,  dimly  seen  through  the  mists  of  the  deep, 
Where  the  foe's  havighty  host  in  dread  silence  reposes, 

What  is  that  which  the  breeze,  o'er  the  towering  steep. 
As  it  fitfully  blows,  now  conceals,  now  discloses? 

Now  it  catches  the  gleam  of  the  morning's  first  beam. 

In  full  glory  reflected  now  shines  on  the  stream: 
'Tis  the  star-spangled  banner!    O  long  may  it  wave 
O'er  the  land  of  the  free  and  the  home  of  the  brave! 

And  where  is  that  band  who  so  vauntingly  swore 
That  the  havoc  of  war  and  the  battle's  confusion 

A  home  and  a  country  should  leave  us  no  more? 

Their  blood  has  washed  out  their  foul  footsteps'  pollution. 

No  refuge  could  save  the  hireling  and  slave 

From  the  terror  of  flight,  or  the  gloom  of  the  grave: 
And  the  star-spangled  banner  in  triumph  doth  wave 
O'er  the  land  of  the  free  and  the  home  of  the  brave! 

Oh!  thus  be  it  ever,  when  freemen  shall  stand 

Between  their  loved  homes  and  the  war's  desolation! 

Blest  with  victory  and  peace,  may  the  heaven-rescued  land 
Praise  the  Power  that  hath  made  and  preserved  us  a 
nation. 

Then  conquer  we  must,  for  our  cause  it  is  just. 

And  this  be  our  motto:  "In  God  is  our  trust." 

And  the  star-spangled  banner  in  triumph  shall  wave 
O'er  the  land  of  the  free  and  the  home  of  the  brave! 

Francis  Scott  Key  [i 780-1843] 


The  American   Flag  2^97 


THE  AMERICAN   FLAG 


When  Freedom,  from  her  mountain  height, 
Unfurled  her  standard  to  the  air, 

She  tore  the  azure  robe  of  night, 
And  set  the  stars  of  glory  there; 

She  mingled  with  its  gorgeous  dyes 

The  milky  baldric  of  the  skies, 

And  striped  its  pure,  celestial  white 

With  streakings  of  the  morning  light; 

Then,  from  his  mansion  in  the  sun, 

She  called  her  eagle  bearer  down, 

And  gave  into  his  mighty  hand, 

The  symbol  of  her  chosen  land. 


Majestic  monarch  of  the  cloud! 

Who  rear'st  aloft  thy  regal  form. 
To  hear  the  tempest-trumpings  loud. 
And  see  the  lightning-lances  driven, 

When  strive  the  warriors  of  the  storm, 
And  rolls  the  thunder-drum  of  heaven — 
Child  of  the  sun!  to  thee  'tis  given 
To  guard  the  banner  of  the  free. 
To  hover  in  the  sulphur  smoke. 
To  ward  away  the  battle-stroke. 
And  bid  its  blendings  shine  afar. 
Like  rainbows  on  the  cloud  of  war. 

The  harbingers  of  victory! 

Ill 

Flag  of  the  brave!  thy  folds  shall  fl}'. 
The  sign  of  hope  and  triumph  high. 
When  speaks  the  signal-trumpet  tone. 
And  the  long  line  comes  gleaming  on : 
Ere  yet  the  life-blood,  warm  and  wet. 
Has  dimmed  the  glistening  bayonet, 


2198  My   Country 

Each  soldier  eye  shall  brightly  turn 
Where  thy  sky-born  glories  burn, 
And,  as  his  springing  steps  advance. 
Catch  war  and  vengeance  from  the  glance; 
And  when  the  cannon-mouthings  loud 
Heave  in  wild  wreaths  the  battle-shroud, 
And  gory  sabres  rise  and  fall. 
Like  shoots  of  flame  on  midnight's  pall; 

Then  shall  thy  meteor-glances  glow, 
And  cowering  foes  shall  sink  beneath 

Each  gallant  arm  that  strikes  below 
That  lovely  messenger  of  death. 

IV 

Flag  of  the  seas !  on  ocean  wave 

Thy  stars  shall  glitter  o'er  the  brave; 

When  death,  careering  on  the  gale. 

Sweeps  darkly  round  the  bellied  sail, 

And  frighted  waves  rush  wildly  back 

Before  the  broadside's  reeling  rack. 

Each  dying  wanderer  of  the  sea 

Shall  look  at  once  to  heaven  and  thee, 

And  smile  to  see  thy  splendors  fly 

In  triumph  o'er  his  closing  eye. 
— 11:3  V 

V 

Flag  of  the  free  heart's  hope  and  home,  ; 

By  angel  hands  to  valor  given; 
Thy  stars  have  lit  the  welkin  dome. 

And  all  thy  hues  were  born  in  heaven. 
Forever  float  that  standard  sheet! 

Where  breathes  the  foe  but  falls  before  us. 
With  Freedom's  soil  beneath  our  feet, 

And  Freedom's  banner  streaming  o'er  us? 

Joseph  Rodman  Drake  [1795-1820] 

YANKEE  DOODLE 

Father  and  I  went  down  to  camp. 

Along  with  Captain  Gooding, 
And  there  we  see  the  men  and  boys. 

As  thick  as  hasty  pudding. 


Yankee   Doodle  2199 

Chorus — Yankee  Doodle,  keep  it  up, 
Yankee  Doodle,  dandy, 
Mind  the  music  and  the  step. 
And  with  the  girls  be  handy. 

And  there  we  see  a  thousand  men, 

As  rich  as  'Squire  David; 
And  what  they  wasted  every  day 

I  wish  it  could  be  saved. 

The  'lasses  they  eat  every  day 

Would  keep  our  house  a  winter; 
They  have  so  much  that,  I'll  be  bound, 

They  eat  whene'er  they're  a  mind  to. 

And  there  we  see  a  swamping  gun, 

As  big  as  a  log  of  maple, 
Upon  a  deuced  little  cart, 

A  load  for  father's  cattle. 

And  every  time  they  shoot  it  off. 

It  takes  a  horn  of  powder, 
And  makes  a  noise  like  father's  gun, 

Only  a  nation  louder. 

I  went  as  nigh  to  one  myself 

As  Siah's  underpimiing; 
And  father  went  as  nigh  again, 

I  thought  the  deuce  was  in  him. 

Cousin  Simon  grew  so  bold, 
I  thought  he  would  have  cocked  it; 

It  scared  me  so,  I  shrinked  it  off. 
And  hung  by  father's  pocket. 

And  Captain  Davis  had  a  gun,  '  * 

He  kind  of  clapped  his  hand  on't. 

And  stuck  a  crooked  stabbing-iron 
Upon  the  little  end  on't. 


2;;oo  My  Country 

And  there  I  see  a  pumpkin  shell       ;;,\  j 

As  big  as  mother's  basin; 
And  every  time  they  touched  it  off, 

They  scampered  like  the  nation. 

I  see  a  little  barrel,  too. 

The  heads  were  made  of  leather, 

They  knocked  upon  't  with  little  clubs 
To  call  the  folks  together. 

And  there  was  Captain  Washington, 

And  gentlefolks  about  him, 
They  say  he's  grown  so  tarnal  proud 

He  will  not  ride  without  'em. 

He  had  got  on  his  meeting  clothes, 
And  rode  a  strapping  stallion, 

And  gave  his  orders  to  the  men, — 
I  guess  there  was  a  million. 

The  flaming  ribbons  in  his  hat. 
They  looked  so  tearing  fine  ah, 

I  wanted  peskily  to  get, 
To  give  to  my  Jemima. 

And  then  I  see  a  snarl  of  men 
A  digging  graves,  they  told  me. 

So  tarnal  long,  so  tarnal  deep, 

They  'tended  they  should  hold  me. 

It  scared  me  so,  I  hooked  it  off, 

Nor  stopped,  as  I  remember. 
Nor  turned  about,  till  I  got  home, 

Locked  up  in  mother's  chamber. 

Edward  Bangs  {?)  [fl.  1776] 


HAIL!   COLUMBIA 

Hail!  Columbia,  happy  land! 
Hail!  ye  heroes,  heaven-born  band. 
Who  fought  and  bled  in  freedom's  cause. 
And  when  the  storm  of  war  was  gone, 


Hail  !   Columbia  2201 

Enjoyed  the  peace  your  valor  won; 
Let  independence  be  your  boast, 
Ever  mindful  what  it  cost, 
Ever  grateful  for  the  prize, 
Let  its  altar  reach  the  skies. 

Chorus — Firm,  united  let  us  be, 

Ralljang  round  our  liberty, 
As  a  band  of  brothers  joined, 
Peace  and  safety  we  shall  find. 

Immortal  patriots,  rise  once  more! 
Defend  your  rights,  defend  your  shore; 
Let  no  rude  foe,  with  impious  hand, 
Invade  the  shrine  where  sacred  lies 
Of  toil  and  blood  the  well-earned  prize; 
While'  offering  peace,  sincere  and  just. 
In  heaven  we  place  a  manly  trust, 
That  truth  and  justice  will  prevail, 
And  every  scheme  of  bondage  fail. 

Sound,  sound  the  trump  of  fame! 

Let  Washington's  great  name 

Ring  through  the  world  with  loud  applause! 

Let  every  clime  to  freedom  dear 

Listen  with  a  joyful  ear; 

With  equal  skill,  with  steady  power, 

He  governs  in  the  fearful  hour 

Of  horrid  war,  or  guides  with  ease 

The  happier  time  of  honest  peace. 

Behold  the  chief,  who  now  commands. 

Once  more  to  serve  his  country  stands. 

The  rock  on  which  the  storm  will  beati 

But,  armed  in  virtue,  firm  and  true. 

His  hopes  are  fixed  on  heaven  and  you. 

When  hope  was  sinking  in  dismay, 

When  gloom  obscured  Columbia's  day. 

His  steady  mind,  from  changes  free,  '"'  ^ 

Resolved  on  death  or  liberty. 

Joseph  Ilopkinson  [1770-1842] 


2202  My  Country 

Columbia 

Columbia,  Columbia,  to  glory  arise, 

The  queen  of  the  world,  and  the  child  of  the  skies; 

Thy  genius  commands  thee;  with  rapture  behold, 

While  ages  on  ages  thy  splendor  unfold, 

Thy  reign  is  the  last  and  the  noblest  of  time. 

Most  fruitful  thy  soil,  most  inviting  thy  chme; 

Let  the  crimes  of  the  east  ne'er  encrimson  thy  name, 

Be  freedom,  and  science,  and  virtue  thy  fame. 

To  conquest  and  slaughter  let  Europe  aspire; 
Whelm  nations  in  blood,  and  wrap  cities  in  fire; 
Thy  heroes  the  rights  of  mankind  shall  defend, 
And  triumph  pursue  them,  and  glory  attend. 
A  world  is  thy  realm:  for  a  world  be  thy  laws, 
Enlarged  as  thine  empire,  and  just  as  thy  cause; 
On  Freedom's  broad  basis,  that  empire  shall  rise, 
Extend  with  the  main,  and  dissolve  with  the  skies. 

Fair  science  her  gates  to  thy  sons  shall  unbar. 
And  the  east  see  the  morn  hide  the  beams  of  her  star. 
New  bards,  and  new  sages,  unrivalled  shall  soar 
To  fame  unextinguished,  when  time  is  no  more; 
To  thee,  the  last  refuge  of  virtue  designed. 
Shall  fly  from  all  nations  the  best  of  mankind; 
Here,  grateful  to  heaven,  with  transport  shall  bring 
Their  incense,  more  fragrant  than  odors  of  spring. 

Nor  less  shall  thy  fair  ones  to  glory  ascend, 
And  genius  and  beauty  in  harmony  blend; 
The  graces  of  form  shall  awake  pure  desire. 
And  the  charms  of  the  soul  ever  cherish  the  fire; 
Their  sweetness  unmingled,  their  manners  refined, 
And  virtue's  bright  image,  instamped  on  the  mind, 
With  peace  and  soft  rapture  shall  teach  hfe  to  glow, 
And  light  up  a  smile  in  the  aspect  of  woe. 

Thy  fleets  to  all  regions  thy  power  shall  display. 

The  nations  admire  and  the  ocean  obey; 

Each  shore  to  thy  glory  its  tribute  unfold, 

And  the  east  and  the  south  yield  their  spices  and  gold. 


"Oh   Mother  of  a  Mighty   Race"     2203 

As  the  day-spring  unbounded,  thy  splendor  shall  flow, 
And  earth's  little  kingdoms  before  thee  shall  bow; 
While  the  ensigns  of  union,  in  triumph  unfurled, 
Hush  the  tumult  of  war  and  give  peace  to  the  world. 

Thus,  as  down  a  lone  valley,  with  cedars  o'erspread. 
From  war's  dread  confusion  I  pensively  strayed, 
The  gloom  from  the  face  of  fair  heaven  retired; 
The  winds  ceased  to  murmur;  the  thunders  expired; 
Perfumes  as  of  Eden  flowed  sweetly  along. 
And  a  voice  as  of  angels,  enchantingly  sung: 
"Columbia,  Columbia,  to  glory  arise. 
The  queen  of  the  world,  and  the  child  of  the  skies." 

Timothy  Lhvight  [1752-1817] 

"OH   MOTHER  OF  A   MIGHTY  RACE" 

Oh  mother  of  a  mighty  race, 
Yet  lovely  in  thy  youthful  grace! 
The  elder  dames,  thy  haughty  peers, 
Admire  and  hate  thy  blooming  years.  ^"  " 

With  words  of  shame 
And  taunts  of  scorn  they  join  thy  name. 

For  on  thy  cheeks  the  glow  is  spread 
That  tints  thy  morning  hills  with  red; 
Thy  step — the  wild  deer's  rustling  feet 
Within  thy  woods  are  not  more  fleet;  7 

Thy  hopeful  eye 
Is  bright  as  thine  own  sunny  sky. 

Ay,  let  them  rail — those  haughty  ones. 
While  safe  thou  dwellest  with  thy  sons. 
They  do  not  know  how  loved  thou  art, 
How  many  a  fond  and  fearless  heart 

Would  rise  to  throw 
Its  life  between  thee  and  the  foe. 

They  know  not,  in  their  hate  and  pride, 
What  virtues  with  thy  children  bide; 
How  true,  how  good,  thy  graceful  maids 
Make  bright,  hke  flowers,  the  valley-shades; 


2  204  My   Country 

What  generous  men 
Spring,  like  thine  oaks,  by  hill  and  glen; — 

What  cordial  welcomes  greet  the  guest 
By  thy  lone  rivers  of  the  West; 
How  faith  is  kept,  and  truth  revered, 
And  man  is  loved,  and  God  is  feared, 

In  woodland  homes, 
And  where  the  ocean  border  foams. 

There's  freedom  at  thy  gates  and  rest 
For  Earth's  down-trodden  and  oppressed, 
A  shelter  for  the  hunted  head, 
For  the  starved  laborer  toil  and  bread. 

Power,  at  thy  bounds, 
Stops  and  calls  back  his  baffled  hounds. 

Oh,  fair  young  mother!  on  thy  brow 
Shall  sit  a  nobler  grace  than  now. 
Deep  in  the  brightness  of  the  skies 
The  thronging  years  in  glory  rise, 

And,  as  they  fleet. 
Drop  strength  and  riches  at  thy  feet. 

William  Cullen  Bryant  [i 794-1 J 


HYMN  OF   THE  WEST 

world's    fair,    ST.    LOUIS,    MO.,    1904 

O  THOU,  whose  glorious  orbs  on  high 

Engird  the  earth  with  splendor  round, 
From  out  Thy  secret  place  draw  nigh 
The  courts  and  temples  of  this  ground; 
Eternal  Light, 
FiU  with  Thy  might 
These  domes  that  in  Thy  purpose  grew. 
And  lift  a  nation's  heart  anew! 

Illumine  Thou  each  pathway  here, 
To  show  the  marvels  God  hath  wrought! 

Since  first  Thy  people's  chief  and  seer 
Looked  up  with  that  prophetic  thought, 


Concord   Hymn  2205 


Bade  Time  unroll 

The  fateful  scroll, 
And  empire  unto  P'reedom  gave 
From  cloudland  height  to  tropic  wave. 

Poured  through  the  gateways  of  the  North 

Thy  mighty  rivers  join  their  tide, 
And,  on  the  wings  of  morn  sent  forth, 
Their  mists  the  far-off  peaks  divide. 
By  Thee  unsealed, 
The  mountains  yield 
Ores  that  the  wealth  of  Ophir  shame. 
And  gems  en  wrought  of  seven-hued  flame. 

Lo,  through  what  years  the  soil  hath  lain, 

At  Thine  own  time  to  give  increase — 
The  greater  and  the  lesser  grain. 
The  ripening  boll,  the  myriad  fleece! 
Thy  creatures  graze 
Appointed  ways; 
League  after  league  across  the  land 
The  ceaseless  herds  obey  Thy  hand. 

Thou,  whose  high  archways  shine  most  clear 

Above  the  plenteous  Western  plain, 
Thine  ancient  tribes  from  round  the  sphere 
To  breathe  its  quickening  air  are  fain: 
And  smiles  the  sun 
To  see  made  one 
Their  brood  throughout  Earth's  greenest  space, 
Land  of  the  new  and  lordlier  race! 

Edmund  Clarence  Sledman  [1833-1008] 

CONCORD  HYMN 

SUNG    AT    THE    COMPLETION   OF    THE    BATTLE   MONUMENT, 
APRIL    19,    1836 

By  the  rude  bridge  that  arched  the  flood, 
Their  flag  to  April's  breeze  unfurled, 

Here  once  the  embattled  farmers  stood 
And  fired  the  shot  heard  round 


22o6  My  Country 

The  foe  long  since  in  silence  slept; 

Alike  the  conqueror  silent  sleeps; 
And  Time  the  ruined  bridge  has  swept 

Down  the  dark  stream  which  seaward  creeps. 

On  this  green  bank,  by  this  soft  stream, 

We  set  to-day  a  votive  stone; 
That  memory  may  their  deed  redeem. 

When,  like  our  sires,  our  sons  are  gone. 

Spirit,  that  made  those  heroes  dare 
To  die,  and  leave  their  children  free, 

Bid  Time  and  Nature  gently  spare 
The  shaft  we  raise  to  them  and  thee. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-1882] 


BATTLE-HYMN  OF   THE   REPUBLIC 

Mine  eyes  have  seen  the  glory  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord ; 
He  is  trampling  out  the  vintage  where  the  grapes  of  wrath 

are  stored ; 
He  hath  loosed  the  fateful  lightning  of  His  terrible  swift 

sword; 

His  truth  is  marching  on. 

I  have  seen  Him  in  the  watch-fires  of  a  hundred   circling 

camps ; 
They  "have  build  ed  Him  an  altar  in  the  evening  dews  and 

damps ; 
I  can  read  his  righteous  sentence  by  the  dim  and  flaring 

lamps ; 

His  clay  is  marching  on. 

I  have  read  a  fiery  gospel,  writ  in  burnished  rows  of  steel: 
"As  ye  deal  with  my  contemners,  so  with  you  my  grace  shall 

deal ; 
Let  the  Hero,  born  of  woman,  crush  the  serpent  with  his 

heel 

'  is  marching  on." 


The  Eagle's  Song  2207 


He  has  sounded  forth  the  trumpet  that  shall  never  call  re- 
treat; 
He  is  sifting  out  the  hearts  of  men  before  His  judgment-seat: 
Oh,  be  swift,  my  soul,  to  answer  Him!  be  jubilant,  my  feet! 
Our  God  is  marching  on. 

In  the  beauty  of  the  lilies  Christ  was  born  across  the  sea, 
With  a  glory  in  His  bosom  that  transfigures  you  and  me: 
As  He  died  to  make  men  holy,  let  us  die  to  make  men  free, 
While  God  is  marching  on. 

Jidia  Ward  Howe  [1819-1910] 


THE  EAGLE'S   SONG 

The  lioness  whelped,  and  the  sturdy  cub 

Was  seized  by  an  eagle  and  carried  up. 

And  homed  for  a  while  in  an  eagle's  nest. 

And  slept  for  a  while  on  an  eagle's  breast; 

And  the  eagle  taught  it  the  eagle's  song: 

"To  be  staunch,  and  valiant,  and  free,  and  strong!' 

The  lion- whelp  sprang  from  the  eyrie  nest, 
From  the  lofty  crag  where  the  queen  birds  rest; 
He  fought  the  Eling  on  the  spreading  plain, 
And  drove  him  back  o'er  the  foaming  main. 
He  held  the  land  as  a  thrifty  chief. 
And  reared  his  cattle,  and  reaped  his  sheaf, 
Nor  sought  the  help  of  a  foreign  hand, 
Yet  welcomed  all  to  his  own  free  land! 

Two  were  the  sons  that  the  country  bore 
To  the  Northern  lakes  and  the  Southern  shore; 
And  Chivalry  dwelt  with  the  Southern  son, 
And  Industry  lived  with  the  Northern  one. 
Tears  for  the  time  when  they  broke  and  fought! 
Tears  was  the  price  of  the  union  wrought! 
And  the  land  was  red  in  a  sea  of  blood, 
Where  brother  for  brother  had  swelled  the  flood! 

And  now  that  the  two  are  one  again. 
Behold  on  their  shield  the  word  "Refrain!" 


22o8  My  Country 

And  the  lion  cubs  twain  sing  the  eagle's  song: 

"To  be  staunch,  and  valiant,  and  free,  and  strong!" 

For  the  eagle's  beak,  and  the  hon's  paw, 

And  the  lion's  fangs,  and  the  eagle's  claw. 

And  the  eagle's  swoop,  and  the  lion's  might, 

And  the  lion's  leap,  and  the  eagle's  sight. 

Shall  guard  the  flag  with  the  word  "Refrain!" 

Now  that  the  two  are  one  again! 

Richard  Mansfeld  [1857-1907] 


THE   FLAG   GOES  BY 

Hats  off! 

Along  the  street  there  comes 

A  blare  of  bugles,  a  ruffle  of  drums, 

A  flash  of  color  beneath  the  sky: 

Hats  off! 

The  flag  is  passing  by! 

Blue  and  crimson  and  white- it  shines. 

Over  the  steel-tipped,  ordered  lines. 

Hats  off! 

The  colors  before  us  fly; 

But  more  than  the  flag  is  passing  by: 

Sea-fights  and  land-fights,  grim  and  great, 
Fought  to  make  and  to  save  the  State: 
Weary  marches  and  sinking  ships; 
Cheers  of  victory  on  dying  lips; 

Days  of  plenty  and  years  of  peace; 
March  of  a  strong  land's  swift  increase; 
Equal  justice,  right  and  law. 
Stately  honor  and  reverend  awe; 

Sign  of  a  nation,  great  and  strong 
To  ward  her  people  from  foreign  wrong: 
Pride  and  glory  and  honor, — all 
Live  in  the  colors  to  stand  or  fall. 


Unmanifest  Destiny  2209 

Hats  off! 

Along  the  street  there  comes 

A  blare  of  bugles,  a  ruffle  of  drums; 

And  loyal  hearts  are  beating  high: 

Hats  off! 

The  flag  is  passing  by! 

Henry  Ilolcomb  Bcnncll  [1863- 


UNMANIFEST  DESTINY 

To  what  new  fates,  my  country,  far 
And  unforeseen  of  foe  or  friend, 

Beneath  what  unexpected  star. 
Compelled  to  what  unchosen  end, 

Across  the  sea  that  knows  no  beach 
The  Admiral  of  Nations  guides 

Thy  blind  obedient  keels  to  reach 
The  harbor  where  thy  future  rides! 

The  guns  that  spoke  at  Lexington 

Knew  not  that  God  was  planning  then 

The  trumpet  word  of  Jefferson 
To  bugle  forth  the  rights  of  men. 

To  them  that  wept  and  cursed  Bull  Run, 
What  was  it  but  despair  and  shame? 

Who  saw  behind  the  cloud  the  sun? 
Who  knew  that  God  was  in  the  flame? 

Had  not  defeat  upon  defeat, 

Disaster  on  disaster  come, 
The  slave's  emancipated  feet 

Had  never  marched  behind  the  drum. 

There  is  a  Hand  that  bends  our  deeds 
To  mightier  issues  than  we  planned ; 

Each  son  that  triumphs,  each  that  l)lceds, 
My  country,  serves  Its  dark  command. 


22 lo  My  Country 

I  do  not  know  beneath  what  sky 
Nor  on  what  seas  shall  be  thy  fate; 

I  only  know  it  shall  be  high, 
I  only  know  it  shall  be  great. 

Richard  Hovey  [1864-1900] 


ON   A   SOLDIER   FALLEN   IN   THE   PHILIPPINES 

Streets  of  the  roaring  town, 

Hush  for  him,  hush,  be  still! 

He  comes,  who  was  stricken  down 

Doing  the  word  of  our  will. 

Hush!    Let  him  have  his  state. 

Give  him  his  soldier's  crown, 

The  grists  of  trade  can  wait 

Their  grinding  at  the  mill. 
But  he  cannot  wait  for  his  honor,  now  the  trumpet  has  been 

blown. 
Wreathe  pride  now  for  his  granite  brow,  lay  love  on  his 
breast  of  stone. 

Toll!   Let  the  great  bells  toll 

Till  the  clashing  air  is  dim, 

Did  we  wrong  this  parted  soul? 

We  will  make  it  up  to  him. 

Toll!    Let  him  never  guess 

What  work  we  set  him  to. 

Laurel,  laurel,  yes; 

He  did  what  we  bade  him  do. 
Praise,  and  never  a  whispered  hint  but  the  fight  he  fought 

was  good; 
Never  a  word  that  the  blood  on  his  sword  was  his  country's 
own  heart's-blood. 

A  flag  for  the  soldier's  bier 
Who  dies  that  his  land  may  live; 
O,  banners,  banners  here, 
That  he  doubt  not  nor  misgive  1 


An   Ode  in   Time  of  Hesitation     22  ii 

That  he  heed  not  from  the  tomb 
The  evil  days  draw  near 
When  the  nation,  robed  in  gloom, 
With  its  faithless  past  shall  strive. 
Let  him  never  dream  that  his  bullet's  scream  went  wide  of 

its  island  mark. 
Home  to  the  heart  of  his  darling  land  where  she  stumbled 
and  sinned  in  the  dark. 

William  Vaughn  Moody  [1869-1910] 


AN  ODE  IN  TIME  OF  HESITATION 

WRITTEN  AFTER  SEEING  AT  BOSTON  THE  STATUE  OF  ROBERT 
GOULD  SHAW,  KILLED  WHILE  STORMING  FORT  WAGNER, 
JULY  18,  1863,  AT  THE  HEAD  OF  THE  FIRST  ENLISTED 
NEGRO   REGIMENT,    THE    54th   MASSACHUSETTS 


Before  the  solemn  bronze  Saint  Gaudens  made 

To  thrill  the  heedless  passer's  heart  with  awe, 

And  set  here  in  the  city's  talk  and  trade 

To  the  good  memory  of  Robert  Shaw, 

This  bright  IMarch  morn  I  stand. 

And  hear  the  distant  spring  come  up  the  land; 

Knowing  that  what  I  hear  is  not  unheard 

Of  this  boy  soldier  and  his  negro  band. 

For  all  their  gaze  is  fixed  so  stern  ahead, 

For  all  the  fatal  rhythm  of  their  tread. 

The  land  they  died  to  save  from  death  and  shame 

Trembles  and  waits,  hearing  the  spring's  great  name. 

And  by  her  pangs  these  resolute  ghosts  are  stirred. 


Through  street  and  mall  the  tides  of  people  go 

Heedless;  the  trees  upon  the  Common  show 

No  hint  of  green;  but  to  my  listening  heart 

The  still  earth  doth  impart 

Assurance  of  her  jubilant  emprise, 

And  it  is  clear  to  my  long-searching  eyes 


2212  My   Country  r(A 

That  love  at  last  has  might  upon  the  skies. 
The  ice  is  runneled  on  the  little  pond; 
A  telltale  patter  drips  from  off  the  trees; 
The  air  is  touched  with  southland  spiceries, 
As  if  but  yesterday  it  tossed  the  frond    -/an /rtid^^b  J 
Of  pendant  mosses  where  the  hve-oaks  grow 
'^         Beyond  Virginia  and  the  Carolines,  ,|j 

Or  had  its  will  among  the  fruits  and  vines 
Of  aromatic  isles  asleep  beyond 
Florida  and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico. 


Ill 

Soon  shall  the  Cape  Ann  children  shout  in  glee;^^'^^'^_ 

Spying  the  arbutus,  spring's  dear  recluse; 

Hill  lads  at  dawn  shall  hearken  the  wild  goose 

Go  honking  northward  over  Tennessee; 

West  from  Oswego  to  Sault  Sainte-Marie, 

And  on  to  where  the  Pictured  Rocks  are  hung, 

And  yonder  where,  gigantic,  willful,  young, 

Chicago  sitteth  at  the  northwest  gates. 

With  restless  violent  hands  and  casual  tongue 

Moulding  her  mighty  fates. 

The  Lakes  shall  robe  them  in  ethereal  sheen; 

And  like  a  larger  sea,  the  vital  green 

Of  springing  wheat  shall  vastly  be  outflung 

Over  Dakota  and  the  prairie  states. 

By  desert  people  immemorial  ' ;^ 

On  Arizonan  mesas  shall  be  done 

Dim  rites  unto  the  thunder  and  the  sun; 

Nor  shall  the  primal  gods  lack  sacrifice 

More  splendid,  when  the  white  Sierras  call 

Unto  the  Rockies  straightway  to  arise 

And  dance  before  the  unveiled  ark  of  the  year, 

Sounding  their  windy  cedars  as  for  shawms,        _ 

Unrolling  rivers  clear 

For  flutter  of  broad  phylacteries; 

While  Shasta  signals  to  Alaskan  seas 

That  watch  old  sluggish  glaciers  downward  creep 

To  fling  their  icebergs  thundering  from  the  steep, 


An   Ode  in  I'ime  of  Hesitation    2213 

And  Mariposa  through  the  purple  calms 

Gazes  at  far  Hawaii  crowned  with  pahns 

Where  East  and  West  are  met, — 

A  rich  seal  on  the  ocean's  bosom  set 

To  saj'  that  East  and  West  are  twain, 

With  different  loss  and  gain: 

The  Lord  hath  sundered  them;  let  them  be  sundered  yet. 


Alas!  what  sounds  are  these  that  come 

Sullenly  over  the  Pacific  seas, — 

Sounds  of  ignoble  battle,  striking  dumb 

The  season's  half-awakened  ecstasies? 

Must  I  be  humble,  then, 

Now  when  my  heart  hath  need  of  pride? 

Wild  love  falls  on  me  from  these  sculptured  men; 

By  loving  much  the  land  for  which  they  died 

I  would  be  justified. 

My  spirit  was  away  on  pinions  wide 

To  soothe  in  praise  of  her  its  passionate  mood 

And  ease  it  of  its  ache  of  gratitude. 

Too  sorely  heavy  is  the  debt  they  lay 

On  me  and  the  companions  of  my  day. 

I  would  remember  now 

My  country's  goodliness,  make  sweet  her  name. 

Alas!  what  shade  art  thou 

Of  sorrow  or  of  blame 

Liftest  the  lyric  leafage  from  her  brow, 

And  pointest  a  slow  finger  at  her  shame? 


Lies!    lies!    It  cannot  be!    The  wars  we  wage 

Are  noble,  and  our  battles  still  are  won 

By  justice  for  us,  ere  we  lift  the  gage. 

We  have  not  sold  our  loftiest  heritage. 

The  proud  republic  hath  not  stooped  to  cheat 

And  scramble  in  the  market-place  of  war; 

Her  forehead  weareth  yet  its  solemn  star. 


2214  ^y   Country 

Here  is  her  witness:  this,  her  perfect  son, 

This  deHcate  and  proud  New  England  soul 

Who  leads  despised  men,  with  just-unshackled  feet, 

Up  the  large  ways  where  death  and  glory  meet,  ^ 

To  show  all  peoples  that  our  shame  is  done,  j. 

That  once  more  we  are  clean  and  spirit-whole.  f 


VI 

Crouched  in  the  sea  fog  on  the  moaning  sand 

All  night  he  lay,  speaking  some  simple  word 

From  hour  to  hour  to  the  slow  minds  that  heard. 

Holding  each  poor  life  gently  in  his  hand 

And  breathing  on  the  base  rejected  clay 

Till  each  dark  face  shone  mystical  and  grand 

Against  the  breaking  day; 

And  lo,  the  shard  the  potter  cast  away 

Was  grown  a  fiery  chalice,  crystal-fine. 

Fulfilled  of  the  divine 

Great  wine  of  battle  wrath  by  God's  ring-finger  stirred. 

Then  upward,  where  the  shadowy  bastion  loomed 

Huge  on  the  mountain  in  the  wet  sea  light. 

Whence  now,  and  now,  infernal  flowerage  bloomed. 

Bloomed,  burst,  and  scattered  down  its  deadly  seed, — 

They  swept,  and  died  like  freemen  on  the  height, 

Like  freemen,  and  like  men  of  noble  breed; 

And  when  the  battle  fell  away  at  night 

By  hasty  and  contemptuous  hands  were  thrust 

Obscurely  in  a  common  grave  with  him 

The  fair-haired  keeper  of  their  love  and  trust. 

Now  limb  doth  mingle  with  dissolved  limb 

In  nature's  busy  old  democracy 

To  flush  the  mountain  laurel  when  she  blows 

Sweet  by  the  southern  sea. 

And  heart  with  crumpled  heart  climbs  in  the  rose : — 

The  untaught  hearts  with  the  high  heart  that  knew 

This  mountain  fortress  for  no  earthly  hold 

Of  temporal  quarrel,  but  the  bastion  old 

Of  spiritual  wrong, 

Built  by  an  unjust  nation  sheer  and  strong. 


An   Ode  in  Time  of  Hesitation    2215 

Expugnable  but  by  a  nation's  rue 

And  bowing  down  before  that  equal  shrine 

By  all  men  held  divine, 

Whereof  his  band  and  he  were  the  most  holy  sign. 

vn 

0  bitter,  bitter  shade! 
Wilt  thou  not  put  the  scorn 

And  instant  tragic  question  from  thine  eyes? 

Do  thy  dark  brows  yet  crave 

That  swift  and  angry  stave — 

Unmeet  for  this  desirous  morn — 

That  I  have  striven,  striven  to  evade? 

Gazing  on  him,  must  I  not  deem  they  err 

Whose  careless  lips  in  street  and  shop  aver 

As  common  tidings,  deeds  to  make  his  cheek 

Flush  from  the  bronze,  and  his  dead  throat  to  speak? 

Surely  some  elder  singer  would  arise, 

Whose  harp  hath  leave  to  threaten  and  to  mourn 

Above  this  people  when  they  go  astray. 

Is  Whitman,  the  strong  spirit,  overworn? 

Has  Whittier  put  his  yearning  wrath  away? 

1  will  not  and  I  dare  not  yet  believe! 
Though  furtively  the  sunlight  seems  to  grieve, 
And  the  spring-laden  breeze 

Out  of  the  gladdening  west  is  sinister 
With  sounds  of  nameless  battle  overseas; 
Though  when  we  turn  and  question  in  suspense 
If  these  things  be  indeed  after  these  ways. 
And  what  things  are  to  follow  after  these, 
Our  fluent  men  of  place  and  consequence 
Fumble  and  fill  their  mouths  with  hollow  phrase, 
Or  for  the  end-all  of  deep  arguments 
Intone  their  dull  commercial  liturgies — 
I  dare  not  yet  believe!     My  ears  are  shut! 
I  will  not  hear  the  thin  satiric  praise 
And  muffled  laughter  of  our  enemies. 
Bidding  us  never  sheathe  our  valiant  sword 
Till  we  have  changed  our  birthright  for  a  gourd 
Of  wild  pulse  stolen  from  a  barbarian's  hut; 


22 1 6  My  Country 

Showing  how  wise  it  is  to  cast  away 

The  symbols  of  our  spiritual  sway, 

That  so  our  hands  with  better  ease 

May  wield  the  driver's  whip  and  grasp  the  jailer's  keys. 

VIII 

Was  it  for  this  our  fathers  kept  the  law? 

This  crown  shall  crown  their  struggle  and  their  ruth? 

Are  we  the  eagle  nation  Milton  saw 

Mewing  its  mighty  youth, 

Soon  to  possess  the  mountain  winds  of  truth, 

And  be  a  swift  famihar  of  the  sun 

Where  aye  before  God's  face  His  trumpets  run? 

Or  have  we  but  the  talons  and  the  maw, 

And  for  the  abject  likeness  of  our  heart 

Shall  some  less  lordly  bird  be  set  apart? — 

Some  gross-billed  wader  where  the  swamps  are  fat? 

Some  gorger  in  the  sun?     Some  prowler  with  the  bat? 

IX 

Ah  no! 

We  have  not  fallen  so. 

We  are  our  fathers'  sons:  let  those  who  lead  us  know! 

'Twas  only  yesterday  sick  Cuba's  cry 

Came  up  the  tropic  wind,  "Now  help  us,  for  we  die!" 

Then  Alabama  heard,  , 

And  rising,  pale,  to  Maine  and  Idaho  ,;  i 

Shouted  a  burning  word. 

Proud  state  with  proud  impassioned  state  conferred, 

And  at  the  lifting  of  a  hand  sprang  forth, 

East,  west,  and  south,  and  north. 

Beautiful  armies.     Oh,  by  the  sweet  blood  and  young 

Shed  on  the  awful  hill  slope  of  San  Juan, 

By  the  unforgotten  names  of  eager  boys 

Who  might  have  tasted  girls'  love  and  been  stung 

With  the  old  mystic  joys 

And  starry  griefs,  now  the  spring  nights  come  on, 

But  that  the  heart  of  youth  is  generous, — 

We  charge  you,  ye  who  lead  us. 

Breathe  on  their  chivalry  no  hint  of  stain! 

Turn  not  their  new- world  victories  to  gain! 


The   Parting  of  the   Ways  2217 

One  least  leaf  plucked  for  chaffer  from  the  bays 
Of  their  dear  praise, 

One  jot  of  their  pure  conquest  put  to  hire, 
The  implacable  republic  will  require; 
With  clamor,  in  the  glare  and  gaze  of  noon, 
Or  subtly,  coming  as  a  thief  at  night, 
But  surely,  very  surely,  slow  or  soon 
That  insult  deep  we  deeply  will  requite. 
Tempt  not  our  weakness,  our  cupidity! 
For  save  we  let  the  island  men  go  free, 
Those  baffled  and  dislaureled  ghosts 
Will  curse  us  from  the  lamentable  coasts 
Where  walk  the  frustrate  dead. 
The  cup  of  trembling  shall  be  drained  quite. 
Eaten  the  sour  bread  of  astonishment, 
With  ashes  of  the  hearth  shall  be  made  white 
Our  hair,  and  wailing  shall  be  in  the  tent; 
Then  on  your  guiltier  head 
Shall  our  intolerable  self-disdain 
Wreak  suddenly  its  anger  and  its  pain; 
For  manifest  in  the  disastrous  light 
We  shall  discern  the  right 
And  do  it,  tardily. — O  ye  who  lead. 
Take  heed! 

Blindness  we  may  forgive,  but  baseness  we  will  smite. 
William  Vaughn  Moody  [1869-1910] 


THE   PARTING   OF  THE  WAYS 

Untrammelled  Giant  of  the  West, 
With  all  of  Nature's  gifts  endowed, 

With  all  of  Heaven's  mercies  blessed, 
Nor  of  thy  power  unduly  proud — 

Peerless  in  courage,  force,  and  skill. 

And  godlike  in  thy  strength  of  will, — 

Before  thy  feet  the  ways  divide: 

One  path  leads  up  to  heights  sublime; 

Downward  the  other  slopes,  where  bide 
The  refuse  and  the  wrecks  of  Time. 


22 1  8  My  Country 

Choose  then,  nor  falter  at  the  start, 

O  choose  the  nobler  path  and  part!  ' 

Be  thou  the  guardian  of  the  weak, 
Of  the  unfriended,  thou  the  friend; 

No  guerdon  for  thy  valor  seek, 
No  end  beyond  the  avowed  end. 

Wouldst  thou  thy  godlike  power  preserve, 

Be  godlike  in  the  will  to  serve! 

Joseph  B.  Gilder  [1858- 


DIXIE 

[the  original  version] 

I  WISH  I  was  in  de  land  ob  cotton, 
Old  times  dar  am  not  forgotten; 

Look  away,  look  away,  look  away,  Dixie  land! 
In  Dixie  land  whar  I  was  born  in, 
Early  on  one  frosty  mornin'. 

Look  away,  look  away,  look  away,  Dixie  land! 

Chorus — Den  I  wish  I  was  in  Dixie!  Hooray!  Hooray! 
In  Dixie's  land  we'll  took  our  stand,  to  lib 

an'  die  in  Dixie, 
Away,  away,  away  down  south  in  Dixie! 
Away,  away,  away  down  south  in  Dixie! 

Old  missus  marry  Will  de  weaber, 
William  was  a  gay  deceaber, 
When  he  put  his  arm  around  'er, 
He  looked  as  fierce  as  a  forty-pounder. 

His  face  was  sharp  as  a  butcher  cleaber, 
But  dat  did  not  seem  to  greab  'er; 
Will  run  away,  missus  took  a  decline,  O, 
Her  face  was  the  color  of  bacon  rhine,  O. 

While  missus  libbed,  she  libbed  in  clover, 
When  she  died,  she  died  all  over; 
How  could  she  act  de  foolish  part, 
An'  marry  a  man  to  break  her  heart? 


'■'      Dixie  2219 

Buckwheat  cakes  an'  stony  batter 
Makes  you  fat  or  a  little  fatter; 
Here's  a  health  to  de  next  old  missus, 
An'  all  de  gals  dat  want  to  kiss  us. 

Now  if  you  want  to  drive  'way  sorrow,'  ^ 
Come  an'  hear  dis  song  to-morrow; 
Den  hoe  it  down  an'  scratch  your  grabble. 
To  Dixie's  land  I'm  bound  to  trabble. 

Daniel  Decatur  Emmctt  [18 15-1904] 


DIXIE 

u 

Southrons,  hear  your  country  call  you! 
Up,  lest  worse  than  death  befall  you! 

To  arms!  To  arms!  To  arms,  in  Dixie! 
Lo!  all  the  beacon-fires  are  lighted, — 
Let  all  hearts  be  now  united! 

To  arms!  To  arms!  To  arms,  in  Dixie! 
Advance  the  flag  of  Dixie! 
Hurrah!  hurrah! 
For  Dixie's  land  we  take  our  stand, 
And  live  or  die  for  Dixie! 
To  arms!  To  arms!   ■ 
And  conquer  peace  for  Dixie ! 

To  arms!  To  arms! 
And  conquer  peace  for  Dixie! 

Hear  the  Northern  thunders  mutter! 
Northern  flags  in  South  winds  flutter! 
Send  them  back  your  fierce  defiance! 
Stamp  upon  the  accursed  alliance! 

Fear  no  danger!    Shun  no  labor! 
Lift  up  rifle,  pike,  and  saber! 
Shoulder  pressing  close  to  shoulder. 
Let  the  odds  make  each  heart  bolder! 

How  the  South 's  great  heart  rejoices 
At  your  cannons'  ringing  voices! 


2220  My   Country 

For  faith  betrayed,  and  pledges  broken, 
Wrongs  inflicted,  insults  spoken. 

Strong  as  lions,  swift  as  eagles, 

Back  to  their  kennels  hunt  these  beagles! 

Cut  the  unequal  bonds  asunder! 

Let  them  hence  each  other  plunder! 

Swear  upon  your  country's  altar 
Never  to  submit  or  falter. 
Till  the  spoilers  are  defeated. 
Till  the  Lord's  work  is  completed! 

Halt  not  till  our  Federation 
Secures  among  earth's  powers  its  station! 
Then  at  peace,  and  crowned  with  glory, 
Hear  your  children  teU  the  story! 

If  the  loved  ones  weep  in  sadness, 
•    Victory  soon  shall  bring  them  gladness, — 
To  arms! 
Exultant  pride  soon  vanquish  sorrow; 
Smiles  chase  tears  away  to-morrow. 
To  arms!  To  arms!  To  arms,  in  Dixie! 
Advance  the  flag  of  Dixie! 
Hurrah!  hurrah! 
For  Dixie's  land  we  take  our  stand. 
And  live  or  die  for  Dixie ! 

To  arms!  To  arms! 
And  conquer  peace  for  Dixie! 

To  arms!  To  arms! 
And  conquer  peace  for  Dixie! 

Albert  Pike  [i 809-1 891] 


MY   MARYLAND 

The  despot's  heel  is  on  thy  shore, 

Maryland! 
His  torch  is  at  thy  temple  door, 

Maryland! 


My   Maryland  2221 

Avenge  the  patriotic  gore 
That  flecked  the  streets  of  Baltimore, 
And  be  the  battle-queen  of  yore, 
Maryland,  my  Maryland! 


Hark  to  an  exiled  son's  appeal, 

Maryland! 
My  Mother  State,  to  thee  I  kneel, 

Maryland ! 
For  Hfe  or  death,  for  woe  or  weal. 
Thy  peerless  chivalry  reveal. 
And  gird  thy  beauteous  hmbs  with  steely 

Maryland,  my  Maryland! 

Thou  wilt  not  cower  in  the  dust, 

Maryland ! 
Thy  beaming  sword  shall  never  rust, 

Maryland! 
Remember  Carroll's  sacred  trust, 
Remember  Howard's  warlike  thrust, 
And  all  thy  slumberers  with  the  just,' 

Maryland,  my  Maryland! 

Come!  'tis  the  red  dawn  of  the  day, 

Maryland! 
Come  with  thy  panoplied  array, 

Maryland! 
With  Ringgold's  spirit  for  the  fray. 
With  Watson's  blood  at  Monterey, 
With  fearless  Lowe  and  dashing  May, 

Maryland,  my  Maryland! 

Dear  Mother,  burst  the  tyrant's  chain^ 

Maryland ! 
Virginia  should  not  call  in  vaiii, 

Maryland ! 
She  meets  her  sisters  on  the  plain, — 
"Sic  semper!"  'tis  the  proud  refrain 


2222  My  Country 

That  baffles  minions  back  amain, 

Maryland! 
Arise  in  majesty  again, 

Maryland,  my  Maryland! 

Come!  for  thy  shield  is  bright  and  strong, 

Maryland! 
Come!  for  thy  dalliance  does  thee  wrong, 

Maryland! 
Come  to  thine  own  heroic  throng 
Stalking  with  Liberty  along, 
And  chant  thy  dauntless  slogan-song, 

Maryland,  my  Maryland! 

I  see  the  blush  upon  thy  cheek, 

Maryland! 
For  thou  wast  ever  bravely  meek, 

Maryland! 
But  lo!  there  surges  forth  a  shriek. 
From  hill  to  hill,  from  creek  to  creek, 
Potomac  calls  to  Chesapeake, 

Maryland,  my  Maryland! 

Thou  wUt  not  yield  the  Vandal  toU, 

Maryland! 
Thou  wilt  not  crook  to  his  control, 

Maryland ! 
Better  the  fire  upon  thee  roll. 
Better  the  shot,  the  blade,  the  bowl. 
Than  crucifixion  of  the  soul, 

Maryland,  my  Maryland! 

I  hear  the  distant  thunder  hum, 

Maryland ! 
The  Old  Line's  bugle,  fife,  and  drum, 

Maryland!  1/1  ifisQ 

She  is  not  dead,  nor  deaf,  nor  dumb; 
Huzza!  she  spurns  the  Northern  scum! 
She  breathes!  She  burns!  She'll  come!  She'll  come! 

Maryland,  my  Maryland! 

James  Ryder  Randall  [1839-1908] 


America  to   Great   Britain  2223 


THE  VIRGINIANS  OF  THE  VALLEY 

The  knightliest  of  the  knightly  race 

That,  since  the  days  of  old, 
Have  kept  the  lamp  of  chivalry 

Alight  in  hearts  of  gold; 
The  kindliest  of  the  kindly  band 

That,  rarely  hating  ease. 
Yet  rode  with  Spotswood  round  the  land, 

And  Raleigh  round  the  seas; 

Who  climbed  the  blue  Virginian  hills 

Against  embattled  foes, 
And  planted  there,  in  valleys  fair, 

The  lily  and  the  rose; 
Whose  fragrance  lives  in  many  lands, 

Whose  beauty  stars  the  earth, 
And  lights  the  hearths  of  happy  homes 

With  loveliness  and  worth. 

We  thought  they  slept ! — the  sons  who  kept 

The  names  of  noble  sires, — 
And  slumbered  while  the  darkness  crept 

Around  their  vigil-fires; 
But  aye  the  "  Golden  Horseshoe"  knights 

Their  old  Dominion  keep,  // 

Whose  foes  have  found  enchanted  ground. 

But  not  a  knight  asleep! 

Francis  Orray  Ticknor  [1822-1874] 

AMERICA  TO   GREAT  BRITAIN 

All  hail!  thou  noble  land. 
Our  Fathers'  native  soil! 
Oh,  stretch  thy  mighty  hand, 

Gigantic  grown  by  toU,  ^ . 

O'er  the  vast  Atlantic  wave  to  our  shore! 
For  thou,  with  magic  might. 
Canst  reach  to  where  the  light 
Of  Phoebus  travels  bright 
The  world  o'er  I 


2224  ^y  Country 

The  Genius  of  our  clime, 

From  his  pine-embattled  steep, 
Shall  hail  the  guest  sublime; 
While  the  Tritons  of  the  deep 
With  their  conchs  the  kindred  league  shall  proclaim 
Then  let  the  world  combine,— 
O'er  the  main  our  naval  line, 
Like  the  milky-way  shall  shine, 
Bright  in  fame! 

Though  ages  long  have  passed 

Since  our  Fathers  left  their  home, 
Their  pilot  in  the  blast, 

O'er  untravelled  seas  to  roam. 
Yet  lives  the  blood  of  England  in  our  veins! 
And  shall  we  not  proclaim 
That  blood  of  honest  fame 
Which  no  tyranny  can  tame 
By  its  chains? 

While  the  language  free  and  bold 
Which  the  bard  of  Avon  sung, 
In  v/hich  our  Milton  told 

How  the  vault  of  heaven  rung 
When  Satan,  blasted,  fell  with  his  host; — 
While  this,  with  reverence  meet, 
'  Ten  thousand  echoes  greet. 
From  rock  to  rock  repeat 
Round  our  coast; — 

While  the  manners,  while  the  arts, 

That  mould  a  nation's  soul, 
Still  cling  around  our  hearts, — 
Between  let  Ocean  roll. 
Our  joint  communion  breaking  with  the  Sun: 
Yet,  still,  from  either  beach 
The  voice  of  blood  shall  reach, 
More  audible  than  speech, 
"We  are  One!" 

Washington  AlhtGii  [1779-1843] 


America  2225 

TO  ENGLAND  '     '  ' 

Lear  and  Cordelia!  'twas  an  ancient  tale 

Before  thy  Shakespeare  gave  it  deathless  fame; 
The  times  have  changed,  the  moral  is  the  same. 

So  like  an  outcast,  dowerless  and  pale, 

Thy  daughter  went;  and  in  a  foreign  gale 

Spread  her  young  banner,  till  its  sway  became 
A  wonder  to  the  nations.     Days  of  shame 

Are  close  upon  thee;  prophets  raise  their  wail. 

When  the  rude  Cossack  with  an  outstretched  hand 
Points  his  long  spear  across  the  narrow  sea, — 
"Lo!  there  is  England!"  when  thy  destiny 

Storms  on  thy  straw-crowned  head,  and  thou  dost  stand 

Weak,  helpless,  mad,  a  by- word  in  the  land, — 
God  grant  thy  daughter  a  Cordelia  be! 

II 
Stand,  thou  great  bulwark  of  man's  liberty! 

Thou  rock  of  shelter,  rising  from  the  wave, 

Sole  refuge  to  the  overwearied  brave 
Who  planned,  arose,  and  battled  to  be  free, 
Fell,  undeterred,  then  sadly  turned  to  thee, — 

Saved  the  free  spirit  from  their  country's  grave, 

To  rise  again,  and  animate  the  slave. 
When  God  shall  ripen  all  things.     Britons,  ye 
Who  guard  the  sacred  outpost,  not  in  vain 

Hold  your  proud  peril !     Freemen  undefiled,  ''^ 

Keep  watch  and  ward !     Let  battlements  be  piled 
Around  your  cliffs;  fleets  marshalled,  till  the  main 
Sink  under  them;  and  if  your  courage  wane, 
=*  •'    Through  force  or  fraud,  look  westward  to  your  child! 

George  Henry  Boker  [1823-1890] 

AMERICA 

Nor  force  nor  fraud  shall  sunder  us!     Oh  ye 
Who  north  or  south,  on  east  or  western  land, 
ari         Native  to  noble  sounds,  say  truth  for  truth. 
Freedom  for  freedom,  love  for  love,  and  God 


2226  My  Country 

For  God;  Oh  ye  who  in  eternal  youth 
Speak  with  a  hving  and  creative  flood 
This  universal  English,  and  do  stand 
Its  breathing  book;  live  worthy  of  that  grand 
Heroic  utterance — parted,  yet  a  whole, 
Far,  yet  unsevered, — children  brave  and  free  '  ^ 

Of  the  great  Mother-tongue,  and  ye  shall  be  --Jif  oR 

Lords  of  an  Empire  wide  as  Shakespeare's  soul. 
Sublime  as  Milton's  immemorial  theme, 
And  rich  as  Chaucer's  speech,  and  fair  as  Spenser's  dream. 

Sydney  Dobell  [1824-1874] 

TO  AMERICA 

ON  A  PROPOSED  ALLIANCE  BETWEEN  TWO  GREAT  NATIONS 

What  is  the  voice  I  hear 

On  the  winds  of  the  western  sea? 
Sentinel,  hsten  from  out  Cape  Clear 

And  say  what  the  voice  may  be. 

'Tis  a  proud  free  people  calling  loud  to  a  people  proud 
and  free. 

And  it  says  to  them:  "Kinsmen,  hail; 

We  severed  have  been  too  long. 
Now  let  us  have  done  with  a  worn-out  tale — 

The  tale  of  ancient  wrong — 

And  our  friendship  last  long  as  our  love  doth  last,  and  be 
stronger  than  death  is  strong." 

Answer  them,  sons  of  the  self-same  race. 
And  blood  of  the  self-same  clan; 

Let  us  speak  with  each  other  face  to  face 

And  answer  as  man  to  man,  .  ;,jf,ig 

And  loyally  love  and  trust  each  other  as  none  but  free 
men  can. 

Now  fling  them  out  to  the  breeze, 

Shamrock,  Thistle,  and  Rose, 
And  the  Star-spangled  Banner  unfurl  with  these — 

A  message  to  friends  and  foes 

Wherever  the  sails  of  peace  are  seen  and  wherever  the 
war  wind  blows — 


Saxon  Grit  2227 

A  message  to  bond  and  thrall  to  wake, 

For  whenever  we  come,  we  twain, 
The  throne  of  the  tyrant  shall  rock  and  quake, 

And  his  menace  be  void  and  vain, 

For  you  are  lords  of  a  strong  land  and  we  are  lords  of  the 
main. 

Yes,  this  is  the  voice  of  the  bluff  March  gale; 

We  severed  have  been  too  long, 
But  now  we  have  clone  with  a  worn-out  tale — 
The  tale  of  an  ancient  wrong — 

And  our  friendship  shall  last  as  love  doth  last  and  be 
stronger  than  death  is  strong. 

A  If  red  A  ustin  [1835-1913] 


SAXON   GRIT 

Worn  with  the  battle  of  Stamford  town, 

Fighting  the  Norman  by  Hastings  bay, 
Harold  the  Saxon's  sun  went  down, 

While  the  acorns  were  falling  one  autumn  day. 
Then  the  Norman  said,  "I  am  lord  of  the  land: 

By  tenor  of  conquest  here  I  sit; 
I  wUl  rule  you  now  with  the  iron  hand;" 

But  he  had  not  thought  of  the  Saxon  grit. 

He  took  the  land,  and  he  took  the  men, 

And  burnt  the  homesteads  from  Trent  to  Tyne, 
Made  the  freemen  serfs  by  a  stroke  of  the  pen, 

Eat  up  the  corn  and  drank  the  wine, 
And  said  to  the  maiden,  pure  and  fair, 

"You  shall  be  my  leman,  as  is  most  fit, 
Your  Saxon  churl  may  rot  in  his  lair;" 

But  he  had  not  measured  the  Saxon  grit. 

To  the  merry  greenwood  went  bold  Robin  Hood, 
With  his  strong-hearted  yeomanry  ripe  for  the  fray, 

Driving  the  arrow  into  the  marrow 

Of  all  the  proud  Normans  who  came  in  his  way; 


2228  My  Country 

Scorning  the  fetter,  fearless  and  free, 

Winning  by  valor,  or  foiling  by  wit, 
Dear  to  our  Saxon  folk  ever  is  he. 

This  merry  old  rogue  with  the  Saxon  grit. 

And  Kett  the  tanner  whipped  out  his  knife. 

And  Watt  the  smith  his  hammer  brought  down, 
For  ruth  of  the  maid  he  loved  better  than  life, 

And  by  breaking  a  head,  made  a  hole  in  the  Crown. 
From  the  Saxon  heart  rose  a  mighty  roar, 

"Our  life  shall  not  be  by  the  King's  permit; 
We  will  iight  for  the  right,  we  want  no  more;" 

Then  the  Norman  found  out  the  Saxon  grit. 

For  slow  and  sure  as  the  oaks  had  grown 

From  acorns  falling  that  autumn  day. 
So  the  Saxon  manhood  in  thorpe  and  town 

To  a  nobler  stature  grew  alway; 
Winning  by  inches,  holding  by  cUnches, 

Standing  by  law  and  the  human  right, 
Many  times  faihng,  never  once  quailing,  .  ; 

So  the  new  day  came  out  of  the  night.  , 


Then  rising  afar  in  the  Western  sea, 

A  new  world  stood  in  the  morn  of  the  day. 
Ready  to  welcome  the  brave  and  free. 

Who  would  wrench  out  the  heart  and  march  away 
From  the  narrow,  contracted,  dear  old  land, 

W^iere  the  poor  are  held  by  a  cruel  bit. 
To  ampler  spaces  for  heart  and  hand — 

And  here  was  a  chance  for  the  Saxon  grit. 

Steadily  steering,  eagerly  peering. 

Trusting  in  God  your  fathers  came, 
Pilgrims  and  strangers,  fronting  all  dangers. 

Cool-headed  Saxons,  with  hearts  aflame. 
Bound  by  the  letter,  but  free  from  the  fetter,  Q-f 

And  hiding  their  freedom  in  Holy  Writ, 
They  gave  Deuteronomy  hints  in  economy, 

And  made  a  new  Moses  of  Saxon  grit. 


At  Gibraltar 


2220 


They  whittled  and  waded  through  forest  and  fen, 

Fearless  as  ever  of  what  might  befall; 
Pouring  out  life  for  the  nurture  of  men, 

In  faith  that  by  manhood  the  world  wins  all. 
Inventing  baked  beans  and  no  end  of  machines;  \]',) 

Great  with  the  rifle  and  great  with  the  axe — 
Sending  their  notions  over  the  oceans. 

To  fill  empty  stomachs  and  straighten  bent  backs. 

Swift  to  take  chances  that  end  in  the  dollar, 

Yet  open  of  hand  when  the  dollar  is  made. 
Maintaining  the  meetin',  exalting  the  scholar, 

But  a  httle  too  anxious  about  a  good  trade; 
This  is  young  Jonathan,  son  of  old  John, 

Positive,  peaceable,  firm  in  the  right, 
Saxon  men  all  of  us,  may  we  be  one. 

Steady  for  freedom,  and  strong  in  her  might. 

Then,  slow  and  sure,  as  the  oaks  have  grown 

From  the  acorns  that  fell  on  that  autumn  day, 
So  this  new  manhood  in  city  and  town, 

To  a  nobler  stature  will  grow  alway; 
Winning  by  inches,  holding  by  clinches. 

Slow  to  contention,  and  slower  to  quit. 
Now  and  then  failing,  never  once  quailing, 

Let  us  thank  God  for  the  Saxon  grit. 

Robert  Collyer  [1823-1912] 


AT  GIBRALTAR 

I 

England,  I  stand  on  thy  imperial  ground, 
Not  all  a  stranger;  as  thy  bugles  blow, 
I  feel  within  my  blood  old  battles  flow, — 

The  blood  whose  ancient  founts  in  thee  are  found. 

Still  surging  dark  against  the  Christian  bound 
While  Islam  presses;  well  its  peoples  know 
Thy  heights  that  watch  them  wandering  below; 

I  think  how  Lucknow  heard  their  gathering  sound. 


2230        '  My  Country 

I  turn,  and  meet  the  cruel,  turbaned  face. 

England!  'tis  sweet  to  be  so  much  thy  son! 
I  feel  the  conqueror  in  my  blood  and  race; 

Last  night  Trafalgar  awed  me,  and  to-day 
Gibraltar  wakened;  hark,  thy  evening  gun 

Startles  the  desert  over  Africa! 

George  Edward  Woodberry  [1855- 

GIBRALTAR 

Seven  weeks  of  sea,  and  twice  seven  days  of  storm 

Upon  the  huge  Atlantic,  and  once  more 

We  ride  into  still  water  and  the  calm 

Of  a  sweet  evening  screened  by  either  shore 

Of  Spain  and  Barbary.    Our  toils  are  o'er, 

Our  exile  is  accomplished.    Once  again 

We  look  on  Europe,  mistress  as  of  yore 

Of  the  fair  earth  and  of  the  hearts  of  men. 

Ay,  this  is  the  famed  rock,  which  Hercules  ,  ,„ 

And  Goth  and  Moor  bequeathed  us.    At  this  door 

England  stands  sentry.    God !  to  hear  the  shrill 

Sweet  treble  of  her  fifes  upon  the  breeze 

And  at  the  summons  of  the  rock  gun's  roar 

To  see  her  red  coats  marching  from  the  hill. 

Wilfrid  Scawen  Blunt  [1840- 

MOTHER  ENGLAND 


There  was  a  rover  from  a  western  shore, 
England!  whose  eyes  the  sudden  tears  did  drown, 
Beholding  the  white  cliff  and  sunny  down 
Of  thy  good  realm,  beyond  the  sea's  uproar. 
I,  for  a  moment,  dreamed  that,  long  before, 
I  had  beheld  them  thus,  when,  with  the  frown 
Of  sovereignty,  the  victor's  palm  and  crown 
Thou  from  the  tilting-field  of  nations  bore. 
Thy  prowess  and  thy  glory  dazzled  first; 
But  when  in  fields  I  saw  the  tender  flame 
Of  primroses,  and  full-fleeced  lambs  at  play, 
Meseemed  I  at  thy  breast,  like  these,  was  nursed; 


"God  Save  the   King"  2231 

Then  mother — Mother  England! — home  I  came 
Like  one  who  hath  been  all  too  long  away! 


As  nestling  at  thy  feet  in  peace  I  lay, 
A  thought  awoke  and  restless  stirred  in  me: 
"My  land  and  congeners  are  beyond  the  sea, 
Theirs  is  the  morning  and  the  evening  day. 
Wilt  thou  give  ear  while  this  of  them  I  say: — 
'Haughty  art  thou,  and  they  are  bold  and  free, 
As  well  befits  who  have  descent  from  thee. 
And  who  have  trodden  brave  the  forlorn  way. 
Children  of  thine,  but  grown  to  strong  estate; 
Nor  scorn  from  thee  would  they  be  slow  to  pay, 
Nor  check  from  thee  submissly  would  they  bear; 
Yet,  Mother  England!  yet  their  hearts  are  great, 
And  if  for  thee  should  dawn  some  darkest  day, 
At  cry  of  thine,  how  proudly  would  they  dare!'" 
Edith  M.  Thomas  [1854- 


"GOD   SAVE  THE  KING" 

God  save  our  gracious  King, 
Long  live  our  noble  King, 

God  save  the  King! 
Send  him  victorious, 
Happy  and  glorious. 
Long  to  reign  over  us, 

God  save  the  King! 

O  Lord  our  God,  arise, 
Scatter  his  enemies. 

And  make  them  fall. 
Confound  their  politics. 
Frustrate  their  knavish  tricks; 
On  Thee  our  hearts  we  fix, 

God  save  us  all! 


2232  My   Country 


Thy  choicest  gifts  in  store, 
On  him  be  pleased  to  pour, 

Long  may  he  reign. 
May  he  defend  our  laws, 
And  ever  give  us  cause, 
To  sing  with  heart  and  voice, 

God  save  the  King! 

Henry  Carey  (?)  [    ?   -1743] 


RULE,  BRITANNIA 

From  "Alfred" 

When  Britain  first,  at  Heaven's  command, 

Arose  from  out  the  azure  main, 
This  was  the  charter  of  the  land, 

And  guardian  angels  sung  the  strain: 
Rule^  Britannia,  rule  the  waves, 
Britons  never  will  be  slaves. 

The  nations  not  so  blest  as  thee 

Must,  in  their  turns,  to  tyrants  fall, 

Whilst  thou  shalt  flourish,  great  and  free, 
The  dread  and  envy  of  them  all. 

Still  more  majestic  shalt  thou  rise. 

More  dreadful  from  each  foreign  stroke; 

As  the  loud  blast  that  tears  the  skies 
Serves  but  to  root  thy  native  oak. 

Thee  haughty  tyrants  ne'er  shaU  tame; 

All  their  attempts  to  bend  thee  down 
Will  but  arouse  thy  generous  flame. 

But  work  their  woe,  and  thy  renown. 

To  thee  belongs  the  rural  reign; 

Thy  cities  shall  with  commerce  shine; 
All  thine  shall  be  the  subject  main, 

And  every  shore  it  circles,  thine. 


"Ye    Mariners  of  England"        2233 

The  Muses,  still  with  Freedom  found,' 

Shall  to  thy  happy  coast  repair: 
Blest  Isle!  with  matchless  beauty  crowned, 
And  manly  hearts  to  guard  the  fair. 
Rule,  Britannia,  rule  the  waves, 
Britons  never  will  be  slaves. 

Jatnes  Thomson  [i  700-1 74 S] 


"YE  MARINERS   OF   ENGLAND" 

Ye  Mariners  of  England 

That  guard  our  native  seas! 
Whose  flag  has  braved,  a  thousand  years, 

The  battle  and  the  breeze! 
Your  glorious  standard  launch  again 

To  match  another  foe; 
And  sweep  through  the  deep, 

While  the  stormy  winds  do  blow! 
While  the  battle  rages  loud  and  long, 

And  the  stormy  winds  do  blow. 

The  spirits  of  your  fathers 

Shall  start  from  every  wave! — 
For  the  deck  it  was  their  field  of  fame, 

And  Ocean  was  their  grave: 
Where  Blake  and  mighty  Nelson  fell 

Your  manly  hearts  shall  glow. 
As  ye  sweep  through  the  deep. 

While  the  stormy  winds  do  blow! 
While  the  battle  rages  loud  and  long, 

And  the  stormy  winds  do  blow. 

Britannia  needs  no  bulwarks. 

No  towers  along  the  steep; 
Her  march  is  o'er  the  mountain-waves, 

Her  home  is  on  the  deep. 
With  thunders  from  her  native  oak 

She  quells  the  floods  below, 


2234  My  Country 

As  they  roar  on  the  shore, 

When  the  stormy  winds  do  blow! 

When  the  battle  rages  loud  and  long, 
And  the  stormy  winds  do  blow. 

The  meteor  flag  of  England 

Shall  yet  terrific  burn; 
Till  danger 's  troubled  night  depart 

And  the  star  of  peace  return. 
Then,  then,  ye  ocean- warriors! 

Our  song  and  feast  shall  flow 
To  the  fame  of  your  name, 

When  the  storm  has  ceased  to  blow! 
When  the  fiery  fight  is  heard  no  more, 

And  the  storm  has  ceased  to  blow. 

Thomas  Campbell  [17  7  7-1844] 


"READY,   AY,   READY" 

Old  England's  sons  are  English  yet, 

Old  England's  hearts  are  strong; 
And  still  she  wears  her  coronet 

Aflame  with  sword  and  song. 
As  in  their  pride  our  fathers  died. 

If  need  be,  so  die  we ; 
So  wield  we  still,  gainsay  who  wfll. 

The  sceptre  of  the  sea. 
England,  stand  fast;  let  heart  and  hand  be  steady; 
Be  thy  first  word  thy  last, — Ready,  ay,  ready! 

We've  Raleighs  stOl  for  Raleigh's  part, 

We've  Nelsons  yet  unknown; 
The  pulses  of  the  Lion  Heart 

Beat  on  through  Wellington. 
Hold,  Britain,  hold  thy  creed  of  old. 

Strong  foe  and  steadfast  friend, 
And,  still  unto  thy  motto  true. 

Defy  not,  but  defend. 
England,  stand  fast;  let  heart  and  hand  be  steady; 
Be  thy  first  word  thy  last, — Ready,  ay,  ready! 


"Of  Old  Sat  Freedom  on  the  Heights"    2235 

Men  whispered  that  our  arm  was  weak, 

Men  said  our  blood  was  cold, 
And  that  our  hearts  no  longer  speak 

The  clarion-note  of  old ; 
But  let  the  spear  and  sword  draw  near 

The  sleeping  lion's  den, 
His  island  shore  shall  start  once  more 
To  life  with  armed  men. 
England,  stand  fast;  let  heart  and  hand  be  steady; 
Be  thy  first  word  thy  last, — Ready,  ay,  ready! 

Herman  Charles  Merivale  [1806-1874] 


"OF  OLD  SAT  FREEDOM  ON  THE  HEIGHTS" 

From  'On  a  Mourner" 

Of  old  sat  Freedom  on  the  heights. 
The  thunders  breaking  at  her  feet; 

Above  her  shook  the  starry  lights, 
She  heard  the  torrents  meet. 

There  in  her  place  she  did  rejoice, 

Self-gathered  in  her  prophet-mind, 
But  fragments  of  her  mighty  voice 

Came  rolling  on  the  wind. 

Then  stepped  she  down  through  town  and  field 

To  mingle  with  the  human  race, 
And  part  by  part  to  men  revealed 

The  fullness  of  her  face — • 

Grave  mother  of  majestic  works. 

From  her  isle-altar  gazing  down, 
Who,  God-like,  grasps  the  triple  forks, 

And,  king-like,  wears  the  crown. 

Her  open  eyes  desire  the  truth. 

The  wisdom  of  a  thousand  years 
Is  in  them.     May  perpetual  youth 

Keep  dry  their  light  from  tears; 


2236  My  Country  hfOlO 

That  her  fair  form  may  stand  and  shine, 
.   Make  bright  our  days  and  light  our  dreams, 
Turning  to  scorn  with  hps  divine 
The  falsehood  of  extremes! 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809- 189 2] 


AN  ODE 

IN  IMITATION  OF  ALC^EUS 

What  constitutes  a  State? 
Not  high-raised  battlement  or  labored  mound. 

Thick  wall  or  moated  gate; 
Not  cities  proud  with  spires  and  turrets  crowned ; 

Not  bays  and  broad-armed  ports, 
Where,  laughing  at  the  storm,  rich  navies  ride; 

Not  starred  and  spangled  courts, 
Where  low-browed  baseness  wafts  perfume  to  pride. 

No: — men,  high-minded  men, 
With  powers  as  far  above  dull  brutes  endued 

In  forest,  brake,  or  den, 
As  beasts  excel  cold  rocks  and  brambles  rude, — 

Men  who  their  duties  know, 
But  know  their  rights,  and,  knowing,  dare  maintain; 

Prevent  the  long-aimed  blow. 
And  crush  the  tyrant  while  they  rend  the  chain : — 

These  constitute  a  State; 
And  sovereign  Law,  that  State's  collected  will. 

O'er  thrones  and  globes  elate 
Sits  empress,  crowning  good,  repressing  ill. 

Smit  by  her  sacred  frown, 
The  fiend,  Dissension,  like  a  vapor  sinks; 

And  e'en  the  all-dazzling  Crown 
Hides  his  faint  rays,  and  at  her  bidding  shrinks. 

Such  was  this  heaven-loved  isle, 
Than  Lesbos  fairer  and  the  Cretan  shore! 

No  more  shall  Freedom  smile? 
Shall  Britons  languish,  and  be  men  no  more? 


England,    1802  2237 

Since  all  must  life  resign, 
Those  sweet  rewards  which  decorate  the  brave 

'Tis  folly  to  decline, 
And  steal  inglorious  to  the  silent  grave. 

William  Jones  [i 746-1 794] 


ENGLAND,   1802 


0  friend!  I  know  not  which  way  I  must  look 
For  comfort,  being,  as  I  am,  oppressed, 
To  think  that  now  our  life  is  only  dressed 
For  show;  mean  handy-work  of  craftsman,  cook. 
Or  groom! — We  must  run  glittering  hke  a  brook 
In  the  open  sunshine,  or  we  are  unblest : 
The  wealthiest  man  among  us  is  the  best : 
No  grandeur  now  in  nature  or  in  book 
Dehghts  us.     Rapine,  avarice,  expense, 
This  is  idolatry;  and  these  we  adore: 
Plain  living  and  high  thinking  are  no  more: 
The  homely  beauty  of  the  good  old  cause 
Is  gone;  our  peace,  our  fearful  innocence, 
And  pure  rehgion  breathing  household  laws. 


Milton!  thou  shouldst  be  living  at  this  hour: 
England  hath  need  of  thee:  she  is  a  fen 
Of  stagnant  waters:  altar,  sword,  and  pen, 

Fireside,  the  heroic  wealth  of  hall  and  bower, 

Have  forfeited  their  ancient  English  dower 
Of  inward  happiness.     We  are  selfish  men; 
Oh!  raise  us  up,  return  to  us  again, 

And  give  us  manners,  virtue,  freedom,  powTr. 

Thy  soul  was  like  a  Star,  and  dwelt  apart; 

Thou  hadst  a  voice  whose  sound  was  like  the  sea: 
Pure  as  the  naked  heavens,  majestic,  free, 
So  didst  thou  travel  on  life's  common  way, 

In  cheerful  godliness;  and  yet  thy  heart 
The  lowliest  duties  on  herself  did  lay. 


2238  My  Country 

in 

Great  men  have  been  among  us;  hands  that  penned 

And  tongues  that  uttered  wisdom^ — better  none: 

The  later  Sidney,  Marvell,  Harrington, 
Young  Vane,  and  others  who  called  Milton  friend. 
These  moralists  could  act  and  comprehend: 

They  knew  how  genuine  glory  was  put  on; 

Taught  us  how  rightfully  a  nation  shone 
In  splendor:  what  strength  was,  that  would  not  bend 
But  in  magnanimous  meekness.     France,  'tis  strange, 

Hath  brought  forth  no  such  souls  as  we  had  then. 
Perpetual  emptiness!     unceasing  change! 

No  single  volume  paramount,  no  code, 

No  master  spirit,  no  determined  road; 

But  equally  a  want  of  books  and  men! 


It  is  not  to  be  thought  of  that  the  flood 
Of  British  freedom,  which,  to  the  open  sea 
Of  the  world's  praise,  from  dark  antiquity 

Hath  flowed,  "with  pomp  of  waters,  unwithstood," — 

Roused  though  it  be  full  often  to  a  mood 
Which  spurns  the  check  of  salutary  bands, — 
That  this  most  famous  stream  in  bogs  and  sands 

Should  perish;  and  to  evil  and  to  good 

Be  lost  for  ever.     In  our  halls  is  hung 
Armory  of  the  invincible  Knights  of  old: 

We  must  be  free  or  die,  who  speak  the  tongue 

That  Shakespeare  spake;  the  faith  and  morals  hold 

Which  ]\Iilton  held. — In  everything  we  are  sprung 
Of  Earth's  first  blood,  have  titles  manifold. 

raeiBi  !rtO 

.       .rr 

When  I  have  borne  in  memory  what  has  tamed 
Great  Nations,  how  ennobling  thoughts  depart 
When  men  change  swords  for  ledgers,  and  desert 

The  student's  bower  for  gold,  some  fears  unnamed  ; 

I  had,  my  Country — am  I  to  be  blamed? 


"England,   My   England"  2239 

Now,  when  I  think  of  thee,  and  what  thou  art, 

Verily,  in  the  bottom  of  my  heart, 
Of  those  unfiHal  fears  I  am  ashamed. 
For  dearly  must  we  prize  thee;  we  who  find 

In  thee  a  bulwark  for  the  cause  of  men; 

And  I  by  my  affection  was  beguiled: 

What  wonder  if  a  Poet  now  and  then. 
Among  the  many  movements  of  his  mind, 

Felt  for  thee  as  a  lover  or  a  child ! 

William  Wordsworth  [i 770-1850] 


"ENGLAND,   MY  ENGLAND" 

What  have  I  done  for  you, 

England,  my  England? 
What  is  there  I  would  not  do, 

England,  my  own? 
With  your  glorious  eyes  austere. 
As  the  Lord  were  walking  near. 
Whispering  terrible  things  and  dear 

As  the  Song  on  your  bugles  blown, 
England — 

Round  the  world  on  your  bugles  blown! 

Where  shall  the  watchful  Sun, 

England,  my  England, 
Match  the  master-work  you've  done, 

England,  my  own? 
When  shall  he  rejoice  agen 
Such  a  breed  of  mighty  men 
As  come  forward,  one  to  ten. 

To  the  Song  on  your  bugles  blown, 
England — ■ 

Down  the  years  on  your  bugles  blown? 

Ever  the  faith  endures, 

England,  my  England:— 
"Take  and  break  us:  we  are  yours, 

England,  my  own! 


2240  My   Country 

Life  is  good,  and  joy  runs  high         V 
Between  English  earth  and  sky: 
Death  is  death;  but  we  shall  die 

To  the  Song  on  your  bugles  blown, 
England — 

To  the  stars  on  your  bugles  blown!" 

They  caU  you  proud  and  hard, 

England,  my  England: 
You  with  worlds  to  watch  and  ward, 

England,  my  own! 
You  whose  mailed  hand  keeps  the  keys 
Of  such  teeming  destinies, 
You  could  know  nor  dread  nor  ease 

Were  the  Song  on  your  bugles  blown, 
England, 

Round  the  Pit  on  your  bugles  blown! 

Mother  of  Ships  whose  might 

England,  my  England, 
Is  the  fierce  old  Sea's  delight, 

England,  my  own. 
Chosen  daughter  of  the  Lord, 
Spouse-in-Chief  of  the  ancient  Sword, 
There's  the  menace  of  the  Word 

In  the  Song  on  your  bugles  blown, 
England — ■ 

Out  of  heaven  on  your  bugles  blown! 

William  Ernest  Henley  [i  849-1 903] 


ENGLAND 

There  she  sits  in  her  Island-home, 

Peerless  among  her  Peers! 
And  Liberty  oft  to  her  arms  doth  come, 

To  ease  its  poor  heart  of  tears. 
Old  England  still  throbs  with  the  muffled  fire 

Of  a  past  she  can  never  forget : 
And  again  shall  she  herald  the  world  up  higher; 

For  there's  life  in  the  Old  Land  yet. 


The  Song  of  the   Bow  2241 

They  would  mock  at  her  now,  who  of  old  looked  forth 

In  their  fear,  as  they  heard  her  afar; 
But  loud  will  your  wail  be,  O  Kings  of  the  Earth! 

When  the  Old  Land  goes  down  to  the  war. 
The  Avalanche  trembles,  half-launched,  and  half-riven, 

Her  voice  will  in  motion  set: 
O  ring  out  the  tidings,  wide-reaching  as  Heaven! 

There's  life  in  the  Old  Land  yet. 

The  old  nursing  Mother's  not  hoary  yet, 

There  is  sap  in  her  ancient  tree: 
She  liftcth  a  bosom  of  glory  yet, 

Through  her  mists,  to  the  Sun  and  the  Sea — 
Fair  as  the  Queen  of  Love,  fresh  from  the  foam, 

Or  a  star  in  a  dark  cloud  set; 
Ye  may  blazon  her  shame, — ye  may  leap  at  her  name, — 

But  there's  life  in  the  Old  Land  yet. 

Let  the  storm  burst,  you  will  find  the  Old  Land 

Ready-ripe  for  a  rough,  red  fray! 
She  will  fight  as  she  fought  when  she  took  her  stand 

For  the  Right  in  the  olden  day. 
Rouse  the  old  royal  soul;  Europe's  best  hope 

Is  her  sword-edge  for  Victory  set ! 
She  shall  dash  Freedom's  foes  down  Death's  bloody  slope; 

For  there's  life  in  the  Old  Land  yet. 

Gerald  Massey  [i 828-1907] 

THE  SONG  OF  THE  BOW 

From  "  The  White  Company  " 

What  of  the  bow? 

The  bow  was  made  in  England: 
Of  true  wood,  of  yew- wood. 
The  wood  of  English  bows; 
So  men  who  are  free 
Love  the  old  yew-tree 
And  the  land  where  the  yew-tree  grows. 

What  of  the  cord? 

The  cord  was  made  in  England: 
A  rough  cord,  a  tough  cord, 

A  cord  that  bowmen  love; 


2242  My  Country 

And  so  we  will  sing  -n^ 

Of  the  hempen  string 
And  the  land  where  the  cord  was  wove. 

What  of  the  shaft?  ,  [[ 

The  shaft  was  cut  in  England: 
A  long  shaft,  a  strong  shaft, 
Barbed  and  trim  and  true; 
So  we'll  drink  all  together 
To  the  gray  goose-feather 
And  the  land  where  the  gray  goose  flew. 

What  of  the  mark? 

Ah,  seek  it  not  in  England: 
A  bold  mark,  our  old  mark, 
Is  waiting  over-sea. 

When  the  strings  harp  in  chorus, 
And  the  lion  flag  is  o'er  us. 
It  is  there  that  our  mark  will  be. 

What  of  the  men? 

The  men  were  bred  in  England: 
The  bowmen — the  yeomen. 
The  lads  of  dale  and  fell. 
Here's  to  you — and  to  you! 
To  the  hearts  that  are  true 
And  the  land  where  the  true  hearts  dwell. 
Arthur  Conan  Doyle  [1859- 

AN  ENGLISH   MOTHER 

Every  week  of  every  season  out  of  English  ports  go  forth, 
White  of  sail  or  white  of  trail.  East,  or  West,  or  South,  or 

North, 
Scattering  like  a  flight  of  pigeons,  half  a  hundred  home-sick 

ships. 
Bearing  half  a  thousand  striplings — each  with  kisses  on  his 

lips 
Of  some  silent  mother,  fearful  lest  she  show  herself  too  fond, 
Giving  him  to  bush  or  desert  as  one  pays  a  sacred  bond, 


An   English   Mother  -243 

— Tell  us,  you  who  hide  your  heartbreak,  which  is  sadder, 

when  all's  done, 
To  repine,  an  English  mother,  or  to  roam,  an  English  son? 

You  who  shared  your  babe's  first  sorrow  when  his  cheek  no 
longer  pressed 

On  the  perfect,  snow-and-roseleaf  beauty  of  your  mother- 
breast, 

In  the  rigor  of  his  nurture  was  your  woman's  mercy  mute, 

Knowing  he  was  doomed  to  exile  with  the  savage  and  the 
brute? 

Did  you  school  yourself  to  absence  all  his  adolescent  years, 

That,  though  you  be  torn  with  parting,  he  should  never  see 
the  tears? 

Now  his  ship  has  left  the  ofBng  for  the  many-mouthed 
sea. 

This  your  guerdon,  empty  heart,  by  empty  bed  to  bend  the 
knee! 

And  if  he  be  but  the  latest  thus  to  leave  your  dwindling 

board, 
Is  a  sorrow  less  for  being  added  to  a  sorrow's  hoard? 
Is   the   mother-pain   the   duUer   that   to-day  his  brothers 

stand. 
Facing  ambuscades  of  Congo  or  alarms  of  Zululand? 
Toil,  where  blizzards  drift  the  snow  Like  smoke  across  the 

plains  of  death? 
Faint,  where  tropic  fens  at  morning  steam  with  fever-laden 

breath? 
Die,  that  in  some  distant  river's  veins  the  Enghsh  blood  may 

run — 
Mississippi,  Yangtze,  Ganges,  Nile,  Mackenzie,  Amazon? 

Ah!  you  still  must  wait  and  suffer  in  a  solitude  untold 

While  your  sisters  of  the  nations  call  you  passive,  call  you 
cold — 

Still  must  scan  the  news  of  sailings,  breathless  search  the 
slow  gazette, 

Find  the  dreadful  name  .  .  .  and,  later,  get  his  bUthe  fare- 
well!    And  yet 


2244  ^y   Country 

Shall  the  lonely  at  the  hearthstone  shame  the  legions  who 

have  died 
Grudging  not  the  price  their  country  pays  for  progress  and 

for  pride? 
— Nay;  but,  England,  do  not  ask  us  thus  to  emulate  your 

scars 
Until  women's  tears  are  reckoned  in  the  budgets  of  your 

wars. 

Robert  Underwood  Johnson  [1853- 


AVE  IMPERATRIX! 

Set  in  this  stormy  Northern  sea, 
Queen  of  these  restless  fields  of  tide, 

England!  what  shall  men  say  of  thee, 
Before  whose  feet  the  worlds  divide? 

The  earth,  a  brittle  globe  of  glass, 

Lies  in  the  hollow  of  thy  hand, 
And  through  its  heart  of  crystal  pass, 

Like  shadows  through  a  twilight  land, 

The  spears  of  crimson-suited  war, 

The  long  white-crested  waves  of  fight, 

And  all  the  deadly  fires  which  are 
The  torches  of  the  lords  of  Night. 

The  yellow  leopards,  strained  and  lean,  , ,, 

The  treacherous  Russian  knows  so  well, 

With  gaping  blackened  jaws  are  seen 
To  leap  through  hail  of  screaming  shell. 

The  strong  sea-lion  of  England's  wars 

Hath  left  his  sapphire  cave  of  sea. 
To  battle  with  the  storm  that  mars 

The  star  of  England's  chivalry. 

The  brazen-throated  clarion  blows 

Across  the  Pathan's  reedy  fen. 
And  the  high  steeps  of  Indian  snows 

Shake  to  the  tread  of  armed  men. 


Ave   Imperatrix!  2245 

And  many  an  Afghan  chief,  who  hes 
Beneath  his  cool  pomegranate-trees, 

Clutches  his  sword  in  fierce  surmise         > 
When  on  the  mountain-side  he  sees 

The  fleet-foot  Marri  scout,  who  comes 

To  tell  how  he  hath  heard  afar 
The  measured  roll  of  English  drums 

Beat  at  the  gates  of  Kandahar. 

For  southern  wind  and  east  wind  meet 

Where,  girt  and  crowned  by  sword  and  fire, 

England  with  bare  and  bloody  feet 
Climbs  the  steep  road  of  wide  empire. 

O  lonely  Himalayan  height. 

Gray  pillar  of  the  Indian  sky. 
Where  saw'st  thou  last  in  clanging  fight 

Our  winged  dogs  of  Victory? 

The  almond  groves  of  Samarcand, 

Bokhara,  where  red  lilies  blow. 
And  Oxus,  by  whose  yellow  sand 

The  grave  white-turbaned  merchants  go; 

And  on  from  thence  to  Ispahan, 
The  gilded  garden  of  the  sun, 
Whence  the  long  dusty  caravan 
i  '  Brings  cedar  and  vermilion; 

And  that  dread  city  of  Cabul 

Set  at  the  mountain's  scarped  feet, 
Whose  marble  tanks  are  ever  fuU 

With  water  for  the  noonday  heat; 

Where  through  the  narrow  straight  Bazaar 

A  little  maid  Circassian 
Is  led,  a  present  from  the  Czar 

Unto  some  old  and  bearded  Khan, — • 


2246  My  Country 

Here  have  our  wild  war-eagles  flown, 
And  flapped  wide  wings  in  fiery  fight ; 

But  the  sad  dove,  that  sits  alone 
In  England — she  hath  no  delight. 

In  vain  the  laughing  girl  will  lean 
To  greet  her  love  with  love-lit  eyes: 

Down  in  some  treacherous  black  ravine, 
Clutching  his  flag,  the  dead  boy  lies. 

And  many  a  moon  and  sun  will  see 
The  lingering  wistful  children  wait 

To  climb  upon  their  father's  knee; 
And  in  each  house  made  desolate. 

Pale  women  who  have  lost  their  lord 
Will  kiss  the  relics  of  the  slain — 

Some  tarnished  epaulette, — some  sword — 
Poor  toys  to  soothe  such  anguished  pain. 

For  not  in  quiet  English  fields 
Are  these,  our  brothers,  lain  to  rest. 

Where  we  might  deck  their  broken  shields 
With  all  the  flowers  the  dead  love  best. 

For  some  are  by  the  Delhi  walls, 
And  many  in  the  Afghan  land, 

And  many  where  the  Ganges  falls 

Through  seven  mouths  of  shifting  sand. 

And  some  in  Russian  waters  lie. 
And  others  in  the  seas  which  are 

The  portals  to  the  East,  or  by 

The  wind-swept  heights  of  Trafalgar. 

O  wandering  graves!     O  restless  sleep! 

O  silence  of  the  sunless  day! 
O  still  ravine!     O  stormy  deep! 

Give  up  your  prey !     Give  up  your  prey ! 


Ave   Imperatrix!  2247 

And  thou  whose  wounds  are  never  healed, 

Whose  weary  race  is  never  won, 
O  Cromwell's  England!  must  thou  yield 

For  every  inch  of  ground  a  son? 

Go!  crown  with  thorns  thy  gold-crowned  head, 
Change  thy  glad  song  to  song  of  pain ; 

Wind  and  wild  wave  have  got  thy  dead. 
And  will  not  yield  them  back  again. 

Wave  and  wild  wind  and  foreign  shore 

Possess  the  flower  of  English  land!— 
Lips  that  thy  lips  shall  kiss  no  more, 

Hands  that  shall  never  clasp  thy  hand. 

What  profit  now  that  we  have  bound 

The  whole  round  world  with  nets  of  gold, 

If  hidden  in  our  heart  is  found 
The  care  that  groweth  never  old? 

What  profit  that  our  galleys  ride. 

Pine-forest-like,  on  every  main? 
Ruin  and  wreck  are  at  our  side, 

Grim  warders  of  the  House  of  Pain. 

Where  are  the  brave,  the  strong,  the  fleet? 

Where  is  our  English  chivalry? 
Wild  grasses  are  their  burial-sheet. 

And  sobbing  waves  their  threnody. 

O  loved  ones  lying  far  away. 

What  word  of  love  can  dead  lips  send! 

O  wasted  dust!     O  senseless  clay! 
Is  this  the  end?    Is  this  the  end? 

Peace,  peace!  we  wrong  the  noble  dead 

To  vex  their  solemn  slumber  so; 
Though  childless,  and  with  thorn-crowned  head, 

Up  the  steep  road  must  England  go, 


2248  My  Country 

Yet  when  this  fiery  web  is  spun, 
Her  watchmen  shall  descry  from  far 

The  young  Republic  like  a  sun 

Rise  from  these  crimson  seas  of  war. 

Oscar  Wilde  [1856-1900] 

RECESSIONAL 

God  of  our  fathers,  known  of  old — 
Lord  of  our  far-flung  battle  line — 

Beneath  whose  awful  hand  we  hold 
Dominion  over  palm  and  pine — 

Lord  God  of  Hosts,  be  with  us  yet, 

Lest  we  forge t^cst  we  forget! 

The  tumult  and  the  shouting  dies — 
The  Captains  and  the  Kings  depart — 

Still  stands  Thine  ancient  sacrifice, 
An  humble  and  a  contrite  heart. 

Lord  God  of  Hosts,  be  with  us  yet, 

Lest  we  forget — ^lest  we  forget!  ,   . 

Far-called,  our  navies  melt  away — 
On  dune  and  headland  sinks  the  fire — 

Lo,  all  our  pomp  of  yesterday 
Is  one  with  Nineveh  and  Tyre! 

Judge  of  the  Nations,  spare  us  yet, 

Lest  we  forget — lest  we  forget! 

If,  drunk  with  sight  of  power,  we  loose 

Wild*  tongues  that  have  not  Thee  in  awe- 
Such  boasting  as  the  Gentiles  use. 

Or  lesser  breeds  without  the  Law — ■ 
Lord  God  of  Hosts,  be  with  us  yet, 
Lest  we  forget — lest  we  forget! 

For  heathen  heart  that  puts  her  trust 

In  reeking  tube  and  iron  shard — 
All  valiant  dust  that  builds  on  dust, 

And  guarding  calls  not  Thee  to  guard, — 
For  frantic  boast  and  foolish  word, 
5  •        Thy  Mercy  on  Thy  People,  Lord!     amen. 
Rtidyard  Kipling  [1865-^ 


Dark   Rosaleen  2249 


THE  WEARIN'   O'   THE   GREEN 

O,  PADDY  dear,  an'  did  ye  hear  the  news  that's  goin'  round? 
The  shamrock  is  by  law  forbid  to  grow  on  Irish  ground ! 
No  more  St.  Patrick's  Day  we'll  keep,  his  color  can't  be 

seen, 
For  there's  a  cruel  law  agin  the  wearin'  o'  the  Green! 
I  met  wid  Nappcr  Tandy,  and  he  took  me  by  the  hand. 
And  he  said,  "How's  poor  Quid  Ireland,  and  how  does  she 

stand?" 
She's  the  most  disthressful  country  that  iver  yet  was  seen, 
For  they're  hangin'  men  and  women  there  for  wearin'  o'  the 

Green. 

An'  if  the  color  we  must  wear  is  England's  cruel  Red, 

Let  it  remind  us  of  the  blood  that  Ireland  has  shed; 

Then  pull  the  shamrock  from  your  hat,  and  throw  it  on  the 

sod, — 
And  never  fear,  'twill  take  root  there,  though  under  foot  'tis 

trod! 
When  law  can  stop  the  blades  of  grass  from  growin'  as  they 

grow, 
And  when  the  leaves  in  summer-time  their  color  dare  not 

show. 
Then  I  will  change  the  color,  too,  I  wear  in  my  caubeen. 
But  till  that  day,  plaze  God,  I'll  stick  to  wearin'  o'  the  Green. 

Unknown 


DARK  ROSALEEN 

O  MY  dark  Rosaleen, 

Do  not  sigh,  do  not  weep! 
The  priests  are  on  the  ocean  green. 

They  march  along  the  deep. 
There's  wine  from  the  royal  Pope 

Upon  the  ocean  green. 
And  Spanish  ale  shall  give  you  hope,. 

My  dark  Rosaleen! 

My  own  Rosaleen! 


2250  My   Country 

Shall  glad  your  heart,  shall  give  you  hope, 
Shall  give  you  health,  and  help,  and  hope, 
My  dark  Rosaleen! 


Over  hills  and  through  dales 

Have  I  roamed  for  your  sake; 
All  yesterday  I  sailed  the  sails  .   1 

On  river  and  on  lake. 
The  Erne,  at  its  highest  flood,  ,, 

I  dashed  across  unseen, 
For  there  was  lightning  in  my  blood,  .j^j,- 

My  dark  Rosaleen!  ,1 

My  own  Rosaleen! 
Oh!  there  was  lightning  in  my  blood, 
Red  lightning  lightened  through  my  blood. 

My  dark  Rosaleen!  ,.j  j 

All  day  long,  in  unrest. 

To  and  fro  do  I  move.  a/. 

The  very  soul  within  my  breast 

Is  wasted  for  you,  love!  >  fl 

The  heart  in  my  bosom  faints 

To  think  of  you,  my  Queen, 
My  life  of  life,  my  saint  of  saints, 

My  dark  Rosaleen!  irfT 

My  own  Rosaleen !  \  lib  JuS 

To  hear  your  sweet  and  sad  complaints, 
My  life,  my  love,  my  saint  of  saints, 

My  dark  Rosaleen! 

Woe  and  pajn,  pain  and  woe. 

Are  my  lot,  night  and  noon. 
To  see  your  bright  face  clouded  so,    " 

Like  to  the  mournful  moon. 
But  yet  will  I  rear  your  throne 

Again  in  golden  sheen; 
'Tis  you  shall  reign,  shall  reign  alone 

My  dark  Rosaleen! 

My  own  Rosaleen! 


Dark  Rosaleen  2251 

'Tis  you  shall  have  the  golden  throne, 
'Tis  you  shall  reign,  and  reign  alone, 
My  dark  Rosaleen ! 

Over  dews,  over  sands, 

Will  I  fly  for  your  weal: 
Your  holy,  delicate  white  hands 

Shall  girdle  me  with  steel. 
At  home  in  your  emerald  bowers, 

From  morning's  dawn  till  e'en, 
You'll  pray  for  me,  my  flower  of  flowers, 

My  dark  Rosaleen! 

My  own  Rosaleen! 
You'll  think  of  me  through  daylight's  hours, 
My  virgin  flower,  my  flower  of  flowers, 

My  dark  Rosaleen! 

I  could  scale  the  blue  air, 

I  could  plough  the  high  hills. 
Oh,  I  could  kneel  all  night  in  prayer, 

To  heal  your  many  ills! 
And  one  beamy  smfle  from  you 

Would  float  like  light  between 
My  toils  and  me,  my  own,  my  true, 

My  dark  Rosaleen! 

My  own  Rosaleen! 
Would  give  me  life  and  soul  anew, 
A  second  life,  a  soul  anew, 

My  dark  Rosaleen! 

Oh!  the  Erne  shall  run  red 

With  redundance  of  blood. 
The  earth  shall  rock  beneath  our  tread, 

And  flames  wrap  hill  and  wood, 
And  gun-peal  and  slogan-cry 

Wake  many  a  glen  serene,  ^f 

Ere  you  shall  fade,  ere  you  shall  die. 

My  dark  Rosaleen!  ' 

My  own  Rosaleen! 


2252  My   Country 

The  Judgment  Hour  must  first  be  nigh, 
Ere  you  shall  fade,  ere  you  can  die, 
My  dark  Rosaleen! 

James  Clarence  Mangan  [1803-1849] 


EXILE  OF  ERIN 

There  came  to  the  beach  a  poor  exile  of  Erin, 

The  dew  on  his  thin  robe  was  heavy  and  chill; 
For  his  country  he  sighed,  when  at  twilight  repairing 

To  wander  alone  by  the  wind-beaten  hill. 

But  the  day-star  attracted  his  eye's  sad  devotion, 

For  it  rose  o'er  his  own  native  isle  of  the  ocean, 

Where  once,  in  the  fire  of  his  youthful  emotion, 

He  sang  the  bold  anthem  of  Erin  go  bragh. 

Sad  is  my  fate!  said  the  heart-broken  stranger; 

The  wild  deer  and  wolf  to  a  covert  can  flee, 
But  I  have  no  refuge  from  famine  and  danger, 

A  home  and  a  countrj'  remain  not  to  me. 
Never  again,  in  the  green  sunny  bowers 
Where  my  forefathers  lived,  shall  I  spend  the  sweet  hours. 
Or  cover  my  harp  with  the  wild-woven  flowers. 

And  strike  to  the  numbers  of  Erin  go  bragh! 

Erin,  my  country!  though  sad  and  forsaken. 

In  dreams  I  revisit  thy  sea-beaten  shore; 
But,  alas!  in  a  far  foreign  land  I  awaken. 

And  sigh  for  the  friends  who  can  meet  me  no  more! 
O  cruel  fate!  wilt  thou  never  replace  me     ,  .>,{|  \j\c\ 
In  a  mansion  of  peace,  where  no  perils  can  chase  me? 
Never  again  shall  my  brothers  embrace  me? 

They  died  to  defend  me,  or  live  to  deplore! 

Where  is  my  cabin-door,  fast  by  the  wildwood? 

Sisters  and  sire,  did  ye  weep  for  its  fall? 
Where  is  the  mother  that  looked  on  my  childhood? 

Knd  where  is  the  bosom-friend,  dearer  than  all? 


Ireland  2253 

O  my  sad  heart!  long  abandoned  by  pleasure, 
Why  did  it  dote  on  a  fast-fading  treasure? 
Tears,  like  the  rain-drop,  may  fall  without  measure, 
But  rapture  and  beauty  they  cannot  recall. 

Yet,  aU  its  sad  recollections  suppressing, 

One  dying  wish  my  lone  bosom  can  draw, — 

Erin,  an  exile  bequeaths  thee  his  blessing! 
Land  of  my  forefathers,  Erin  go  bragh! 

Buried  and  cold,  when  my  heart  stills  her  motion, 

Green  be  thy  fields,  sweetest  isle  of  the  ocean! 

And  thy  harp-striking  bards  sing  aloud  with  devotion,^ 
Erin  mavournin,  Erin  go  bragh! 

Thomas  Cavipbcll  [1777-1S44] 


ANDROMEDA 

They  chained  her  fair  young  body  to  the  cold  and  cruel 

stone; 
The  beast  begot  of  sea  and  slime  had  marked  her  for  his  own; 
The  callous  world  beheld  the  wrong,  and  left  her  there  alone. 
Base  caitiffs  who  belied  her,  false  kinsmen  who  denied  her, 
Ye  left  her  there  alone! 

My  Beautiful,  they  left  thee  in  thy  peril  and  thy  pain; 
The  night  that  hath  no  morrow  was  brooding  on  the  main: 
But,  lo!  a  light  is  breaking  of  hope  for  thee  again; 
'Tis  Perseus'  sword  a-flaming,  thy  dawn  of  day  proclaiming 

Across  the  western  main. 
0  Ireland!  O  my  country!  he  comes  to  break  thy  chain! 
James  Jeffrey  Rockc  [1847-1908] 


IRELAND 

Si  oblitus  fuero  tui  lenisalem:  oblivion!  detur  dextera  mea. 

Thy  sorrow,  and  the  sorrow  of  the  sea. 
Are  sisters;  the  sad  winds  are  of  thy  race: 
The  heart  of  melancholy  beats  in  thee. 
And  the  lamenting  spirit  haunts  thy  face, 


2254  ^y  Country 


Mournful  and  mighty  Mother!  who  art  kin 

To  the  ancient  earth's  first  woe, 
When  holy  Angels  wept,"  beholding  sin. 
For  not  in  penance  do  thy  true  tears  flow, 
Not  thine  the  long  transgression:  at  thy  name, 

We  sorrow  not  with  shame. 
But  proudly:  for  thy  soul  is  as  the  snow. 

Old  as  the  sorrow  for  lost  Paradise 

Seems  thine  old  sorrow:  thou  in  the  mild  West,  ' 

Who  wouldst  thy  children  upon  earth  suffice 

For  Paradise,  and  pure  Hesperian  rest; 

Had  not  the  violent  and  bitter  fates  ^  =^ ' 

Burned  up  with  fiery  feet 
The  greenness  of  thy  pastures;  had  not  hates, 
Envies,  and  desolations,  with  fierce  heat 
Wasted  thee,  and  consumed  the  land  of  grace. 

Beauty's  abiding  place;  'i  vshT 

And  vexed  with  agony  bright  joy's  retreat.         loja 

.;gd  9riT 

Swift  at  the  word  of  the  Eternal  Will,  "        "" 

Upon  thee  the  malign  armed  Angels  came. 

Flame  was  their  winging,  flame  that  laps  thee  still,; 

And  in  the  anger  of  their  eyes  was  flame. 

One  was  the  Angel  of  the  field  of  blood,  ,]/^ 

And  one  of  lonelier  death: 
One  saddened  exiles  on  the  ocean  flood. 
And  famine  followed  on  another's  breath.  ;  | 

Angels  of  evil,  with  incessant  sword, 

Smote  thee,  O  land  adored !  <  o 

And  yet  smite:  for  the  Will  of  God  so  saith. 

A  severing  and  sundering  they  wrought, 
A  rending  of  the  soul.     They  turned  to  tears 
The  laughter  of  thy  waters:  and  they  brought, 
To  sow  upon  thy  fields,  quick  seed  of  fears; 
That  brother  should  hate  brother,  and  one  roof 

Shelter  unkindly  hearts; 
Friend  from  his  ancient  friendship  hold  aloof, 
And  comrades  learn  to  play  sad  alien  parts, 


Ireland 

Province  from  noble  province  dwell  estranged, 

And  all  old  trusts  be  changed; 
And  treason  teach  true  men  her  impious  arts. 


But  yet  in  their  reluctant  hands  they  bore 
Laurel,  and  palm,  and  crown,  and  bay:  an  host. 
Heartened  by  wrath  and  sorrow  more  and  more, 
Strove  ever,  giving  up  the  mighty  ghost; 
The  field  well  fought,  the  song  well  sung,  for  sake, 

Mother!  of  thee  alone: 
Sorrow  and  wrath  bade  deathless  courage  wake, 
And  struck  from  burning  harps  a  deathless  tone. 
With  palm  and  laurel  won,  with  crown  and  bay, 

Went  proudly  down  death's  way 
Children  of  Ireland,  to  their  deathless  throne. 

Proud  and  sweet  habitation  of  thy  dead! 
Throne  upon  throne,  its  thrones  of  sorrow  filled: 
Prince  on  prince  coming  with  triumphant  tread, 
All  passion,  save  the  love  of  Ireland,  stilled. 
By  the  forgetful  waters  they  forget 

Not  thee,  O  Inisfail! 
Upon  thy  fields  their  dreaming  eyes  are  set. 
They  hear  thy  winds  call  ever  through  each  vale. 
Visions  of  victory  exalt  and  thrill 

Their  hearts'  whole  hunger  still: 
High  beats  their  longing  for  the  living  Gael. 

Sarsfield  is  sad  there  with  his  last  desire; 
FitzGerald  mourns  with  Emmet;  ancient  chiefs 
Dream  on  their  saffron-mantled  hosts,  afire 
Against  the  givers  of  their  Mother's  griefs. 
Was  it  for  naught,  captain  asks  captain  old. 

Was  it  in  vain,  we  fell ^ 
Shall  we  have  fallen  like  the  leaves  of  gold, 
And  no  green  spring  wake  from  the  long  dark  spell? 
Shall  never  a  crown  of  summer  fruitage  come 

From  blood  of  martyrdom? 
Yet  to  our  faith  will  we  not  say  farewell  I 


^^5S 


2256  My    Country- 

There  the  white  soul  of  Davis,  there  the  worn,   ' '"  ' 
Waste  soul  of  Mangan,  there  the  surging  soul     ' ' 
Of  Grattan,  hunger  for  thy  promised  morn: 
There  the  great  legion  of  thy  martyr  roll, 
Filled  with  the  fames  of  seven  hundred  years,       :  1  '] 

Hunger  to  hear  the  voice, 
Sweeter  than  marriage  music  in  their  ears, 
That  shall  bid  thee  and  all  thy  sons  rejoice. 
There  bide  the  spirits  who  for  thee  yet  burn: 

Ah  I  might  we  but  return, 
And  make  once  more  for  thee  the  martyr  choice! 

No  swordsmen  are  the  Christians!    Oisin  cried:     Ji  // 
O  Patrick!  thine  is  but  a  little  race.  If 

Nay,  ancient  Oisin!  they  have  greatly  died  lirf  ,) 

In  battle  glory  and  with  warrior  grace. 
Signed  with  the  Cross,  they  conquered  and  they  fell^ 

Sons  of  the  Cross,  they  stand:  ,j  .j^Q.jff'X" 

The  Prince  of  Peace  loves  righteous  warfare  well, 
And  loves  thine  armies,  O  our  Holy  Land! 
The  Lord  of  Hosts  is  with  thee,  and  thine  eyes 

Shall  see  upon  thee  rise 
His  glory,  and  the  blessing  of  His  Hand. 

Thou  hast  no  fear:  with  immemorial  pride, 

Bright  as  when  Oscar  ran  the  morning  glades; 

The  knightly  Fenian  hunters  at  his  side, 

The  sunlight  through  green  leaves  glad  on  their  blades; 

The  heart  in  thee  is  full  of  joyous  faith. 

Not  in  the  bitter  dust 
Thou  crou chest,  heeding  what  the  coward  saith: 
But,  radiant  with  an  everlasting  trust, 
Hearest  thine  ancient  rivers  in  their  glee  ; 

Sing  themselves  on  to  sea, 
Thy  winds  make  melody:  O  joy  most  just! 


-I  n 


Nay!  we  insult  thee  not  with  tears,  although 
With  thee  we  sorrow:  not  as  for  one  dead    ''■'^'^"  wcs\6 
We  mourn,  for  one  in  the  cold  earth  laid  low,    '''''*! 
Still  is  the  crown  upon  thy  sovereign  head,  ^  -  ' 


Ireland 


2257 


Still  is  the  scepter  within  thy  strong  hand, 

Still  is  the  kingdom  thine: 
The  armies  of  thy  sons  on  thy  command 
Wait,  and  thy  starry  eyes  through  darkness  shine. 
Tears  for  the  dear  and  dead !     For  thee,  All  hail! 

Unconquered  Inisfail! 
Tears  for  the  lost:  thou  livest,  O  divine! 

Thou  passest  not  away:  the  sternest  powers 
Spoil  not  all  beauty  of  thy  face,  nor  mar 
All  peace  of  thy  great  heart,  O  pulse  of  ours! 
The  darkest  cloud  dims  thee  not  all,  O  star! 
Ancient  and  proud  thy  sorrows,  and  their  might 

That  of  the  murmuring  waves: 
They  hearten  us  to  fight  the  unceasing  fight. 
Filled  with  the  grace,  that  flows  from  holy  graves. 
Sons  pass  away,  and  thou  hast  sons  as  true 

To  fight  the  fight  anew: 
Thy  welfare,  all  the  gain  their  warfare  craves. 

Sweet  Mother!  in  what  marvellous  dear  ways 
Close  to  thine  heart  thou  keepest  all  thine  own! 
Far  off,  they  yet  can  consecrate  their  days 
To  thee,  and  on  the  swift  winds  westward  blown, 
Send  thee  the  homage  of  their  hearts,  their  vow 

Of  one  most  sacred  care: 
To  thee  devote  aU  passionate  power,  since  thou 
Vouchsafest  them,  O  land  of  love!  to  bear 
Sorrow  and  joy  with  thee.     Each  far  son  thrills 

Toward  thy  blue  dreaming  hills, 
And  longs  to  kiss  thy  feet  upon  them.  Fair! 

//  death  come  sivift  upon  me,  it  will  be 

Because  of  the  great  love  I  hear  the  Gad! 

So  sang  upon  the  separating  sea 

Columba,  while  his  boat  sped  out  of  hail, 

And  aU  grew  lonely.     But  some  sons  thou  hast, 

Whose  is  an  heavier  lot, 
Close  at  thy  side:  they  see  thy  torment  last, 
And  all  their  will  to  help  thee  helps  thee  not. 


22  5^  My  Country 

Mother!  their  grief,  to  look  on  thy  dear  face,       ''i'2 

Worn  with  each  weary  trace  '^ 

Of  fresh  woes,  and  of  old  woes  unforgot! 

And  yet  great  spirits  ride  thy  winds:  thy  ways 
Are  haunted  and  enchanted  evermore. 
Thy  children  hear  the  voices  of  old  days 
In  music  of  the  sea  upon  thy  shore. 
In  falling  of  the  waters  from  thine  hills, 

In  whispers  of  thy  trees: 
A  glory  from  the  things  eternal  fills 
Their  eyes,  and  at  high  noon  thy  people  sees 
Visions,  and  wonderful  is  all  the  air. 

So  upon  earth  they  share 
Eternity:  they  learn  it  at  thy  knees. 

Eternal  is  our  faith  in  thee:  the  sun 
Shall  sooner  fall  from  Heaven,  than  from  our  lives 
That  faith;  and  the  great  scars  fade  one  by  one, 
Ere  fade  that  light  in  which  thy  people  strives. 
Strong  in  the  everlasting  righteousness 

Triumphs  our  faith:  the  fight 
Hath  holiest  hosts  to  inspire  it  and  to  bless; 
Thy  children  lift  true  faces  to  the  light. 
Theirs  are  the  visitations  from  on  high. 

Voices  that  call  and  cry: 
Celestial  comfort  in  the  deeps  of  night. 

Charmed  upon  waters  three,  forlorn  and  cold, 
The  swans,  Children  of  Lir,  endured  their  doom : 
From  off  their  white  wings  flashed  the  morning  gold. 
And  round  their  white  wings  closed  the  twilight  gloom. 
Yet  on  their  stormy  weird  the  Christian  bell 

Broke,  and  they  stirred  with  dread:  c- 

The  Corning  of  the  Saints  upon  them  fell; 
They  woke  to  joy,  and  found  their  white  wings  fled. 
And  thou,  in  these  last  days,  shalt  thou  not  hear 

A  sound  of  sacred  fear? 
God's  bells  shall  ring,  and  all  sad  days  be  dead. 


Ireland  2259 

But  desolate  be  the  houses  of  thy  foes: 
Sorrow  encompass  them,  and  vehement  wrath 
Besiege  them:  be  their  hearts  cold  as  the  snowsriiii  ^i 
Let  lamentation  keen  about  their  path,  ',   / 

The  fires  of  God  burn  round  them,  and  His  night 

Lie  on  their  blinded  eyes: 
And  when  they  call  to  the  Eternal  Light, 
None  shall  make  answer  to  their  stricken  cries. 
Mercy  and  pity  shall  not  know  them  more: 

God  shall  shut  to  the  door. 
And  close  on  them  His  everlasting  skies. 

How  long?     Justice  of  Very  God!     How  long? 
The  Isle  of  Sorrows  from  of  old  hath  trod 
The  stony  road  of  unremitting  wrong, 
The  purple  winepress  of  the  wrath  of  God: 
Is  then  the  Isle  of  Destiny  indeed 

To  grief  predestinate; 
Ever  foredoomed  to  agonize  and  bleed, 
Beneath  the  scourguig  of  eternal  fate? 
Yet  against  hope  shall  we  still  hope,  and  still 

Beseech  the  Eternal  Will: 
Our  lives  to  this  one  service  dedicate. 

Ah,  tremble  into  passion,  Harp!  and  sing 

War  song,  O  Sword!     Fill  the  fair  land,  great  Twain! 

Wake  all  her  heavy  heart  to  triumphing: 

To  vengeance,  and  armed  trampling  of  the  plain! 

And  you,  white  spirits  on  the  mountain  wind. 

Cry  between  eve  and  morn! 
Cry,  mighty  Dead!  until  the  people  find 
Their  souls  a  furnace  of  desire  and  scorn. 
Call  to  the  hosting  upon  Tara,  call 

The  tribes  of  Eire  all: 
Trump  of  the  Champions!  immemorial  Horn! 

Shall  not  the  Three  Waves  thunder  for  their  King, 
The  Captain  of  thy  people?     Shall  not  streams 
Leap  from  thy  mountains'  heart,  and  many  a  spring 
Gladden  thy  valleys,  for  the  joy  of  dreams 


226o  My  Country 

Fulfilled,  for  glory  of  the  battle  won? 

Hast  thou  no  prophet  left? 
Is  all  thy  Druid  wizardry  undone, 
And  thou  of  thy  foreknowledge  quite  bereft? 
Nay!  but  the  power  of  faith  is  prophecy. 

Vision,  and  certainty: 
Faith,  that  hath  walked  the  waves,  and  mountains  cleft. 

As  haunting  Tirnanoge  within  the  sea, 
So  hid  within  the  Eyes  of  God  thy  fate 
Lies  dreaming:  and  when  God  shall  bid  it  be, 
Ah,  then  the  fair  perfection  of  thy  state! 
Bravely  the  gold  and  silver  bells  shall  chime, 

When  thou  art  wed  with  peace: 
Far  to  the  desert  of  their  own  sad  clime 
Shall  fly  the  ill  Angels,  when  God  bids  them  cease. 
Thine  shall  be  only  a  majestic  joy. 

No  evil  can  destroy: 
.  The  sorrows  of  thy  soul  shall  have  release. 

Thy  blood  of  martyrs  to  the  martyrs'  Home 
Cries  from  the  earth :  the  altar  of  high  Heaven 
Is  by  their  cries  besieged  and  overcome: 
The  Rainbow  Throne  and  flaming  Spirits  Seven 
Know  well  the  music  of  that  agony, 

That  surge  of  a  long  sigh, 
That  voice  of  an  unresting  misery, 
That  ardor  of  anguish  unto  the  Most  High. 
Thou  from  thy  wronged  earth  pleadest  with  the  Just, 

Whose  loving  mercy  must 
Hear,  and  command  thy  death  in  life  to  die. 

Golden  allies  are  thine,  bright  souls  of  Saints, 

Glad  choirs  of  intercession  for  the  Gael: 

Their  flame  of  prayer  ascends,  their  stream  of  plaints 

Flows  to  the  wounded  feet,  for  Inisfail. 

Victor,  the  Angel  of  thy  Patrick,  pleads; 

Mailed  Michael  with  his  sword 
Kneels  there,  the  champion  of  thy  bitter  needs, 
Prince  of  the  shining  armies  of  the  Lord: 


To  the   Dead  of  '98  2261 

And  there,  Star  of  the  Morning  and  the  Sea, 

Mary  pours  prayer  for  thee: 
And  unto  Mary  be  thy  prayers  outpoured. 

O  Rose!    O  Lily!    O  Lady  full  of  grace! 
O  Mary  Mother!     0  Mary  Maid!  hear  thou. 
Glory  of  Angels!    Pity,  and  turn  thy  face, 
Praying  thy  Son,  even  as  we  pray  thee  now, 
For  thy  dear  sake  to  set  thine  Ireland  free: 

Pray  thou  thy  little  Child! 
Ah!  who  can  help  her,  but  in  mercy  He? 
Pray  then,  pray  thou  for  Ireland,  Mother  mild  I 
0  Heart  of  Mary !  pray  the  Sacred  Heart  : 

His,  at  Whose  word  depart 
Sorrows  and  hates,  home  to  HcWs  waste  and  wild. 

Lionel  Johnson  [1867-1902] 


TO  THE   DEAD   OF   '98 

God  rest  you,  rest  you,  rest  you,  Ireland's  dead! 

Peace  be  upon  you  shed, 
Peace  from  the  Mercy  of  the  Crucified, 

You,  who  for  Ireland  died! 
Soft  fall  on  you  the  dews  and  gentle  airs 

Of  interceding  prayers. 
From  lowly  cabins  of  our  ancient  land, 

Yours  yet,  O  Sacred  Band! 
God  rest  you,  rest  you:  for  the  fight  you  fought 

Was  His;  the  end  you  sought, 
His;  from  His  altar  fires  you  took  your  flame. 

Hailing  His  Holy  Name. 
Triumphantly  you  gave  yourselves  to  death: 
.  And  your  last  breath 
Was  one  last  sigh  for  Ireland,  sigh  to  Him, 

As  the  loved  land  grew  dim. 

And  still,  blessed  and  martyr  souls!  you  pray 

In  the  same  faith  this  day: 
From  forth  your  dwelling  beyond  sun  and  star. 

Where  only  spirits  are, 


2262  My  Country 

Your  prayers  in  a  perpetual  flight  arise,         '' 

To  fold  before  God's  Eyes 
Their  tireless  wings,  and  wait  the  Holy  Word 

That  one  day  shall  be  heard. 
Not  unto  us,  they  plead,  Thy  goodness  gave 

Our  mother  to  enslave; 
To  us  Thou  gavest  death  for  love  of  her : 

Ah,  what  death  lovelier? 
But  to  our  children's  children  give  to  see 

The  perfect  victory! 
Thy  dead  beseech  thee:  to  Thy  living  give 

In  liberty  to  live! 

Lionel  Johnson  [1867-1902] 


THE  MEMORY  OF  THE  DEAD 

Who  fears  to  speak  of  Ninety-Eight? 

Who  blushes  at  the  name? 
When  cowards  mock  the  patriot's  fate, 

Who  hangs  his  head  for  shame? 
He's  all  a  knave,  or  half  a  slave, 

Who  slights  his  country  thus; 
But  a  true  man,  hke  you,  man, 

WiU  fill  your  glass  with  us. 

We  drink  the  memory  of  the  brave, 

The  faithful  and  the  few — 
Some  lie  far  off  beyond  the  wave, 

Some  sleep  in  Ireland,  too; 
All,  all  are  gone — but  still  lives  on 

The  fame  of  those  who  died; 
All  true  men,  like  you,  men, 

Remember  them  with  pride. 

Some  on  the  shores  of  distant  lands 
Their  weary  hearts  have  laid. 

And  by  the  stranger's  heedless  hands 
Their  lonely  graves  were  made; 


Cushla  Ma  Chree  2263 

But,  though  their  clay  be  far  away 

Beyond  the  Atlantic  foam, 
Tn  true  men,  like  you,  men, 

Their  spirit's  still  at  home. 

The  dust  of  some  is  Irish  earth; 

Among  their  own  they  rest; 
And  the  same  land  that  gave  them  birth 

Has  caught  them  to  her  breast; 
And  we  will  pray  that  from  their  clay 

Full  many  a  race  may  start 
Of  true  men,  like  you,  men, 

To  act  as  brave  a  part. 

They  rose  in  dark  and  evil  days 

To  right  their  native  land; 
They  kindled  here  a  living  blaze 

That  nothing  shall  withstand. 
Alas!  that  Might  can  vanquish  Right — 

They  fell  and  passed  away; 
But  true  men,  like  you,  men, 

Are  plenty  here  to-day. 

Then  here's  their  memory — may  it  be 

For  us  a  guiding  light, 
To  cheer  our  strife  for  liberty. 

And  teach  us  to  unite. 
Through  good  and  ill,  be  Ireland's  still, 

Though  sad  as  theirs  your  fate; 
And  true  men  be  you,  men, 

Like  those  of  Ninety-Eight! 

John  Kclls  Ingram  [1823-1007] 


CUSHLA  MA   CHREE 

Dear  Erin,  how  sweetly  thy  green  bosom  rises! 

An  emerald  set  in  the  ring  of  the  sea ! 
Each  blade  of  thy  meadows  my  faithful  heart  prizes. 

Thou  queen  of  the  west!  the  world's  cushla  ma  chree! 


226^  My   Country 

Thy  gales  open  wide  to  the  poor  and  the  stranger — 
There  smiles  hospitaHty  hearty  and  free; 

Thy  friendship  is  seen  in  the  moment  of  danger, 

And  the  wanderer  is  welcomed  with  cushla  ma  chree. 

Thy  sons  they  are  brave;  but,  the  battle  once  over, 
In  brotherly  peace  with  their  foes  they  agree; 

And  the  roseate  cheeks  of  thy  daughters  discover 
The  soul-speaking  blush  that  says  cushla  ma  chree. 

Then  flourish  forever,  my  dear  native  Erin! 

While  sadly  I  wander  an  exile  from  thee; 
And,  firm  as  thy  mountains,  no  injury  fearing, 

May  heaven  defend  its  own  cushla  ma  chree! 

John  PhiJpot  Curran  [1750-1817] 

THE   GREEN  LITTLE   SHAMROCK  OF  IRELAND 

There's  a  dear  little  plant  that  grows  in  our  isle, 

'Twas  Saint  Patrick  himself  sure  that  set  it; 
And  the  sun  on  his  labor  with  pleasure  did  smile, 

And  with  dew  from  his  eye  often  wet  it. 
It  thrives  through  the  bog,  through  the  brake,  and  the 

mireland; 
And  he  called  it  the  dear  little  shamrock  of  Ireland — 
The  sweet  httle  shamrock,  the  dear  little  shamrock, 
The  sweet  Httle,  green  little,  shamrock  of  Ireland! 

This  dear  little  plant  still  grows  in  our  land, 

Fresh  and  fair  as  the  daughters  of  Erin, 
Whose  smiles  can  bewitch,  whose  eyes  can  command. 

In  each  climate  that  they  may  appear  in; 
And  shine  through  the  bog,  through  the  brake,  and  the 

mireland, 
Just  like  their  own  dear  little  shamrock  of  Ireland. 

The  sweet  httle  shamrock,  the  dear  little  shamrock, 

The  sweet  little,  green  little,  shamrock  of  Ireland! 

This  dear  little  plant  that  springs  from  our  soil, 

W^hen  its  three  little  leaves  are  extended, 
Denotes  on  one  stalk  we  together  should  toil, 

And  ourselves  by  ourselves  be  befriended; 


Fainne  Gael  an   Lae  2265 

And  still  through   the  bog,   through  the  brake,   and  the 

mireland. 
From  one  root  should  branch,  like  the  shamrock  of  Ireland, 
The  sweet  little  shamrock,  the  dear  little  shamrock, 
The  sweet  little,  green  Httle,  shamrock  of  Ireland! 

Aiidreii.'  Cherry  [1762-1812] 

MY  LAND 

She  is  a  rich  and  rare  land; 
'  Oh!  she's  a  fresh  and  fair  land, 

She  is  a  dear  and  rare  land — 
This  native  land  of  mine. 

No  men  than  hers  are  braver — 
Her  women's  hearts  ne'er  waver; 
I'd  freely  die  to  save  her, 
And  think  my  lot  divine. 

She's  not  a  dull  or  cold  land; 
No!  she's  a  warm  and  bold  land; 
Oh!  she's  a  true  and  old  land — 
This  native  land  of  mine. 

Could  beauty  ever  guard  her, 
And  virtue  still  reward  her, 
No  foe  would  cross  her  border — 
No  friend  within  it  pine. 

Oh !  she's  a  fresh  and  fair  land. 
Oh!  she's  a  true  and  rare  land! 
Yes,  she's  a  rare  and  fair  land — 
This  native  land  of  mine. 

Thomas  Osborne  Davis  [1814-1845] 

FAINNE   GAEL  AN  LAE 

"  Until  the  day  break  and  the  shadows  flee  away  " 

Ere  the  long  roll  of  the  ages  end 
And  the  days  of  time  are  done, 

The  Lord  shall  unto  Erin  send 
His  own  appointed  One, 


2266  My  Country 

Whose  soul  must  wait  the  hour  of  Fate, 
His  name  be  known  to  none; 

But  his  feet  shall  stand  on  the  Irish  land 
In  the  rising  of  the  sun. 

In  darkness  of  our  captive  night, 

Whilst  storms  the  watch-tower  shake, 
Some  shall  not  sleep,  but  vigil  keep 

Until  the  morning  break; 
Until  through  clouds  of  threatening  hate, 

The  seas  of  sorrow  o'er, 
The  first  red  beam  of  the  sun-burst  gleam 

Illumines  Erin's  shore. 

Oh!  perfect,  pure,  exalted  One,. 

For  whom  in  prayer  wc  wait, 
Of  Irish-born  thou  happiest  son 

And  noblest  of  the  great; 
As  night  to  noon  goes  swift  and  soon. 

May  years  now  roll  away 
And  bring  the  hour  of  thy  conquering  power 

And  the  dawning  of  the  day! 

Alice  Milligan  [i8     - 


IRELAND 

Ireland,  oh  Ireland!  center  of  my  longings, 
Country  of  my  fathers,  home  of  my  heart! 

Overseas  you  call  me:  Why  an  exile  from  me  ? 
Wherefore  sea-severed,  long  leagues  apart? 

As  the  shining  salmon,  homeless  in  the  sea-depths, 
Hears  the  river  call  him,  scents  out  the  land, 

Leaps  and  rejoices  in  the  meeting  of  the  waters. 
Breasts  weir  and  torrent,  nests  in  the  sand; 

Lives  there  and  loves;  yet  with  the  year's  returning, 
Rusting  in  the  river,  pines  for  the  sea, 

Sweeps  back  again  to  the  ripple  of  the  tideway, 
Roamer  of  the  waters,  vagabond  and  free; — 


"Hills  o'   My   Heart"  2267 

Wanderer  am  I  like  the  salmon  of  the  rivers; 

London  is  my  ocean,  murmurous  and  deep, 
Tossing  and  vast;  yet  through  the  roar  of  London 

Comes  to  me  thy  summons,  calls  me  in  sleep. 

Pearly  are  the  skies  in  the  country  of  my  fathers, 
Purple  are  thy  mountains,  home  of  my  heart. 

Mother  of  my  yearning,  love  of  all  my  longings, 
Keep  me  in  remembrance,  long  leagues  apart. 
Stephen  Lucius  Gwynn  [1865- 


" HILLS  O'   MY  HEART" 

Hills  o'  my  heart! 
I  have  come  to  you  at  calling  of  my  one  love  and  only, 

I  have  left  behind  the  cruel  scarlet  wind  of  the  east. 
The  hearth  of  my  fathers  wanting  me  is  lonely, 

And  empty  is  the  place  I  filled  at  gathering  of  the  feast. 

Hills  o'  my  heart! 
You  have  cradled  him  I  love  in  your  green  quiet  hollows. 
Your  wavering  winds  have  hushed  him  to  soft  forgetful 
sleep. 
Below  dusk  boughs  where  bird-voice  after  bird-voice  follows 
In  shafts  of  silver  melody  that  split  the  hearkening  deep. 

HiUs  o'  my  heart! 
Let  the  herdsman  who  walks  in  your  high  haunted  places 
Give  him  strength  and  courage,  and  weave  his  dreams 
alway : 
Let  your  cairn-heaped  hero-dead  reveal  their  grand  exultant 
faces. 
And  the  Gentle  Folk  be  good  to  him  betwixt  the  dark  and 
day. 

HiUs  o'  my  heart! 
And  I  would  the  Green  Harper  might  wake  his  soul  to  singing 
With  music  of  the  golden  wires  heard  when  the  world 
was  new, 
That  from  his  lips  an  echo  of  its  sweetness  may  come  ringing, 
A  song  of  pure  and  noble  hopes — a  song  of  aU  things  true. 


2268  My  Country 

Hills  o'  my  heart! 
For  sake  of  the  yellow  head  that  drew  me  wandering  over 
Your  misty  crests  from  my  own  home  where  sorrow  bided 
then, 
I  set  my  seven  blessings  on  your  kindly  heather  cover, 
On  every  starry  moorland  loch,  and  every  shadowy  glen, 
Hills  o'  my  heart! 

Ethia  Carhery   [    ?    -1902] 


SCOTLAND   YET 

Gae  bring  my  guid  auld  harp  ance  mair, 

Gae  bring  it  free  and  fast, 
For  I  maun  sing  anither  sang, 

Ere  a'  my  glee  be  past; 
And  trow  ye  as  I  sing,  my  lads, 

The  burden  o't  shall  be, 
Auld  Scotland's  howes  and  Scotland's  knowes, 

And  Scotland's  hills  for  me; 
We'll  drink  a  cup  to  Scotland  yet, 

Wi'  a'  the  honors  three. 

The  heath  waves  wild  upon  her  hills, 

And,  foaming  frae  the  fells. 
Her  fountains  sing  0'  freedom  still, 

As  they  dance  doun  the  dells; 
And  weel  I  lo'e  the  land,  my  lads. 

That's  girded  by  the  sea; 
Then  Scotland's  vales  and  Scotland's  dales, 

And  Scotland's  hills  for  me; 
We'll  drink  a  cup  to  Scotland  yet, 

Wi'  a'  the  honors  three. 

The  thistle  wags  upon  the  fields, 

Where  Wallace  bore  his  blade, 
That  gave  her  foemen's  dearest  bluid 

To  dye  her  auld  gray  plaid ; 
And  looking  to  the  lift,  my  lads, 

He  sang  this  doughty  glee, 


The  Watch  on  the   Rhine  2269 

Auld  Scotland's  right  and  Scotland's  might, 

And  Scotland's  hills  for  me; 
We'll  drink  a  cup  for  Scotland  yet, 

Wi'  a'  the  honors  three. 

They  tell  o'  lands  wi'  brighter  skies, 

Where  freedom's  voice  ne'er  rang; 
Gie  me  the  hills  where  Ossian  Ues, 

And  Coila's  minstrel  sang; 
For  I've  nae  skill  o'  lands,  my  lads, 

That  kenna  to  be  free; 
Then  Scotland's  right  and  Scotland's  might, 

And  Scotland's  hills  for  me; 
We'll  drink  a  cup  to  Scotland  yet, 

Wi'  a'  the  honors  three. 

Henry  Scott  Riddell  [1798-1870] 


THE  WATCH  ON  THE   RHINE* 

A  VOICE  resounds  like  thunder-peal, 
'Mid  clashing  waves  and  clang  of  steel : — 
"The  Rhine,  the  Rhine,  the  German  Rhine! 
Who  guards  to-day  my  stream  divine?" 

Chorus — Dear  Fatherland,  no  danger  thine: 

Firm  stand  thy  sons  to  watch  the  Rhine! 

They  stand  a  hundred  thousand  strong. 
Quick  to  avenge  their  country's  wrong; 
With  filial  love  their  bosoms  swell, 
They'll  guard  the  sacred  landmark  well! 

The  dead  of  a  heroic  race 
From  heaven  look  down  and  meet  their  gaze; 
They  swear  with  dauntless  heart,  "O  Rhine, 
Be  German  as  this  breast  of  mine! 

"While  flows  one  drop  of  German  blood, 
Or  sword  remains  to  guard  thy  flood, 
While  rifle  rests  in  patriot  hand, — 
No  foe  shall  tread  thy  sacred  strand! 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3833. 


2270  My  Country 

"Our  oath  resounds,  the  river  flows, 

In  golden  light  our  banner  glows; 

Our  hearts  will  guard  thy  stream  divine: 

The  Rhine,  the  Rhine,  the  German  Rhine!" 

After  the  German  of  Max  Schneckenburger  [1810-1849] 


THE   GERMAN  FATHERLAND* 

Which  is  the  German's  fatherland? 

Is't  Prussia's  or  Swabia's  land? 

Is't  where  the  Rhine's  rich  vintage  streams? 

Or  where  the  Northern  sea-gull  screams? — ■ 

Ah,  no,  no,  no! 
His  fatherland's  not  bounded  so! 

Whicl  is  the  German's  fatherland? 
Bavaria's  or  Styria's  land? 
Is't  where  the  Marsian  ox  unbends? 
Or  where  the  Marksman  iron  rends  ?^ 

Ah,  no,  no,  no! 
His  fatherland's  not  bounded  so! 

Which  is  the  German's  fatherland? 
Pomerania's  or  Westphalia's  land? 
Is  it  where  sweep  the  Dunian  waves? 
Or  where  the  thundering  Danube  raves? — 

Ah,  no,  no,  no! 
His  fatherland's  not  bounded  so! 

Which  is  the  German's  fatherland? 

O,  tell  me  now  the  famous  land! 

Is't  Tyrol,  or  the  land  of  TeU? 

Such  lands  and  people  please  me  well. — 

Ah,  no,  no,  no! 
His  fatherland's  not  bounded  so! 

Which  is  the  German's  fatherland? 
Come,  tell  me  now  the  famous  land. 
Doubtless,  it  is  the  Austrian  state, 
In  honors  and  in  triumphs  great. — 

*For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3834 


The   Marseillaise  2271 

Ah,  no,  no! 
His  fatherland's  not  bounded  so! 

Which  is  the  German's  fatherland? 
So  tell  me  now  at  last  the  land! — 
As  far's  the  German  accent  rings 
And  hymns  to  God  in  heaven  sings, — 

That  is  the  land, — 
There,  brother,  is  thy  fatherland! 

There  is  the  German's  fatherland. 
Where  oaths  attest  the  grasped  hand, — 
Where  truth  beams  from  the  sparkling  eyes, 
And  in  the  heart  love  warmly  lies; — 

That  is  the  land, — 
There,  brother,  is  thy  fatherland! 

That  is  the  German's  fatherland, 
Where  wrath  pursues  the  foreign  band, — 
Where  every  Frank  is  held  a  foe, 
And  Germans  all  as  brothers  glow; — 

That  is  the  land, — 
All  Germany's  thy  fatherland! 

All  Germany,  then,  the  land  shall  be; 
Watch  o'er  it,  God,  and  grant  that  we 
With  German  hearts,  in  deed  and  thought. 
May  love  it  truly  as  we  ought. 

Be  this  the  land. 
All  Germany  shall  be  the  land! 
From  the  German  of  Ernst  Moritz  Arndt  [1769-1860] 


THE   MARSEILLAISE* 

Ye  sons  of  freedom,  wake  to  glory! 

Hark!  hark!  what  myriads  bid  you  rise! 
Your  children,  wives,  and  grandsires  hoary, 

Behold  their  tears  and  hear  their  cries! 
Shall  hateful  tyrants,  mischief  breeding, 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3836. 


2272  My  Country 

With  hireling  hosts,  a  ruffian  band, 
Affright  and  desolate  the  land, 
While  peace  and  liberty  lie  bleeding? 
To  arms!  to  arms,  ye  brave! 

The  avenging  sword  unsheathe; 
March  on!  march  on!  all  hearts  resolved 
On  victory  or  death. 

Now,  now  the  dangerous  storm  is  rolling, 

Which  treacherous  kings,  confederate,  raise; 
The  dogs  of  war,  let  loose,  are  howling. 

And  lo!  our  fields  and  cities  blaze; 
And  shall  we  basely  view  the  ruin, 

While  lawless  force,  with  guilty  stride, 
Spreads  desolation  far  and  wide. 
With  crimes  and  blood  his  hands  imbruing? 

With  luxury  and  pride  surrounded. 

The  vile,  insatiate  despots  dare, 
Their  thirst  of  power  and  gold  unbounded, 

To  meet  and  vend  the  light  and  air; 
Like  beasts  of  burden  would  they  load  us, 

Like  gods  would  bid  their  slaves  adore: 

But  man  is  man,  and  who  is  more? 
Then,  shall  they  longer  lash  and  goad  us? 

O  Liberty!  can  man  resign  thee, 

Once  having  felt  thy  generous  flame? 
Can  dungeons,  bolts,  or  bars  confine  thee? 

Or  whips  thy  noble  spirit  tame? 
Too  long  the  world  has  wept,  bewailing 
That  falsehood's  dagger  tyrants  wield, 
Bat  freedom  is  our  sword  and  shield. 
And  all  their  arts  are  unavailing. 
To  arms!  to  arms,  ye  brave! 

The  avenging  sword  unsheathe; 
March  on!  march  on!  all  hearts  resolved 
On  victory  or  death. 
Adapted  from  the  French  of  Rouget  de  Lisle  [i  760-1 836] 


SOLDIER  SONGS 

=  CHARLIE  IS  MY  DARLING" 

'TwAS  on  a  Monday  morning 

Richt  early  in  the  year, 
That  Charlie  cam'  to  our  toun, 

The  young  Chevalier. 

And  Charlie  he's  my  darling, 
My  darling,  my  darling; 

Charlie  he's  my  darling, 
The  young  Chevalier  ! 

As  he  was  walking  up  the  street, 

The  city  for  to  view, 
Oh,  there  he  spied  a  bonny  lass 

The  window  looking  through.    , 

Say  licht's  he  jumped  up  the  stair. 

And  tirled  at  the  pin; 
And  wha  sae  ready  as  hersel' 

To  let  the  laddie  in? 

He  set  his  Jenny  on  his  knee, 
All  in  his  Highland  dress; 

For  brawly  weel  he  kenned  the  way 
To  please  a  bonny  lass. 

It's  up  yon  heathery  mountain, 
And  down  yon  scroggy  glen. 

We  daurna  gang  a-milking, 
For  Charlie  and  his  men. 

And  Charlie  he's  my  darling, 
My  darling,  my  darling; 

Charlie  he's  my  darling, 
The  young  Chevalier  ! 

2273 


Unknown 


22  74  Soldier  Songs 


THE   FAREWELL 

It  was  a'  for  our  rightfu"  King 

We  left  fair  Scotland's  strand; 
It  was  a'  for  our  rightfu'  King 

We  e'er  saw  Irish  land, 
My  dear — 

We  e'er  saw  Irish  land. 

Now  a'  is  done  that  men  can  do, 

And  a'  is  done  in  vain; 
My  love  and  native  land,  farewell, 

For  I  maun  cross  the  main, 
My  dear — 

For  I  maun  cross  the  main. 

He  turned  him  right  and  round  about 

Upon  the  Irish  shore. 
And  gae  his  bridle-reins  a  shake, 

With,  Adieu  for  evermore, 
My  dear — 

With,  Adieu  for  evermore! 

The  sodger  frae  the  wars  returns, 

The  sailor  frae  the  main; 
But  I  hae  parted  frae  my  love, 

Never  to  meet  again, 
My  dear — • 

Never  to  meet  again. 

WTaen  day  is  gane,  and  night  is  come, 

And  a'  folk  bound  to  sleep, 
I  think  on  him  that's  far  awa'. 
The  Ice-lang  night,  and  weep, 

My  dear — 
The  lee-lang  night,  and  weep. 

Robert  Burns  [i  759-1796] 


"Here's  a  Health  to  Them  That's  Awa'"  2275 


"HERE'S  A  HEALTH  TO  THEM  THAT'S  AWA'" 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa', 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa'; 

And  wha  winna  wish  guid-luck  to  our  cause, 

May  never  guid-luck  be  their  fa' ! 

It's  guid  to  be  merry  and  wise, 

It's  guid  to  be  honest  and  true, 

It's  guid  to  support  Caledonia's  cause, 

And  bide  by  the  buff  and  the  blue. 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa'. 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa'; 

Here's  a  health  to  Charlie,  the  chief  o'  the  clan, 

Although  that  his  band  be  sma'. 

May  Liberty  meet  wi'  success! 

May  Prudence  protect  her  frae  evil! 

May  tyrants  and  Tyranny  tine  in  the  mist. 

And  wander  their  way  to  the  devil! 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa'. 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa'; 

Here's  a  health  to  Tammie,  the  Norland  laddie, 

That  lives  at  the  lug  o'  the  law! 

Here's  freedom  to  him  that  wad  read! 

Here's  freedom  to  him  that  wad  write ! 

There's  nane  ever  feared  that  the  truth  should  be  heard, 

But  they  wham  the  truth  wad  indite. 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa', 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa'; 

Here's  Maitland  and  Wycombe,  and  who  does  na  like  'em 

We'll  build  in  a  hole  o'  the  wa'. 

Here's  timmer  that's  red  at  the  heart, 

Here's  fruit  that's  sound  at  the  core! 

May  he  that  would  turn  the  buff  and  blue  coat 

Be  turned  to  the  back  o'  the  door. 


2276  Soldier  Songs 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa', 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa'; 

Here's  Chieftain  McLeod,  a  chieftain  worth  gowd, 

Though  bred  amang  mountains  o'  snaw! 

Here's  friends  on  baith  sides  o'  the  Forth, 

And  friends  on  baith  sides  o'  the  Tweed; 

And  wha  wad  betray  Old  Albion's  rights, 

May  they  never  eat  of  her  bread! 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


THE  BLUE  BELLS  OF  SCOTLAND 

Oh  where!  and  oh  where!  is  your  Highland  laddie  gone? 
He's  gone  to  fight  the  French  for  King  George  upon  the 
throne;  ^^ 

And  it's  oh!  in  my  heart  how  I  wish  him  safe  at  home.      '■^^■'■ 

.>uo(fJlA 
Oh  where!  and  oh  where!  does  your  Highland  laddie  dwell! 
He  dwells  in  merry  Scotland  at  the  sign  of  the  Blue  Bell; 
And  it's  oh!  in  my  heart  that  I  love  my  laddie  well. 

What  clothes,  in  what  clothes  is  your  Highland  laddie  clad? 
His  bonnet's  of  the  Saxon  green,  his  waistcoat's  of  the  plaid; 
And  it's  oh !  in  my  heart  that  I  love  my  Highland  lad.  '  * 

Suppose,  oh  suppose,  that  your  Highland  lad  should  die? 
The  bagpipes  shall  play  over  him,  I'll  lay  me  down  and  cry; 
And  it's  oh!  in  my  heart  that  I  wish  he  may  not  die! 

Unknown 


THE  BONNY  EARL  OF  MURRAY 

Ye  Highlands  and  ye  Lawlands, 

O  where  hae  ye  been? 
They  hae  slain  the  Earl  of  Murray, 

And  hae  laid  him  on  the  green. 

Now  wae  be  to  thee,  Huntly! 

And  wherefore  did  ye  sae? 
I  bade  you  bring  him  wi'  you. 

But  forbade  you  him  to  slay. 


Pibroch   of  Donald   Dhu  2277 

He  was  a  braw  gallant, 

And  he  rid  at  the  ring; 
And  the  bonny  Earl  of  Murray, 

0  he  might  hae  been  a  king! 

He  was  a  braw  gallant. 

And  he  played  at  the  ba' ; 
And  the  bonny  Earl  of  Murray 

Was  the  flower  amang  them  a' ! 

He  was  a  braw  gallant, 

And  he  played  at  the  gluve; 
And  the  bonny  Earl  of  Murray, 

O  he  was  the  Queen's  luve! 

O  lang  will  his  Lady 

Look  owre  the  Castle  Doune, 
Ere  she  see  the  Earl  of  Murray 

Come  sounding  through  the  toun! 

Unknown 

PIBROCH  OF  DONALD   DHU 

Pibroch  of  Donuil  Dhu, 

Pibroch  of  Donuil, 
Wake  thy  v/ild  voice  anew, 

Summon  Clan-Conuil! 
Come  away,  come  away, 

Hark  to  the  summons! 
Come  in  your  war  array, 

Gentles  and  commons. 

Come  from  deep  glen,  and 

From  mountain  so  rocky: 
The  war-pipe  and  pennon 

Are  at  Inverlochy. 
Come  every  hill-plaid,  and 

True  heart  that  wears  one; 
Come  every  steel  blade,  and 

Strong  hand  that  bears  one. 


2278  Soldier  Songs 


Leave  untended  the  herd, 

The  flock  without  shelter; 
Leave  the  corpse  uninterred, 

The  bride  at  the  altar; 
Leave  the  deer,  leave  the  steer, 

Leave  nets  and  barges : 
Come  with  your  fighting  gear, 

Broadswords  and  targes. 

Come  as  the  winds  come,  when 

Forests  are  rended: 
Come  as  the  waves  come,  when 

Navies  are  stranded ! 
Faster  come,  faster  come. 

Faster  and  faster — 
Chief,  vassal,  page,  and  groom. 

Tenant  and  master! 

Fast  they  come,  fast  they  come — 

See  how  they  gather! 
Wide  waves  the  eagle  plume. 

Blended  with  heather. 
Cast  your  plaids,  draw  your  blades, 

Forward  each  man  set! 
Pibroch  of  Donuil  Dhu, 

Kneel  for  the  onset! 

Walter  Scoit  [1771-1832] 

BORDER  BALLAD 

From  "The  Monastery  " 

March,  march,  Ettrick  and  Teviotdale; 

Why  the  de'il  dinna  ye  march  forward  in  order? 
March,  march,  Eskdale  and  Liddesdale! 

All  the  Blue  Bonnets  are  bound  for  the  Border! 

Many  a  banner  spread 

Flutters  above  your  head. 
Many  a  crest  that  is  famous  in  story. 

Mount  and  make  ready,  then, 

Sons  of  the  mountain  glen, 
Fight  for  the  Queen  and  our  old  Scottish  glory. 


"When   Banners  Are  Waving"     2279 

Come  from  the  hills  where  the  hirsels  arc  grazing; 

Come  from  the  glen  of  the  buck  and  the  roe; 
Come  to  the  crag  where  the  beacon  is  blazing; 
Come  with  the  buckler,  the  lance,  and  the  bow. 
Trumpets  are  sounding; 
War-steeds  are  bounding; 
Stand  to  your  arms,  then,  and  march  in  good  order. 
England  shall  many  a  day 
Tell  of  the  bloody  fray 
When  the  Blue  Bonnets  came  over  the  Border.  ^ 

Walter  Scott  [i 771-1832]  "■ 

"WHEN  BANNERS  ARE  WAVING" 

When  banners  are  waving,  and  lances  are  pushing; 
When  captains  are  shouting,  and  war-horses  rushing; 
When  cannon  are  roaring,  and  hot  bullets  flying, 
He  that  would  honor  win,  must  not  fear  dying. 

Though  shafts  fly  so  quick  that  it  seems  to  be  snowing;^ 
Though  streamlets  with  blood  more  than  water  are  flowing; 
Though  with  sabre  and  bullet  our  bravest  are  dying. 
We  speak  of  revenge,  but  we  ne'er  speak  of  flying. 

Come,  stand  to  it,  heroes!    The  heathen  are  coming; 
Horsemen  are  round  the  walls,  riding  and  running; 
Maidens  and  matrons  all  Arm!  arm!  are  crying, 
From  petards  the  wildfire's  flashing  and  flying. 

The  trumpets  from  turrets  high  loudly  are  braying; 
The  steeds  for  the  onset  are  snorting  and  neighing;  r^ 

As  waves  in  the  ocean,  the  dark  plumes  are  dancing; 
As  stars  in  the  blue  sky,  the  helmets  are  glancing. 

Their  ladders  are  planting,  their  sabres  are  sweeping; 
Now  swords  from  our  sheaths  by  the  thousand  are  leaping; 
Like  the  flash  of  the  levin,  ere  men  hearken  thunder. 
Swords  gleam,  and  the  steel  caps  are  cloven  asunder. 

The  shouting  has  ceased,  and  the  flashing  of  cannon! 
I  looked  from  the  turret  for  crescent  and  pennon: 
As  flax  touched  by  fire,  as  hail  in  the  river. 
They  were  smote,  they  were  fallen,  and  had  melted  for  ever. 

Unkfiown 


228o  Soldier  Songs 

;'j     THE  BRITISH   GRENADIERS        ) 

Some  talk  of  Alexander,  and  some  of  Hercules; 

Of  Hector  and  Lysander,  and  such  great  names  as  these; 

But  of  all  the  world's  brave  heroes,  there's  none  that  can 
compare, 

With  a  tow,  row,  row,  row,  row,  row,  to  the  British  Grena- 
dier. 

Those  heroes  of  antiquity  ne'er  saw  a  cannon  ball, 
Or  knew  the  force  of  powder  to  slay  their  foes  withal; 
But  our  brave  boys  do  know  it,  and  banish  all  their  fears, 
Sing  tow,  row,  row,  row,  row,  row,  for  the  British  Grenadiers. 

Whene'er  we  are  commanded  to  storm  the  palisade?^,  ^''^ 
Our  leaders  march  with  fusees,  and  we  with  hand  grenades; 
We  throw  them  from  the  glacis,  about  the  enemies'  ears; 
Sing  tow,  row,  row,  row,  row,  row,  for  the  British  Grena- 
diers. <:  , 

And  when  the  seige  is  over,  we  to  the  town  repair^  ;a(5a  aV/ 
The  townsmen  cry  "Hurra,  boys,  here  comes  a  grenadier, 
Here  comes  the  grenadiers,  my  boys,  who  know  no  doubts 

or  fears, 
Then  sing  tow,  row,  rov/,  row,  row,  row,  for  the  British  Gren- 
adiers." 

■  •  -riT 

Then  let  us  fill  a  bumper,  and  drink  a  health  to  those       '  ^ 
Who  carry  cups  and  pouches,  and  wear  the  louped  clothes; 
May  they  and  their  commanders  live  happy  all  their  years, 
With  a  tow,  row,  row,  row,  row,  row,  for  the  British  Grena- 
i         diers. 

Unknown 

HEART  OF  OAK 

Come,  cheer  up,  my  lads!  'tis  to  glory  we  steer,        ■ 
To  add  something  more  to  this  wonderful  year: 
To  honor  we  call  you,  not  press  you  like  slaves; 
For  who  are  so  free  as  the  sons  of  the  waves? 


The  Soldier's  Dream  2281 

Heart  of  oak  are  our  ships,        't  ':  5  j'^iT:  ■ 
Heart  of  oak  are  our  men, 

We  always  are  ready: 

Steady,  boys,  steady! 
We'll  fight  and  we'll  conquer  again  and  again. 

We  ne'er  see  our  foes  but  we  wish  them  to  stay, 
They  never  see  us  but  they  wish  us  away; 
If  they  run,  why,  we  follow,  or  run  them  ashore; 
For  if  they  won't  fight  us  we  cannot  do  more.    . 

They  swear  they'll  invade  us,  these  terrible  foes! 
They  frighten  our  women,  our  children  and  beaux; 
But  should  their  flat  bottoms  in  darkness  get  o'er. 
Still  Britons  they'll  find  to  receive  them  on  shore. 

Britannia  triumphant,  her  ships  sweep  the  sea; 
Her  standard  is  Justice — her  watchward,  "  Be  free." 
Then  cheer  up,  my  lads!  with  one  heart  let  us  sing, 
"Our  soldiers,  our  sailors,  our  statesmen,  our  King," 

David  Gar  rick  [  1 7 1 7- 1 7  7  9] 


THE   SOLDIER'S   DREAM 

Our  bugles  sang  truce,  for  the  night-cloud  had  lowered 
And  the  sentinel  stars  set  their  watch  in  the  sky; 

And  thousands  had  sunk  on  the  ground  overpowered, 
The  weary  to  sleep,  and  the  wounded  to  die. 

When  reposing  that  night  on  my  pallet  of  straw 
By  the  wolf-scaring  faggot  that  guarded  the  slain. 

At  the  dead  of  the  night  a  sweet  Vision  I  saw; 
And  thrice  ere  the  morning  I  dreamt  it  again. 

Methought  from  the  battle-field's  dreadful  array, 
Far,  far  I  had  roamed  on  a  desolate  track: 

'Twas  Autumn,— and  sunshine  arose  on  the  way 
To  the  home  of  my  fathers,  that  welcomed  me  back 


2282  Soldier  Songs 

I  flew  to  the  pleasant  fields  traversed  so  oft 

In  life's  morning  march,  when  my  bosom  was  young; 

I  heard  my  own  mountain-goats  bleating  aloft, 

And  knew  the  sweet  strain  that  the  corn- reapers  sung. 

Then  pledged  we  the  wine-cup,  and  fondly  I  swore 
From  my  home  and  my  weeping  friends  never  to  part ; 

My  little  ones  kissed  me  a  thousand  times  o'er, 
And  my  wife  sobbed  aloud  in  her  fulness  of  heart.i  i 

"Stay,  stay  with  us!' — rest! — thou  art  weary  and  worn!" 
And  fain  was  their  war-broken  soldier  to  stay;— 

But  sorrow  returned  with  the  dawning  of  morn, 
And  the  voice  in  my  dreaming  ear  melted  away. 

Thomas  Campbell  [i 777-1844] 


THE   CAVALIER'S   SONG 

A  STEED,  a  steed  of  matchless  speed! 

A  sword  of  metal  keen! 
All  else  to  noble  hearts  is  dross. 

All  else  on  earth  is  mean. 
The  neighing  of  the  war-horse  proud, 

The  rolling  of  the  drum. 
The  clangor  of  the  trumpet  loud. 

Be  sounds  from  heaven  that  come; 
And  oh!  the  thundering  press  of  knights, 

Whenas  their  war-cries  swell. 
May  tole  from  heaven  an  angel  bright, 

And  rouse  a  fiend  from  hell. 

Then  mount!  then  mount,  brave  gallants  all, 

And  don  your  helms  amain; 
Death's  coviriers.  Fame  and  Honor,  call 

Us  to  the  field  again. 
No  shrewish  fears  shall  fill  our  eye 

When  the  sword-hilt's  in  oui'  hand — 
Heart-whole  we'll  part,  and  no  whit  sigh 

For  the  fairest  of  the  land! 


Cavalier  Tunes  --83 

Let  piping  swain,  and  craven  wight, 
Thus  weep  and  puling  cry;  :'A 

Our  business  is  like  men  to  fight, 
And  hero-like  to  die! 

Willia-iii  MotJicrwell  [1797-1835] 


CAVALIER  TUNES 

I — MARCHING   ALONG 

Kentish  Sir  Bj^ng  stood  for  his  King, 

Bidding  the  crop-headed  Parliament  swing: 

And,  pressing  a  troop  unable  to  stoop. 

And  see  the  rogues  flourish  and  honest  folk  droop, 

Marched  them  along,  fifty-score  strong, 

Great-hearted  gentlemen,  singing  this  song. 

God  for  King  Charles!    Pym  and  such  carles 

To  the  Devil  that  prompts  'em  their  treasonous  paries! 

Cavaliers,  up!    Lips  from  the  cup. 

Hands  from,  the  pasty,  nor  bite  take  nor  sup 

Till  you're — 

Chorus. — Marching  along,  fifty-score  strong, 

Great-hearted  gentlemen,  singing  this  song. 

Hampton  to  hell,  and  his  obsequies'  knell. 
Serve  Hazelrig,  Fiennes,  and  young  Harry  as  well! 
England,  good  cheer!     Rupert  is  near! 
Kentish  and  loyalists,  keep  we  not  here. 

Chorus.— '^iaxching  along,  fifty-score  strong, 

Great-hearted  gentlemen,  singing  this  song? 

Then,  God  for  King  Charles!     Pym  and  his  snarls 
To  the  Devil  that  pricks  on  such  pestilent  carles! 
Hold  by  the  right,  you  double  your  might; 
So,  onward  to  Nottingham,  fresh  from  the  fight,     . 

Chorus. — March  we  along,  fifty-score  strong. 

Great-hearted  gentlemen,  singing  this  song! 


2284  Soldier  Songs 

II — GIVE  A   ROUSE 

King  Charles,  and  who'll  do  him  right  now? 
King  Charles,  and  who's  ripe  for  fight  now? 
Give  a  rouse:  here's,  in  hell's  despite  now, 
King  Charles! 

Who  gave  me  the  goods  that  went  since? 
Who  raised  me  the  house  that  sank  once? 
Who  helped  me  to  gold  I  spent  since? 
Who  found  me  in  wine  you  drank  once? 

Cho. — King  Charles,  and  who'll  do  him  right  now? 
King  Charles,  and  who's  ripe  for  fight  now? 
Give  a  rouse:  here's,  in  hell's  despite  now, 
King  Charles! 

To  whom  used  my  boy  George  quaff  else, 
By  the  old  fool's  side  that  begot  him? 
For  whom  did  he  cheer  and  laugh  else. 
While  Noll's  damned  troopers  shot  him? 

Cho. — King  Charles,  and  who'll  do  him  right  now? 
King  Charles,  and  who's  ripe  for  fight  now? 
Give  a  rouse:  here's,  in  hell's  despite  now, 
King  Charles! 

Ill — BOOT   AND    SADDLE 

Boot,  saddle,  to  horse,  and  away! 
Rescue  my  castle  before  .the  hot  day 
Brightens  to  blue  from  its  silvery  gray. 

Cho. — Boot,  saddle,  to  horse,  and  away! 

Ride  past  the  suburbs,  asleep  as  you'd  say; 
Many's  the  friend  there,  will  hsten  and  pray 
"God's  luck  to  gallants  that  strike  up  the  lay — 

Cho. — Boot,  saddle,  to  horse,  and  away!" 

Forty  miles  off,  like  a  roebuck  at  bay, 

Flouts  Castle  Brancepeth  the  Roundheads'  array: 

Who  laughs,  "Good  fellows  ere  this,  by  my  fay, 

C/w.— Boot,  saddle,  to  horse,  and  away!" 


The  Song  of  the  Camp  2285 

Who?     My  wife  Gertrude,  that,  honest  and  gay. 
Laughs  when  you  talk  of  surrendering,  "Nay! 
I've  better  counsellors;  what  counsel  they? 

Cho. — Boot,  saddle,  to  horse,  and  away!" 

Robert  Broivning  [1812-1889] 


THE  SONG  OF  THE   CAMP 

"Give  us  a  song!"  the  soldiers  cried. 

The  outer  trenches  guarding. 
When  the  heated  guns  of  the  camps  allied 

Grew  weary  of  bombarding. 

The  dark  Redan,  in  silent  scoff. 
Lay,  grim  and  threatening,  under; 

And  the  tawny  mound  of  the  Malakoff 
No  longer  belched  its  thunder. 

There  was  a  pause.     A  guardsman  said, 
"We  storm  the  forts  to-morrow; 

Sing  while  we  may,  another  day 
Will  bring  enough  of  sorrow." 

They  lay  along  the  battery's  side, 

Below  the  smoking  cannon: 
Brave  hearts,  from  Severn  and  from  Clyde, 

And  from  the  banks  of  Shannon. 

They  sang  of  love,  and  not  of  fame; 

Forgot  was  Britain's  glory: 
Each  heart  recalled  a  different  name. 

But  all  sang  "Annie  Laurie." 

Voice  after  voice  caught  up  the  song. 

Until  its  tender  passion 
Rose  like  an  anthem,  rich  and  strong, — 

Their  battle-eve  confession. 

Dear  girl,  her  name  he  dared  not  speak, 

But,  as  the  song  grew  louder, 
Something  upon  the  soldier's  cheek 

Washed  off  the  stains  of  powder. 


2286  Soldier  Songs 

Beyond  the  darkening  ocean  burned 

The  bloody  sunset's  embers, 
While  the  Crimean  valleys  learned 

How  English  love  remembers. 

And  once  again  a  fire  of  hell 

Rained  on  the  Russian  quarters, 

With  scream  of  sKot,  and  burst  of  sheU, 
And  bellowing  of  the  mortars ! 

And  Irish  Nora's  eyes  are  dim 
For  a  singer,  dumb  and  gory; 

And  English  Mary  mourns  for  him 
Who  sang  of  "Annie  Laurie." 

Sleep,  soldiers!  still  in  honored  rest 
Your  truth  and  valor  wearing: 

The  bravest  are  the  tenderest, — 
The  loving  are  the  daring. 

Bayard  Taylor  [i 825-1 878] 

REVEILLE 

The  morning  is  cheery,  my  boys,  arouse! 
The  dew  shines  bright  on  the  chestnut  boughs, 
And  the  sleepy  mist  on  the  river  lies. 
Though  the  east  is  flushing  with  crimson  dyes. 
Awake!  awake!  awake! 

O'er  field  and  wood  and  brake, 
With  glories  newly  born. 

Comes  on  the  blushing  mom. 
Awake!  awake! 

You  have  dreamed  of  your  homes  and  friends  all  night ; 
You  have  basked  in  your  sweethearts'  smiles  so  bright; 
Come,  part  with  them  all  for  a  while  again, — 
Be  lovers  in  dreams;  when  awake,  be  men. 
Turn  out!  turn  out!  turn  out! 

You  have  dreamed  full  long,  I  know. 
Turn  out!  turn  out!  turn  out! 
The  east  is  all  aglow. 
Turn  out!  turn  out' 


"I   Give   My  Soldier   Boy  a   Blade"    2287 

From  every  valley  and  hill  there  come 
The  clamoring  voices  of  fife  and  drum; 
And  out  in  the  fresh,  cool  morning  air 
The  soldiers  are  swarming  everywhere. 
Fall  in!  fall  in!  fall  in! 

Every  man  in  his  place, 
Fall  in!  fall  in!  fall  in! 
Each  with  a  cheerful  face. 
Fall  in!  fall  in! 

Michael  O'Connor  [1837-1862] 


"I   GIVE  MY  SOLDIER  BOY  A  BLADE" 

I  GIVE  my  soldier  boy  a  blade, 

In  fair  Damascus  fashioned  well: 
Who  first  the  glittering  falchion  swayed, 

Who  first  beneath  its  fury  fell, 
I  know  not;  but  I  hope  to  know, 

That,  for  no  mean  or  hireling  trade, 
To  guard  no  feeling  base  or  low — 

I  give  my  soldier  boy  the  blade! 

Cool,  calm,  and  clear— the  lucid  flood 

In  which  its  tempering  work  was  done; — 
As  calm,  as  clear,  in  wind  and  wood,, 

Be  thou  where'er  it  sees  the  sun! 
For  country's  claim  at  honor's  call, 

For  outraged  friend,  insulted  maid, 
At  mercy's  voice  to  bid  it  fall — 

I  give  my  soldier  boy  the  blade! 

The  eye  which  marked  its  peerless  edge. 

The  hand  that  weighed  its  balanced  poise. 
Anvil  and  pincers,  forge  and  wedge, 

Are  gone  with  all  their  flame  and  noise; 
Yet  still  the  gleaming  sword  remains! 

So,  when  in  dust  I  low  am  laid, 
Remember  by  these  heartfelt  strains, 

I  give  my  soldier  boy  the  blade! 

William  Maginn  [i 793-1842] 


2288  Soldier   Songs 


STONEWALL  JACKSON'S  WAY 

Come,  stack  arms,  men!     Pile  on  the  rails, 

Stir  up  the  camp-fire  bright; 
No  growling  if  the  canteen  fails, 

We'll  make  a  roaring  night. 
Here  Shenandoah  brawls  along. 
There  burly  Blue  Ridge  echoes  strong, 
To  swell  the  Brigade's  rousing  song 

Of  "Stonewall  Jackson's  way." 

We  see  him  now — the  queer  slouched  hat 

Cocked  o'er  his  eye  askew; 
The  shrewd,  dry  smile;  the  speech  so  pat, 

So  calm,  so  blunt,  so  true. 
The  "Blue-Light  Elder"  knows  'em  well; 
Says  he,  "That's  Banks — he's  fond  of  shell; 
Lord  save  his  soul!  we'll  give  him — "  well! 

That's  "Stonewall  Jackson's  way." 

Silence!  ground  arms!  kneel  all!  caps  off! 

Old  Massa's  goin'  to  pray. 
Strangle  the  fool  that  dares  to  scoff! 

Attention!  it's  his  way. 
Appealing  from  his  native  sod, 
In  forma  pauperis  to  God : 
"Lay  bare  Thine  arm:  stretch  forth  Thy  rod! 

Amen!"     That's  "Stonewall's  way." 

He's  in  the  saddle  now.     Fall  in! 

Steady!  the  whole  brigade! 
Hill's  at  the  ford,  cut  ofif;  we'll  win 

His  way  out,  ball  and  blade! 
What  matter  if  our  shoes  are  worn? 
What  matter  if  our  feet  are  torn? 
"Quick  step!  we're  with  him  before  morn!" 

That's  "  Stonewall  Jackson's  way." 


Music  in   Camp  2289 

The  sun's  bright  lances  rout  the  mists 

Of  morning,  and,  by  George! 
Here's  Longstreet,  struggling  in  the  lists, 

Hemmed  in  an  ugly  gorge. 
Pope  and  his  Dutchmen,  whipped  before; 
"Bay'nets  and  grape!"  hear  Stonewall  roar; 
"  Charge,  Stuart !     Pay  off  Ashby's  score! " 

In  "Stonewall  Jackson's  way." 

Ah!  Maiden,  wait  and  watch  and  yearn 

For  news  of  Stonewall's  band! 
Ah!  Widow,  read,  with  eyes  that  burn, 

That  ring  upon  thy  hand. 
Ah!  Wife,  sew  on,  pray  on,  hope  on; 
Thy  life  shall  not  be  all  forlorn; 
The  foe  had  better  ne'er  been  born 

That  gets  in  "Stonewall's  way." 

John  Williamson  Palmer  [1825-1906] 


MUSIC  IN   CAMP 

Two  armies  covered  hill  and  plain, 
Where  Rappahannock's  waters 

Ran  deeply  crimsoned  with  the  stain 
Of  battle's  recent  slaughters. 

The  summer  clouds  lay  pitched  like  tents 

In  meads  of  heavenly  azure; 
And  each  dread  gun  of  the  elements 

Slept  in  its  high  embrasure. 

The  breeze  so  softly  blew,  it  made 

No  forest  leaf  to  quiver; 
And  the  smoke  of  the  random  cannonade 

Rolled  slowly  from  the  river. 

And  now,  where  circling  hills  looked  down 
With  cannon  grimly  planted. 

O'er  listless  camp  and  silent  town 
The  golden  sunset  slanted. 


2290  Soldier  Songs 

When  on  the  fervid  air  there  came 
A  strain, — now  rich,  now  tender; 

The  music  seemed  itself  aflame 
With  day's  departing  splendor. 

A  Federal  band,  which,  eve  and  morn, 
Played  measures  brave  and  nimble, 

Had  just  struck  up  with  flute  and  horn 
And  lively  clash  of  cymbal. 

Down  flocked  the  soldiers  to  the  banks; 

Till,  margined  by  its  pebbles. 
One  wooded  shore  was  blue  with  "Yanks," 

And  one  was  gray  with  "Rebels."  ■' 

Then  all  was  still;  and  then  the  band, 
With  movement  light  and  tricksy, 

Made  stream  and  forest,  hill  and  strand, 
Reverberate  with  "Dixie." 

The  conscious  stream,  with  burnished  glow, 
Went  proudly  o'er  its  pebbles. 

But  thrilled  throughout  its  deepest  flow 
With  yelling  of  the  Rebels. 

Again  a  pause;  and  then  again 
The  trumpets  pealed  sonorous. 

And  "Yankee  Doodle"  was  the  strain 
To  which  the  shore  gave  chorus. 

The  laughing  ripple  shoreward  flew 

To  kiss  the  shining  pebbles; 
Loud  shrieked  the  swarming  Boys  in  Blue 

Defiance  to  the  Rebels. 

And  yet  once  more  the  bugles  rang 

Above  the  stormy  riot; 
No  shout  upon  the  evening  rang — 

There  reigned  a  holy  quiet. 


The  "Grey   Horse  Troop"        2291 

The  sad,  slow  stream,  its  noiseless  flood 

Poured  o'er  the  glistening  pebbles; 
All  silent  now  the  Yankees  stood, 

All  silent  stood  the  Rebels. 

No  unresponsive  soul  had  heard 

That  plaintive  note's  appealing, 
So  deeply  "Home,  Sweet  Home"  had  stirred 

The  hidden  founts  of  feeling. 

Or  Blue  or  Gray,  the  soldier  sees. 

As  by  the  wand  of  fairy, 
The  cottage  'neath  the  live-oak  trees. 

The  cabin  by  the  prairie. 

Or  cold  or  warm,  his  native  skies 

Bend  in  their  beauty  o'er  him; 
Seen  through  the  tear-mist  in  his  eyes, 

His  loved  ones  stand  before  him. 

As  fades  the  iris  after  rain 

In  April's  tearful  weather, 
The  vision  vanished,  as  the  strain 

And  daylight  died  together. 

But  Memory,  waked  by  Music's  art. 

Expressed  in  simplest  numbers. 
Subdued  the  sternest  Yankee's  heart — 

Made  light  the  Rebel's  slumbers. 

And  fair  the  form  of  IMusic  shines — 

That  bright,  celestial  creature, 
Who  still,  'mid  War's  embattled  lines, 

Gave  this  one  touch  of  Nature. 

John  Reuben  Thompson  [1823-1873] 


THE  "GREY  HORSE  TROOP" 

All  alone  on  the  hillside — 

Larry  an'  Barry  an'  me; 

Nothin'  to  see  but  the  sky  an'  the  plain, 

Nothin'  to  see  but  the  drivin'  rain, 


2292  Soldier  Songs 

Nothin'  to  see  but  the  painted  Sioux, 
Galloping,  galloping:  "Whoop — whuroo! 
The  divil  in  yellow  is  down  in  the  mud!" 
Sez  Larry  to  Barry,  "I'm  losin'  blood." 

"Cheers  for  the  Greys!"  yells  Barry; 
"Second  Dragoons!"  groans  Larry; 
Hurrah !  hurrah !  for  Egan's  Grey  Troop  1 
Whoop!  ye  divils — ye've  got  to  whoop; 
Cheer  for  the  troopers  who  die:  sez  I — 
"Cheer  for  the  troop  that  never  shall  die^'' 

All  alone  on  the  hillside — 

Larry  an'  Barry  an'  me; 

Flat  on  our  bellies,  an'  pourin'  in  lead — 

Seven  rounds  left,  an'  the  horses  dead — 

Barry  a-cursin'  at  every  breath; 

Larry  beside  him,  as  white  as  death; 

Indians  galloping,  galloping  by, 

Wheelin'  and  squealin'  like  hawks  in  the  sky! 

"Cheers  for  the  Greys!"  yells  Barry; 
"Second  Dragoons!"  groans  Larry; 
Hurrah!  hurrah!  for  Egan's  Grey  Troop! 
Whoop!  ye  divils — ye've  got  to  whoop; 
Cheer  for  the  troopers  who  die:  sez  I — ■ 
"Cheer  for  the  troop  that  never  shall  die!" 

All  alone  on  the  hillside — 
Larry  an'  Barry  an'  me; 
Two  of  us  livin'  and  one  of  us  dead — 
Shot  in  the  head,  and  God! — how  he  bled! 
"Larry's  done  up,"  sez  Barry  to  me; 
"Diwy  his  cartridges!  Quick!  gimme  three!" 
While  nearer  an'  nearer  an'  plainer  in  view, 
Galloped  an'  galloped  the  murderin'  Sioux. 

"Cheers  for  the  Greys!"  yells  Barry; 
"Cheer — "  an'  he  falls  on  Larry. 
Alas!  alas!  for  Egan's  Grey  Troop! 
The  Red  Sioux,  hovering  stoop  to  swoop; 


Danny   Deever  '^'^93 

'"'     "       Two  out  of  three  lay  dead,  while  I'" ■ 

Cheered  for  the  troop  that  never  shall  die. 

All  alone  on  the  hillside — 

Larry  an'  Barry  an'  me; 

An'  I  fired  an'  yelled  till  I  lost  my  head, 

Cheerin'  the  livin,  cheerin'  the  dead, 

Swingin'  my  cap,  I  cheered  until 

I  stumbled  and  fell.     Then  over  the  hill 

There  floated  a  trumpeter's  silvery  call, 

An'  Egan's  Grey  Troop  galloped  up,  that's  all. 

f 

Drink  to  the  Greys, — an'  Barry! 

Second  Dragoons, — an'  Larry! 

Here's  a  bumper  to  Egan's  Grey  Troop! 

Let  the  crape  on  the  guidons  droop; 

Drink  to  the  troopers  who  die,  while  I 

Drink  to  the  troop  that  never  shall  die! 

Robert  William  Chambers  [1865- 

DANNY  DEEVER 

^''What  are  the  bugles  blowin'  for?"  said  Files-on-Parade. 

"To  turn  you  out,  to  turn  you  out,"  the  Color-Sergeant  said. 

"What  makes  you  look  so  white,  so  white?"  said  Files-on- 
Parade. 

"I'm  dreadin'  what  I've  got  to  watch,"  the  Color-Sergeant 
said. 
For  they're  hangin'  Danny  Deever,  you  can  'car  the  Dead 

March  play, 
The  regiment's  in  'oUow   square — they're    hangin'  him 
to-day;  1  niauaju 

They've  taken  of  his  buttons  off  ah'  cut  his  stripes  away, 
An'  they're  hangin'  Danny  Deever  in  the  mornin'. 

"What  makes  the  rear-rank  breathe  so  'ard?"  said  Files- 
on-Parade. 

"It's  bitter  cold,  it's  bitter  cold,"  the  Color-Sergeant  said. 

"What  makes  that  front-rank  man  fall  down?"  says  Files- 
on-Parade. 

"A  touch  o'  sun,  a  touch  o'  sun,"  the  Color-Sergeant  said. 


2294  Soldier  Songs 

They're  hangin'  Danny  Deever,  they  are  marchin'  of  'im 

round, 
They  'ave  'alted   Danny  Deever   by  'is    coidfin   on    the 

ground ; 
An'  'e'll  swing  in  'arf  a  minute  for  a  sneakin'  shootin' 

hound — 
O  they're  hangin'  Danny  Deever  in  the  mornin' ! 


Is  cot  was  right-'and  cot  to  mine,"  said  Files-on-Parade. 

E's  sleepin'  out  an'  far  to-night,"  the  Color-Sergeant  said. 

'I've  drunk  'is  beer  a  score  o'  times,"  said  Files-on-Parade. 

E's  drinkin'  bitter  beer  alone,"  the  Color-Sergeant  said. 

They  are  hangin'  Danny  Deever,  you  must  mark  'im  to 

'is  place. 
For  'e  shot  a  comrade  sleepin' — you  must  look  'im  in  the 

face; 
Nine  'undred  of  'is  county  an'  the  regiment's  disgrace, 
While  they're  hangin'  Danny  Deever  in  the  mornin'. 

"What's  that  so  black  agin  the  sun?"  said  Files-on-Parade. 
"It's  Danny  fightin'  'ard  fur  life,"  the  Color-Sergeant  said. 
"What's  that  that  whimpers  over'ead?"  said  Files-on- 
Parade. 
"It's  Danny's  soul  that's  passin'  now,"  the  Color-Sergeant 
said.  I       ,T 

For  they're  done  with  Danny  Deever,  you  can  'ear  the 
quickstep  play, 
|,  The  regiment's  in  column,  an'  they're  marchin'  us  away; 
Ho!  the  young  recruits  are  shakin',  an'  they'll  want  their 

beer  to-day, 
After  hangin'  Danny  Deever  in  the  mornin'. 

Rud yard  Kipling  [1865- 


GUNGA  DIN  ^iJrf//" 

i-no 
You  may  talk  0' gin  an' beer  id  a'Jl" 

When  you're  quartered  safe  out  'ere,  JjjriY/" 

An'  you're  sent  to  penny-fights  an'  Aldershot,^!; 
But  when  it  comes  to  slaughter  jj^j  /\  » 


Gunga   Din  '^'^95 

You  will  do  your  work  on  water,        'i'    .m  ;■   i;  .;  '    ." 

An'  you'll  lick  the  bloomin'  boots  of  'im  that's  got  it. 

Now  in  Injia's  sunny  clime, 

Where  I  used  to  spend  my  time 

A-servin'  of  'Er  Majesty  the  Queen, 

Of  all  them  black-faced  crew 

The  finest  man  I  knew  •  f  .7 

Was  our  regimental  bhisti,  Gunga  Din. 

He  was  "Din!  Din!  Din! 

You  limpin'  lump  o'  brick-dust,  Gunga  Din! 

Hi!  slippey  hither ao! 

Water!  get  it!  Panee  lao! 

You  squidgy-nosed  old  idol,  Gunga  Din!" 

The  uniform  'e  wore 

Was  nothin'  much  before. 

An'  rather  less  than  'arf  o'  that  be'ind, 

For  a  twisty  piece  o'  rag 

An'  a  goatskin  water-bag 

Was  all  the  field-equipment  'e  could  find. 

When  the  sweatin'  troop-train  lay 

In  a  si  din'  through  the  day. 

Where  the  'eat  would  make  your  bloomin'  eye-brows  crawl, 

We  shouted  ''Harry  By!^' 

Till  our  throats  were  bricky-dry,  i 

Then  we  wopped  'im  cause  'e  couldn't  serve  us  all. 

It  was  "Din!  Din!  Din! 

You  'eathen,  where  the  mischief  'ave  you  been? 

You  put  some  juldee  in  it 

Or  I'll  marrow  you  this  minute, 

If  you  don't  fill  up  my  helmet,  Gunga  Din!" 

'E  was  dot  an'  carry  one 

Till  the  longest  day  was  done.; 

An'  'e  didn't  seem  to  know  the  use  o'  fear. 

If  we  charged  or  broke  or  cut, 

You  could  bet  your  bloomin'  nut, 

'E'd  be  waitin'  fifty  paces  right  flank  rear. 

With  'is  mussick  on  'is  back, 

'E  would  skip  with  our  attack, 


2296  Soldier  Songs 

An'  watch  us  till  the  bugles  made  "R.etire,"'  liiv,'  Mrr 

An'  for  all  'is  dirty  'ide 

'E  was  white,  clear  white,  inside 

When  'e  went  to  tend  the  wounded  under  fire! 

It  was  "Din!  Din!  Din!"  n 

With  the  bullets  kickin'  dust-spots  on  the  green.0 
When  the  cartridges  ran  out,  V 

You  could  'ear  the  front-files  shout, 
"Hi!  ammunition-mules  an'  Gunga  Din!" 

I  sha'n't  forgit  the  night 

When  I  dropped  be'ind  the  fight 

With  a  bullet  where  my  belt-plate  should  'a'  been. 

I  was  chokin'  mad  with  thirst, 

An'  the  man  that  spied  me  first 

Was  our  good  old  grinnin',  gruntin'  Gunga  Din. 

'E  lifted  up  my  'ead,  'A 

An'  'e  plugged  me  where  I  bled,  '■! 

An'  'e  guv  me  'arf-a-pint  o'  water — green:  ' ' 

It  was  crawlin'  an'  it  stunk. 

But  of  all  the  drinks  I've  drurtk, 

I'm  gratefuUest  to  one  from  Gunga  Din. 
It  was  "Din!  Din!  Din! 

'Ere's  a  beggar  with  a  bullet  through  'is  spleen; 
'E's  chawin'  up  the  ground,  '■  I' 

An'  'e's  kickin'  all  around:  "^ 

For  Gawd's  sake  git  the  water,  Gunga  Din!" 

'E  carried  me  away 

To  where  a  dooli  lay, 

An'  a  bullet  come  an'  drilled  the  beggar  clean. 

'E  put  me  safe  inside, 

An'  just  before  'e  died:  - 

"I  'ope  you  liked  your  drink,"  sez  Gunga  Din.  ^^ 

So  I'll  meet  'im  later  on 

In  the  place  where  'e  is  gone — 

Where  it's  always  double  drill  an'  no  canteen; 

'E'll  be  squattin'  on  the  coals, 

Givin'  drink  to  pore  damned  souls. 

An'  I'll  git  a  swig  in  hell  from  Gunga  Din! 


The   Men   Behind  the  Guns       2297 

Yes,  Din!  Din!  Din!       ■  .:Vi  -.il:  ,,■; 
You  Lazarushian-leather  Gunga  Din! 
Though  I've  belted  you  an'  flayed  you, 
By  the  livin'  Gawd  that  made  you, 
You're  a  better  man  than  I  am,  Gunga  Din! 
Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 


THE  MEN  BEHIND  THE  GUNS 

A  CHEER  and  salute  for  the  Adniiral,  and  here's  to  the  Cap- 
tain bold,  .„{j  ,,ri)  Wi^v.y 

And  never  forget  the  Commodore's  debt  when  the  deeds  of 
might  are  told! 

They  stand  to  the  deck  through  the  battle's  wreck  when  the 
great  shells  roar  and  screech — 

And  never  they  fear  when  the  foe  is  near  to  practice  what 
they  preach: 

But  off  with  your  hat  and  three  times  three  for  Columbia's 
true-blue  sons. 

The  men  below  who  batter  the  foe — the  men  behind  the 


guns 


Oh,  light  and  merry  of  heart  are  they  when  they  swing  into 

port  once  more. 
When,  with  more  than  enough  of  the  "green-backed  stufT," 

they  start  for  their  leave-o'-shore; 
And  you'd  think,  perhaps,  that  the  blue-bloused  chaps  who 

loll  along  the  street 
Are  a  tender  bit,  with  salt  on  it,  for  some  fierce  "mustache" 

to  eat — 
Some  warrior  bold,  with  straps  of  gold,  who  dazzles  and 

fairly  stuns 
The  modest  worth  of  the  sailor  boys — the  lads  who  serve  the 

guns.  jon:-I  ,{VyAV 

But  say  not  a  word  till  the  shot  is  heard  that  tells  that  the 

fight  is  on, 
Till  the  long,  deep  roar  grows  more  and  more  from  the  ships 

of  "Yank"  and  "Don," 


2298  Soldier  Songs 

Till  over  the  deep  the  tempests  sweep  of  fire  and  bursting 
shell,       ■  JxtiQ  «;sinjLrD  iaiiJfi'jl-nBiflauicsK  J  jjoY 

And  the  very  air  is  a  rnad  Despair  in 'the  throes  of  a  living 
hell; 

Then  down,  deep  down,  in  the  mighty  ship,  unseen  by  the 
midday  suns, 

You'll  find  the  chaps  who  are  giving  the  raps — the  men  be- 
hind the  guns! 

Oh,  well  they  know  how  the  cyclones  blow  that  they  loose 
from  their  cloud  of  death, 

And  they  know  is  heard  the  thunder-word  their  fierce  ten- 
incher  saith! 

The  steel  decks  rock  with  the  lightning  shock,  and  shake 
with  the  great  recoil,     ya"'^'''^'  --^^-^m  :jnj  >,.  ,ni,Aa  i^di 

And  the  sea  grows  red  with  the:  blbbd '6f  th'e  d€ad  inai'eaches 
for  his  spoil — 

But  not  till  the  foe  has  gone  below  or  turns  his  prow  and 
runs, 

Shall  the  voice  of  peace  bring  sweet  release  to  the  men  be- 
hind the  guns! 

John  Jerome  Rooney  [1866- 

riO 

THE   FIGHTING   RACE  '^   „„ 

"Read  out  the  names! "  and  Burke  sat  back, 
■  •     And  Kelly  drooped  his  head,  ;/- 

While  Shea — they  call  him  Scholar  Jack — ■ 

Went  down  the  list  of  the  dead.  '-'A 

Officers,  seamen,  gunners,  marines,  ^^ 

The  crews  of  the  gig  and  yawl,  v  3mo8 

The  bearded  man  and  the  lad  in  his  teens, 

Carpenters,  coal-passers — all.  ^!  1" 

Then,  knocking  the  ashes  from  out  his  pipe,  i^^' 

Said  Burke  in  an  offhand  way: 
"We're  all  in  that  dead  man's  Ust,  by  Cripe!  '(W  iuQ. 

Kelly  and  Burke  and  Shea." 
"Well,  here's  to  the  Maine,  and  I'm  sorry  for.  Spain,'*  iT 

Said  Kelly  and  Burke  and  Shea.  .jjY''  io 


The  Fighting  Race  2299 

"Wherever  there's  Kellys  there's  trouble,"  said  Burke. 

"Wherever  fighting's  the  game, 
Or  a  spice  of  danger  in  grown  man's  work," 

Said  Kelly,  "you'll  find  my  name."  ■^' 

"And  do  we  fall  short,"  said  Burke,  getting  mad, 

"When  it's  touch-and-go  for  life?" 
Said  Shea,  "It's  thirty-odd  years,  bedad, 

Since  I  charged  to  drum  and  fife 
Up  Marye's  Heights,  and  my  old  canteen 

Stopped  a  rebel  ball  on  its  way; 
There  were  blossoms  of  blood  on  our  sprigs  of  green — 

Kelly  and  Burke  and  Shea — 
And  the  dead  didn't  brag."    "Well,  here's  to  the  flag!" 

Said  Kelly  and  Burke  and  Shea. 

"I  wish  'twas  in  Ireland,  for  there's  the  place," 

Said  Burke,  "that  we'd  die  by  right, 
In  the  cradle  of  our  soldier  race. 

After  one  good  stand-up  fight. 
My  grandfather  fell  on  Vinegar  Hill, 

And  fighting  was  not  his  trade; 
But  his  rusty  pike's  in  the  cabin  still. 

With  Hessian  blood  on  the  blade." 
"Aye,  aye,"  said  Kelly,  "the  pikes  were  great 

When  the  word  was  'clear  the  way!' 
We  were  thick  on  the  roll  in  ninety-eight— 

Kelly  and  Burke  and  Shea." 
"Well,  here's  to  the  pike  and  the  sword  and  the  like!" 

Said  Kelly  and  Burke  and  Shea. 

And  Shea,  the  scholar,  with  rising  joy, 

Said,  "We  were  at  Ramillies; 
We  left  our  bones  at  Fontenoy 

And  up  in  the  Pyrenees; 
Before  Dunkirk,  on  Landen's  plain, 

Cremona,  Lille,  and  Ghent; 
We're  all  over  Austria,  France,  and  Spain, 

Wherever  they  pitched  a  tent. 
We've  died  for  England  from  Waterloo 

To  Egypt  and  Dargai; 


2300  Soldier  Songs 

And  still  there's  enough  for  a  corps  or  crew,.;^.j-fgj{\^^> 
Kelly  and  Burke  and  Shea."  -^t-iH'//" 

"Well,  here's  to  good  honest  fighting-blood!"- 
Said  Kelly  and  Burke  and  Shea. 

"Oh,  the  fighting  races  don't  die  out, 

If  they  seldom  die  in  bed, 
For  love  is  first  in  their  hearts,  no  doubt," 

Said  Burke;  then  Kelly  said: 
"When  Michael,  the  Irish  Archangel,  stands, 

The  Angel  with  the  sword. 
And  the  battle-dead  from  a  hundred  lands 

Are  ranged  in  one  big  horde. 
Our  line,  that  for  Gabriel's  trumpet  waits, 

Will  stretch  three  deep  that  day, 
From  Jehoshaphat  to  the  Golden  Gates — 

Kelly  and  Burke  and  Shea." 
"Well,  here's  thank  God  for  the  race  and  the  sod!" 

Said  Kelly  and  Burke  and  Shea. 

Joseph  I.  C.  Clarke  [1846- 


-;f« 


"HOW  SLEEP. THE  BRAVE" 

"SOLDIER,   REST!  THY  WARFARE  O'ER" 

From  "  The  Lady  of  the  Lake  " 

Soldier,  rest!  thy  warfare  o'er, 

Sleep  the  sleep  that  knows  not  breaking; 
Dream  of  battled  fields  no  more, 

Days  of  danger,  nights  of  waking. 
In  our  isle's  enchanted  hall, 

Hands  unseen  thy  couch  are  strewing, 
Fairy  strains  of  music  fall, 

Every  sense  in  slumber  dewing. 
Soldier,  rest!  thy  warfare  o'er. 
Dream  of  fighting  fields  no  more: 
Sleep  the  sleep  that  knows  not  breaking, 
Morn  of  toil,  nor  night  of  waking. 

No  rude  sound  shall  reach  thine  ear. 

Armor's  clang,  or  war-steed  champing. 
Trump  nor  pibroch  summon  here 

Mustering  clan,  or  squadron  tramping. 
Yet  the  lark's  shrill  fife  may  come 

At  the  daybreak  from  the  fallow, 
And  the  bittern  sound  his  drum. 

Booming  from  the  sedgy  shallow. 
Ruder  sounds  shall  none  be  near, 
Guards  nor  warders  challenge  here, 
Here's  no  war-steed's  neigh  and  champing, 
Shouting  clans,  or  squadrons  stamping. 

Huntsman,  rest!  the  chase  is  done; 

While  our  slumbrous  spells  assail  ye, 
Dream  not,  with  the  rising  sun. 

Bugles  here  shall  sound  reveille. 
2301 


2302  "How  Sleep  the  Brave" 

Sleep!  the  deer  is  in  his  den; 

Sleep!  thy  hounds  are  by  thee  lying; 
Sleep!  nor  dream  in  yonder  glen, 

How  thy  gallant  steed  lay  dying. 
Huntsman,  rest!  thy  chase  is  done, 
Think  not  of  the  rising  sun. 
For  at  dawning  to  assail  ye 
Here  no  bugles  sound  reveille. 

Walter  Scott  [1771-1832] 


"PEACE  TO  THE   SLUMBERERS" 

Peace  to  the  slumberers! 

They  lie  on  the  battle-plain. 
With  no  shroud  to  cover  thernj 

The  dev/  and  the  summer  rain 
And  all  that  sweep  over  them. 
Peace  to  the  slumberers! 


liJU   ill 


Vain  was  their  bravery! — 

The  fallen  oak  lies  where  it  lay 
Across  the  wintry  river; 

But  brave  hearts,  once  swept  away, 
Are  gone,  alas!  forever. 

Vain  was  their  bravery! 

Woe  to  the  conqueror! 

Our  limbs  shall  lie  as  cold  as  theirs 
Of  whom  his  sword  bereft  us, 

Ere  we  forget  the  deep  arrears      .■  •', 
Of  vengeance  they  have  left  us!       J 
Woe  to  the  conqueror!  iinM 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 

THE   MINSTREL-BOY"'^"^^*"^ 

The  Minstrel-Boy  to  the  war  is  gone, 
In  the  ranks  of  death  you'll  find  him; 

His  father's  sword  he  has  girded  on. 
And  his  wild  harp  slung  behind  him. 


"  It  is  Great  for  Our  Country  to  Die  "     2303 

"Land  of  song!"  said  the  warrior-bard, 

"Though  all  the  world  betrays  thee,  30/4 

,:.-     {yiic  sword,  at  least,  thy  rights  shall  guard,     ■  '  '"' 
brtB  M    One  faithful  harp  shall  praise  thee!" 

The  Minstrel  fell! — but  the  foeman's  chain 

Could  not  bring  his  proud  soul  under; 
The  harp  he  loved  ne'er  spoke  again, 

For  he  tore  its  chords  asunder, 
And  said,  "No  chains  shall  sully  thee,  ,,  -, 

Thou  soul  of  love  and  bravery! 
Thy  songs  were  made  for  the  pure  and  free, 

They  shall  never  sound  in  slavery!" 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 


"IT  IS  GREAT  FOR  OUR  COUNTRY  TO  DIE" 

O,  IT  is  great  for  our  country  to  die,  where  ranks  are  con- 
tending! 
Bright  is  the  wreath  of  our  fame;  Glory  awaits  us  for 
aye,— 
Glory,  that  never  is  dim,  shining  on  with  light  never  end- 
ing,— 
Glory  that  never  shall  fade,  never,  O  never,  away! 

O,  it  is  sweet  for  our  country  to  die!     How  softly  reposes 
Warrior-youth  on  his  bier,  wet  by  the  tears  of  his  love, 
Wet  by  a  mother's  warm  tears.     They  crown  him  with  gar- 
lands of  roses,  "i-.f,   r- 
Weep,  and  then  joyously  turn,  bright  where  he  triumphs 
above. 

Not  to  the  shades  shall  the  youth  descend,  who  for  country 
hath  perished; 
Hebe  awaits  him  in  heaven,  welcomes  him  there  with  her 
smile ; 
There,  at  the  banquet  divine,  the  patriot  spirit  is  cherished; 
Gods  love  the  young  who  ascend  pure  from  the  funeral 
pile. 


2304  "How  Sleep  the  Brave  "np^O  g{  jj  »> 

Not  to  Elysian  fields,  by  the  still,  oblivious  river; 

Not  to  the  isles  of  the  blest,  over  the  blue,  rolling  sea; 
But  on  Olympian  heights  shall  dwell  the  devoted  forever; 

There  shall  assemble  the  good,  there  the  wise,  valiant,  and 
free. 

O,  then,  how  great  for  our  country  to  die,  in  the  front  rank 
to  perish. 
Firm  with  our  breast  to  the  foe,  Victory's  shout  in  our 
ear! 
Long  they  our  statues  shall  crown,  in  songs  our  memory 
cherish ; 
We  shall  look  forth  from  our  heaven,  pleased  the  sweet 
music  to  hear. 

James  Gates  Percival  [1795-1856] 

«3j(^  ,         A  BALLAD   OF  HEROES  .p, 

Now  all  your  victories  are  in  vain — A.  Mary  F.  Robinson 
-fio; 

Because  you  passed,  and  now  are  not, — jhnaj 
7ol  Because,  in  some  remoter  day,  ,.',,;..'i 

Your  sacred  dust  from  doubtful  spot 
-bxis  lyj:    Was  blown  of  ancient  airs  away, —      .^^.      j^^j 
Because  you  perished, — must  men  say    ,^.- 
Your  deeds  were  naught,  and  so  profane 
Your  Hves  with  that  cold  burden?     Nay, 
.>9^0'.i'j>rhe  deeds  you  wrought  are  not  in  vain! 

""'"'/'though,  it  may  be,  above  the  plot  '' 

That  hid  your  once  imperial  clay,  ''^  ^' 

No  greener  than  o'er  men  forgot 
.ii._.i  ,,,        rpj^^  unregarding  grasses  sway; — 

Though  there  no  sweeter  is  the  lay  ; 

From  careless  bird, — though  you  remain 

Without  distinction  of  decay, —  "  "'  '"  ' 

The  deeds  you  wrought  are  not  in  vain! 

No.     For  while  yet  in  tower  or  cot 

Your  story  stirs  the  pulses'  play;  -,x{'p 

And  men  forget  the  sordid  lot —  .1 

The  sordid  care,  of  cities  gray; 


The  Captain's   Feather  -^305 

While  yet,  beset  in  homelier  fray, 
They  learn  from  you  the  lesson  plain 

That  Life  may  go,  so  Honor  stay, — 
The  deeds  you  wrought  are  not  in  vain! 

ENVOY 

Heroes  of  old !     I  humbly  lay 

The  laurel  on  your  graves  again ; 
Whatever  men  have  done,  men  may, — 

The  deeds  you  wrought  are  not  in  vain! 
Austin  Dohson  [1840- 


THE   CAPTAIN'S   FEATHER 

The  dew  is  on  the  heather, 

The  moon  is  in  the  sky, 
And  the  captain's  waving  feather 

Proclaims  the  hour  is  nigh^ 
When  some  upon  their  horses 

Shall  through  the  battle  ride,       J 
And  some  with  bleeding  corses 

Must  on  the  heather  bide. 

The  dust  is  on  the  heather. 

The  moon  is  in  the  sky. 
And  about  the  captain's  feather 

The  bolts  of  battle  fly; 
But  hark,  what  sudden  wonder 

Breaks  forth  upon  the  gloom? 
It  is  the  cannon's  thunder — 

It  is  the  voice  of  doom ! 

The  blood  is  on  the  heather, 

The  night  is  in  the  sky. 
And  the  gallant  captain's  feather 

Shall  wave  no  more  on  high ; 
The  grave  and  hoi}'  brother 

To  God  is  saying  Mass, 
But  who  shall  tell  his  mother,^  "•' 

And  who  shall  tell  his  lass?'      '   '' 

Samuel  Minturn  Peck  [1854- 


2306         "  How  Sleep  the  Brave 


ENGLAND'S  DEAD 

Son  of  the  ocean  isle! 
Where  sleep  your  mighty  dead? 
Show  me  what  high  and  stately  pile 
Is  reared  o'er  Glory's  bed. 

Go,  stranger!  track  the  deep, 
Free,  free,  the  white  sail  spread! 
Wave  may  not  foam,  nor  wild  wind  sweep^ 
Where  rest  not  England's  dead. 

On  Egypt's  burning  plains, 
By  the  pyramid  o'erswayed. 
With  fearful  power  the  noonday  reigns, 
And  the  palm-trees  yield  no  shade. 

But  let  the  angry  sun 
From  heaven  look  fiercely  red, 
Unfelt  by  those  whose  task  is  done, — 
There  slumber  England's  dead. 

The  hurricane  hath  might 
Along  the  Indian  shore, 
And  far,  by  Ganges'  banks  at  night 
Is  heard  the  tiger's  roar. 

But  let  the  sound  roll  on! 
It  hath  no  tone  of  dread 
For  those  that  from  their  toils  are  gone; — 
There  slumber  England's  dead! 

Loud  rush  the  torrent-floods 
The  western  wilds  among, 
And  free,  in  green  Columbia's  woods 
The  hunter's  bow  is  strung. 

But  let  the  floods  rush  on! 
Let  the  arrow's  flight  be  sped! 
Why  should  they  reck  whose  task  is  done?- 
There  slumber  England's  dead! 


The  Pipes  o'   Gordon's   Men       2307 

The  mountain-storms  rise  high 
In  the  snowy  Pyrenees,  \i. 

And  toss  the  pine-boughs  through  the  sky,.    ,  ■  il'I 
Like  rose-leaves  on  the  breeze.  .i'l  bnA 

But  let  the  storm  rage  on!  'i,-  ,,1  .fi" 

Let  the  forest-wreaths  be  shed: 
For  the  Roncesvalles'  field  is  won, — 
ihi^ip  '^^\There  slumber  England's  dead.  ,  r 

On  the  frozen  deep's  repose, 
'Tis  a  dark  and  dreadful  hour,  ^  ; 

When  round  the  ship  the  ice-fields  close, 
To  chain  her  with  their  power. 


V 


But  let  the  ice  drift  on! 
Let  the  cold-blue  desert  spread! 
7'heir  course  with  mast  and  flag  is  done, — 
{lb — Even  there  sleep  England's  dead.  "^ 

The  warlike  of  the  isles, 
The  men  of  field  and  wave! 
Are  not  the  rocks  their  funeral  piles, 
The  seas  and  shores  their  grave? 

"'•  Go,  stranger!  track  the  deep, 
Free,  free  the  white  sail  spread! 
Wave  may  not  foam,  nor  wild  wind  sweep. 
Where  rest  not  England's  dead. 

Felicia  Dorothea  Hcmans  [1793-1835] 


THE  PIPES  O'   GORDON'S  MEN  ■ 

Home  comes  a  lad  with  the  bonnic  h^iir, 

And  the  kilted  plaid  that  the  hill-clans  wear; 

And  you  hear  the  mother  say, 

"  Whcar  ha'  ye  ben,  wee  Laddie;  whear  ha'  ye  ben  th'  day?" 

"0!  I  ha'  ben  wi'  Gordon's  men; 

Dinna  ye  hear  th'  bagpipes  play? 

And  I  followed  th'  soldiers  across  the  green, 

And  doon  th'  road  ta  Aberdeen. 


2308  "How  Sleep  the   Brave  "  r 

And  when  I'm  a  man,  my  Mother, 

And  th'  Hielanders  parade, 

I'll  be  marchin'  there,  wi'  my  Father's  pipes,     \:L 

And  I'll  wear  th'  red  cockade."  i 

Beneath  the  Soudan's  sky  ye  ken  the  smoke, 

As  the  clans  reply  when  the  tribesmen  spoke. 

Then  the  charge  roars  by! 

The  death-sweat  clings  to  the  kilted  form  that  the  stretcher 

brings. 
And  the  iron-nerved  surgeons  say, 

"Whear  ha'  ye  ben,  my  Laddie;  whear  ha'  ye  ben  th'  day?" 
"O,  I  ha'  ben  wi'  Gordon's  men; 
Dinna  ye  hear  th'  bagpipes  play? 
And  I  piped  th'  clans  from  the  river  barge 
Across  the  sands,  and  through  the  charge.         i^ 
And  I — skirled — th'  pibroch — keen — an'  high,    y^ 
But  th'  pipes — ben  broke — an'  — my — lips — ben — dry." 

CORONACH 

Upon  the  hill-side,  high  and  steep. 

Where  rank  on  rank  the  soldiers  sleep, — 

Where  the  silent  cannons  beside  the  path. 

Point  the  last  forced-march  that  the  soldier  hath, — 

Where  the  falling  grave-grass  has  partly  hid 

The  round-shot,  heaped  in  a  pyramid —  ,  f / 

A  white  stone  rises.    Across  its  face 

You  can  read  the  words  that  the  chisels  trace: 

"Whear  ha'  ye  ben,  wee  Laddie;  whear  ha'  ye  ben  th'  day?" 

"O,  I  ha'  ben  wi'  Gordon's  men; 

Dinna  ye  hear  th'  bagpipes  play?" 

/.  Scotl  Glaseow  [18    —         ,1- 

:",^.;Ir  hriA 
.[A 

By  the  flow  of  the  inland  river,  ^  T  '0" 

Whence  the  fleets  of  iron  have  fled,  ;CI 

Where  the  blades  of  the  grave-grass  quiveij  ■  ^  fiA 
Asleep  are  the  ranks  of  the  dead: —        'ob  bnA 


THE  BLUE  AND   THE   GRAY 


The   Blue  and  the  Gray  -309 

Under  the  sod  and  the  dew, 
Waiting  the  Judgment  Day: — 

Under  the  one,  the  Blue; 
Under  the  other,  the  Gray. 

These  in  the  robings  of  glory, 

Those  in  the  gloom  of  defeat, 
All  with  the  battle-blood  gory, 
In  the  dusk  of  eternity  meet: — 
Under  the  sod  and  the  dew, 

Waiting  the  Judgment  Day:— 
Under  the  laurel,  the  Blue; 
Under  the  willow,  the  Gray. 

From  the  silence  of  sorrowful  hours 

The  desolate  mourners  go. 
Lovingly  laden  with  flowers. 

Alike  for  the  friend  and  the  foe:— 
Under  the  sod  and  the  dew. 

Waiting  the  Judgment  Day:— 
Under  the  roses,  the  Blue; 
Under  the  lilies,  the  Gray. 

So,  with  an  equal  splendor 

The  morning  sun-rays  fall. 
With  a  touch  impartially  tender. 
On  the  blossoms  blooming  for  all:— 
Under  the  sod  and  the  dew. 

Waiting  the  Judgment  Day: — 
Broidered  with  gold,  the  Blue; 
Mellowed  with  gold,  the  Gray. 

So,  when  the  summer  calleth, 
On  forest  and  field  of  grain. 
With  an  equal  murmur  falleth 
The  cooling  drip  of  the  rain: — 
Under  the  sod  and  the  dew, 

Waiting  the  Judgment  Day: — 
Wet  with  the  rain,  the  Blue; 
Wet  with  the  rain,  the  Gray. 


2310  "How  Sleep  the  Brave" 

Sadly,  but  not  with  upbraiding, 
The  generous  deed  was  done. 
In  the  storms  of  the  years  that  are  fading 
No  braver  battle  was  won : — 
Under  the  sod  and  the  dew, 

Waiting  the  Judgment  Day: — 
Under  the  blossoms,  the  Blue; 
Under  the  garlands,  the  Gray. 

No  more  shall  the  war-cry  sever, 

Or  the  winding  rivers  be  red: 
They  banish  our  anger  forever 

When  they  laurel  the  graves  of  our  dead! 
Under  the  sod  and  the  dew, 

Waiting  the  Judgment  Day: —  [ 
Love  and  tears  for  the  Blue; 
Tears  and'love  for  the  Gray. 

Francis  Miles  Finch  [1827-1007] 


THE  BIVOUAC   OF  THE   DEAD 

The  muffled  drum's  sad  roll  has  beat 

The  soldier's  last  tattoo; 
No  more  on  Life's  parade  shall  meet 

That  brave  and  fallen  few. 
On  Fame's  eternal  camping-ground 

Their  silent  tents  are  spread. 
And  Glory  guards,  with  solemn  round, 

The  bivouac  of  the  dead. 

No  rumor  of  the  foe's  advance 

Now  swells  upon  the  wind; 
No  troubled  thought  at  midnight  haunts 

Of  loved  ones  left  behind ; 
No  vision  of  the  morrow's  strife 

The  warrior's  dream  alarms; 
No  braying  horn  nor  screaming  fife 

At  dawn  shall  call  to  arms. 


The   Bivouac  of  the   Dead         23  ii 

Their  shivered  swords  are  red  with  rust; 

Their  plumed  heads  are  bowed ;         :  1 
Their  haughty  banner,  trailed  in  dust^  /■ 

Is  now  their  martial  shroud.  r 

And  plenteous  funeral  tears  have  washed 

The  red  stains  from  each  brow, 
And  the  proud  forms,  by  battle  gashed, 

Are  free  from  anguish  now. 

The  neighing  troop,  the  flashing  blade. 

The  bugle's  stirring  blast. 
The  charge,  the  dreadful  cannonade. 

The  din  and  shout,  are  past; 
Nor  war's  wild  note,  nor  glory's  peal, 

Shall  thrill  with  fierce  delight 
Those  breasts  that  nevermore  may  feel 

The  rapture  of  the  fight. 

Like  the  fierce  northern  hurricane 

That  sweeps  his  great  plateau. 
Flushed  with  the  triumph  yet  to  gain, 

Came  down  the  serried  foe. 
Who  heard  the  thunder  of  the  fray 

Break  o'er  the  field  beneath, 
Knew  well  the  watchword  of  that  day 

Was  "Victory  or  Death." 

Long  had  the  doubtful  conflict  raged 

O'er  all  that  stricken  plain, 
For  never  fiercer  fight  had  waged 

The  vengeful  blood  of  Spain; 
And  still  the  storm  of  battle  blew. 

Still  swelled  the  gory  tide; 
Not  long,  our  stout  old  chieftain  knev/, 

Such  odds  his  strength  could  bide. 

'Twas  in  that  hour  his  stern  command 

Called  to  a  martyr's  grave 
The  flower  of  his  beloved  land, 

The  nation's  flag  to  save. 


2312  "How  Sleep  the   Brave" 

By  rivers  of  their  fathers'  gore 

His  first-born  laurels  grew, 
And  well  he  deemed  the  sons  would  pour 

Their  lives  for  glory  too. 

Full  many  a  norther's  breath  has  swept 

O'er  Angostura's  plain, 
And  long  the  pitying  sky  has  wept 

Above  its  mouldered  slain. 
The  raven's  scream,  or  eagle's  flight. 

Or  shepherd's  pensive  lay. 
Alone  awakes  each  sullen  height 

That  frowned  o'er  that  dread  fray. 

Sons  of  the  Dark  and  Bloody  Ground, 

Ye  must  not  slumber  there. 
Where  stranger  steps  and  tongues  resound 

Along  the  heedless  air. 
Your  own  proud  land's  heroic  soil 

Shall  be  your  fitter  grave; 
She  claims  from  war  his  richest  spoil — 

The  ashes  of  her  brave.  ' 

Thus  'neath  their  parent  turf  they  rest. 

Far  from  the  gory  field, 
Borne  to  a  Spartan  mother's  breast 

On  many  a  bloody  shield; 
The  sunshine  of  their  native  sky 

Smiles  sadly  on  them  here, 
And  kindred  eyes  and  hearts  watch  by 

The  heroes'  sepulchre. 

Rest  on,  embalmed  and  sainted  dead!  '■ 

Dear  as  the  blood  ye  gave; 
No  impious  footstep  here  shall  tread 

The  herbage  of  your  grave; 
Nor  shall  your  story  be  forgot. 

While  Fame  her  record  keeps, 
Or  Honor  points  the  hallowed  spot 

Where  Valor  proudly  sleeps. 


Roll-Call  231. 

Yon  marble  minstrel's  voiceless  stone 

In  deathless  song  shall  tell, 
When  many  a  vanished  age  hath  flown, 

The  story  how  ye  fell; 
Nor  wreck,  nor  change,  nor  winter's  blight, 

Nor  Time's  remorseless  doom. 
Shall  dim  one  ray  of  glory's  light 

That  gilds  your  deathless  tomb. 

Theodore  O'Hara  [1820-1867] 


ROLL-CALL 

"Corporal  Green!"  the  Orderly  cried; 
"Here!"  was  the  answer  loud  and  clear. 
From  the  lips  of  a  soldier  standing  near, — 
And  "Here!"  v/as  the  word  the  next  rephed. 

"Cyrus  Drew!" — then  a  silence  fell; 

Tliis  time  no  answer  followed  the  call; 

Only  his  rear-man  had  seen  him  fall : 
Killed  or  wounded — he  could  not  tell. 

There  they  stood  in  the  failing  light. 

These  men  of  battle,  with  grave,  dark  looks, 
As  plain  to  be  read  as  open  books. 

While  slowly  gathered  the  shades  of  night. 

The  fern  on  the  hiU-sides  was  splashed  with  blood, 
And  down  in  the  corn,  where  the  poppies  grew. 
Were  redder  stains  than  the  poppies  knew. 

And  crimson-dyed  was  the  river's  flood. 

For  the  foe  had  crossed  from  the  other  side, 
That  day,  in  the  face  of  a  murderous  fire 
That  swept  them  down  in  its  terrible  ire; 

And  their  hfe-blood  went  to  color  the  tide. 

"Herbert  Cline!" — At  the  call  there  came 
Two  stalwart  soldiers  into  the  line. 
Bearing  between  them  this  Herbert  Cline, 

Wounded  and  bleeding,  to  answer  his  name. 


2314  "How   Sleep  the   Brave" 

"Ezra  Kerr!" — and  a  voice  answered  "Here!" 
"Hiram  Kerr!" — but  no  man  replied. 
They  were  brothers,  these  two;  the  sad  wind 
sighed, 

And  a  shudder  crept  through  the  cornfield  near. 

"Ephraim  Deane! " — then  a  soldier  spoke: 

"Deane  carried  our  regiment's  colors,"  he  said, 
"When  our  ensign  was  shot;  I  left  him  dead 

Just  after  the  enemy  wavered  and  broke. 

"Close  to  the  roadside  his  body  lies; 

I  paused  a  moment  and  gave  him  to  drink; 

He  murmured  his  mother's  name,  I  think, 
And  Death  came  with  it  and  closed  his  eyes." 

'Twas  a  victory, — yes;  but  it  cost  us  dear: 
For  that  company's  roll,  when  called  at  night, 
Of  a  hundred  men  who  went  into  the  fight. 

Numbered  but  twenty  that  answered  "Here!" 

Nathaniel  Graham  Shepherd  [183 5- 1860] 


DIRGE 

FOR  ONE  WHO  FELL  IN  BATTLE 

Room  for  a  Soldier!  lay  him  in  the  clover; 

He  loved  the  fields,  and  they  shall  be  his  cover; 

Make  his  mound  with  hers  who  called  him  once  her  lover: 

Where  the  rain  may  rain  upon  it. 

Where  the  sun  may  shine  upon  it, 

Where  the  lamb  hath  lain  upon  it, 

And  the  bee  will  dine  upon  it. 

Bear  him  to  no  dismal  tomb  under  city  churches; 
Take  him  to  the  fragrant  fields,  by  the  silver  birches. 
Where   the   whippoorwill   shall   mourn,    where   the   oriole 
perches : 

•  Make  his  mound  with  sunshine  on  it. 
Where  the  bee  will  dine  upon  it. 
Where  the  lamb  hath  lain  upon  it, 
And  the  rain  will  rain  upon  it. 


Dirge  for  a  Soldier  ^  ]  i  C 

Busy  as  the  busy  bee,  his  rest  should  be  the  clover; 
Gentle  as  the  lamb  was  he,  and  the  fern  should  be  his  cover; 
Fern  and  rosemary  shall  grow  my  soldier's  pillow  over: 

Where  the  rain  may  rain  upon  it, 

Where  the  sun  may  shine  upon  it, 

Where  the  lamb  hath  lain  upon  it, 

And  the  bee  will  dine  upon  it. 

Sunshine  in  his  heart,  the  rain  would  come  full  often 
Out  of  those  tender  eyes  which  evermore  did  soften; 
He  never  could  look  cold,  till  we  saw  him  in  his  coffin: 

Make  a  mound  with  sunshine  on  it, 

Where  the  wind  may  sigh  upon  it, 

Where  the  moon  may  stream  upon  it, 

And  Memory  shall  dream  upon  it. 

"Captain  or  Colonel," — whatever  invocation 
Suit  our  hymn  the  best,  no  matter  for  thy  station, — 
On  thy  grave  the  rain  shall  fall  from  the  eyes  of  a  mighty 
nation! 

Long  as  the  sun  doth  shine  upon  it 
Shall  grow  the  goodly  pine  upon  it, 
Long  as  the  stars  do  gleam  upon  it 
Shall  Memory  come  to  dream  upon  it. 

Thomas  William  Parsons  [i 819-1892] 


DIRGE   FOR  A   SOLDIER 

Close  his  eyes;  his  work  is  done! 
What  to  him  is  friend  or  foeman, 
Rise  of  moon,  or  set  of  sun, 
.  Hand  of  man,  or  kiss  of  woman? 
Lay  him  low,  lay  him  low, 
In  the  clover  or  the  snow! 
What  cares  he?  he  cannot  know: 
Lay  him  low! 

As  man  may,  he  fought  his  fight. 
Proved  his  truth  by  his  endeavor; 

Let  him  sleep  in  solemn  night, 
Sleep  forever  and  forever. 


2316  "How  Sleep  the   Brave" 

Lay  him  low,  lay  him  low,  ,    ,3;,;^ 

In  the  clover  or  the  snow! 
What  cares  he?  he  cannot  know; 
Lay  him  low! 

Fold  him  in  his  country's  stars. 

Roll  the  drum  and  fire  the  volley! 
What  to  him  are  all  our  wars, 

What  but  death-bemocking  folly? 
Lay  him  low,  lay  him  low. 
In  the  clover  or  the  snow! 
What  cares  he?  he  cannot  know: 
Lay  him  low! 

Leave  him  to  God's  watching  eye; 

Trust  him  to  the  hand  that  made  him. 
Mortal  love  weeps  idly  by: 

God  alone  has  power  to  aid  him. 
Lay  him  low,  lay  him  low, 
In  the  clover  or  the  snow! 
What  cares  he?  he  cannot  know: 
Lay  him  low! 

George  Henry  Boker  [i 823-1 890J 


"BLOW,   BUGLES,   BLOW" 

Blow,  bugles,  blow^,  soft  and  sweet  and  low. 

Sing  a  good-night  song  for  them  who  bravely  faced  the  foe; 

Sing  a  song  of  truce  to  pain, 

Where  they  sleep  nor  wake  again, 

'Neath  the  sunshine  or  the  rain — 
Blow,  bugles,  blow. 

Wave,  banners,  wave,  above  each  hero's  grave, 

Fold  them,  O  thou  stainless  flag  that  they  died  to  save; 

All  thy  stars  with  glory  bright. 

Bore  they  on  through  Treason's  night, 

Through  the  darkness  to  the  light — 
Wave,  banners,  wave. 


"Such  is  the  Death  the  Soldier  Dies"      -317 

Fall,  blossoms,  fall,  over  one  and  all, 

They  who  heard  their  country's  cry  and  answered  to  the 

call; 

'Mid  the  shock  of  shot  and  shell, 

Where  they  bled  and  where  they  fell, 

They  who  fought  so  long  and  well — 
Fall,  blossoms,  fall. 

Sigh,  breezes,  sigh,  so  gently  wandering  by, 
Bend  above  them  tenderly,  blue  of  summer  sky; 

All  their  weary  marches  done, 

All  their  battles  fought  and  won, 

Friend  and  lover,  sire  and  son — 
Sigh,  breezes,  sigh. 

John  S.  McCroarty  [1862- 


"SUCH  IS  THE  DEATH  THE  SOLDIER  DIES" 

Such  is  the  death  the  soldier  dies:  •  ■ 

He  falls, — the  column  speeds  away; 

Upon  the  dabbled  grass  he  lies. 
His  brave  heart  following,  still,  the  fray. 

The  smoke-wraiths  drift  among  the  trees, 
The  battle  storms  along  the  hill; 

The  ghnt  of  distant  arms  he  sees; 
He  hears  his  comrades  shouting  still. 

A  glimpse  of  far-borne  flags,  that  fade 
And  vanish  in  the  rolling  din: 

He  knows  the  sweeping  charge  is  made. 
The  cheering  hnes  are  closing  in. 

Unmindful  of  his  mortal  wound. 
He  faintly  calls  and  seeks  to  rise; 

But  weakness  drags  him  to  the  ground: — 
Such  is  the  death  the  soldier  dies. 

Robert  Burns  Wilson  [1850- 


oji8  "How  Sleep  the   Brave" 

THE  BRAVE  AT  HOME 

From  "  The  Wagoner  of  the  AUeghanies" 

The  maid  who  binds  her  warrior's  sash 

With  smile  that  well  her  pain  dissembles, 
The  while  beneath  her  drooping  lash 

One  starry  tear-drop  hangs  and  trembles, 
Though  Heaven  alone  records  the  tear, 

And  Fame  shall  never  know  her  story. 
Her  heart  has  shed  a  drop  as  dear 

As  e'er  bedewed  the  field  of  glory. 

The  wife  who  girds  her  husband's  sword,  "^ 

Mid  little  ones  who  weep  or  wonder, 
And  bravely  speaks  the  cheering  word, 

What  though  her  heart  be  rent  asunder, 
Doomed  nightly  in  her  dreams  to  hear 

The  bolts  of  death  around  him  rattle. 
Hath  shed  as  sacred  blood  as  e'er 

Was  poured  upon  the  field  of  battle! 

The  mother  who  conceals  her  grief 

While  to  her  breast  her  son  she  presses, 
Then  breathes  a  few  brave  words  and  brief, 

Kissing  the  patriot  brow  she  blesses. 
With  no  one  but  her  secret  God 

To  know  the  pain  that  weighs  upon  her, 
Sheds  holy  blood  as  e'er  the  sod 

Received  on  Freedom 's  field  of  honor ! 

Thomas  Buchanan  Read  [1822-1872] 


SOMEBODY'S  DARLING 

Into  a  ward  of  the  whitewashed  walls 
Where  the  dead  and  the  dying  lay — 

Wounded  by  bayonets,  shells,  and  balls — 
Somebody's  darling  was  borne  one  day. 


rlT 


■,m 


Somebody's   Darling  '^3^9 

Somebody's  darling!  so  young  and  so  brave, 
Wearing  still  on  his  pale,  sweet  face — 

Soon  to  be  hid  by  the  dust  of  the  grave — 
The  lingering  light  of  his  boyhood's  grace. 

t 
Matted  and  damp  are  the  curls  of  gold 

Kissing  the  snow  of  that  fair  young  brow; 
Pale  are  the  lips  of  delicate  mould — 

Somebody's  darling  is  dying  now. 
Back  from  the  beautiful  blue-veined  brow 

Brush  the  wandering  waves  of  gold; 
Cross  his  hands  on  his  bosom  now — 

Somebody's  darling  is  still  and  cold. 

Kiss  him  once  for  Somebody's  sake; 

Murmur  a  prayer,  soft  and  low; 
One  bright  curl  from  the  cluster  take —         /. 

They  were  Somebody's  pride,  you  know.  J 
Somebody's  hand  hath  rested  there; 

Was  it  a  mother's,  soft  and  white? 
And  have  the  lips  of  a  sister  fair 

Been  baptized  in  those  waves  of  light?       1/ 

God  knows  best.     He  has  Somebody's  love; 

Somebody's  heart  enshrined  him  there; 
Somebody  wafted  his  name  above. 

Night  and  morn,  on  the  wings  of  prayer. 
Somebody  wept  when  he  marched  away, 

Looking  so  handsome,  brave,  and  grand;'  \ 
Somebody's  kiss  on  his  forehead  lay; 

Somebody  clung  to  his  parting  hand; — - 

Somebody's  watching  and  waiting  for  him. 

Yearning  to  hold  him  again  to  her  heart; 
There  he  lies — with  the  blue  eyes  dim,,    ,;,»Y/ 
And  the  smihng,  child-like  Ups  apart.- rirjoj  " 
Tenderly  bury  the  fair  young  dead, 

Pausing  to  drop  on  his  grave  a  tear; 

Carve  on  the  wooden  slab  at  his  head, 

,i     "Somebody's  darling  slumbers  here!" 

Marie  R.  La  Conle  [18    -j{[ 


V2320         "How  Sleep  the   Brave" 

LITTLE  GIFFEN 

Out  of  the  focal  and  foremost  fire, 
Out  of  the  hospital  walls  as  dire, 
Smitten  of  grape-shot  and  gangrene 
(Eighteenth  battle  and  he  sixteen!) — 
Spectre  such  as  you  seldom  see. 
Little  Giffen  of  Tennessee. 

"Take  him  and  welcome!"  the  surgeon  said; 
"Little  the  doctor  can  help  the  dead!" 
So  we  took  him  and  brought  him  where 
The  balm  was  sweet  on  the  summer  air; 
And  we  laid  him  down  on  a  wholesome  bed — 
Utter  Lazarus,  heel  to  head! 

And  we  watched  the  war  with  bated  breath — • 
Skeleton  Boy  against  skeleton  Death. 
Months  of  torture,  how  many  such! 
Weary  weeks  of  the  stick  and  crutch;        •    _  ^ 
And  still  a  glint  in  the  steel-blue  eye 
Told  of  a  spirit  that  wouldn't  die, — ■ 

And  didn't.     Nay,  more!  in  death's  despite 
The  crippled  skeleton  learned  to  write. 
"Dear  Mother,"  at  first,  of  course;  and  then, 
"Dear  Captain,"  inquiring  about  "the  men." 
Captain's  answer:  "Of  eighty-and-five, 
Giffen  and  I  are  left  alive." 

Word  of  gloom  from  the  war,  one  day: 

"Johnston's  pressed  at  the  front,  they  say!" 

Little  Giffen  was  up  and  away; 

A  tear — his  first — as  he  bade  good-by. 

Dimmed  the  glint  of  his  steel-blue  eye. 

"I'll  write,  if  spared. "    There  was  news  of  the  fight; 

But  none  of  Giffen. — He  did  not  write. 


I  sometimes  fancy  that,  were  1  king 

Of  the  princely  Knights  of  the  Golden  Ring, 

With  the  song  of  the  minstrel  in  mine  ear, 

And  the  tender  legend  that  trembles  here, 

I'd  give  the  best  on  his  bended  knee, 

The  whitest  soul  of  my  chivalry. 

For  Little  Giffen  of  Tennessee. 

Franiis  Orray  Ticknor  [1822-1874] 

ODE 

Sung  on  the  occasion  of  decorating  the  graves  of  the  Confedeiate  dead,  at  Mag- 
nolia Cemetery,  Charleston,  S.  C,  1867. 

Sleep  sweetly  in  your  humble  graves, 

Sleep,  martyrs  of  a  fallen  cause; 
Though  yet  no  marble  column  craves 

The  pilgrim  here  to  pause. 

In  seeds  of  laurel  in  the  earth 

The  blossom  of  your  fame  is  blown. 

And  somewhere,  waiting  for  its  birth. 
The  shaft  is  in  the  stone! 

Meanwhile,  behalf  the  tardy  years 

Which  keep  in  tnast  your  storied  tombs. 

Behold!  your  sisters  bring  their  tears, 
And  these  memorial  blooms. 

Small  tributes!  but  your  shades  will  smile 
More  proudly  on  these  wreaths  to-day. 

Than  when  some  cannon-moulded  pile, 
Shall  overlook  this  bay. 

Stoop,  angels,  hither  from  the  skies! 

There  is  no  holier  spot  of  ground      i  7/ 
Than  where  defeated  valor  lies, 

By  mourning  beauty  crowned! 

Henry  Timrod  [1829-1867] 


2322  "How  Sleep  the   Brave" 


SENTINEL  SONGS 

When  falls  the  soldier  brave, 

Dead  at  the  feet  of  wrong,  [ 

The  poet  sings  and  guards  his  grave  : 

With  sentinels  of  song. 

Songs,  march!  he  gives  command, 

Keep  faithful  watch  and  true; 
The  living  and  dead  of  the  Conquered  Land 

Have  now  no  guards  save  you. 

Gray  Ballads !  mark  ye  well !  "^J  °o  s'k'S 

Thrice  holy  is  your  trust ! 
Go!  halt  by  the  fields  where  warriors  fell; 

Rest  arms!  and  guard  their  dust. 

List!  Songs!  your  watch  is  long, 

The  soldiers'  guard  was  brief; 
Whilst  right  is  right,  and  wrong  is  wrong, 

Ye  may  not  seek  relief. 

Go!  wearing  the  gray  of  grief! 

Go!  watch  o'er  the  Dead  in  Gray! 
Go!  guard  the  private  and  guard  the  chief, 

And  sentinel  their  clay! 

And  the  songs,  in  stately 'rhyme. 

And  with  softly-sounding  tread. 
Go  forth,  to  watch  for  a  time — a  time — 

Where  sleep  the  Deathless  Dead. 

And  the  songs,  Hke  funeral  dirge. 

In  music  soft  and  low. 
Sing  round  the  graves,  whilst  hot  tears  surge 

From  hearts  that  are  homes  of  woe. 

What  though  no  sculptured  shaft"""HT 
Immortalize  each  brave?  i  ' 

What  though  no  monument  epitaphed 
Be  built  above  each  grave? 


Heroes 


^3^3 


When  marble  wears  away, 

And  monuments  are  dust, 
The  songs  that  guard  our  soldiers'  clay 

Will  still  fullil  their  trust. 

,7/ 
With  hfted  head,  and  steady  tread. 

Like  stars  that  guard  the  skies,  ,'/ 

Go  watch  each  bed,  where  rest  the  dead. 

Brave  Songs,  with  sleepless  eyes. 

AbramJ.Ryan  [183Q-18J 


HEROES 

The  winds  that  once  the  Argo  bore 

Have  died  by  Neptune's  ruined  shrines, 
And  her  hull  is  the  drift  of  the  deep-sea  floor, 

Though  shaped  of  Pelion's  tallest  pines. 
You  may  seek  her  crew  on  every  isle 

Fair  in  the  foam  of  ^Egean  seas. 
But,  out  of  their  rest,  no  charm  can  wile 

Jason  and  Orpheus  and  Hercules. 

And  Priam's  wail  is  heard  no  more 

By  windy  Ilion's  sea-built  walls; 
Nor  great  Achilles,  stained  with  gore. 

Shouts,  "O  ye  gods,  'tis  Hector  falls!" 
On  Ida's  mount  is  the  shining  snow. 

But  Jove  has  gone  from  its  brow  away; 
And  red  on  the  plain  the  poppies  grow 

Where  Greek  and  Trojan  fought  that  day. 

Mother  Earth,  are  the  heroes  dead? 

Do  they  thrill  the  soul  of  the  years  no  more? 
Are  the  gleaming  snows  and  the  poppies  red 

All  that  is  left  of  the  brave  of  yore?       jjj,j 7/ 
Are  there  none  to  fight  as  Theseus  fought,,  -,[ 

Far  in  the  young  world's  misty  dawn? 
Or  to  teach  as  gray-haired  Nestor  taught? 

Mother  Earth,  are  the  heroes  gone? 


2324  "How  Sleep  the   Brave" 

Gone?     In  a  grander  form  they  rise. 

Dead?     We  may  clasp  their  hands  in  ours, 
And  catch  the  light  of  their  clearer  eyes, 

And  wreathe  their  brows  with  immortal  flowers. 
Wherever  a  noble  deed  is  done, 

'Tis  the  pulse  of  a  hero's  heart  is  stirred; 
Wherever  Right  has  a  triumph  won. 

There  are  the  heroes'  voices  heard. 

Their  armor  rings  on  a  fairer  field 

Than  Greek  and  Trojan  fiercely  trod; 
For  Freedom's  sword  is  the  blade  they  wield, 

And  the  gleam  above  is  the  smile  of  God. 
So,  in  his  isle  of  calm  delight, 

Jason  may  sleep  the  years  away; 
For  the  heroes  live,  and  the  sky  is  bright, 

And  the  world  is  a  braver  world  to-day. 

Edna  Dean  Proctor  [1838- 

THE  ONLY  SON 

O  BITTER  wind  toward  the  sunset  blowing, 

What  of  the  dales  to-night? 
In  yonder  gray  old  hall  what  fires  are  glowing, 

What  ring  of  festal  light? 

"/«  the  great  window  as  the  day  was  dwindling 

I  saw  an  old  man  stand; 
His  head  was  proudly  held  and  his  eyes  kindling, 

But  the  list  shook  in  his  hand." 

O  wind  of  twilight,  was  there  no  word  uttered, 

No  sound  of  joy  or  wail? 
"  'A  great  fight  and  a  good  death,'  he  muttered; 
'Trust  him,  he  would  not  fail.'"' 

What  of  the  chamber  dark  where  she  was  lying 

For  whom  all  life  is  done? 
''Within  her  heart  she  rocks  a  dead  child,  crying 

'My  son,  my  little  son.'  " 

Henry  Newholt  [1862- 


Young  Windebank  "^3^5 


YOUNG  WINDEBANK 

They  shot  j^oung  Windebank  just  here, 

By  Merton,  where  the  sun 
Strikes  on  the  wall.    'Twas  in  a  year 

Of  blood  the  deed  was  done. 

At  morning  from  the  meadows  dim 
He  watched  them  dig  his  grave. 

Was  this  in  truth  the  end  for  him, 
The  well  beloved  and  brave? 

He  marched  with  soldier  scarf  and  sword, 

Set  free  to  die  that  day, 
And  free  to  speak  once  more  the  word 

That  marshalled  men  obey. 

But  silent  on  the  silent  band 
That  faced  him  stern  as  death, 

He  looked  and  on  the  summer  land, 
And  on  the  grave  beneath. 

Then  with  a  sudden  smile  and  proud 
He  waved  his  plume  and  cried, 

"The  king!  the  king!"  and  laughed  aloud, 
'The  king!  the  king!"  and  died. 

Let  none  affirm  he  vainly  fell, 

And  paid  the  barren  cost 
Of  having  loved  and  served  too  well 

A  poor  cause  and  a  lost. 


He  in  the  soul's  eternal  cause 

Went  forth  as  martyrs  must — 
The  kings  who  make  the  spirit  laws 

And  rule  us  from  the  dust. 

Whose  wills  unshaken  by  the  breath 

Of  adverse  Fate  endure, 
To  give  us  honor  strong  as  death 

And  loyal  love  as  sure. 

Margaret  L.  Woods  [1856- 


JO 


2326  ''How   Sleep  the   Brave" 


A  HARROW  GRAVE  IN  FLANDERS 

Here  in  the  marshland,  past  the  battered  bridge, 
One  of  a  hundred  grains  untimely  sown, 

Here,  with  his  comrades  of  the  hard-won  ridge, 
He  rests,  unknown. 

His  horoscope  had  seemed  so  plainly  drawn: 

School  triumphs  earned  apace  in  work  and  play; 

Friendships  at  will;  then  love's  delightful  dawn 
And  mellowing  day. 

Home  fostering  hope;  some  service  to  the  State; 

Benignant  age;  then  the  long  tryst  to  keep 
Where  in  the  yew-tree  shadow  congregate 

His  fathers  sleep. 

Was  here  the  one  thing  needful  to  distil 

From  life's  alembic,  through  this  holier  fate. 
The  man's  essential  soul,  the  hero-will? 

We  ask:  and  wait. 

Robert  OJflcy  Ashhurlon  [1858- 


V.  D.  F. 

You  from  Givenchy,  since  no  years  can  harden 
The  beautiful  dead,  when  holy  twilight  reaches 
The  sleeping  cedar  and  the  copper  beeches, 

Return  to  walk  again  in  Wadham  Garden. 

We,  growing  old,  grow  stranger  to  the  College, 
Symbol  of  youth,  where  we  were  young  together, 
But  you,  beyond  the  reach  of  time  and  weather. 

Of  youth  in  death  forever  keep  the  knowledge. 

We  hoard  our  youth,  we  hoard  our  youth,  and  fear  it, 
But  you,  who  freely  gave  what  we  have  hoarded. 
Are  with  the  final  goal  of  youth  rewarded — 

The  road  to  travel  and  the  traveler's  spirit. 

And  therefore,  when  for  us  the  stars  go  down, 

Your  star  is  steady  over  Oxford  Town. 

Unknown 


POEMS  OF  HISTORY 

THE  DESTRUCTION  OF   SENNACHERIB 

[710  B.    C] 

The  Assyrian  came  down  like  the  wolf  on  the  fold, 
And  his  cohorts  were  gleaming  in  purple  and  gold; 
And  the  sheen  of  their  spears  was  like  stars  on  the  sea, 
When  the  blue  wave  rolls  nightly  on  deep  Galilee. 

Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  Summer  is  green. 
That  host  with  their  banners  at  sunset  were  seen: 
Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  Autumn  hath  blown. 
That  host  on  the  morrow  lay  withered  and  strown. 

For  the  Angel  of  Death  spread  his  wings  on  the  blast, 
And  breathed  in  the  face  of  the  foe  as  he  passed; 
And  the  eyes  of  the  sleepers  waxed  deadly  and  chill, 
And  their  hearts  but  once  heaved,  and  for  ever  grew  still! 

And  there  lay  the  steed  with  his  nostril  all  wide. 
But  through  it  there  rolled  not  the  breath  of  his  pride: 
And  the  foam  of  his  gasping  lay  white  on  the  turf. 
And  cold  as  the  spray  of  the  rock-beating  surf. 

And  there  lay  the  rider  distorted  and  pale, 
With  the  dew  on  his  brow,  and  the  rust  on  his  mail; 
And  the  tents  were  all  silent,  the  banners  alone, 
The  lances  unUfted,  the  trumpet  unblown. 

And  the  widows  of  Ashur  are  loud  in  their  wail. 
And  the  idols  are  broke  in  the  temple  of  Baal; 
And  the  might  of  the  Gentile,  unsmote  by  the  sword. 
Hath  melted  like  snow  in  the  glance  of  the  Lord! 

George  Gordon  Byron  [i 788-1824] 
2327 


2328  Poems  of  History 


THE  VISION   OF  BELSHAZZAR 

[538  B.    C] 

The  King  was  on  his  throne, 

The  Satraps  thronged  the  hall; 
A  thousand  bright  lamps  shone 

O'er  that  high  festival. 
A  thousand  cups  of  gold, 

In  Judah  deemed  divine, —  ,  ,-r 

Jehovah's  vessels  hold 

The  godless  Heathen's  wine!  ,. ,-, 

In  that  same  hour  and  hall, 

The  fingers  of  a  hand 
Came  forth  against  the  wall, 

And  wrote  as  if  on  sand: 
The  fingers  of  a  man; — 

A  solitary  hand 
Along  the  letters  ran. 

And  traced  them  like  a  wand. 

The  monarch  saw,  and  shook,  ; ,  / 

And  bade  no  more  rejoice; 
AU  bloodless  waxed  his  look,  ,,|, 

And  tremulous  his  voice.  :ja 

"Let  the  men  of  lore  appear,  ■[/; 

The  wisest  of  the  earth,  ,/, 

And  expound  the  words  of  fear, 

Which  mar  our  royal  mirth." 

Chaldea's  seers  are  good, 

But  here  they  have  no  skill; 
And  the  unknown  letters  stood, 

Untold  and  awful  still. 
And  Babel's  men  of  age 

Are  wise  and  deep  in  lore;  :iA 

But  now  they  were  not  sage,  Tf 

They  saw, — but  knew  no  more. 


Horatius  at  the   Bridge  2329 

A  captive  in  the  land, 

A  stranger  and  a  youth, 
He  heard  the  King's  command, 

He  saw  that  writing's  truth. 
The  lamps  around  were  bright, 

The  prophecy  in  view: 
.  He  read  it  on  that  night, — 

The  morrow  proved  it  true. 

"  Belshazzar's  grave  is  made. 

His  kingdom  passed  away, 
He,  in  the  balance  weighed, 

Is  light  and  worthless  clay; 
The  shroud,  his  robe  of  state, 

His  canopy,  the  stone: 
The  Mede  is  at  his  gate! 

The  Persian  on  his  throne! " 

George  Gordon  Byron  [i  788-1824] 

HORATIUS   AT  THE  BRIDGE 

[C.  496  B.  C] 

Lars  Porsena  of  Clusium 

By  the  Nine  Gods  he  swore 
That  the  great  house  of  Tarquin 

Should  suffer  wrong  no  more. 
By  the  Nine  Gods  he  swore  it. 

And  named  a  trysting-day, 
And  bade  his  messengers  ride  forth, 
East  and  west  and  south  and  north, 

To  summon  his  array. 

East  and  west  and  south  and  north 

The  messengers  ride  fast, 
And  tower  and  town  and  cottage 

Have  heard  the  trumpet's  blast. 
Shame  on  the  false  Etruscan 

Who  hngers  in  his  home. 
When  Porsena  of  Clusium 

Is  on  the  march  for  Rome. 


"^SS*^  Poems  of  History 

The  horsemen  and  the  footmen 

Are  pouring  in  amain 
From  many  a  stately  market-place, 

From  many  a  fruitful  plain, 
From  many  a  lonely  hamlet, 

Which,  hid  by  beech  and  pine, 
Like  an  eagle's  nest,  hangs  on  the  crest 

Of  purple  Apennine; 

From  lordly  Volaterrae 

Where  scowls  the  far-famed  hold 
Piled  by  the  hands  of  giants 

For  godlike  kings  of  old; 
From  sea-girt  Populonia, 

Whose  sentinels  descry 
Sardinia's  snowy  mountain-tops 

Fringing  the  southern  sky; 

From  the  proud  mart  of  Pisae, 

Queen  of  the  western  waves, 
Where  ride  Massilia's  triremes 

Heavy  with  fair-haired  slaves; 
From  where  sweet  Clanis  wanders 

Through  corn  and  vines  and  flowers, 
From  where  Cortona  lifts  to  heaven 

Her  diadem  of  towers. 

Tall  are  the  oaks  whose  acorns 

Drop  in  dark  Auser's  rill; 
Fat  are  the  stags  that  champ  the  boughs 

Of  the  Ciminian  hill; 
Beyond  all  streams,  Clitumnus 

Is  to  the  herdsman  dear; 
Best  of  all  pools  the  fowler  loves 

The  great  Volsinian  mere. 

But  now  no  stroke  of  woodman 

Is  heard  by  Auser's  rill; 
No  hunter  tracks  the  stag's  green  path 

Up  the  Ciminian  hill; 


Horatius  at  the   Bridge  '^33^ 

Unwatched  along  Clitumnus 

Grazes  the  milk-white  steer; 
Unharmed  the  water-fowl  may  dip 

In  the  Volsinian  mere. 

The  harvests  of  Arretium, 

This  year,  old  men  shall  reap; 
This  year,  young  boys  in  Umbro 

Shall  plunge  the  struggling  sheep; 
And  in  the  vats  of  Luna, 

This  year,  the  must  shall  foam 
Round  the  white  feet  of  laughing  girls 

Whose  sires  have  marched  to  Rome. 

There  be  thirty  chosen  prophets, 

The  wisest  of  the  land, 
Who  alway  by  Lars  Porsena 

Both  morn  and  evening  stand: 
Evening  and  morn  the  Thirty 

Have  turned  the  verses  o'er, 
Traced  from  the  right  on  linen  white 

By  mighty  seers  of  yore. 

And  with  one  voice  the  Thirty 

Have  their  glad  answer  given: 
"Go  forth,  go  forth,  Lars  Porsena, — 

Go  forth,  beloved  of  Heaven! 
Go,  and  return  in  glory 

To  Clusium's  royal  dome. 
And  hang  round  Nurscia's  altars 

The  golden  shields  of  Rome!" 

And  now  hath  every  city 

Sent  up  her  tale  of  men ;  '  ) 

The  foot  are  fourscore  thousand, 

The  horse  are  thousands  ten. 
Before  the  gates  of  Sutrium  r'i 

Is  met  the  great  array; 
A  proud  man  was  Lars  Porsena 

Upon  the  trysting-day. 


233^  Poems  of  History 

For  all  the  Etruscan  armies 

Were  ranged  beneath  his  eye, 
And  many  a  banished  Roman, 

And  many  a  stout  ally; 
And  with  a  mighty  following, 

To  join  the  muster,  came 
The  Tusculan  Mamilius, 

Prince  of  the  Latian  name. 

But  by  the  yellow  Tiber 

Was  tumult  and  affright: 
From  all  the  spacious  champaign 

To  Rome  men  took  their  flight. 
A  mile  around  the  city, 

The  throng  stopped  up  the  ways; 
A  fearful  sight  it  was  to  see 

Through  two  long  nights  and  days. 

For  aged  folk  on  crutches, 

And  women  great  with  child, 
And  mothers,  sobbing  over  babes 

That  clung  to  them  and  smiled, 
And  sick  men  borne  in  litters 

High  on  the  necks  of  slaves. 
And  troops  of  sunburned  husbandmen 

With  reaping-hooks  and  staves. 

And  droves  of  mules  and  asses 

Laden  with  skins  of  wine, 
And  endless  flocks  of  goats  and  sheep, 

And  endless  herds  of  kine. 
And  endless  trains  of  wagons. 

That  creaked  beneath  the  weight 
Of  corn-sacks  and  of  household  goods, 

Choked  every  roaring  gate. 

Now,  from  the  rock  Tarpeian, 
Could  the  wan  burghers  spy 

The  line  of  blazing  villages 
Red  in  the  midnight  sky. 


Horatius  at  the   Bridge  -333 

The  Fathers  of  the  City, 

They  sat  all  night  and  day, 
For  every  hour  some  horseman  came 

With  tidings  of  dismay. 

To  eastward  and  to  westward 

Have  spread  the  Tuscan  bands, 
Nor  house,  nor  fence,  nor  dovecote 

In  Crustumerium  stands. 
\'erbenna  down  to  Ostia 

Hath  wasted  all  the  plain; 
Astur  hath  stormed  Janiculum, 

And  the  stout  guards  are  slain. 

I  wis,  in  all  the  Senate 

There  was  no  heart  so  bold 
But  sore  it  ached,  and  fast  it  beat, 

When  that  ill  news  was  told. 
Forthwith  up  rose  the  Consul, 

Up  rose  the  Fathers  all; 
In  haste  they  girded  up  their  gowns, 

And  hied  them  to  the  wall. 

They  held  a  council,  standing 

Before  the  River-Gate; 
Short  time  was  there,  ye  well  may  guess, 

For  musing  or  debate. 
Out  spake  the  Consul  roundly: 

"The  bridge  must  straight  go  down; 
For,  since  Janiculum  is  lost, 

Naught  else  can  save  the  town." 

Just  then  a  scout  came  flying. 

All  wild  with  haste  and  fear: 
"To  arms!  to  arms!  Sir  Consul, — 

Lars  Porsena  is  here." 
On  the  low  hills  to  westward 

The  Consul  fixed  his  eye. 
And  saw  the  swarthy  storm  of  dust 

Rise  fast  along  the  sky. 


-334  Poems  of  History  f"- 

And  nearer  fast  and  nearer 

Doth  the  red  whirlwind  come; 
And  louder  still,  and  still  more  loud, 
From  underneath  that  rolling  cloud, 
Is  heard  the  trumpet's  war-note  proud, 

The  trampling  and  the  hum. 
And  plainly  and  more  plainly 

Now  through  the  gloom  appeaf Sj  - 
Far  to  left  and  far  to  right. 
In  broken  gleams  of  dark-blue  light, 
The  long  array  of  helmets  bright. 

The  long  array  of  spears. 

And  plainly  and  more  plainly, 

Above  that  glimmering  line. 
Now  might  ye  see  the  banners 

Of  twelve  fair  cities  shine; 
But  the  banner  of  proud  Clusium 

Was  highest  of  them  all, — 
The  terror  of  the  Umbrian, 

The  terror  of  the  Gaul. 

And  plainly  and  more  plainly 

Now  might  the  burghers  know; 
By  port  and  vest,  by  horse  and  crest. 

Each  warlike  Lucumo: 
There  Cilnius  of  Arretium 

On  his  fleet  roan  was  seen;    . 
And  Astur  of  the  fourfold  shield, 
Girt  with  the  brand  none  else  may  wield; 
Tolumnius  with  the  belt  of  gold, 
And  dark  Verbenna  from  the  hold 

By  reedy  Thrasymene. 

Fast  by  the  royal  standard/,  '  '^     . 

Overlooking  all  the  war, '        .  ^ 
Lars  Porsena  of  Clusium 

Sat  in  his  ivory  car. 


Horatius  at  the   Bridge  "^335 

By  the  right  wheel  rode  Mamilius, 

Prince  of  the  Latian  name; 
And  by  the  left  false  Sextus, 

That  wrought  the  deed  of  shame. 

But  when  the  face  of  Sextus 

Was  seen  among  the  foes, 
A  yell  that  rent  the  firmament 

From  all  the  town  arose. 
On  the  house-tops  was  no  woman 

But  spat  towards  him  and  hissed, 
No  child  but  screamed  out  curses, 

And  shook  its  httle  fist. 

But  the  Consul's  brow  was  sad, 

And  the  Consul's  speech  was  low. 
And  darkly  looked  he  at  the  wall. 

And  darkly  at  the  foe: 
"Their  van  will  be  upon  us 

Before  the  bridge  goes  down; 
And  if  they  once  may  win  the  bridge, 

What  hope  to  save  the  town?" 

Then  out  spake  brave  Horatius, 

The  Captain  of  the  Gate: 
"To  every  man  upon  this  earth 

Death  cometh  soon  or  late. 
And  how  can  man  die  better 

Than  facing  fearful  odds 
For  the  ashes  of  his  fathers 

And  the  temples  of  his  Gods, 

"And  for  the  tender  mother 

Who  dandled  him  to  rest. 
And  for  the  wife  who  nurses 

His  baby  at  her  breast. 
And  for  the  holy  maidens 

Who  feed  the  eternal  flame, — 
To  save  them  from  false  Sextus 

That  wrought  the  deed  of  shame? 


2336  '   'Poems  of  History 

"Hew  down  the  bridge,  Sir  Consul, 

With  all  the  speed  ye  may; 
I,  with  two  more  to  help  me, 

Will  hold  the  foe  in  play. 
In  yon  strait  path  a  thousand 

May  well  be  stopped  by  three: 
Now  who  will  stand  on  either  hand, 

And  keep  the  bridge  with  me?" 

Then  out  spake  Spurius  Lartius, — 

A  Ramnian  proud  was  he: 
"Lo,  I  will  stand  at  thy  right  hand, 

And  keep  the  bridge  with  thee." 
And  out  spake  strong  Herminius, — 

Of  Titian  blood  was  he: 
"I  will  abide  on  thy  left  side, 

And  keep  the  bridge  with  thee." 

"Horatiuo,"  quoth  the  Consul, 

"As  thou  sayest  so  let  it  be." 
And  straight  against  that  great  array 

Forth  went  the  dauntless  Three. 
For  Romans  in  Rome's  quarrel 

Spared  neither  land  nor  gold. 
Nor  son  nor  wife,  nor  limb  nor  life, 

In  the  brave  days  of  old. 

Then  none  was  for  a  party; 

Then  all  were  for  the  state; 
Then  the  great  man  helped  the  poor, 

And  the  poor  man  loved  the  great : 
Then  lands  were  fairly  portioned; 

Then  spoils  were  fairly  sold : 
The  Romans  were  like  brothers 

In  the  brave  days  of  old. 

Now  Roman  is  to  Roman 
More  hateful  than  a  foe, 

And  the  Tribunes  beard  the  high, 
And  the  Fathers  grind  the  low. 


Horatlus  at  the   Bridge  ^33 7 

As  we  wax  hot  in  faction, 

In  battle  we  wax  cold; 
Wherefore  men  fight  not  as  they  tought 

In  the  brave  days  of  old. 

Now  while  the  Three  were  tightening 

Their  harness  on  their  backs, 
The  Consul  was  the  foremost  man 

To  take  in  hand  an  axe; 
And  Fathers,  mixed  with  Commons, 

Seized  hatchet,  bar,  and  crow, 
And  smote  upon  the  planks  above, 

And  loosed  the  props  below. 

Meanwhile  the  Tuscan  army. 

Right  glorious  to  behold, 
Came  flashing  back  the  noonday  light, 
Rank  behind  rank,  like  surges  bright 

Of  a  broad  sea  of  gold. 
Four  hundred  trumpets  sounded 

A  peal  of  warhke  glee, 
As  that  great  host  with  measured  tread, 
And  spears  advanced,  and  ensigns  spread,  ^ 
Rolled  slowly  towards  the  bridge's  head, 

Where  stood  the  dauntless  Three. 

The  Three  stood  calm  and  silent. 

And  looked  upon  the  foes, 
And  a  great  shout  of  laughter 

From  all  the  vanguard  rose; 
And  forth  three  chiefs  came  spurring 

Before  that  deep  array; 
To  earth  they  sprang,  their  swords  they  drew, 
And  lifted  high  their  shields,  and  flew 

To  win  the  narrow  way : 

Aunus,  from  green  Tifernum, 

Lord  of  the  Hill  of  \'incs; 
And  Seius,  whose  eight  hundred  slaves 

Sicken  in  Ilva's  mines; 
And  Picus,  long  to  Clusium 

Vassal  in  peace  and  war, 


2338  Poems  of  History 

Who  led  to  fight  his  Umbrian  powers 
From  that  gray  crag  where,  girt  with  towers. 
The  fortress  of  Nequinum  lowers 
O'er  the  pale  waves  of  Nar. 

Stout  Lartius  hurled  down  Aunus 

Into  the  stream  beneath; 
Herminius  struck  at  Seius; 

And  clove  him  to  the  teeth; 
At  Picus  brave  Horatius 

Darted  one  fiery  thrust, 
And  the  proud  Umbrian's  gilded  arms      -  • 

Clashed  in  the  bloody  dust. 

Then  Ocnus  of  Falerii 

Rushed  on  the  Roman  Three;  ' 

And  Lausulus  of  Urgo, 

The  rover  of  the  sea;  '   "  " 

And  Aruns  of  Volsinium, 

Who  slew  the  great  wild  boar, — 
The  great  wild  boar  that  had  his  den 
Amidst  the  reeds  of  Cosa's  fen, 
And  wasted  fields,  and  slaughtered  men, 

Along  Albinia  's  shore . 

"Herminius  smote  down  Aruns;  ^^(.y 

Lartius  laid  Ocnus  low; 
Right  to  the  heart  of  Lausulus 

Horatius  sent  a  blow: 
"Lie  there,"  he  cried,  "fell  pirate! 

No  more,  aghast  and  pale, 
From  Ostia's  walls  the  crowd  shall  mark 
The  track  of  thy  destroying  bark ; 
No  more  Campania's  hinds  shall  fly 
To  woods  and  caverns,  when  they  spy 

Thy  thrice-accursed  sail!" 

But  now  no  sound  of  laughter 

Was  heard  among  the  foes;  ;,-; 

A  wild  and  wrathful  clamor  r.fr/ 

From  all  the  vanguard  rose,;^  ni  IseBu/ 


oi 


Horatius  at  the   Bridge  '^339 

Six  spears'  lengths  from  the  entrance, 

Halted  that  deep  array, 
And  for  a  space  no  man  came  forth 

To  win  the  narrow  way. 

But,  hark!  the  cry  is  Astur: 

And  lo!  the  ranks  divide; 
And  the  great  Lord  of  Luna 

Comes  with  his  stately  stride. 
Upon  his  ample  shoulders 

Clangs  loud  the  fourfold  shield, 
And  in  his  hand  he  shakes  the  brand 

Which  none  but  he  can  wield. 

He  smiled  on  those  bold  Romans, 

A  smile  serene  and  high; 
He  eyed  the  flinching  Tuscans, 

And  scorn  was  in.  his  eye. 
Quoth  he,  "The  she-wolf's  litter 

Stand  savagely  at  bay; 
But  will  ye  dare  to  follow, 

If  Astur  clears  the  way?" 

Then,  whirling  up  his  broadsword 

With  both  hands  to  the  height, 
He  rushed  against  Horatius, 

And  smote  with  all  his  might. 
With  shield  and  blade  Horatius 

Right  deftly  turned  the  blow. 
The  blow,  though  turned  came  yet  too  nigh; 
It  missed  his  helm,  but  gashed  his  thigh. 
The  Tuscans  raised  a  joyful  cry 

To  see  the  red  blood  flow. 

He  reeled,  and  on  Herminius 

He  leaned  one  breathing-space. 
Then,  like  a  wild-cat  mad  with  wounds. 

Sprang  right  at  Astur's  face. 
Through  teeth,  and  skull,  and  helmet 

So  fierce  a  thrust  he  sped. 
The  good  sword  stood  a  hand-breadth  out 

Behind  the  Tuscan's  head. 


^34^  Poems  of  History 

And  the  great  lord  of  Luna 

Fell  at  that  deadly  stroke, 
As  falls  on  Mount  Avernus 

A  thunder-smitten  oak. 
Far  o'er  the  crashing  forest 

The  giant  arms  lie  spread; 
And  the  pale  augurs,  muttering  low, 

Gaze  on  the  blasted  head. 

On  Astur's  throat  Horatius 

Right  firmly  pressed  his  heel, 
And  thrice  and  four  times  tugged  amain, 

Ere  he  wrenched  out  the  steel. 
"And  see,"  he  cried,  "the  welcome. 

Fair  guests,  that  waits  you  here! 
What  noble  Lucumo  comes  next 

To  taste  our  Roman  cheer?  " 

But  at  his  haughty  challenge 

A  sullen  murmur  ran, 
Mingled  of  wrath,  and  shame,  and  dread. 

Along  that  glittering  van. 
There  lacked  not  men  of  prowess, 

Nor  men  of  lordly  race. 
For  all  Etruria's  noblest 

Were  round  the  fatal  place. 

But  all  Etruria's  noblest 

Felt  their  hearts  sink  to  see 
On  the  earth  the  bloody  corpses. 

In  the  path  the  dauntless  Three; 
And,  from  the  ghastly  entrance 

Where  those  bold  Romans  stood. 
All  shranl ,  like  boys  who,  unaware. 
Ranging  the  woods  to  start  a  hare. 
Come  to  the  mouth  of  the  dark  lair 
Where,  growling  low,  a  fierce  old  bear 

Lies  amidst  bones  and  blood. 

Was  none  who  would  be  foremost 
To  lead  such  dire  attack; 


Horatius  at  the   Bridge  -34 1 

But  those  behind  cried  "Forward!"'' 

And  those  before  cried  "Back!" 
And  backward  now  and  forward 
.    Wavers  the  deep  array ; 
And  on  the  tossing  sea  of  steel 
To  and  fro  the  standards  reel, 
And  the  victorious  trumpet-peal 

Dies  fitfully  away. 

Yet  one  man  for  one  moment 

Stood  out  before  the  crowd; 
Well  known  was  he  to  all  the  Three, 

And  they  gave  him  greeting  loud: 
"Now  welcome,  welcome,  Sextus! 

Now  welcome  to  thy  home! 
Why  dost  thou  stay,  and  turn  away? 

Here  lies  the  road  to  Rome." 

Thrice  looked  he  at  the  city; 

Thrice  looked  he  at  the  dead; 
And  thrice  came  on  in  fury,  , 

And  thrice  turned  back  in  dread; 
And,  white  with  fear  and  hatred, 

Scowled  at  the  narrow  way 
Where,  wallowing  in  a  pool  of  blood, 

The  bravest  Tuscans  lay. 

But  meanwhile  axe  and  lever 

Have  manfully  been  plied; 
And  now  the  bridge  hangs  tottering 

Above  the  boiling  tide. 
"Come  back,  come  back,  Horatius!" 

Loud  cried  the  Fathers  all.— 
"Back,  Lartius!  back,  Herminius! 

Sack,  ere  the  ruin  fall!" 

Back  darted  Spurius  Lartius; — 

Herminius  darted  back; 
And,  as  they  passed,  beneath  their  feet 

They  felt  the  timbers  crack. 


234-  Poems  of  History.  M 

But  when  they  turned  their  faces,     I 
And  on  the  farther  shore 

Saw  brave  Horatius  stand  alone, 
They  would  have  crossed  once  more; 

But  with  a  crash  like  thunder  :■ 

Fell  every  loosened  beam. 
And,  like  a  dam,  the  mighty  wreck 

Lay  right  athwart  the  stream: 
And  a  long  shout  of  triumph 

Rose  from  the  walls  of  Rome, 
As  to  the  highest  turret-tops 

Was  splashed  the  yellow  foam. 

And,  like  a  horse  unbroken, 

When  first  he  feels  the  rein, 
The  furious  river  struggled  hard. 

And  tossed  his  tawny  mane, 
And  burst  the  curb,  and  bounded, 

Rejoicing  to  be  free; 
And  whirling  down,  in  fierce  career, 
Battlement,  and  plank,' and  pier. 

Rushed  headlong  to  the  sea. 

Alone  stood  brave  Horatius, 

But  constant  still  in  mind, — 
Thrice  thirty  thousand  foes  before. 

And  the  broad  flood  behind. 
"Down  with  him!"  cried  false  Se.xtus, 

With  a  smile  on  his  pale  face; 
"Now  yield  thee,"  cried  Lars  Porsena, 

"Now  yield  thee  to  our  grace." 

Round  turned  he,  as  not  deigning 

Those  craven  ranks  to  see; 
Naught  spake  he  to  Lars  Porsena, 

To  Sextus  naught  spake  he; 
But  he  saw  on  Palatinus 

The  white  porch  of  his  home; 
And  he  spake  to  the  noble  river 

That  rolls  by  the  towers  of  Rome: 


Horatius  at  the   Bridge  -343 

"0  Tiber!  Father  Tiber! 

To  whom  the  Romans  pray, 
A  Roman's  life,  a  Roman's  arms, 

Take  thou  in  charge  this  day!" 
So  he  spake,  and,  speaking,  sheathed 

The  good  sword  by  his  side, 
And,  with  his  harness  on  his  back, 

Plunged  headlong  in  the  tide. 

No  sound  of  joy  or  sorrow 

Was  heard  from  either  bank. 
But  friends  and  foes  in  dumb  surprise, 
With  parted  lips  and  straining  eyes, 

Stood  gazing  where  he  sank; 
And  when  above  the  surges 

They  saw  his  crest  appear, 
All  Rome  sent  forth  a  rapturous  cry,.  , 
And  even  the  ranks  of  Tuscany 

Could  scarce  forbear  to  cheer. 

But  fiercely  ran  the  current. 

Swollen  high  by  months  of  rain;      > 
And  fast  his  blood  was  flowing, 

And  he  was  sore  in  pain. 
And  heavy  with  his  armor, 

And  spent  with  changing  blows; 
And  oft  they  thought  him  sinking,        ' 

But  still  again  he  rose. 

Never,  I  ween,  did  swimmer. 


In  such  an  evil  case. 
Struggle  through  such  a  raging  flood 

Safe  to  the  landing-place; 
But  his  limbs  were  borne  up  bravely 

By  the  brave  heart  within. 
And  our  good  Father  Tiber 

Bore  bravely  up  his  chin. 

"Curse  on  him!"  quoth  false  Sextus;- 
"Will  not  the  villain  drown? 

But  for  this  stay,  ere  close  of  day 
We  should  have  sacked  the  town!" 


[T 


L344  Poems  of  History  1 4 

"Heaven  help  him!"  quoth  Lars  Porsena, 
"And  bring  him  safe  to  shore; 

For  such  a  gallant  feat  of  arms 
Was  never  seen  before." 

And  now  he  feels  the  bottom ; 

Now  on  dry  earth  he  stands; 
Now  round  him  throng  the  Fathers 

To  press  his  gory  hands; 
And  now,  with  shouts  and  clapping, 

And  noise  of  weeping  loud, 
He  enters  through  the  River-Gate,    "'^ 

Borne  by  the  joyous  crowd.  ^' 

They  gave  him  of  the  cgrn-land,' "'  ^^'^-^ 

That  was  of  public  right,  "' ' 

As  much  as  two  strong  oxen 

Could  plough  from  morn  till  night;'' - 
And  they  made  a  molten  image, 

And  set  it  up  on  high,  g; 

And  there  it  stands  unto  this  day 

To  witness  if  I  lie.  /^ 

It  stands  in  the  Comitium, 

Plain  for  all  folk  to  see, — 
Horatius  in  his  harness. 

Halting  upon  one  knee; 
And  underneath  is  written, 

In  letters  all  of  gold, 
How  valiantly  he  kept  the  bridge 

In  the  brave  days  of  old. 

And  still  his  name  sounds  stirring 

Unto  the  men  of  Rome, 
As  the  trumpet-blast  that  cries  to  them 

To  charge  the  Volscian  home; 
And  wives  still  pray  to  Juno 

For  boys  with  hearts  as  bold 
As  his  who  kept  the  bridge  so  well 

In  the  brave  days  of  old. 


Leonidas  ^345 

And  in  the  nights  of  winter 

When  the  cold  north-winds  blow, 
And  the  long  howling  of  the  wolves 

Is  heard  amidst  the  snow; 
When  round  the  lonely  cottage 

Roars  loud  the  tempest's  din, 
And  the  good  logs  of  Algidus 

Roar  louder  yei,  within; 

When  the  oldest  cask  is  opened. 

And  the  largest  lamp  is  lit ; 
When  the  chestnuts  glow  in  the  embers, 

And  the  kid  turns  on  the  spit; 
f'  "When  young  and  old  in  circle 

Around  the  firebrands  close; 
When  the  girls  are  weaving  baskets, 

And  the  lads  are  shaping  bows; 

When  the  goodman  mends  his  armor, 

And  trims  his  helmet's  plume; 
W'hen  the  goodwife's  shuttle  merrily 

Goes  flashing  through  the  loom; 
With  weeping  and  with  laughter 

Still  is  the  story  told. 
How  well  Horatius  kept  the  bridge 

In  the  brave  days  of  old. 

Thomas  Babington  Macaulay  [1800-1859] 

LEONIDAS 

[480  B.    C] 

Shout  for  the  mighty  men 

Who  died  along  this  shore, 
Who  died  w-ithin  this  mountain's  gleni 
For  never  nobler  chieftain's  head 
Was  laid  on  valor's  crimson  bed. 

Nor  ever  prouder  gore 
Sprang  forth,  than  theirs  who  won  the  day 
Upon  thy  strand,  Thermopyla;! 

Shout  for  the  mighty  men 
Who  on  the  Persian  tents, 


2346  Poems  of  History 


Like  lions  from  their  midnight  den 
Bounding  on  the  slumbering  deer, 
Rushed — a  storm  of  sword  and  spear; 

Like  the  roused  elements, 
Let  loose  from  an  immortal  hand 
To  chasten  or  to  crush  a  land! 

But  there  are  none  to  hear — 

Greece  is  a  hopeless  slave. 
Leonidas!  no  hand  is  near 
To  lift  thy  falchion  now; 
No  warrior  makes  the  warrior's  vow 

Upon  thy  sea-washed  grave. 
The  voice  that  should  be  raised  by  men 
Must  now  be  given  by  wave  and  glen. 

And  it  is  given!     The  surge, 

The  tree,  the  rock,  the  sand 
On  freedom's  kneeling  spirit  urge. 
In  sounds  that  speak  but  to  the  free, 
The  memory  of  thine  and  thee! 

The  vision  of  thy  band 
Still  gleams  within  the  glorious  dell 
Which  their  gore  hallowed  as  it  fell! 

And  is  thy  grandeur  done? 

IMother  of  men  like  these! 
Has  not  thy  outcry  gone 
Where  justice  has  an  ear  to  hear? 
Be  holy!  God  shall  guide  thy  spear, 

Till  in  thy  crimsoned  seas 
Are  plunged  the  chain  and  scimitar.  . 
Greece  shall  be  a  new-born  star! 

George  Croly  [ 1 7 80- 1860] 

ANTONY  TO   CLEOPATRA 

[august,    30   B.    C] 

I  AM  dying,  Egypt,  dying! 

Ebbs  the  crimson  life-tide  fast,"' 
And  the  dark  Plutonian  shadows  .[[?. 

Gather  on  the  evening  blast;    / 


Antony   to   Cleopatra  ^347 

Let  thine  arms,  O  Queen,  enfold  me, 

Hush  thy  sobs  and  bow  thine  ear, 
Listen  to  the  great  heart-secrets 

Thou,  and  thou  alone,  must  hear. . 

lid  -idi  bitrin  noffi  on  ,rl/. 
Though  my  scarred  and  veteran  legions 

Bear  their  eagles  high  no  more. 
And  my  wrecked  and  scattered  galleys 

Strew  dark  Actium's  fatal  shore; 
Though  no  glittering  guards  surround  me, 

Prompt  to  do  their  master's  will, 
I  must  perish  like  a  Roman, 

Die  the  great  Triumvir  still. 

Let  not  Caesar's  servile  minions 

Mock  the  lion  thus  laid  low; 
'Twas  no  foeman's  arm  that  felled  him, 

'Twas  his  own  that  struck  the  blow:^ 
His  who,  pillowed  on  thy  bosom, 

Turned  aside  from  glory's  ray — 
His  who,  drunk  wath  thy  caresses. 

Madly  threw  a  world  away. 

IV)  h'l'ji 

Should  the  base  plebeian  rabble 

Dare  assail  my  name  at  Rome, 
Where  the  noble  spouse,  Octavia, 

Weeps  within  her  widowed  home. 
Seek  her;  say  the  gods  bear  witness,^^ 

Altars,  augurs,  circling  wings, — 
That  her  blood,  with  mine  commingled^ 

Yet  shall  mount  the  throne  of  kings. 

And  for  thee,  star-eyed  Egyptian- 
Glorious  sorceress  of  the  Nile! — 

Light  the  path  to  Stygian  horrors, 
With  the  splendor  of  thy  smile; 

Give  the  Ca;sar  crowns  and  arches, 
Let  his  brow  the  laurel  twine: 

I  can  scorn  the  Senate's  triumphs',  "'J'-"' 
Triumphing  in  love  like  thine.  "^'1 


234^  Poems  of  History 

I  am  dying,  Egypt,  dying!  '  .i 

Hark!  the  insulting  foeman's  cry;  ^ 
They  are  coming — quick,  my  falchion! 

Let  me  front  them  ere  I  die. 
Ah,  no  more  amid  the  battle 

Shall  my  heart  exulting  swell; 
Isis  and  Osiris  guard  thee — 

Cleopatra — Rome — farewell ! 

William  Haines  Lytle  [1826-1863] 

BOADICEA:  AN  ODE 

[62   A.   D.] 

When  the  British  warrior  cjueen. 
Bleeding  from  the  Roman  rods. 

Sought,  with  an  indignant  mien. 
Counsel  of  her  country's  gods. 

Sage  beneath  a  spreading  oak 

Sat  the  Druid,  hoary  chief, 
Every  burning  word  he  spoke  , 

Full  of  rage  and  full  of  grief: 

"Princess!  if  our  aged  ej^es 
Weep  upon  thy  matchless  wrongs, 

'Tis  because  resentment  ties 
All  the  terrors  of  our  tongues. 

"Rome  shall  perish: — write  that  word 
In  the  blood  that  she  has  spilt; 

Perish,  hopeless  and  abhorred. 
Deep  in  ruin  as  in  guilt. 

"Rome,  for  empire  far  renowned, 
Tramples  on  a  thousand  states; 

Soon  her  pride  shall  kiss  the  ground, — 
Hark !  the  Gaul  is  at  her  gates. 

"Other  Romans  shall  arise 

Heedless  of  a  soldier's  name; 
Sounds,  not  arms,  shall  win  the  prize, 

Harmony  the  path  to  fame. 


"  He  Never  Smiled  Again  "        2349 

"Then  the  progeny  that  springs 

From  the  forests  of  our  land, 
Armed  with  thunder,  clad  with  wings, 

Shall  a  wider  world  command. 

"  Regions  Caesar  never  knew 

Thy  posterity  shall  sway; 
Where  his  eagles  never  flew, 

None  invincible  as  they." 

Such  the  bard's  prophetic  words, 

Pregnant  with  celestial  fire. 
Bending  as  he  swept  the  chords 

Of  his  sweet  but  awful  lyre. 

She,  with  all  a  monarch's  pride, 

Felt  them  in  her  bosom  glow. 
Rushed  to  battle,  fought  and  died; 

Dying,  hurled  them  at  the  foe. 

"Ruffians!  pitiless  as  proud. 

Heaven  awards  the  vengeance  due;    ■  ■ 

Empire  is  on  us  bestowed, 

Shame  and  ruin  wait  for  you!" 

William  Cowper  [1731-1800] 

;.!;,  TR 

"HE  NEVER  SMILED  AGAIN"   • 

[NOVEMBER,    II2o] 

The  bark  that  held  the  prince  went  down, 

The  sweeping  waves  rolled  on; 
And  what  was  England's  glorious  crown 

To  him  that  wept  a  son? 
He  lived — for  hfe  may  long  be  borne. 

Ere  sorrow  break  its  chain; — 
Why  comes  not  death  to  those  who  mourn? — 

He  never  smiled  again! 

There  stood  proud  forms  around  his  throne, 

The  stately  and  the  brave; 
But  which  could  fill  the  place  of  one, 

That  one  beneath  the  wave? 


2350  Poems  of  History 

Before  him  passed  the  young  and  fair, 

In  pleasure's  reckless  train; 
But  seas  dashed  o'er  his  son's  bright  hair — 

He  never  smiled  again! 

He  sat  Vv'here  festal  bowls  went  round, 

He  heard  the  minstrel  sing; 
He  saw  the  tourney's  victor  crowned 

Amidst  the  knightly  ring; 
A  murmur  of  the  restless  deep 

Was  blent  with  every  strain, 
A  voice  of  winds  that  would  not  sleep — ; . 

He  never  smiled  again! 

Hearts,  in  that  time,  closed  o'er  the  trace 

Of  vows  once  fondly  poured. 
And  strangers  took  the  kinsman's  place 

At  many  a  joyous  board; 
Graves,  which  true  love  had  bathed  with  tears, 

Were  left  to  heaven's  bright  rain, 
Fresh  hopes  were  born  for  other  years — 

He  never  smiled  again! 

Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans  [1793-1835] 


BRUCE  TO  HIS   MEN  AT  BANNOCKBURN 

[JUNE    24,    13 14] 

Scots,  wha  hae  wi'  Wallace  bled, 
Scots,  whami  Bruce  has  aften  led; 
Welcome  to  your  gory  bed, 
Or  to  victory! 

Now's  the  day,  and  now's  the  hour: 
See  the  front  o'  battle  lour:  -■■  3i3 

See  approach  proud  Edward's  power,— 
Chains  and  slavery! 

Wha  will  be  a  traitor  knave? 
Wha  can  fill  a  co weed's  grave? 
Wha  sae  base  as  be  a  slave?  'J^ 

Let  him  turn  and  flee  I 


Coronach  ^3  51 

Wha  for  Scotland's  king  and  law 
Freedom's  sword  will  strongly  draw, 
Freeman  stand,  or  freeman  fa'. 
Let  him  follow  me! 

By  oppression's  woes  and  pains! 
By  your  sons  in  servile  chains, 
We  will  drain  our  dearest  veins. 
But  they  shall  be  free! 

Lay  the  proud  usurpers  low! 
Tyrants  fall  in  every  foe! 
Liberty's  in  every  blow! — 
Let  us  do  or  die! 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


CORONACH 

From  "  The  Lady  of  the  Lake  " 

He  is  gone  on  the  mountain, 

He  is  lost  to  the  forest, 
Like  a  summer-dried  fountain. 

When  our  need  was  the  sorest. 
The  font,  reappearing 

From  the  raindrops  shall  borrow, 
But  to  us  comes  no  cheering. 

To  Duncan  no  morrow! 

The  hand  of  the  reaper 

Takes  the  ears  that  are  hoary, 
But  the  voice  of  the  weeper 

Wails  manhood  in  glory. 
The  autumn  winds  rushing 

Waft  the  leaves  that  are  serest', 
But  our  flower  was  in  flushing. 

When  blighting  was  nearest. 

Fleet  foot  on  the  correi, 

Sage  counsel  in  cumber, 
Red  hand  in  the  foray, 

How  sound  is  thy  slumber! 


235-  Poems  of  History 

Like  the  dew  on  the  mountain, 

Like  the  foam  on  the  river, 
Like  the  bubble  on  the  fountain. 

Thou  art  gone,  and  for  ever! 

Walter  Scott  [1771-1832] 


CRECY 

[august  26,  1346] 

At  Cregy  by  Somme  in  Ponthieu 

High  up  on  a  windy  hill 
A  mill  stands  out  like  a  tower: 

King  Edward  stands  on  the  mill. 
The  plain  is  seething  below. 

As  Vesuvius  seethes  with  flame, 
But  O!  not  with  fire,  but  gore. 
Earth  incarnadined  o'er, 

Crimson  with  shame  and  with  fame. 
To  the  King  run  the  messengers,  crying, 
"Thy  Son  is  hard  pressed  to  the  dying!" 
"Let  alone:  for  to-day  will  be  written  in  story 
To  the  great  world's  end  and  for  ever: 
.So  let  the  boy  have  the  glory." 

Erin  and  Gwalia  there 

With  England  arc  ranked  against  France; 
Out-facing  the  oriflamme  red 

The  red  dragons  of  Merlin  advance; 
As  a  harvest  in  autumn  renewed 

The  lances  bend  over  the  fields; 
Snow-thick  our  arrow-heads  white 
Level  the  foe  as  they  light; 

Knighthood  to  yeomanry  yields: 
Proud  heart,  the  King  watches,  as  higher 
Goes  the  blaze  of  the  battle,  and  nigher: 
"To-day  is  a  day  will  be  written  in  story 
To  the  great  world's  end,  and  for  ever! 
Let  the  boy  alone  have  the  glory." 


The  Patriot's  Pass-Word  2353 

Harold  at  Senlac-on-Sea 

By  Norman  arrow  laid  low, 
When  the  shield-wall  was  breached  by  the  shaft, 

Thou  art  avenged  by  the  bow! 
Chivalry!  name  of  romance! 

Thou  art  henceforth  but  a  name; 
Weapon  that  none  can  withstand, 
Yew  in  the  Englishman's  hand, 
Flight-shaft  unerring  in  aim ! 
As  a  lightning-struck  forest  the  foemen 
Shiver  down  to  the  stroke  of  the  bowmen ; 
"O  to-day  is  a  day  will  be  written  in  story 
To  the  great  world's  end,  and  for  ever! 
So,  let  the  boy  have  the  glory." 

Pride  of  Liguria's  shore 

Genoa  wrestles  in  vain; 
Vainly  Bohemia's  king 

King-like  is  laid  with  the  slain. 
The  Blood-lake  is  wiped  out  in  blood, 

The  shame  of  the  centuries  o'er; 
Where  the  pride  of  the  Norman  had  sway, 
The  lions  lord  over  the  fray, 

The  legions  of  France  are  no  more: 
The  Prince  to  his  father  kneels  lowly: 
"His  is  the  battle— his  wholly! 
For  to-day  is  a  day  will  be  written  in  story 
To  the  great  world's  end,  and  for  ever! 
So,  let  him  have  the  spurs  and  the  glory." 

Francis  Turner  Pal  grave  [i  824-1 897] 


THE   PATRIOT'S   PASS-WORD 

[JULY  9,    1386] 

"Make  way  for  Liberty!"  he  cried, 
Made  way  for  Liberty,  and  died. 

In  arms  the  Austrian  phalanx  stood, 
A  living  wall,  a  human  wood; 


2354  Poems  of  History 

A  wall, — where  every  conscious  stone 
Seemed  to  its  kindred  thousands  grown; 
A  rampart  all  assaults  to  bear, 
Till  time  to  dust  their  frames  should  wear: 
A  wood, — like  that  enchanted  grove 
In  which  with  fiends  Rinaldo  strove, 
Where  every  silent  tree  possessed 
A  spirit  prisoned  in  its  breast, 
Which  the  first  stroke  of  coming  strife 
Might  startle  into  hideous  life: 
So  still,  so  dense,  the  Austrians  stood, 
A  living  wall,  a  human  wood. 
Impregnable  their  front  appears. 
All-horrent  with  projected  spears, 
W^ose  polished  points  before  them  shine. 
From  flank  to  flank,  one  brilliant  line, 
Bright  as  the  breakers'  splendors  run 
Along  the  biUows  to  the  sun. 

Opposed  to  these,  a  hovering  band 

Contended  for  their  father-land: 

Peasants,  whose  new-found  strength  had  broke 

From  manly  necks  the  ignoble  yoke. 

And  forged  their  fetters  into  swords, 

On  equal  terms  to  fight  their  lords. 

And  what  insurgent  rage  had  gained 

In  many  a  mortal  fray  maintained. 

Marshalled  once  more,  at  Freedom's  call, 

They  came  to  conquer  or  to  fall. 

Where  he  who  conquered,  he  who  fell, 

Was  deemed  a  dead,  or  living,  Tell; 

Such  virtue  had  that  patriot  breathed, 

So  to  the  soil  his  soul  bequeathed. 

That  wheresoe'er  his  arrows  flew. 

Heroes  in  his  own  likeness  grew. 

And  warriors  sprang  from  every  sod, 

Which  his  awakening  footstep  trod. 

And  now  the  work  of  life  and  death 
Hung  on  the  passing  of  a  breath; 


The  Patriot's  Pass-Word  ~3SS 

The  fire  of  conflict  burned  within, 

The  battle  trembled  to  begin; 

Yet,  while  the  Austrians  held  their  ground, 

Point  for  assault  was  nowhere  found ; 

Where'er  the  impatient  Switzers  gazed. 

The  unbroken  line  of  lances  blazed: 

That  line  'twere  suicide  to  meet. 

And  perish  at  their  tyrants'  feet: 

How  could  they  rest  within  their  graves, 

And  leave  their  homes  the  haunts  of  slaves? 

Would  they  not  feel  their  children  tread 

With  clanging  chains,  above  their  head? 

It  must  not  be:  this  day,  this  hour, 
Annihilates  the  invader's  power: 
All  Switzerland  is  in  the  field. 
She  will  not  fly,  she  cannot  yield, 
She  must  not  fall;  her  better  fate 
Here  gives  her  an  immortal  date. 
Few  were  the  number  she  could  boast, 
Yet  every  freeman  was  a  host. 
And  felt  as  'twere  a  secret  known 
That  one  should  turn  the  scale  alone. 
While  each  unto  himself  were  he 
On  whose  sole  arm  hung  victory. 

It  did  depend  on  one  indeed; 

Behold  him, — Arnold  Winkelried! 

There  sounds  not  to  the  trump  of  fame 

The  echo  of  a  nobler  name. 

Unmarked  he  stood  amid  the  throng, 

In  rumination  deep  and  long, 

Tin  you  might  see,  with  sudden  grace. 

The  very  thought  come  o'er  his  face, 

And  by  the  motion  of  his  form 

Anticipate  the  bursting  storm, 

And  by  the  uplifting  of  his  brow 

Tell  where  the  bolt  would  strike,  and  how. 

But  'twas  no  sooner  thought  than  done, 
The  field  was  in  a  moment  won; 


235*^  i/.    Poems  of  History 

"Make  way  for  Liberty! "  he  cried,  [ 

Then  ran,  with  arms  extended  wide, 
As  if  his  dearest  friend  to  clasp; 
Ten  spears  he  swept  within  his  grasp; 
"Make  way  for  Liberty!"  he  cried; 
Their  keen  points  met  from  side  to  side; 
He  bowed  amidst  them,  Uke  a  tree. 
And  thus  made  way  for  Liberty. 

Swift  to  the  breach  his  comrades  fly; 

"Make  way  for  Liberty!"  they  cry, 

And  through  the  Austrian  phalanx  dart, 

As  rushed  the  spears  through  Arnold's  heart; 

While,  instantaneous  as  his  fall, 

Rout,  ruin,  panic  seized  them  all; 

An  earthquake  could  not  overthrow 

A  city  with  a  surer  blow. 

Thus  Switzerland  again  was  free; 
Thus  Death  made  way  for  Liberty! 

James  Montgomery  [1771-1854] 


THE  BATTLE  OF  OTTERBURN 

[august  10,  1388] 

It  fell  about  the  Lammas  tide, 
When  muir-men  win  their  hay. 

That  the  doughty  Earl  of  Douglas  rade 
Into  England,  to  take  a  prey. 

He  chose  the  Gordons  and  the  Graemes, 
With  them  the  Lindsays  gay ; 

But  the  Jardines  wald  not  with  him  ride, 
And  they  rue  it  to  this  day. 

And  they  hae  harried  the  dales  o'  Tyne, 
And  half  o'  Bambrough-shire, 

And  the  Otter-dale  they  burned  it  hale. 
And  set  it  a'  on  fire. 


The  Battle  of  Otterburn  2357 

Then  he  cam'  up  to  Newcastle, 

And  rade  it  round  about : 
"O  wha's  the  lord  of  this  castle? 

Or  wha's  thelady  o't?" 

But  up  spake  proud  Lord  Percy  then, 

And  O  but  he  spake  hie ! 
"I  am  the  lord  of  this  castle, 

My  wife's  the  lady  gay." 

"If  thou'rt  the  lord  of  this  castle, 

Sac  weel  it  pleases  me, 
For,  ere  I  cross  the  Border  fells, 

The  tane  of  us  shall  dee." 

He  took  a  lang  spear  in  his  hand, 

Shod  with  the  metal  free. 
And  for  to  meet  the  Douglas  there 

He  rode  right  furiouslie. 

But  O  how  pale  his  lady  looked, 

Frae  aff  the  castle-wa'. 
As  down  before  the  Scottish  spear 

She  saw  proud  Percy  fa'. 

"Had  we  twa  been  upon  the  green, 

And  never  an  eye  to  see, 
I  wad  hae  had  you,  flesh  and  fell; 

But  your  sword  sail  gae  wi  me.'' 

"Now  gae  ye  up  to  Otterbourne, 

And  wait  there  dayis  three, 
And  gin  I  come  not  ere  they  end, 

A  fause  knight  ca'  ye  me." 

"The  Otterbourne's  a  bonnic  burn; 

'Tis  pleasant  there  to  be ; 
But  there  is  naught  at  Otterbourne 

To  feed  my  men  and  me. 


2358  Poems  of  History 

"The  deer  rins  wild  on  hill  and  dale, 
The  birds  fly  wild  frae  tree  to  tree; 

But  there  is  neither  bread  nor  kale 
To  fend  my  men  and  me. 

"Yet  I  will  stay  at  Otterbourne, 
Where  you  sail  welcome  be; 

And,  if  ye  come  not  at  three  days'  end, 
A  fause  lord  I'll  ca'  thee." 

"Thither  will  I  come,"  proud  Percy  said, 
"By  the  might  of  Our  Ladye;" 

"There  will  I  bide  thee,"  said  the  Douglas, 
"My  troth  I  plight  to  thee." 

They  licted  high  on  Otterbourne, 

Upon  the  bent  sae  broun; 
They  licted  high  on  Otterbourne, 

And  pitched  their  palhons  doun. 

And  he  that  had  a  bonnie  boy. 

He  sent  his  horse  to  grass; 
And  he  that  had  not  a  bonnie  boy, 

His  ain  servant  he  was. 

But  up  then  spak'  a  little  page. 

Before  the  peep  o'  dawn: 
"O  waken  ye,  waken  ye,  my  good  lord 

For  Percy's  hard  at  hand." 

"Ye  lie,  ye  lie,  ye  liar  loud! 

Sae  loud  I  hear  ye  he : 
For  Percy  had  not  men  yestreen 

To  dight  my  men  and  me. 

"But  I  hae  dreamed  a  dreary  dream, 

Beyond  the  Isle  of  Sky; 
I  saw  a  deid  man  win  a  fight. 

And  I  think  that  man  was  I." 


The   Battle  of  Otterburn  2359 

He  belted  on  his  gude  braid-sword, 

And  to  the  field  he  ran, 
But  he  forgot  the  hewmont  strong, 

That  should  have  kept  his  brain. 

When  Percy  wi'  the  Douglas  met, 

I  wot  he  was  fu'  fain; 
They  swakkit  swords,  till  sair  they  swat, 

And  the  blud  ran  down  like  rain. 

But  Percy  wi'  his  gude  braid-sword, 

That  could  sae  sharply  wound, 
Has  wounded  Douglas  on  the  brow, 

Till  he  fell  to  the  ground. 

And  then  he  called  his  little  foot-page. 

And  said,  "Run  speedily, 
And  fetch  my  ain  dear  sister's  son, 

Sir  Plugh  Montgomery. 

"My  nephew  gude,"  the  Douglas  said, 
■     "What  recks  the  death  of  ane? 
Last  night  I  dreamed  a  dreary  dream. 
And  I  ken  the  day's  thy  ain! 

"My  wound  is  deep;  I  fain  wad  sleep; 

Tak'  thou  the  vanguard  o'  the  three, . 
And  bury  me  by  the  braken-bush. 

That  grows  on  yonder  hlye  lea. 

"O  bury  me  by  the  braken-bush, 

Beneath  the  blumin'  brier; 
Let  never  living  mortal  ken 

That  a  kindly  Scot  lies  here." 

He  lifted  up  that  noble  lord, 

Wi'  the  saut  tear  in  his  e'e; 
He  hid  him  by  the  braken-bush, 

That  his  merrie  men  might  not  see. 


2360  Poems  of  History 

The  moon  was  clear,  the  day  drew  near, 

The  spears  in  flinders  flew, 
And  mony  a  gallant  Englishman 

Ere  day  the  Scotsmen  slew. 

The  Gordons  gude,  in  Enghsh  bludc 

They  wat  their  hose  and  shoon; 
The  Lindsays  flew  like  fire  about, 

Till  a'  the  fray  was  dune. 

The  Percy  and  Montgomery  met, 

That  either  of  other  was  fain; 
They  swakkit  swords,  and  sair  they  swat, 

And  the  blude  ran  down  between. 

"Now  yield  thee,  yield  thee,  Percy,"  he  said, 

"Or  else  I  will  lay  thee  low!" 
"To  whom  maun  I  yield,"  quoth  Earl  Percy, 

"Since  I  see  it  maun  be  so?" 

"Thou  shalt  not  yield  to  lord  or  loun, 

Nor  yet  shalt  thou  yield  to  mc; 
But  yield  thee  to  the  braken-bush. 

That  grows  upon  yon  lilye  lea." 

"I  will  not  yield  to  a  braken-bush. 

Nor  yet  will  I  yield  to  a  brier; 
But  I  would  yield  to  Earl  Douglas, 

Or  Sir  Hugh  the  Montgomery,  if  he  were  here." 

As  soon  as  he  knew  it  was  Montgomery, 
He  struck  his  sword's  point  in  the  gronde; 

The  Montgomery  was  a  courteous  knight, 
And  quickly  took  him  by  the  honde. 

This  deed  was  done  at  the  Otterbourne, 

About  the  breaking  o'  the  day; 
Earl  Douglas  was  buried  at  the  braken-bush. 

And  the  Percy  led  captive  away. 

Unknown 


AgincoLirt  2361 

AGINCOURT 

[OCTOBER  25,  141 5] 

Fair  stood  the  wind  for  France 
When  we  our  sails  advance, 
Nor  now  to  prove  our  chance 

Longer  will  tarry; 
But  putting  to  the  main, 
At  Caux,  the  mouth  of  Seine, 
With  all  his  martial  train 

Landed  King  Harry. 

And  taking  many  a  fort, 
Furnished  in  v/arlike  sort, 
Marcheth  towards  Agincourt 

In  happy  hour; 
Skirmishing  day  by  day 
With  those  that  stopped  his  way. 
Where  the  French  general  lay 

With  all  his  power. 

Which,  in  his  height  of  pride, 
King  Henry  to  deride. 
His  ransom  to  provide 

Unto  him  sending; 
Which  he  neglects  the  while 
As  from  a  nation  vile, 
Yet  with  an  angry  smile 

Their  fall  portending. 

And  turning  to  his  men. 
Quoth  our  brave  Henry  then, 
"Though  they  to  one  be  ten 

Be  not  amazed: 
Yet  have  we  well  begun:  •  !^ 

Battles  so  bravely  won 
Have  ever  to  the  sun 

By  fame  been  raised. 


1262  Poems  of  History 

"And  for  myself  (quoth  he) 
This  my  full  rest  shall  be: 
England  ne'er  mourn  for  me 

Nor  more  esteem  me: 
Victor  I  will  remain 
Or  on  this  earth  He  slain, 
Never  shall  she  sustain 

Loss  to  redeem  m_e. 

"Poitiers  and  Cressy  tell, 
When  most  their  pride  did  swell, 
Under  our  swords  they  fell: 

No  less  our  skill  is 
Than  when  our  grandsire  great 
Claiming  the  regal  seat, 
By  many  a  warlike  feat 

Lopped  the  French  lilies." 

The  Duke  of  York  so  dread 
The  eager  vanguard  led; 
With  the  main  Henry  sped 

Among  his  henchmen. 
Excester  had  the  rear, 
A  braver  man  not  there; 
O  Lord,  how  hot  they  were 

On  the  false  Frenchmen! 

They  now  to  fight  are  gone, 
Armor  on  armor  shone, 
Drum  now  to  drum  did  groan, 

To  hear  was  wonder; 
That  with  the  cries  they  make 
The  very  earth  did  shake: 
Trumpet  to  trumpet  spake. 

Thunder  to  thunder. 

Well  it  thine  age  became, 
O  noble  Erpingham, 
Which  didst  the  signal  aim 
To  our  hid  forces! 


Agincourt  '^3(^3 

When  from  a  meadow  by, 
Like  a  storm  suddenly 
The  EngUsh  archery 

Struck  the  French  horses. 

With  Spanish  yew  so  strong, 
Arrows  a  cloth-yard  long 
That  like  to  serpents  stung, 

Piercing  the  weather; 
None  from  his  fellow  starts, 
But  playing  manly  parts. 
And  Hke  true  English  hearts 

Stuck  close  together. 

When  down  their  bows  they  threw, 
And  forth  their  bilbos  drew, 
And  on  the  French  they  flew. 

Not  one  was  tardy; 
Arms  were  from  shoulders  sent. 
Scalps  to  the  teeth  were  rent, 
Down  the  French  peasants  went — • 

Our  men  were  hardy. 

This  while  our  noble  king, 
His  broadsword  brandishing, 
Down  the  French  host  did  ding 

As  to  o'erwhelm  it; 
And  many  a  deep  wound  lent. 
His  arms  with  blood  besprent, 
And  many  a  cruel  dent 

Bruised  his  helmet. 

Gloster,  that  duke  so  good. 
Next  of  the  royal  blood, 
For  famous  England  stood 

With  his  brave  brother; 
Clarence,  in  steel  so  bright. 
Though  but  a  maiden  knight 
Yet  in  that  furious  fight 

Scarce  such  another. 


2364  Poems  of  History 

Warwick  in  blood  did  wade, 
Oxford  the  foe  invade, 
And  cruel  slaughter  made 

Still  as  they  ran  up; 
Suffolk  his  axe  did  ply, 
Beaumont  and  Willoughby 
Bare  them  right  doughtily, 

Ferrers  and  Fanhope. 

Upon  Saint  Crispin's  Day 
Fought  w'as  this  noble  fray, 
Which  fame  did  not  delay 

To  England  to  carry. 
O  when  shall  English  men 
With  such  acts  fill  a  pen? 
Or  England  breed  again 

Such  a  King  Harry? 

Michael  Drayton  [1563-1631] 


A  BALLAD   OF  ORLEANS 

[1429] 

The  fray  began  at  the  middle-gate. 

Between  the  night  and  the  day; 
Before  the  matin  bell  was  rung 

The  foe  was  far  away. 
There  was  no  knight  in  the  land  of  France 

Could  gar  that  foe  to  flee. 
Till  up  there  rose  a  young  maiden,  . 

And  drove  them  to  the  sea. 

Sixty  forts  around  Orleans  town, 

And  sixty  forts  of  stone  ! 
Sixty  forts  at  our  gates  last  night — 

To-day  there  is  not  one  ! 

Talbot,  Suffolk,  and  Pole  are  fled 

Beyond  the  Loire,  in  fear — 
Many  a  captain  who  would  not  drink, 

Hath  drunken  deeply  there — 


Columbus  '^S^^S 

Many  a  captain  is  fallen  and  drowned, 

And  many  a  knight  is  dead, 
And  many  die  in  the  misty  dawn 

While  forts  are  burning  red. 

The  blood  ran  off  our  spears  all  night 

As  the  rain  runs  off  the  roofs — 
God  rest  their  souls  that  fell  i'  the  fight 

Among  our  horses'  hoofs! 
They  came  to  rob  us  of  our  own 

With  sword  and  spear  and  lance, 
They  fell  and  clutched  the  stubborn  earth, 

And  bit  the  dust  of  France! 

W^e  fought  across  the  moonless  dark 

Against  their  unseen  hands — 
A  knight  came  out  of  Paradise 

And  fought  among  our  bands. 
Fight  on,  O  maiden  knight  of  God, 

Fight  on  and  do  not  tire — 
For  lo!  the  misty  break  o'  the  day 

Sees  all  their  forts  on  fire! 

Sixty  forts  around  Orleans  town, 

And  sixty  for  Is  of  stone  ! 
Sixty  forts  at  our  gates  last  night — 

To-day  there  is  not  one  ! 

A.  Mary  F.  Robinson  [1857- 

COLUMBUS 

[JANUARY,    1487] 

St.  Stephen's  cloistered  hall  was  proud 

In  learning's  pomp  that  day. 
For  there  a  robed  and  stately  crowd 

Pressed  on  in  long  array. 
A  mariner  with  simple  chart 

Confronts  thart  conclave  high. 
While  strong  ambition  stirs  his  heart, 
And  burning  thoughts  of  wonder  part 

From  lip  and  sparkling  eye. 


2^66  Poems  of  History 

What  hath  he  said?     With  frowning  face, 

In  whispered  tones  they  speak, 
And  Hnes  upon  their  tablets  trace. 

Which  flush  each  ashen  cheek; 
The  Inquisition's  mystic  doom 

Sits  on  their  brows  severe, 
And  bursting  forth  in  visioned  gloom, 
Sad  heresy  from  burning  tomb 

Groans  on  the  startled  ear. 

Courage,  thou  Genoese!     Old  Time 

Thy  splendid  dream  shall  crown; 
Yon  Western  Hemisphere  subhme. 

Where  unshorn  forests  frown, 
The  awful  Andes'  cloud-wrapped  brow. 

The  Indian  hunter's  bow, 
Bold  streams  untamed  by  hehn  or  prow. 
And  rocks  of  gold  and  diamonds,  thou 

To  thankless  Spain  shalt  show. 

Courage,  World-finder!    Thou  hast  need! 

In  Fate's  unfolding  scroll, 
Dark  woes  and  ingrate  wrongs  I  read. 

That  rack  the  noble  soul. 
On!  on!  Creation's  secrets  probe, 

Then  drink  thy  cup  of  scorn, 
And  wrapped  in  fallen  Caesar's  robe, 
Sleep  like  that  master  of  the  globe. 

All  glorious, — yet  forlorn. 

Lydia  Huntly  Sigoiirney  [1791-1865] 


COLUMBUS 

[august   3— OCTOBER    12,    1 49 2] 

Behind  him  lay  the-gray  Azores, 
Behind  the  Gates  of  Hercules;      / 

Before  him  not  the  ghost  of  shores,A 
Before  him  only  shoreless  seas. 


Columbus  2367 


The  good  mate  said:  "Now  must  we  pray, 

For  lo!  the  very  stars  are  gone. 
Brave  Admiral,  speak,  what  shall  I  say?" 

"Why,  say  'Sail  on!  sail  on!  and  on!'" 

"My  men  grow  mutinous  day  by  day; 

My  men  grow  ghastly  wan  and  weak." 
The  stout  mate  thought  of  home;  a  spray 

Of  salt  wave  washed  his  swarthy  cheek. 
"What  shall  I  say,  brave  Admiral,  say, 

If  we  sight  naught  but  seas  at  dawn?" 
"Why,  you  shall  say  at  break  of  day, 

'Sail  on!  sail  on!  sail  on!  and  on!'" 

They  sailed  and  sailed,  as  winds  might  blow, 

Until  at  last  the  blanched  mate  said: 
"Why,  now  not  even  God  would  know 

Should  I  and  all  my  men  fall  dead. 
These  very  \vinds  forget  their  way, 

For  God  from  these  dread  seas  is  gone. 
Now  speak,  brave  Admiral,  speak  and  say" — 

He  said:  "Sail  on!  sail  on!  and  on!" 

They  sailed.     They  sailed.     Then  spake  the  mate: 

"This  mad  sea  shows  his  teeth  to-night. 
He  curls  his  lip,  he  lies  in  wait. 

With  hfted  teeth,  as  if  to  bite! 
Brave  Admiral,  say  but  one  good  word: 

What  shaU  we  do  when  hope  is  gone?  " 
The.  words  leapt  like  a  leaping  sword: 

"Sail  on!  sail  on!  sail  on!  and  on!" 

Then,  pale  and  worn,  he  kept  his  deck. 

And  peered  through  darkness.     Ah,  that  night 
Of  all  dark  nights!     And  then  a  speck — 

A  light!  a  light!  a  light!  a  light! 
It  grew,  a  starlit  flag  unfurled! 

It  grew  to  be  Time's  burst  of  dawn. 
He  gained  a  world;  he  gave  that  world 

Its  grandest  lesson:  "On!  sail  on!" 

''  Joaquin  Miller  [1841-1913J 


2368  Poems  of  History 


A  LAMENT  FOR   FLODDEN 

[SEPTEMBER   9,    1513] 

I've  heard  them  Kiting  at  our  ewe-milking, 

Lasses  a-hlting  before  dawn  o'  day; 
But  now  they  are  moaning  on  ilka  green  loaning: 

"The  Flowers  of  the  Forest  are  a'  \^ede  away." 

At  buchts,  in  the  morning,  nae  bhthe  lads  are  scorning, 

Lasses  are  lanely  and  dowie  and  wae ; 
Nae  daffing,  nae  gabbing,  but  sighing  and  sabbing, 

Ilk  ane  lifts  her  leglen  and  hies  her  away. 

In  har'st,  at  the  shearing,  nae  youths  now  are  jeering, 
The  bandsters  are  lyart,  and  runkled,  and  gra}^: 

At  fair  or  at  preaching,  nae  wooing,  nae  fieeching — 
The  Flowers  of  the  Forest  are  a'  wede  away. 

At  e'en,  in  the  gloaming,  nae  swankies  are  roaming 
'Bout  stacks  wi'  the  lasses  at  bogle  to  play; 

But  ilk  ane  sits  eerie,  lamenting  her  dearie — 
The  Flowers  of  the  Forest  are  a'  wede  away. 

Dool  and  wae  for  the  order  sent  our  lads  to  the  Border! 

The  English,  for  ance,  by  guile  wan  the  day; 
The  Flowers  of  the  Forest,  that  fought  aye  the  foremost. 

The  prime  o'  our  land,  lie  cauld  in  the  clay. 

We'll  hear  nae  mair  lilting  at  our  ewe-milking; 

Women  and  bairns  are  heartless  and  wae; 
Sighing  and  moaning  on  ilka  green  loaning: 

"The  Flowers  of  the  Forest  are  a'  wede  away." 

Jane  Elliot  [1727-1805] 

SIR  HUMPHREY   GILBERT 

[1583] 

Southward  with  fleet  of  ice 

Sailed  the  corsair  Death; 
Wild  and  fast  blew  the  blast, 

And  the  east-wind  was  his  breath. 


Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  '^36^) 

His  lordly  ships  of  ice 

Glisten  in  the  sun; 
On  each  side,  like  pennons  wide, 

Flashing  crystal  streamlets  run. 

His  sails  of  white  sea-mist 

Dripped  with  silver  rain; 
But  where  he  passed  there  was  cast 

Leaden  shadows  o'er  the  main. 

Eastward  from  Campobcllo 

Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  sailed; 
Three  days  or  more  seaward  he  bore, 

Then,  alas!  the  land-wdnd  failed. 

Alas!  the  land-wind  failed, 

And  ice-cold  grew  the  night; 
And  nevermore,  on  sea  or  shore, 

Should  Sir  Humphrey  see  the  light. 

He  sat  upon  the  deck. 

The  Book  was  in  his  hand ; 
"Do  not  fear!  Heaven  is  as  near," 

He  said,  "by  water  as  by  land!" 

In  the  first  watch  of  the  night, 

Without  a  signal's  sound. 
Out  of  the  sea,  mysteriously, 

The  fleet  of  Death  rose  all  around. 

The  moon  and  the  evening  star 

Were  hanging  in  the  shrouds; 
Every  mast,  as  it  passed, 

Seemed  to  rake  the  passing  clouds. 

They  grappled  with  their  prize. 

At  midnight  black  and  cold! 
As  of  a  rock  was  the  shock ; 

Heavily  the  ground-swell  rolled. 


2370  Poems  of  History:  ir^ 

Southward  through  day  and  dark, 

They  drift  in  dose  embrace, 
With  mist  and  rain,  o'er  the  open  main; 

Yet  there  seems  no  change  of  place. 

Southward,  forever  southward, 
They  drift  through  dark  and  day; 

And  hke  a  dream,  in  the  Gulf-Stream, 
Sinking,  vanish  all  away. 

Henry  Wads-worth  Longfelloiv  [180 7- if 


THE  ARMADA:   A   FRAGMENT 

[JULY  21-29,   1588] 

Attend,  all  ye  who  Ust  to  hear  our  noble  England's  praise; 
I  sing  of  the  thrice  famous  deeds  she  wrought  in  ancient  days. 
When  that  great  fleet  invincible  against  her  bore,  in  vain. 
The  richest  spoils  of  Mexico,  the  stoutest  hearts  of  Spain. 

It  was  about  the  lovely  close  of  a  warm  summer  day. 

There  came  a  gallant  merchant-ship  fuU  sail  to  Plymouth 

Bay; 
The  crew  had  seen  Castile's  black  fleet,  beyond  Aurigny's 

isle. 
At  earliest  twilight,  on  the  waves  lie  heaving  many  a  mile. 
At  sunrise  she  escaped  their  van,  by  God's  especial  grace; 
And  the  tall  Pinta,  till  the  noon,  had  held  her  close  in  chase. 
Forthwith  a  guard  at  every  gun  was  placed  along  the  wall; 
The  beacon  blazed  upon  the  roof  of  Edgecumbe's  lofty  hall; 
Many  a  light  fishing-bark  put  out  to  pry  along  the  coast; 
And  with  loose  rein  and  bloody  spur  rode  inland  many  a  post. 

With  his  white  hair  unbonneted,  the  stout  old  sheriff  comes; 
Behind  him  march  the  halberdiers;  before  him  sound  the 

drums: 
His  yeomen  round  the  market  cross  make  clear  ^n  ample 

space; 
For  there  behooves  him  to  set  up  the  standard  of  Her  Grace. 
And  haughtily  the  trumpets  peal,  and  gaily  dance  the  bells, 
As  slow  upon  the  laboring  wind  the  royal  blazon  swells. 


The  Armada:    A  Fragment        2371 

Look  how  the  Lion  of  the  sea  hfts  up  his  ancient  crown, 
And  underncatli  his  deadly  paw  treads  the  gay  hhes  down. 
So  stalked  he  Vv^hen  he  turned  to  flight,  on  that  famed  Picard 

field, 
Bohemia's  plume,  and  Genoa's  bow,  and  Caesar's  eagle  shield. 
So  glared  he  when  at  Agincourt  in  wrath  he  turned  to  bay. 
And  crushed  and  torn  beneath  his  claws  the  princely  hunters 

lay. 
Ho!  strike  the  flagstaff  deep,  Sir  Knight:  ho!  scatter  flowers, 

fair  maids: 
Ho!  gunners,  fire  a  loud  salute:  ho!  gallants,  draw  your 

blades : 
Thou  sun,  shine  on  her  joyously;  ye  breezes,  waft  her  wide; 
Our  glorious  Semper  Eadem,  the  banner  of  our  pride. 

The  freshening  breeze  of  eve  unfurled  that  banner's  massy 

fold; 
The  parting  gleam  of  sunshine  kissed  that  haughty  scroll  of 

gold; 
Night  sank  upon  the  dusky  beach,  and  on  the  purple  sea, 
Such  night  in  England  ne'er  had  been,  nor  e'er  again  shall 

be. 
From  Eddystone  to  Berwick  bounds,  from  Lynn  to  Milford 

Bay, 
That  time  of  slumber  was  as  bright  and  busy  as  the  day; 
For  swift  to  east  and  swift  to  west  the  ghastly  war-flame 

spread. 
High  on  St.  Michael's  Mount  it  shone:  it  shone  on  Beachy 

Head. 
Far  o'er  the  deep  the  Spaniard  saw,  along  each  southern 

shire. 
Cape  beyond  cape,  in  endless  range,  those  twinkling  points  of 

fire. 
The  fisher  left  his  skiff  to  rock  on  Tamar's  ghttering  waves: 
The  rugged  miners  poured  to  war  from  Mendip's  sunless 

caves : 
O'er  Longleat's  towers,  o'er  Cranbourne's  oaks,  the  fiery 

herald  flew: 
He  roused   the  shepherds  of  Stonehcnge,   the  rangers  of 

Beauheu. 


237-  Poems  of  History 

Right  sharp  and  quick  the  bells  all  night  rang  out  from  Bris- 
tol town, 

And  ere  the  day  three  hundred  horse  had  met  on  Chfton 
Down; 

The  sentinel  on  Whitehall  gate  looked  forth  into  the  night, 

And  saw,  o'erhanging  Richmond  Hill,  the  streak  of  blood- 
red  hght: 

Then  bugle's  note  and  cannon's  roar  the  deathlike  silence 
broke, 

And  with  one  start,  and  with  one  cry,  the  royal  city  woke. 

At  once  on  all  her  stately  gates  arose  the  answering  fires; 
At  once  the  wild  alarum  clashed  from  all  her  reeling  spires; 
From  all  the  batteries  of  the  Tower  pealed  loud  the  voice  of 

fear; 
And  all  the  thousand  masts  of  Thames  sent  back  a  louder 

cheer : 
And  from  the  furthest  wards  was  heard  the  rush  of  hurrying 

feet, 
And  the  broad  streams  of  pikes  and  flags  rushed  down  each 

roaring  street: 
And  broader  still  became  the  blaze,  and  louder  still  the 

din, 
As  fast  from  every  village  round  the  horse  came  spurring  in ; 
And  eastward  straight  from  wild  Blackheath  the  warlike 

errand  went. 
And  roused  in  many  an  ancient  hall  the  gallant  squires  of 

Kent. 
Southward  from  Surrey's  pleasant  hills  tlew  those  bright 

couriers  forth; 
High  on  bleak  Hampstead's  swarthy  moor  they  started  for 

the  north; 
And  on,  and  on,  without  a  pause,  untired  they  bounded 

still: 
All  night  from  tower  to  tower  they  sprang;  they  sprang  from 

hill  to  hill; 
Till  the  proud  Peak  unfurled  the  flag  o'er  Darwin's  rocky 

dales; 
Till  like  volcanoes  flared   to  heaven   the  stormy  hills  of 

Wales;  -i 


"God  Save  Elizabeth!  "  2373 

Till  twelve  fair  counties  saw  the  blaze  on  Malvern's  lonely 

height; 
Till  streamed  in  crimson  on  the  wind  the  Wrekin's  crest  of 

light; 
Till  broad  and  fierce  the  star  came  forth  on  Ely's  stately 

fane, 
And  tower  and  hamlet  rose  in  arms  o'er  all  the  boundless 

plain ; 
Till  Belvoir's  lordly  terraces  the  sign  to  Lincoln  sent, 
And  Lincoln  sped  the  message  on  o'er  the  wide  vale  of  Trent: 
Till  Skiddaw  saw  the  lire  that  burned  on  Gaunt 's  embattled 

pile, 
And  the  red  glare  on  Skiddaw  roused  the  burghers  of  Carlisle. 
Thomas  Babinglon  Macatday  [1800-1859] 


"GOD   SAVE  ELIZABETH!" 

Let  them  come,  come  never  so  proudly, 

O'er  the  green  waves  as  giants  ride; 
Silver  clarions  menacing  loudly, 

"All  the  Spains"  on  their  banners  wide; 
High  on  deck  of  the  gilded  galleys 

Our  light  sailors  they  scorn  below: — 
We  will  scatter  them,  plague,  and  shatter  them, 
Till  their  flag  hauls  down  to  their  foe! 
For  our  oath  we  swear 
By  the  name  we  bear. 
By  England's  Queen,  and  England  free  and  fair,- 
Her's  ever  and  her's  still,  come  life,  come  death! 
God  save  Elizabeth! 

Sidonia,  Recalde,  and  Leyva 

Watch  from  their  bulwarks  in  swarthy  scorn, 
Lords  and  Princes  by  Philip's  favor; — 

We  by  birthright  are  noble  born! 
Freemen  born  of  the  blood  of  freemen: 

Sons  of  Cregy  and  Flodden  are  we! 
We  shall  sunder  them,  fire,  and  plunder  them; 

English  boats  on  the  English  sea! 


2374  Poems  of  History 

Drake  and  Frobisher,  Hawkins  and  Howard,  '":T 

Raleigh,  Cavendish,  Cecil,  and  Brooke, 
Hang  Hke  wasps  by  the  ilagships  towered. 

Sting  their  way  through  the  thrice-piled  oak! 
Let  them  range  their  seven-mile  crescent, 

Giant  galleons,  canvas  wide! 
Ours  will  harry  them,  board,  and  carry  them, 

Plucking  the  plumes  of  the  Spanish  pride. 

Has  God  risen  in  wrath  and  scattered? 

Have  His  tempests  smote  them  in  scorn? 
Past  the  Orcades,  dumb  and  tattered, 

'Mong  sea-beasts  do  they  drift  forlorn? 
We  were  as  lions  hungry  for  battle; 

God  has  made  our  battle  His  own! 
God  has  scattered  them,  sunk,  and  shattered  them: 
Give  the  glory  to  Him  alone! 
While  our  oath  we  swear 
By  the  name  we  bear. 
By  England's  Queen,  and  England  free  and  fair, — 
Her's  ever  and  her's  still,  come  life,  come  death! 
God  save  Elizabeth! 

Francis  Turner  Palgrave  [1824-1897] 


IVRY 

[march  14,  1590] 

Now  glory  to  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  from  whom  all  glories  are! 

And  glory  to  our  Sovereign  Liege,  King  Henry  of  Navarre! 

Now  let  there  be  the  merry  sound  of  music  and  of  dance, 

Through  thy  corn-fields  green,  and  sunny  vines,  oh  pleasant 
land  of  France! 

And  thou,  Rochelle,  our  own  Rochelle,  proud  city  of  the 
waters. 

Again  let  rapture  light  the  eyes  of  all  thy  mourning  daugh- 
ters. 

As  thou  wert  constant  in  our  ills,  be  joyous  in  our  joy; 

For  cold,  and  stiff,  and  still  are  they  who  wrought  thy  walls 
annoy. 


Ivry  2375 

Hurrah!  hurrah!  a  single  field  hath  turned  the  chance  of  war. 
Hurrah!  hurrah!  for  Ivry,  and  Henry  of  Navarre. 

Oh!  how  our  hearts  were  beating,  when,  at  the  dawn  of  day, 
We  saw  the  army  of  the  League  drawn  out  in  long  array; 
With  all  its  priest-led  citizens,  and  all  its  rebel  peers, 
And   Appenzel's    stout    infantry,    and    Egmont's    Flemish 

spears. 
There  rode  the  brood  of  false  Lorraine,  the  curses  of  our  land; 
And  dark  Mayenne  was  in  the  midst,  a  truncheon  in  his 

hand; 
And,  as  we  looked  on  them,  we  thought  of  Seine's  empurpled 

flood. 
And  good  Coligni's  hoary  hair  all  dabbled  with  his  blood; 
And  we  cried  unto  the  living  God,  who  rules  the  fate  of  war, 
To  fight  for  His  own  holy  name,  and  Henry  of  Navarre. 

The  King  is  come  to  marshal  us,  in  all  his  armor  dressed; 
And  he  has  bound  a  snow-white  plume  upon  his  gallant  crest. 
He  looked  upon  his  people,  and  a  tear  was  in  his  eye; 
He  looked  upon  the  traitors,  and  his  glance  was  stern  and 

high. 
Right  graciously  he  smiled  on  us,  as  rolled  from  wing  to  wing, 
Down  all  our  line,  a  deafening  shout:  "God  save  our  Lord 

the  King!" 
"And  if  my  standard-bearer  fall,  as  fall  full  well  he  may, 
For  never  saw  I  promise  yet  of  such  a  bloody  fray. 
Press  where  ye  see  my  white  plume  shine,  amidst  the  ranks 

of  war, 
And  be  your  orifiamme  to-day  the  helmet  of  Navarre." 

Hurrah!  the  foes  arc  moving.    Hark  to  the  mingled  din. 
Of  fife,  and  steed,  and  trump,  and  drum,  and  roaring  culverin. 
The  fiery  Duke  is  pricking  fast  across  Saint  Andre's  plain, 
With  all  the  hireling  chivalry  of  Guelders  and  Almayne.      ^I 
Now  by  the  lips  of  those  ye  love,  fair  gentlemen  of  France, 
Charge  for  the  golden  lilies, — upon  them  with  the  lance! 
A  thousand  spurs  are  striking  deep,  a  thousand  spears  in  rest, 
A  thousand  knights  are  pressing  cloee  behind  the  snow-white 
crest; 


121^  Poems  of  History 

And  in  they  burst,  and  on  they  ruslied,  while,  hke  a  guiding 

star. 
Amidst  the  thickest  carnage  bhized  the  helmet  of  Navarre. 

Now,  God  be  praised,  the  day  is  ours.   Mayenne  hath  turned 

his  rein; 
D'Aumale  hath  cried  for  quarter;  the  Flemish  count  is  slain. 
Their  ranks  are  breaking  like  thin  clouds  before  a  Biscay  gale; 
The  field  is  heaped  with  bleeding  steeds,  and  flags,  and 

cloven  mail. 
And  then  we  thought  on  vengeance,  and,  all  along  our  van, 
"Remember  Saint  Bartholomew'"  was  passed  from  man  to 

man. 
But  out  spake  gentle  Henry,  "No  Frenchman  is  my  foe: 
Down,  down  with  every  foreigner,  but  let  your  brethren 

go." 
Oh!  was  there  ever  such  a  knight,  in  friendship  or  in  war. 
As  our  Sovereign  Lord,  King  Henry,  the  soldier  of  Navarre? 

Right  well  fought  all  the  Frenchmen  who  fought  for  France 
to-day; 

And  many  a  lordly  banner  God  gave  them  for  a  prey. 

But  we  of  the  religion  have  borne  us  best  in  fight; 

And  the  good  Lord  of  Rosny  hath  ta'en  the  cornet  white. 

Our  own  true  Maximilian  the  cornet  white  hath  ta'en. 

The  cornet  white  with  crosses  black,  the  flag  of  false  Lor- 
raine.     ^1  ,,f„,,,r  /,r 

Up  with  it  high;  unfurl  it  wide;  that  all  the  host  may  know 

How  God  hath  humbled  the  proud  house  which  wrought  His 
Church  such  woe. 

Then  on  the  ground,  while  trumpets  sound  their  loudest 
point  of  war, 

Fling  the  red  shreds,  a  footcloth  meet  for  Henry  of  Navarre. 

Ho!  maidens  of  Vienna;  ho!  matrons  of  Lucerne; 

Weep,  weep,  and  rend  your  hair  for  those  who  never  shall 
return. 

Ho!  Philip,  send,  for  charity,  thy  Mexican  pistoles, 

That  Antwerp  monks  may  sing  a  mass  for  thy  poor  spear- 
men's souls. 


The  "Revenge"  -377 

Ho!  gallant  nobles  of  the  League,  look  ihit  your  arms  be 
bright; 

Ho!  burghers  of  St.  Genevieve,  keep  watch  and  ward  to- 
night; 

For  our  God  hath  crushed  the  tyrant,  our  God  hath  raised 
the  slave, 

And  mocked  the  counsel  of  the  wise,  and  the  valor  of  the 
brave. 

Then  glory  to  His  holy  name,  from  whom  all  glories  are; 

And  glory  to  our  Sovereign  Lord,  King  Henry  of  Navarre! 
Thomas  Babington  Macaiday  [1800-1859J 


THE   "REVENGE" 

A  BALLAD  OF  THE  FLEET  [SEPTEMBER,   1591] 

At  Floras  in  the  Azores  Sir  Richard  Grenville  lay. 

And  a  pinnace,  like  a  fluttered  bird,  came  flying  from  far 

away : 
"Spanish  ships  of  war  at  sea!  wc  have  sighted  fifty-three!" 
Then  sware  Lord  Thomas  Howard:  "'Fore  God  I  am  no 

coward ; 
But  I  cannot  meet  them  here,  for  my  ships  are  out  of  gear, 
And  the  half  my  men  are  sick.    I  must  fly,  but  follow  quick. 
We  are  six  ships  of  the  line;  can  we  fight  with  fift3'-three?" 

Then  spake  Sir  Richard  Grenville:  "I  know  you  are   no 

coward ; 
You  fly  them  for  a  moment  to  fight  with  them  again. 
But  I've  ninety  men  and  more  that  are  lying  sick  ashore. 
I  should  count  myself  the  coward  if  I  left  them,  my  Lord 

Howard, 
To  these  Inquisition  dogs  and  the  devildoms  of  Spain." 

So  Lord  Howard  passed  away  with  five  ships  of  war  that 

day, 
Till  he  melted  like  a  cloud  in  the  silent  summer  heaven; 
But  Sir  Richard  bore  in  hand  all  his  sick  men  from  the  land 
Very  carefully  and  slow, 
Men  of  Bidcford  in  Devon, 


2378  Poems  of  History 

And  we  laid  them  on  the  ballast  down  below; 

For  we  brought  them  all  aboard, 

And  they  blessed  him  in  their  pain,  that  they  were  not  left 

to  Spain, 
To  the  thumbscrew  and  the  stake,  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord. 

He  had  only  a  hundred  seamen  to  work  the  ship  and  to  fight, 
And  he  sailed  away  from  Floras  till  the  Spaniard  came  in 

sight, 
With  his  huge  sea-castles  heaving  upon  the  weather  bow. 
"Shall  we  fight  or  shall  we  fiy? 
Good  Sir  Richard,  tell  us  now, 
For  to  fi-ght  is  but  to  die! 

There'll  be  little  of  us  left  by  the  time  this  sun  be  set." 
And  Sir  Richard  said  again:  "We  be  all  good  English  men. 
Let  us  bang  these  dogs  of  Seville,  the  children  of  the  devil. 
For  I  never  turned  my  back  upon  Don  or  devil  yet." 

Sir  Richard  spoke  and  he  laughed,  and  we  roared  a  hurrah, 

and  so 
The  little  Revenge  ran  on  sheer  into  the  heart  of  the  foe, 
With  her  hundred  fighters  on  deck,  and  her  ninety  sick  below; 
For  half  of  their  fleet  to  the  right  and  half  to  the  left  were 

seen, 
And  the  little  Revenge  ran  on  through  the  long  sea-lane 

between. 

Thousands  of  their  soldiers  looked  down  from  their  decks 

and  laughed, 
Thousands  of  their  seamen  made  mock  at  the  mad  little  craft 
Running  on  and  on,  till  delayed 
By  their  mountain-like  San  Philip  that,  of  fifteen  hundred 

tons, 
And  up-shadowing  high  above  us  with  her  yawning  tiers  of 

guns. 
Took  the  breath  from  our  sails,  and  we  stayed. 

And  while  now  the  great  San  Philip  hung  above  us  like  a  cloud 

Whence  the  thunderbolt  will  fall 

Long  and  loud, 

Four  galleons  drew  away 

From  the  Spanish  fleet  that  day, 


The  "Revenge"  2379 

And  two  upon  the  larboard  and  two  upon  the  starboard  lay, 
And  the  battle-thunder  broke  from  them  all. 

But  anon  the  great  San  Philip,  she  bethought  herself  and 

went, 
Having  that  within  her  womb  that  had  left  her  ill  content; 
And  the  rest  they  came  aboard  us,  and  they  fought  us  hand 

to  hand, 
For  a  dozen  times  they  came  with  their  pikes  and  muscjue- 

teers, 
And  a  dozen  times  we  shook  'em  ofT  as  a  dog  that  shakes  his 

ears 
When  he  leaps  from  the  water  to  the  land. 

And  the  sun  went  down,  and  the  stars  came  out  far  over 

the  summer  sea. 
But  never  a  moment  ceased  the  fight  of  the  one  and  the 

fifty- three. 
Ship  after  ship,  the  whole  night  long,  their  high-built  galleons 

came, 
Ship  after  ship,  the  whole  night  long,  drew  back  with  her 

dead  and  her  shame. 
For  some  were  sunk  and  many  were  shattered,  and  so  could 

fight  us  no  more — 
God  of  battles,  was  ever  a  battle  like  this  in  the  world  before? 

For  he  said,  "Fight  on!  fight  on!" 

Though  his  vessel  was  all  but  a  wreck; 

And  it  chanced  that,  when  half  of  the  short  summer  night 

was  gone, 
With  a  grisly  wound  to  be  dressed  he  had  left  the  deck, 
But  a  bullet  struck  him  that  was  dressing  it  suddenly  dead, 
And  himself  he  was  wounded  again  in  the  side  and  the  head, 
And  he  said,  "Fight  on!  fight  on!" 

And  the  night  went  down,  and  the  sun  smiled  out  far  over 

the  summer  sea. 
And  the  Spanish  fleet  with  broken  sides  lay  round  us  all  in  a 

ring; 
But  they  dared  not  touch  us  again,  for  they  feared  that  we 

still  could  sting. 


2380  Poems  of  History 

So  they  watched  what  the  end  would  be.  ■■! 

And  we  had  not  fought  them  in  vain, 

But  in  perilous  phght  were  we, 

Seeing  forty  of  our  poor  hundred  were  slain,  'ff 

And  half  of  the  rest  of  us  maimed  for  life 

In  the  crash  of  the  cannonades  and  the  desperate  strife; 

And  the  sick  men  down  in  the  hold  were  most  of  them  stark 

and  cold. 
And  the  pikes  were  all  broken  or  bent,  and  the  powder  was 

all  of  it  spent ; 
And  the  masts  and  the  rigging  were  lying  over  the  side;  ^■^'■ 
But  Sir  Richard  cried  in  his  English  pride, 
"We  have  fought  such  a  fight  for  a  day  and  a  night 
As  may  never  be  fought  again! 
We  have  won  great  glory,  my  men! 
And  a  day  less  or  more 
At  sea  or  ashore, 
We  die — does  it  matter  when? 
Sink  me  the  ship,  IVIaster  Gunner — sink  her,  split  her  in 

twain! 
Fall  into  the  hands  of  God,  not  into  the  hands  of  Spain!" 

And  the  gunner  said,  "Ay,  ay,"  but  the  seamen  made  re- 
ply: 
"We  have  children,  we  have  wives, 
And  the  Lord  hath  spared  our  lives. 

We  will  make  the  Spaniard  promise,  if  we  yield,  to  let  us  go; 
We  shall  live  to  fight  again  and  to  strike  another  blow." 
And  the  lion  there  lay  dying,  and  they  yielded  to  the  foe. 

And  the  stately  Spanish  men  to  their  flagship  bore  him  then, 
Where  they  laid  him  by  the  mast,  old  Sir  Richard  caught  at 

last,  ,  t^ 

And  they  praised  him  to  his  face  with  their  courtly  foreign 

grace ; 
But  he  rose  upon  their  decks,  and  he  cried: 
"I  have  fought  for  Queen  and  Faith  like  a  valiant  man  and 

true; 
I  have  only  done  my  duty  as  a  man  is  bound  to  do. 
With  a  joyful  spirit  I  Sir  Richard  Grenville  die!" 
And  he  fell  upon  their  decks,  and  he  died. 


The  Song  of  the  Spanish   Main     2381 

And  they  stared  at  the  dead  that  had  been  so  vaUant  and 

true, 
And  had  holden  the  power  and  glory  of  Spain  so  cheap 
That  he  dared  her  with  one  Uttle  ship  and  his  Enghsh  few; 
Was  he  devil  or  man?  He  was  devil  for  aught  they  knew, 
But  they  sank  his  body  with  honor  down  into  the  deep. 
And  they  manned  the  Revenge  with  a  swarthier  alien  crew. 
And  away  she  sailed  with  her  loss  and  longed  for  her  own; 
When  a  wind  from  the  lands  they  had  ruined  awoke  from 

sleep,  ' 

And  the  water  began  to  heave  and  the  weather  to  moan, 
And  or  ever  that  evening  ended  a  great  gale  blew, 
And  a  wave  like  the  wave  that  is  raised  by  an  earthquake 

grew. 
Till  it  smote  on  their  hulls  and  their  sails  and  their  masts  and 

their  flags. 
And  the  whole  sea  plunged  and  fell  on  the  shot-shattered 

navy  of  Spain, 
And  the  little  Revenge  herself  went  down  by  the  island  crags 
To  be  lost  evermore  in  the  main. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 

THE  SONG  OF  THE   SPANISH  MAIN;;  " 

Out  in  the  south,  when  the  day  is  done, 

And  the  gathered  winds  go  free. 
Where  golden-sanded  rivers  run. 
Fair  islands  fade  in  the  setting  sun, 
And  the  great  ships  stagger,  one  by  one, 

Up  from  the  windy  sea. 

Out  in  the  .south,  where  a  twilight  shroud 

Hangs  o'er  the  ocean's  rim, 
Sail  on  sail,  like  a  floating  cloud. 
Galleon,  brigantine,  cannon-browed, 
Rich  from  the  Indies,  homeward  crowd. 

Singing  a  Spanish  hymn. 

Out  in  the  south,  when  the  sun  has  set 

And  the  lightning  flickers  pale. 
The  cannon  bellow  their  steady  threat, 


1^82  Poems  of  History  '  ' 

The  ships  grind,  all  in  a  crimson  sweat, 
And  hoarse  throats  call,  "Have  ye  stricken  yet?" 
Across  the  quarter-rail.  •^^- 

n; 

Out  in  the  south,  in  the  dead  of  night. 

When  I  hear  the  thunder  speak, 
'Tis  the  Englishmen  in  their  pride  and  might 
Mad  with  glory  and  blind  with  fight, 
Locked  with  the  Spaniards,  left  and  right, 

Fighting  them  cheek  to  cheek. 

Out  in  the  south,  when  the  dawn's  pale  light 

Walks  cold  on  the  beaten  shore, 
And  the  mists  of  night,  like  clouds  of  fight, 
Silvery  violet,  blinding  bright. 
Drift  in  glory  from  height  to  height 

Where  the  white-tailed  eagles  soar; 

There  comes  a  song  through  the  salt  and  spray, 

Blood-kin  to  the  ocean's  roar, 
"All  day  long  down  Florez  way 
Richard  Grenville  stands  at  bay. 
Come  and  take  him  if  ye  may!" 

Then  hush,  forevermore. 

John  Bennett  [1865- 


HENRY  HUDSON'S   QUEST 
[1609] 

Out  from  the  harbor  of  Amsterdam 

The  Half  Moon  turned  her  prow  to  sea; 
The  coast  of  Norway  dropped  behind, 

Yet  Northward  still  kept  she 
Through  the  drifting  fog  and  the  driving  snow, 
Where  never  before  man  dared  to  go: 
"O  Pilot,  shall  we  find  the  strait  that  leads  to  the  Eastern 

Sea?" 
"A  waste  of  ice  before  us  lies — we  must  turn  back,"  said  he. 


Henry   Hudson's   Quest  2383 

Westward  they  steered  their  tiny  bark, 
Westward  through  weary  weeks  they  sped, 

Till  the  cold  gray  strand  of  a  stranger-land 
Loomed  through  the  mist  ahead. 

League  after  league  they  hugged  the  coast, 

And  their  Captain  never  left  his  post: 

"O  Pilot,  see  you  yet  the  strait  that  leads  to  the  Eastern 
Sea?" 

"I  see  but  the  rocks  and  the  barren  shore;  no  strait  is 
there,"  quoth  he. 

They  sailed  to  the  North — they  sailed  to  the  South — 

And  at  last  they  rounded  an  arm  of  sand 
Which  held  the  sea  from  a  harbor's  mouth— 

The  loveliest  in  the  land; 
They  kept  their  course  across  the  bay, 
And  the  shore  before  them  fell  away: 
"O  Pilot,  see  you  not  the  strait  that  leads  to  the  Eastern 

sea?" 
"Hold   the  rudder  true!    Praise  Christ  Jesu!  the  strait  is 
here,"  said  he. 

Onward  they  glide  with  wind  and  tide, 

Past  marshes  gray  and  crags  sun-kissed; 
They  skirt  the  sills  of  green-clad  hills, 

And  meadows  white  with  mist — 
But  alas!  the  hope  and  the  brave,  brave  dream! 
For  rock  and  shallow  bar  the  stream: 
"O  Pilot,  can  this  be  the  strait  that  leads  to  the  Eastern 

Sea?" 
"Nay,  Captain,  nay;  'tis  not  this  way;  turn  back  we  must," 
said  he. 

Full  sad  was  Hudson's  heart  as  he  turned 

The  Half  Moon's  prow  to  the  South  once  more; 

He  saw  no  beauty  in  crag  or  hill, 
No  beauty  in  curving  shore; 

For  they  shut  him  away  from  that  fabled  main 

He  sought  his  whole  life  long, — in  vain: 


-3^4  Poems  of  History 

"O   Pilot,  say,   can   there  be  a  strait   that  leads   to  the 

Eastern  Sea?" 
^' God's  crypt  is  sealed!     'Twill  stand  revealed  in  His  own 

good  time,"  quoth  he. 

Burton  Egbert  Stevenson  [1872- 


TO  THE   VIRGINIAN  VOYAGE 

[1611] 

You  brave  heroic  minds. 
Worthy  your  country's  name, 

That  honor  still  pursue; 

Go  and  subdue! 
Whilst  loitering  hinds 
Lurk  here  at  home,  with  shame. 

Britons,  you  stay  too  long: 
Quickly  aboard  bestow  you, 

And  with  a  merry  gale 

Swell  your  stretched  sail, 
With  vows  as  strong 
As  the  winds  that  blow  you. 

Your  course  securely  steer, 
West  and  by  south  forth  keep! 

Rocks,  lee-shores,  nor  shoals, 

When  Eolus  scowls. 
You  need  not  fear. 
So  absolute  the  deep. 

And  cheerfully  at  sea. 
Success  you  still  entice. 

To  get  the  pearl  and  gold, 

And  ours  to  hold 
Virginia,  '""  '  ^''  ' 

Earth's  only  paradise;  ^'^  '"'^'^  ' 

Where  nature  hath  in  store 
Fowl,  venison,  and  fish. 


To  the  Virginian  Voyage  ^3^5 

And  the  fruilful'sl  soil, 

Without  your  toil, 
Three  harvests  more, 
All  greater  than  your  wish 

And  the  ambitious  vine 
Crowns  with  his  purple  mass 

The  cedar  reaching  high 

To  kiss  the  sky, 
The  cypress,  pine. 
And  useful  sassafras; 

To  whom  the  Golden  Age 
Still  nature's  laws  doth  give, 

No  other  cares  attend. 

But  them  to  defend  ■    ■ 

From  winter's  rage. 
That  long  there  doth  not  live. 

When  as  the  luscious  smell 
Of  that  delicious  land. 

Above  the  seas  that  flows, 

The  clear  wind  throws. 
Your  hearts  to  swell 
Approaching  the  dear  strand; 

In  kenning  of  the  shore 
(Thanks  to  God  first  given) 

O  you  the  happiest  men, 

Be  frolic  then! 
Let  cannons  roar, 
Frighting  the  wide  heaven; 

And  in  regions  far, 

Such  heroes  bring  j'e  forth 

As  those  from  whom  we  came, 

And  plant  our  name 
Under  that  star 
Not  known  unto  our  North: 


2j86  Poems  of  History 


And  as  there  plenty  grows 
Of  laurel  everywhere, — 

Apollo's  sacred  tree, — 

You  it  may  see, 
A  poet's  brow 
To  crown,  that  may  sing  there. 

Thy  Voyages  attend 
Industrious  Hakluyt, 

Whose  reading  shall  inflame 

Men  to  seek  fame, 
And  much  commend 
To  after-times  thy  wit. 

Michael  Drayton  [1563-1631"! 

"THE  WORD   OF   GOD   TO  LEYDEN  CAME" 

[august  15,  1620] 

The  word  of  God  to  Leyden  came, 

Dutch  town  by  Zuyder  Zee: 
Rise  up,  my  children  of  no  name, 

My  kings  and  priests  to  be. 
There  is  an  empire  in  the  West, 

Which  I  will  soon  unfold ; 
A  thousand  harvests  in  her  breast. 

Rocks  ribbed  with  iron  and  gold. 

Rise  up,  my  children,  time  is  ripe! 

Old  things  are  passed  away. 
Bishops  and  kings  from  earth  I  wipe; 

Too  long  they've  had  their  day. 
A  little  ship  have  I  prepared 

To  bear  you  o'er  the  seas; 
And  in  your  souls,  my  will  declared, 

Shah  grow  by  slow  degrees. 

Beneath  my  throne  the  martyrs  cry: 
I  hear  their  voice,  How  long? 

It  mingles  with  their  praises  high, 
And  with  their  victor  song. 


The   Landing  of  the   Pilgrim   Fathers       2387 

The  thing  they  longed  and  waited  for. 

But  died  without  the  sight; 
So,  this  shall  be!    I  wrong  abhor, 

The  world  I'll  now  set  right. 

Leave,  then,  the  hammer  and  the  loom, 

You've  other  work  to  do; 
For  Freedom's  commonwealth  there's  room, 

And  you  shall  build  it  too. 
I'm  tired  of  bishops  and  their  pride, 

I'm  tired  of  kings  as  well; 
Henceforth  I  take  the  people's  side, 

And  with  the  people  dwell. 

Tear  off  the  mitre  from  the  priest. 

And  from  the  king,  his  crown; 
Let  all  my  captives  be  released; 

Lift  up,  whom  men  cast  down. 
Their  pastors  let  the  people  choose, 

And  choose  their  rulers  too; 
Whom  they  select,  I'll  not  refuse. 

But  bless  the  work  they  do. 

The  Pilgrims  rose,  at  this,  God's  word, 

And  sailed  the  wintry  seas: 
With  their  own  flesh  nor  blood  conferred. 

Nor  thought  of  wealth  or  ease. 
They  left  the  towers  of  Leyden  town, 

They  left  the  Zuyder  Zee; 
And  where  they  cast  their  anchor  down, 

Rose  Freedom's  realm  to  be. 

Jeremiah  Eames  Rankin  [1828-1004] 


THE   LANDING  OF  THE   PILGRIM   FATHERS 

[NOVEMBER    IQ,    1620] 

The  breaking  waves  dashed  high 
On  a  stern  and  rock-bound  coast. 

And  the  woods,  against  a  stormy  sky. 
Their  giant  branches  tossed; 


ojSS  Poems  of  History  !    siiT 

And  the  heavy  night  hung  dark 

The  hills  and  waters  o'er, 
When  a  band  of  exiles  moored  their  bark 

On  the  wild  New  England  shore. 

Not  as  the  conqueror  comes, 

They,  the  true-hearted,  came: 
Not  with  the  roU  of  the  stirring  drums, 

And  the  trumpet  that  sings  of  fame; 

Not  as  the  %ing  come, 

In  silence  and  in  fear, — ■ 
They  shook  the  depths  of  the  desert's  gloom 

With  their  hymns  of  lofty  cheer. 

Amidst  the  storm  they  sang, 

And  the  stars  heard,  and  the  sea; 
And  the  sounding  aisles  of  the  dim  woods  rang 

To  the  anthem  of  the  free! 

The  ocean-eagle  soared 

From  his  nest  by  the  white  wave's  foam, 
And  the  rocking  pines  of  the  forest  roared; 

This  was  their  welcome  home' 

There  were  men  with  hoary  hair 

Amidst  that  pilgrim-band; 
Why  had  they  come  to  wither  there, 

Away  from  their  childhood's  land? 

There  was  woman's  fearless  eye, 

Lit  by  her  deep  love's  truth; 
There  was  manhood's  brow,  serenely  high, 

And  the  fiery  heart  of  youth. 

What  sought  they  thus  afar? 

Bright  jewels  of  the  mine? 
The  wealth  of  seas,  the  spoils  of  war? — 

They  sought  a  faith's  pure  shrine! 


The   Mayflower  2389 

Aye,  call  it  holy  ground,  ' 

The  soil  where  tirst  they  trod! 

They  have  left  unstained  what  there  they  found- 
Freedom  to  worship  God! 

Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans  [i793->S3s] 

THE  MAYFLOWER 

[DECEMBER    21,    1620] 

Down  in  the  bleak  December  bay 
The  ghostly  vessel  stands  away; 
Her  spars  and  halyards  white  with  ice, 
Under  the  dark  December  skies.  ' 

A  hundred  souls,  in  company. 
Have  left  the  vessel  pensively, — 
Have  reached  the  frosty  desert  there, 
And  touched  it  with  the  knees  of  prayer. 

And  now  the  day  begins  to  dip, 
The  night  begins  to  lower 

Over  the  bay,  and  over  the  ship 
Mayflower. 

Neither  the  desert  nor  the  sea 
Imposes  rites:  their  prayers  are  free; 
Danger  and  toil  the  wild  imposes. 
And  thorns  must  grow  before  the  roses. 
And  who  are  these? — and  what  distress 
The  savage-acred  wilderness 
On  mother,  maid,  and  child  may  bring, 
Beseems  them  for  a  fearful  thing; 

For  now  the  day  begins  to  dip. 
The  night  begins  to  lower 

Over  the  bay,  and  over  the  ship 
IMayflower. 

But  Carver  leads  (in  heart  and  health 
A  hero  of  the  commonwealth) 
The  axes  that  the  camp  requires. 
To  build  the  lodge,  and  heap  the  fires. 
And  Standish  from  his  warlike  store 
Arrays  his  men  along  the  shore, 


L390  Poems  of  History 

Distributes  weapons  resonant,    oil  ii  iiu)  ,ovA 
And  dons  his  harness  militant;  ,rf'"  fioa  ariT 

For  now  the  day  begins  to  dip,       /nrf  vorIT 
The  night  begins  to  lower  M.'hiTf'T 

i>  :>  -       Over  the  bay,  and  over  the  ship 
Mayflower; 

And  Rose,  his  wife,  unlocks  a  chest — 
She  sees  a  Book,  in  vellum  dressed, 
She  drops  a  tear,  and  kisses  the  tome, 
Thinking  of  England  and  of  home : 
Might  they — the  Pilgrims,  there  and  then 
Ordained  to  do  the  work  of  men — 
Have  seen,  in  visions  of  the  air. 
While  pillowed  on  the  breast  of  prayer 

(When  now  the  day  began  to  dip. 
The  night  began  to  lower 

Over  the  bay,  and  over  the  ship 
Mayflower) , 

The  Canaan  of  their  wilderness , ,  ,   ,  ,- 

-'1-  <_jjia 

A  boundless  empire  of  success; 

And  seen  the  years  of  future  nights      '    ■' 

Jewelled  with  myriad  household  lights;    ' 

And  seen  the  honey  hll  the  hive; 

And  seen  a  thousand  ships  arrive; 

And  heard  the  wheels  of  travel  go ; 

It  would  have  cheered  a  thought  of  woe. 

When  now  the  day  began  to  dip,  ^ 

The  night  began  to  lower  loaaaa 

Over  the  bay,  and  over  the  ship    '"'^ 
Mayflower. 

Erastus  Wokoti  Ellsworth  [1822-1902] 


THE  PILGRIM   FATHERS  "*  ^"^ 

The  Pilgrim  Fathers, — where  are  theyS/IT 
The  waves  that  brought  them  o'errd  oT 

Still  roll  in  the  bay,  and  throw  their  spray 
As  they  break  along  the  shore; 


.-{O 


The   Pilgrim   Fathers  2391 

Still  roll  in  the  bay,  as  they  rolled  that  day 

When  the  Mayflower  moored  below; 
When  the  sea  around  was  black  with  storms, 

And  white  the  shore  with  snow. 

The  mists  that  wrapped  the  Pilgrim's  sleep 

Still  brood  upon  the  tide; 
And  his  rocks  yet  keep  their  watch  by  the  deep 

To  stay  its  waves  of  pride. 
But  the  snow-white  sail  that  he  gave  to  the  gale, 

When  the  heavens  looked  dark,  is  gone,— 
"■bfi  As  an  angel's  wing  through  an  opening  cloud 

Is  seen,  and  then  withdrawn. 

The  pilgrim  exile, — sainted  name! 

The  hill  whose  icy  brow 
Rejoiced,  when  he  came,  in  the  morning's  flame, 

In  the  morning's  flame  burns  now. 
And  the  moon's  cold  light,  as  it  lay  that  night 

On  the  hillside  and  the  sea, 
StiU  lies  where  he  laid  his  houseless  head, — 

But  the  Pilgrim, — where  is  he? 

The  Pilgrim  Fathers  are  at  rest: 

When  summer's  throned  on  high, 
And  the  world's  warm  breast  is  in  verdure  dressed, 

Go,  stand  on  the  hill  where  they  lie. 
The  earliest  ray  of  the  golden  day 

On  that  hallowed  spot  is  cast; 
And  the  evening  sun,  as  he  leaves  the  world, 

Looks  kindly  on  that  spot  last. 

The  Pilgrim  spirit  has  not  fled: 

It  walks  in  noon's  broad  Hght; 
And  it  watches  the  bed  of  the  glorious  dead. 

With  the  holy  stars,  by  night. 
It  watches  the  bed  of  the  brave  who  have  bled, 

And  still  guard  this  ice-bound  shore, 
Till  the  waves  of  the  bay,  where  the  Mayflower  lay, 

Shall  foam  and  freeze  no  more. 

John  Pier ponl  [1785-1866] 


23 9 2  Poems  of  History 


THE  BATTLE  OF  NASEBY 

by  obadiah  bind-their-kings-in-chains-and-their-no- 
bles-with-links-of-iron;  sergeant  in  ireton's  regi- 
ment. 

[JUNE   14,   1645] 

Oh,  wherefore  come  ye  forth,  in  triumph  from  the  North, 
With  your  hands,  and  your  feet,  and  your  raiment  all  red? 

And  wherefore  doth  your  rout  send  forth  a  joyous  shout? 
And  whence  be  the  grapes  of  the  wine-press  that  ye  tread? 

Oh,  evil  was  the  root,  and  bitter  was  the  fruit. 

And  crimson  was  the  juice  of  the  vintage  that  we  trod; 

For  we  trampled  on  the  throng  of  the  haughty  and  the  strong. 
Who  sate  in  the  high  places  and  slew  the  saints  of  God. 

It  was  about  the  noon  of  a  glorious  day  of  June, 

That  we  saw  their  banners  dance  and  their  cuirasses  shine. 

And  the  Man  of  Blood  was  there,  with  his  long  essenced 
hair. 
And  Astley,  and  Sir  Marmaduke,  and  Rupert  of  the  Rhine. 

Like  a  servant  of  the  Lord,  with  his  Bible  and  his  sword. 
The  General  rode  along  us  to  form  us  for  the  fight; 

When  a  murmuring  sound  broke  out,  and  swelled  into  a 
shout 
Among  the  godless  horsemen  upon  the  tyraat.'a  rigj^t. 

And  hark !  like  the  roar  of  the  billows  on  the  shore, 

The  cry  of  battle  rises  along  their  charging  line: 
For  God!  for  the  Cause!  for  the  Church!  for  the  Laws! 

For  Charles,  King  of  England,  and  Rupert  .o£  th0„Rhine! 

\^  dim 
The  furious  German  comes,  with  his  clarions  and  his  drums, 

His  bravoes  of  Alsatia,  and  pages  of  Whitehall; 
They  are  bursting  on  our  flanks!     Grasp  your  pikes!:  ■•  (Close 
your  ranks! 

For  Rupert  never  comes  but  to  conquer  or  to  fall. 


The   Battle  of  Naseby  2393 

They  are  here!     They  rush  on!     We  are  broken!     We  arc 
9dJ  1  gone! 

Our  left  is  borne  before  them  Hke  stubble  on  the  blast. 

O  Lord,  put  forth  Thy  might!     O  Lord,  defend  the  right! 
.'j.i'Stand  back  to  back,  in  God's  name,  and  fight  it  to  the  last! 

Stout  Skippon  hath  a  wound;  the  centre  hath  given  ground: 

-.,  !,fHark!  hark!  what  means  the  trampling  of  horsemen  on 

our  rear? 

Whose  banner  do  I  see,  boys?     'Tis  he!  thank  God!  'tis  he, 

boys!  ... 

Bear  up  another  minute!     Brave  Oliver  is  here/  y^jj 

Their  heads  all  stooping  low,  their  points  all  in  a  row. 
Like  a  whirlwind  on  the  trees,  like  a  deluge  on  the  dykes. 

Our  cuirassiers  have  burst  on  the  ranks  of  the  Accursed, 
And  at  a  shock  have  scattered  the  forest  of  his  pikes. 

Fast,  fast  the  gallants  ride,  in  some  safe  nook  to  hide 
Their  coward  heads,  predestined  to  rot  on  Temple  Bar; 

And  he, — he  turns,  he  flies: — shame  on  those  cruel  eyes 
That  bore  to  look  on  torture,  and  dare  not  look  on  war! 

Ho!  comrades,  scour  the  plain;  and,  ere  ye  strip  the  slain, 
First  give  another  stab  to  make  your  search  secure; 

Then  shake  from  sleeves  and  pockets  their  broad-pieces  and 
lockets. 
The  tokens  of  the  wanton,  the  plunder  of  the  poor. 

Fools!  your  doublets  shone  with  gold,  and  your  hearts  were 
gay  and  bold, 

When  you  kissed  your  lily  hands  to  your  lemans  to-day; 
And  to-morrow  shall  the  fox,  from  her  chamber  in  the  rocks, 

Lead  forth  her  tawny  cubs  to  howl  above  the  prey. 

Where  be  your  tongues  that  late  mocked  at  heaven,  and  hell, 
and  fate? 
And  the  fingers  that  once  were  so  busy  with  your  blades  ? 
Your  perfumed  satin  clothes,  your  catches  and  your  oaths, 
Your  stage-plays  and  your  sonnets,  your  diamonds  and 
your  spades? 


2394  Poems  of  History 

Down!  down!  forever  down,  with  the  mitre  and  the  crown! 

With  the  BeUal  of  the  Court,  and  the  Mammon  of  the 
Pope! 
There  is  woe  in  Oxford  halls;  there  is  wail  in  Durham's  stalls; 

The  Jesuit  smites  his  bosom;  the  Bishop  rends  his  cope. 

And  she  of  the  Seven  Hills  shall  mourn  her  children's  ills, 
And  tremble  when  she  thinks  on  the  edge  of  England's 
sword; 
And  the  kings  of  earth  in  fear  shall  shudder  when  they  hear 
What  the  hand  of  God  hath  wrought  for  the  Houses  and 
the  Word! 

Thomas  Bab'uigton  Macaulay  [1800-185Q] 


THE  EXECUTION  OF   MONTROSE 

[may  21,  1650]  .,.,;.| 

Come  hither,  Evan  Cameron! 

Come,  stand  beside  my  knee: 
I  hear  the  river  roaring  down 

Towards  the  wintry  sea. 
There's  shouting  on  the  mountain-side, 

There's  war  within  the  blast; 
Old  faces  look  upon  me. 

Old  forms  go  trooping  past: 
I  hear  the  pibroch  wailing 

Amidst  the  din  of  fight. 
And  my  dim  spirit  wakes  again 

Upon  the  verge  of  night. 

'Twas  I  that  led  the  Highland  host 

Through  wild  Lochaber's  snows, 
What  time  the  plaided  clans  came  down 

To  battle  with  Montrose. 
I've  told  thee  how  the  Southrons  fell 

Beneath  the  broad  claymore. 
And  how  we  smote  the  Campbell  clan 

By  Inverlochy's  shore. 


The   Execution  of  Montrose       2395 

I've  told  thee  how  we  swept  Dundee, 

And  tamed  the  Lindsays'  pride; 
But  never  have  I  told  thee  yet 

How  the  great  Marquis  died. 

A  traitor  sold  hiin  to  his  foes; —       ■■  htfl 

O  deed  of  deathless  shame! 
I  charge  thee,  boy,  if  e'er  thou  meet 

With  one  of  Assynt's  name — 
Be  it  upon  the  mountain's  side, 

Or  yet  within  the  glen, 
Stand  he  in  martial  gear  alone. 

Or  backed  by  armed  men — 
Face  him,  as  thou  wouldst  face  the  man 

Who  wronged  thy  sire's  renown ; 
Remember  of  what  blood  thou  art, 

And  strike  the  caitiff  down! 

They  brought  him  to  the  Watergate, 

Hard  bound  with  hempen  span, 
As  though  they  held  a  lion  there, 

And  not  a  fenceless  man. 
They  set  him  high  upon  a  cart, — 

The  hangman  rode  below, — 
They  drew  his  hands  behind  his  back, 

And  bared  his  noble  brow. 
Then,  as  a  hound  is  slipped  from  leash, 

They  cheered  the  common  throng, 
And  blew  the  note  with  yell  and  shout, 

And  bade  him  pass  along. 

It  would  have  made  a  brave  man's  heart 

Grow  sad  and  sick  that  day. 
To  watch  the  keen  malignant  eyes  ii 

Bent  down  on  that  array. 
There  stood  the  Whig  west-country  lords, 

In  balcony  and  bow; 
There  sat  their  gaunt  and  withered  dames, 

And  their  daughters  all  a-row. 


239^  Poems  of  History        ; 

And  every  open  window 

Was  full  as  full  might  be 
With  black-robed  Covenanting  carles,    '' 

That  goodly  sport  to  see! 

But  when  he  came,  though  pale  and  wan, 

He  looked  so  great  and  high, 
So  noble  was  his  manly  front. 

So  calm  his  steadfast  eye, 
The  rabble  rout  forebore  to  shout. 

And  each  man  held  his  breath. 
For  well  they  knew  the  hero's  soul 

Was  face  to  face  with  death. 
And  then  a  mournful  shudder 

Through  all  the  people  crept. 
And  some  that  came  to  scofT  at  him 

Now  turned  aside  and  wept. 

But  onwards — always  onwards, 

In  silence  and  in  gloom. 
The  dreary  pageant  labored, 

Till  it  reached  the  house  of  doom. 
Then  first  a  woman's  voice  was  heard 

In  jeer  and  laughter  loud, 
And  an  angry  cry  and  a  hiss  arose 

From  the  heart  of  the  tossing  crowd: 
Then,  as  the  Graeme  looked  upwards. 

He  saw  the  ugly  smile 
Of  him  who  sold  his  king  for  gold, — 
.  The  master- fiend  Argyle! 

The  Marquis  gazed  a  moment, 

And  nothing  did  he  say. 
But  Argyle's  cheek  grew  ghastly  pale 

And  he  turned  his  eyes  away. 
The  painted  harlot  by  his  side. 

She  shook  through  every  limb, 
For  a  roar  like  thunder  swept  the  street, 

And  hands  were  clenched  at  him: 


The   Execution   of  Montrose       2397 

And  a  Saxon  soldier  cried  aloud, 

"Back,  coward,  from  thy  place! 
For  seven  long  years  thou  hast  not  dared 

To  look  him  in  the  face." 

Had  I  been  there  with  sword  in  hand, 

And  fifty  Camerons  by, 
That  day  through  high  Dunedin's  streets 

Had  pealed  the  slogan-cry. 
Not  all  their  troops  of  trampling  horse, 

Nor  might  of  mailed  men. 
Not  all  the  rebels  in  the  south 

Had  borne  us  backwards  then! 
Or.ce  more  his  foot  on  Highland  heath 

Had  trod  as  free  as  air, 
Or  I,  and  all  who  bore  my  name, 

Been  laid  around  him  there! 

It  might  not  be.    They  placed  him  next 

Within  the  solemn  hall. 
Where  once  the  Scottish  kings  were  throned 

Amidst  their  nobles  all. 
But  there  was  dust  of  vulgar  feet 

On  that  polluted  floor, 
And  perjured  traitors  filled  the  place 

Where  good  men  sate  before. 
With  savage  glee  came  Warriston 

To  read  the  murderous  doom; 
And  then  uprose  the  great  Montrose 

In  the  middle  of  the  room. 

"Now,  by  my  faith  as  belted  knight, 

And  by  the  name  I  bear. 
And  by  the  bright  Saint  Andrew's  cross 

That  waves  above  us  there, 
Yea,  by  a  greater,  mightier  oath — 

And  oh,  that  such  should  be! — 
By  that  dark  stream  of  royal  blood 

That  lies  'twixt  you  and  me,^ 


2398  Poems  of  History 

I  have  not  sought  in  battle-field  / 

A  wreath  of  such  renown, 
Nor  dared  I  hope  on  my  dying  d^y  j^  ^^J  , 

To  win  the  martyr's  crown!    :.>ofoT 

'There  is  a  chamber  far  away 

Where  sleep  the  good  and  brave, 
But  a  better  place  ye  have  named  for  me 

Than  by  my  fathers'  grave. 
For  truth  and  right,  'gainst  treason's  might, 

This  hand  hath  always  striven. 
And  ye  raise  it  up  for  a  witness  still 

In  the  eye  of  earth  and  heaven. 
Then  nail  my  head  on  yonder  tower,     ,  , 

Give  every  town  a  limb, — 
And  God  who  made  shall  gather  themii 

I  go  from  you  to  Him!" 

The  morning  dawned  full  darkly,  :  i 

The  rain  came  flashing  down, 
And  the  jagged  streak  of  the  levin-bolt 

Lit  up  the  gloomy  town: 
The  thunder  crashed  across  the  heaven, 

The  fatal  hour  was  come; 
Yet  aye  broke  in,  with  muffled  beat. 

The  'larum  of  the  drum. 
There  was  madness  on  the  earth, below,, 

And  anger  in  the  sky,         1  b/;i-j  oT 
And  young  and  old,  and  rich  and  poor. 

Came  forth  to  see  him  die. 

Ah,  God!  that  ghastly  gibbet! 

How  dismal  'tis  to  see 
The  great  tall  spectral  skeleton, 

The  ladder  and  the  tree! 
Hark!  hark!  it  is  the  clash  of  arms — 

The  bells  begin  to  toll — 
"He  is  coming!  he  is  coming! 

God's  mercy  on  his  soul!" 


The   Execution  of   Montrose       2399 

One  last  long  peal  of  thunder:    -.  nirfT 

The  clouds  are  cleared  away, 
And  the  glorious  sun  once  more  looks  down 

Amidst  the  dazzling  day. 

"He  is  coming!  he  is  coming!" 

Like  a  bridegroom  from  his  room, 
Came  the  hero  from  his  prison 

To  the  scaffold  and  the  doom. 
There  was  glory  on  his  forehead, 

There  was  luster  in  his  eye. 
And  he  never  walked  to  battle 

More  proudly  than  to  die; 
There  was  color  in  his  visage, 

Though  the  cheeks  of  all  were  wan, 
And  they  marvelled  as  they  saw  him  pass. 

That  great  and  goodly  man ' 

He  mounted  up  the  scaffold, 
H'JJli   And  he  turned  him  to  the  crowd; 
But  they  dared  not  trust  the  people, 

So  he  might  not  speak  aloud. 
But  he  looked  upon  the  heavens, 

And  they  were  clear  and  blue, 
And  in  the  liquid  ether 

The  eye  of  God  shone  through; 
Yet  a  black  and  murky  battlement 

Lay  resting  on  the  hill. 
As  though  the  thunder  slept  within— - 

All  else  was  calm  and  still. 

The  grim  Geneva  ministers 

With  anxious  scowl  drew  near. 
As  you  have  seen  the  ravens  tlock 

Around  the  dying  deer. 
He  would  not  deign  them  word  nor  sign, 
But  alone  he  bent  the  knee, 
J-'"' And  veiled  his  face  for  Christ's  dear  grace 
!•'     Beneath  the  gallows-tree. 


2400  Poems  of  History 

Then  radiant  and  serene  he  rose, 
And  cast  his  cloak  away: 
"  '  "For  he  had  ta'en  his  latest  look 
Of  earth  and  sun  and  day. 

A  beam  of  light  fell  o'er  him, 

Like  a  glory  round  the  shriven, 
And  he  climbed  the  lofty  ladder 

As  it  were  the  path  to  heaven. 
Then  came  a  flash  from  out  the  cloud. 

And  a  stunning  thunder-roll; 
And  no  man  dared  to  look  aloft, 

For  fear  was  on  every  soul. 
There  was  another  heavy  sound, 

A  hush  and  then  a  groan; 
And  darkness  swept  across  the  sky — 

The  work  of  death  was  done! 

William  Edmondstoiine  Aytoun  [1813-1865] 


AN  HORATIAN  ODE  UPON  CROISIWELL'S 
RETURN   FROM   IRELAND 

[1650I 

The  forward  youth  that  would  appear 
Must  now  forsake  his  Muses  dear. 

Nor  in  the  shadows  sing 

His  numbers  languishing. 

'Tis  time  to  leave  the  books  in  dust. 
And  oil  the  unused  armor's  rust, 

Removing  from  the  wall 

The  corselet  of  the  hall. 

So  restless  Cromwell  could  not  cease 
In  the  inglorious  arts  of  peace, 
But  through  adventurous  war 
'"^^  Urged  his  active  star; 

And,  like  the  three-forked  lightning,  first 
Breaking  the  clouds  where  it  was  nursed. 


An   Horatian   Ode  2401 

Did  through  his  own  side       —''rr" 
His  fiery  way  divide; 

For  'tis  all  one  to  courage  high, 
The  emulous,  or  enemy, 

And  with  such,  to  enclose 

Is  more  than  to  oppose; — 

Then  burning  through  the  air  he  went, 

And  palaces  and  temples  rent ; 
And  Cjesar's  head  at  last 
Did  through  his  laurels  blast.       i  --' 

'Tis  madness  to  resist  or  blame 
The  face  of  angry  Heaven's  flame; 

And  if  we  would  speak  true. 

Much  to  the  man  is  due. 

Who,  from  his  private  gardens,  where 
He  lived  reserved  and  austere 

(As  if  his  highest  plot 

To  plant  the  bergamot) , 

Could  by  industrious  valor  climb 

To  ruin  the  great  work  of  time, 
And  cast  the  Kingdoms  old 
Into  another  mould;  ' ' 

Though  Justice  against  Fate  complain. 
And  plead  the  ancient  rights  in  vain — 

But  those  do  hold  or  break 

As  men  are  strong  or  weak — 

Nature,  that  hateth  emptiness, 

Allows  of  penetration  less, 

And  therefore  must  make  room 
Where  greater  spirits  come.  lA 

What  field  of  all  the  civil  war 
Where  his  were  not  the  deepest  scar? 

And  Hampton  shows  what  part 

He  had  of  wiser  art ; 


2402  Poems  of  History 

Where,  twining  subtle  fears  with  hope, 
He  wove  a  net  of  such  a  scope 

That  Charles  himself  might  chase 
To  Caresbrooke's  narrow  case; 

That  thence  the  Royal  actor  borne 
The  tragic  scaffold  might  adorn: 
While  round  the  armed  bands 
Did  clap  their  bloody  hands. 

He  nothing  common  did  or  mean 
Upon  that  memorable  scene, 
But  with  his  keener  eye 
The  axe's  edge  did  try; 

Nor  called  the  gods,  with  vulgar  spite, 
To  vindicate  his  helpless  right; 

But  bowed  his  comely  head 

Down,  as  upon  a  bed. 

This  was  that  memorable  hour 
Which  first  assured  the  forced  power: 
So  when  they  did  design 
The  Capitol's  first  line, 

A  Bleeding  Head,  where  they  begun, 
Did  fright  the  architects  to  run; 
And  yet  in  that  the  State 
,ni)      Foresaw  its  happy  fate! 

And  now  the  Irish  are  ashamed 
To  see  themselves  in  one  year  tamed; 
So  much  one  man  can  do 
That  does  both  act  and  know. 

They  can  affirm  his  praises  best, 
And  have,  though  overcome,  confessed 
How  good  he  is,  how  just 
And  fit  for  highest  trust.  ■    ■ 

Nor  yet  grown  stiffer  with  command, 
But  still  in  the  republic's  hand —  ; 


An   Horatian   Ode  2403 

How  fit  he  is  to  sway 
That  can  so  well  obey! 

He  to  the  Commons'  feet  prjesents 
A  Kingdom  for  his  first  year's  rents, 

And,  what  he  may,  forbears 

His  fame,  to  make  it  theirs:      |jj[X   VIO 

And  has  his  sword  and  spoils  ungirt 

To  lay  them  at  the  pubhc's  skirt.  ./, 

So  when  the  falcon  high  ; 

Falls  heavy  from  the  sky,  i 

She,  having  killed,  no  more  doth  search 
But  on  the  next  green  bough  to  perch; 

Where,  when  he  first  does  lure, 

The  falconer  has  her  sure. 


iol/i 


What  may  not  then  our  Isle  presume, 
While  victory  his  crest  does  plume? 
What  may  not  others  fear. 
If  thus  he  crowns  each  year? 

As  Csesar,  he,  ere  long,  to  Gaul, 
To  Italy  an  Hannibal, 

And  to  all  States  not  free 

Shall  Climacteric  be. 

The  Pict  no  shelter  now  shall  find 
Within  his  parti-colored  mind,        nO 

But,  from  this  valor,  sad,         ''. 

Shrink  underneath  the  plaid      -.^f 

Happy,  if  in  the  tufted  brake 
The  English  hunter  him  mistake,  .  ^ 
Nor  lay  his  hounds  in  near    .  ,-|Q 
The  Caledonian  deer.  j 

But  thou,  the  war's  and  fortune's  son, 

March  indelatigably  on, 
And  for  the  last  effect. 
Still  keep  the  sword  erect : 


24*^4  Poems  of  History 

Besides  the  force  it  has  to  fright 
The  spirits  of  the  shady  night; 
The  same  arts  that  did  gain 
A  power,  must  it  maintain. 

Andrew  Marvcll  [i 621- 1678] 

ON  THE  LATE  MASSACRE  IN   PIEDMONT 

[1655] 

Avenge,  O  Lord,  thy  slaughtered  saints,  whose  bones 
Lie  scattered  on  the  Alpine  mountains  cold; 
Even  them  who  kept  thy  truth  so  pure  of  old, 
When  all  our  fathers  worshipped  stocks  and  stones, 

Forget  not:  in  thy  book  record  their  groans 
Who  were  thy  sheep,  and  in  their  ancient  fold 
Slain  by  the  bloody  Piemontese,  that  rolled 
Mother  with  infant  down  the  rocks.    Their  moans 

The  vales  redoubled  to  the  hills,  and  they 

To  Heaven.    Their  martyred  blood  and  ashes  sow 
O'er  all  the  Italian  fields,  where  still  doth  sway 

The  triple  Tyrant;  that  from  these  may  grow 
A  hundred-fold,  who,  having  learnt  thy  way, 
Early  may  fly  the  Babylonian  woe. 

John  Milton  [1608-1674] 

MORGAN 

[166S] 

Oh,  what  a  set  of  Vagabundos, 

Sons  of  Neptune,  sons  of  Mars, 
Raked  from  todos  otros  mundos, 

Lascars,  Gascons,  Portsmouth  tars, 
Prison  mate  and  dock-yard  fellow, 

Blades  to  Meg  and  Molly  dear,      ' 
Off  to  capture  Porto  BcUo 

Sailed  with  Morgan  the  Buccaneer! 

Out  they  voyaged  from  Port  Royal 

(Fathoms  deep  its  ruins  be, 
Pier  and  convent,  fortress  loyal, 

Sunk  beneath  the  gaping  sea) ; 


Morgan  2405 

On  the  Spaniard's  beach  they  landed, 

Dead  to  pity,  void  of  fear, — 
Round  their  blood-red  flag  embanded, 

Led  by  Morgan  the  Buccaneer. 

Dawn  till  dusk  they  stormed  the  castle, 

Beat  the  gates  and  gratings  down; 
Then,  with  ruthless  rout  and  wassail, 

Night  and  day  they  sacked  the  town, 
Staved  the  bins  its  cellars  boasted. 

Port  and  Lisbon,  tier  on  tier. 
Quaffed  to  heart's  content,  and  toasted 

Harry  Morgan  the  Buccaneer: 

Stripped  the  church  and  monastery. 

Racked  the  prior  for  his  gold. 
With  the  traders'  wives  made  merry, 

Lipped  the  young  and  mocked  the  old, 
Diced  for  hapless  seiioritas 

(Sire  and  brother  bound  anear), —  ■;-■ 

Juanas,  Lolas,  Manuelitas, 

Cursing  Morgan  the  Buccaneer. 

Lust  and  rapine,  flame  and  slaughter, 

Forayed  with  the  Welshman  grim: 
"Take  my  pesos,  spare  my  daughter!" 

"Ha!  ha!"  roared  that  devil's  limb, 
"These  shall  jingle  in  our  pouches. 

She  with  us  shall  find  good  cheer." 
"Lash  the  graybeard  till  he  crouches!" 

Shouted  Morgan  the  Buccaneer. 

Out  again  through  reef  and  breaker. 

While  the  Spaniard  moaned  his  fate, 
Back  they  voyaged  to  Jamaica, 

Flush  with  doubloons,  coins  of  eight, 
Crosses  wrung  from  Popish  varlets, 

Jewels  torn  from  arm  and  ear, — 
Jesu!  how  the  Jews  and  harlots 

Welcomed  IMorgan  the  Buccaneer! 

Edmund  Clarence  Sledman  [i 833-1908] 


2406  Poems  of  History 


THE  LAMENTABLE  B.\LLAD   OF  THE  BLOODY 
BROOK 

[SEPTEMBER  1 8,  1675] 

Come  listen  to  the  Story  of  brave  Lathrop  and  his  Men, — 

How  they  fought,  how  they  died, 
When  they  marched  against  the  Red  Skins  in  the  Autumn 
Days,  and  then 

How  they  fell,  in  their  pride, 

By  Pocumtuck  Side. 

"Who  will  go  to  Deerfield  Meadows  and  bring  the  ripened 
Grain?" 

Said  old  IVIosely  to  his  men  in  Array. 
"Take  the  Wagons  and  the  Horses,  and  bring  it  back  again: 

But  be  sure  that  no  Man  stray 

All  the  Day,  on  the  Way." 

Then  the  Flower  of  Essex  started,  with  Lathrop  at  their 
head. 

Wise  and  brave,  bold  and  true. 
He  had  fought  the  Pequots  long  ago,  and  now  to  Mosely  said, 

"Be  there  Many,  be  there  Few, 

I  will  bring  the  Grain  to  you." 

They  gathered  all  the  Harvest,  and  marched  back  on  their 
Way, 

Through  the  Woods  which  blazed  like  Fire. 
No  Soldier  left  the  Line  of  march  to  wander  or  to  stray, 

Till  the  Wagons  were  stalled  in  the  Mire, 

And  the  Beasts  began  to  tire. 

The  Wagons  have  all  forded  the  Brook  as  it  flows, 

And  then  the  Rear-Guard  stays 
To  pick  the  purple  Grapes  that  are  hanging  from  the  Boughs, 

When,  crack! — to  their  Amaze, 

A  hundred  Fire-locks  blaze ! 


The  Song  of  the  Western   Men    2407 

Brave  Lathrop,  he  lay  dying;  but  as  he  fell  he  cried, 

"Each  Man  to  his  Tree,"  said  he, 
"Let  no  one  yield  an  Inch;  "  and  so  the  Soldier  died; 

And  not  a  Man  of  all  can  see 

Where  the  Foe  can  be. 

And  Philip  and  his  Devils  pour  in  their  Shot  so  fast, 

From  behind  and  before, 
That  Man  after  Man  is  shot  down  and  breathes  his  last. 

Every  Man  lies  dead  in  his  Gore 

To  fight  no  more, — no  more! 

Oh,  weep,  ye  Maids  of  Essex,  for  the  Lads  who  have  died, — 

The  Flower  of  Essex  they! 
The  Bloody  Brook  still  ripples  by  the  black  Mountain-side, 
But  never  shall  they  come  again  to  see  the  ocean-tide. 
And  never  shall  the  Bridegroom  return  to  his  Bride, 

From  that  dark  and  cruel  Day, — cruel  Day! 

Edward  Everett  Hale  [1822-1900] 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  WESTERN  MEN 

[1688] 

A  GOOD  sword  and  a  trusty  hand! 

A  merry  heart  and  true! 
King  James's  men  shall  understand 

What  Cornish  lads  can  do. 

And  have  they  fixed  the  where  and  when? 

And  shall  Trelawny  die? 
Here's  twenty  thousand  Cornish  men 

Will  know  the  reason  why! 

Out  spake  their  captain  brave  and  bold, 

A  merry  wight  was  he: 
"If  London  Tower  were  Michael's  hold, 

We'll  set  Trelawny  free! 


2408  Poems  of  History 

"We'll  cross  the  Tamar,  land  to  land,  '  .-,,  .rr 

The  Severn  is  no  stay, 
With  'One  and  all!'  and  hand  in  hand, 

And  who  shall  bid  us  nay? 

"And  when  we  come  to  London  Wall, 
A  pleasant  sight  to  view,-  ,,,<  r,;^  1,^,^,  ^^^^^  ^^^ 

Come  forth!  come  forth,  ye  cowards  all,  ; 

Here's  men  as  good  as  you! 

"Trelawny  he's  in  keep  and  hold, 

Trelawny  he  may  die; 
But  here's  twenty  thousand  Cornish  bold 

Will  know  the  reason  why!" 

Robert  Stephen  Haivker  [1803-1875] 


BONNIE  DUNDEE 

From  "The  Doom  of  Devoirgoil  " 


To  the  Lords  of  Convention  'twas  Claver'se  who  spoke, 
"  Ere  the  King's  crown  shall  fall,  there  are  crowns  to  be  broke; 
So  let  each  Cavalier  who  loves  honor  and  me 
Come  follow  the  bonnet  of  Bonnie  Dundee ! 

'^  Come  fill  up  my  cup,  come  fill  up  my  can, 
Come  saddle  your  horses,  and  call  up  your  men; 
Come  open  the  West  Port  and  let  me  gang  free, 
And  it's  room  for  the  bonnets  of  Bonnie  Dundee !" 

Dundee  he  is  mounted,  he  rides  up  the  street, 
The  bells  are  rung  backward,  the  drums  they  are  beat; 
But  the  Provost,  douce  man,  said,  "Just  e'en  let  him  be, 
The  Gude  Town  is  well  quit  of  that  deil  of  Dundee! " 

As  he  rode  doun  the  sanctified  bends  of  the  Bow, 

Ilk  carUne  was  flyting  and  shaking  her  pow; 

But  the  young  plants  of  grace  they  looked  couthie  and  slee. 

Thinking,  Luck  to  thy  bonnet,  thou  Bonnie  Dundee! 


Bonnie   Dundee  2409 

With  sour-featured  Whigs  the  Grass-market  was  thrangcd, 
As  if  half  the  West  had  set  tryst  to  be  hanged; 
There  was  spite  in  each  look,  there  was  fear  in  each  e'e, 
As  they  watched  for  the  bonnets  of  Bonnie  Dundee. 

These  cowls  of  Kilmarnock  had  spits  and  had  spears, 
And  lang-hafted  gullies  to  kill  cavaliers; 
But  they  shrunk  to  close-heads,  and  the  causeway  was  free 
At  the  toss  of  the  bonnet  of  Bonnie  Dundee. 

He  spurred  to  the  foot  of  the  proud  Castle  rock, 

And  with  the  gay  Gordon  he  gallantly  spoke: 

"Let  Mons  Meg  and  her  marrows  speak  twa  words  or  three. 

For  the  love  of  the  bonnet  of  Bonnie  Dundee."  , 

The  Gordon  demands  of  him  which  way  he  goes. 
"Where'er  shall  direct  me  the  shade  of  Montrose! 
Your  Grace  in  short  space  shall  hear  tidings  of  me. 
Or  that  low  lies  the  bonnet  of  Bonnie  Dundee. 

"There  are  hills  beyond  Pentland,  and  lands  beyond  Forth; 
If  there's  lords  in  the  Lowlands,  there's  chiefs  in  the  North; 
There  are  wild  Duniewassals  three  thousand  times  three 
Will  cry  'Hoigh!'  for  the  bonnet  of  Bonnie  Dundee. 

"There's  brass  on  the  target  of  barkened  bull-hide. 
There's  steel  in  the  scabbard  that  dangles  beside; 
The  brass  shall  be  burnished,  the  steel  shall  Hash  free, 
At  a  toss  of  the  bonnet  of  Bonnie  Dundee. 

"Away  to  the  hills,  to  the  caves,  to  the  rocks, — 
Ere  I  own  an  usurper,  I'll  couch  with  the  fox; 
And  tremble,  false  Whigs,  in  the  midst  of  your  glee, 
You  have  not  seen  the  last  of  my  bonnet  and  me!" 

He  waved  his  proud  hand,  and  the  trumpets  were  blown, 
The  kettle-drums  clashed,  and  the  horsemen  rode  on. 
Till  on  Ravelston's  cliffs  and  on  Clermiston's  lea 
Died  away  the  wild  war-notes  of  Bonnie  Dundee. 

]l'aUcr  Scott  [1771-18,52] 


2410  Poems  ot   History 

A  BALLAD  OF  SARSFIELD^    '  """'-  f^"'-'^ 
[1690] 

Sarsfield  went  out  the  Dutch  to  rout, 

And  to  take  and  break  their  cannon; 
To  Mass  went  he  at  half-past  three, 

And  at  four  he  crossed  the  Shannon. 

Tirconnel  slept.    In  dream  his  thoughts 

Old  fields  of  victory  ran  on; 
And  the  chieftains  of  Thomond  in  Limerick's  towers 

Slept  well  by  the  banks  of  Shannon. 

He  rode  ten  miles  and  he  crossed  the  ford, 

And  couched  in  the  wood  and  waited ; 
Till,  left  and  right,  on  marched  in  sight 

That  host  which  the  true  men  hated. 

"Charge!"  Sarsfield  cried;  and  the  green  hill-side 
As  they  charged  replied  in  thunder;  , 

They  rode  o'er  the  plain  and  they  rode  o'er  the  slain  _,^ 
And  the  rebel  rout  lay  under. 

The  spark  flashed  out — like  a  sailor's  shout  :  j  •• 

The  sound  into  heaven  ascended;  ; 

The  hosts  of  the  sky  made  to  earth  reply, 

And  the  thunders  twain  were  blended!  ; ;/ 

Sarsfield  went  out  the  Dutch  to  rout, 
And  to  take  and  break  their  cannon; — 

A  century  after,  Sarsfield's  laughter 
Was  echoed  from  Dungannon. 

Aubrey  Thomas  Dc  Verc  [1814-1902] 

THE  BATTLE  OF  BLENHEIM 

[august  13,  1704] 

It  was  a  summer  evening;  r&A  ixoY 

Old  Kaspar's  work  was  done, 
And  he  before  his  cottage-door    .^frf  Mvrw  9H 

Was  sitting  in  the  sun; 
And  by  him  sported  on  the  green 
His  little  grandchild,  Wilhelmine. 


The   Battle  of  Blenheim  241  i 

She  saw  her  brother  Peterkin 

Roll  something  large  and  round, 
That  he  beside  the  rivulet, 

In  playing  there,  had  found: 
She  ran  to  ask  what  he  had  found, 
That  was  so  large  and  smooth  and  round.. 

Old  Kaspar  took  it  from  the  boy, 

Who  stood  expectant  by; 
And  then  the  old  man  shook  his  head, 

And  with  a  natural  sigh, 
'"Tis  some  poor  fellow's  skull,"  said  he, 
"Who  fell  in  the  great  victory. 

"I  find  them  in  my  garden. 

For  there's  many  here  about; 
And  often,  when  I  go  to  plough, 

The  ploughshare  turns  them  out; 
For  many  thousand  men,"  said  he, 
"Were  slain  in  that  great  victory." 

"Now  tell  us  what  'twas  all  about," 

Young  Peterkin,  he  cries; 
And  little  Wilhelmine  looks  up 

With  wonder- waiting  eyes; 
"Now  tell  us  all  about  the  war. 
And  what  they  fought  each  other  for." 

"It  was  the  English,"  Kaspar  cried, 

"Who  put  the  French  to  rout; 
But  what  they  fought  each  other  for 

I  could  not  well  make  out ; 
But  everybody  said,"  quoth  he, 
"That  'twas  a  famous  victory. 

"My  father  lived  at  Blenheim  then, 

Yon  little  stream  hard  by; 
They  burned  his  dwelhng  to  the  ground, 

And  he  was  forced  to  fly; 
So  with  his  wife  and  child  he  fled, 
Nor  had  he  where  to  rest  his  head. 


2412  Poems  of  History 

"With  fire  and  sword  the  country  round 

Was  wasted  far  and  wide, 
And  many  a  childing  mother  then, 

And  new-born  baby,  died; 
But  things  Hke  that,  you  know,  must  be 
At  every  famous  victory. 

"They  say  it  was  a  shocking  sight 

After  the  field  was  won; 
For  many  thousand  bodies  here 

Lay  rotting  in  the  sun: 
But  things  like  that,  you  know,  must  be 
After  a  famous  victory. 

"Great  praise  the  Duke  of  Marlborough  won 

And  our  good  Prince  Eugene." 
"Why,  'twas  a  very  wicked  thing!" 

Said  little  Wilhelmine. 
"Nay,  nay,  my  little  girl,"  quoth  he, 
"It  was  a  famous  victory. 

"And  everybody  praised  the  Duke, 

Who  this  great  fight  did  win." 
"But  what  good  came  of  it  at  last?" 

Quoth  little  Peterkin. 
"Why,  that  I  cannot  tell,"  said  he; 
"But  'twas  a  famous  victory." 

Robert  Sonthey  [1774-1843] 


LOVEWELL'S  FIGHT 

[may  8,  1725] 

Of  worthy  Captain  Lovewell  I  purpose  now  to  sing. 
How  valiantly  he  served  his  country  and  his  King; 
He  and  his  valiant  soldiers  did  range  the  woods  full  wide 
And  hardships  they  endured  to  quell  the  Indian's  pride. 

'Twas  nigh  unto  Pigwacket,  on  the  eighth  day  of  May, 
They  spied  a  rebel  Indian  soon  after  break  of  day; 
He  on  a  bank  was  walking,  upon  a  neck  of  land, 
Which  leads  into  a  pond,  as  we're  made  to  understand. 


Lovewell's   Fight  2413 

Our  men  resolved  to  have  him,  and  travelled  two  miles  round 
Until  they  met  the  Indian,  \\ho  boldly  stood  his  ground; 
Then  spake  up  Captain  Lovewell,  "Take  you  good  heed," 

says  he, 
"This  rogue  is  to  decoy  us,  I  very  plainly  see. 

"The  Indians  lie  in  ambush,  in  some  place  nigh  at  hand, 
In  order  to  surround  us  upon  this  neck  of  land; 
Therefore  we'll  march  in  order,  and  each  man  leave  his  pack 
That  we  may  briskly  fight  them,  when  they  make  their  at- 
tack." 

They  came  unto  this  Indian,  who  did  them  thus  defy, 
As  soon  as  they  came  nigh  him,  two  guns  he  did  let  fly, 
Which  wounded  Captain  Lovewell,  and  likewise  one  man 

more, 
But  when  this  rogue  was  running,  they  laid  him  in  his  gore. 

Then  having  scalped  the  Indian,  they  went  back  to  the  spot 
Where  they  had  laid  their  packs  down,  but  there  they  found 

them  not, 
For  the  Indians  having  spied  them,  when  they  them  down 

did  lay, 
Did  seize  them  for  their  plunder,  and  carry  them  away. 

These  rebels  lay  in  ambush,  this  very  place  hard  by, 

So  that  an  Enghsh  soldier  did  one  of  them  espy,  -.^^ 

And  cried  out,  "Here's  an  Indian!"    With  that  they  started 

out, 
As  fiercely  as  old  lions,  and  hideously  did  shout. 

With  that  our  valiant  English  all  gave  a  loud  huzza, 
To  show  the  rebel  Indians  they  feared  them  not  a  straw: 
So  now  the  fight  began,  and  as  fiercely  as  could  be. 
The  Indians  ran  up  to  them,  but  soon  were  forced  to  flee. 

Then  spake  up  Captain  Lovewell,  when  first  the  fight  began: 
"Fight  on.  my  valiant  heroes!  you  see  they  fall  like  rain." 
For  as  we  are  informed,  the  Indians  were  so  thick 
A  man  could  scarcely  fire  a  gun  and  not  some  of  them  liit. 


2414  Poems  of  History 

Then  did  the  rebels  try  their  best  our  soldiers  to  surround, 
But  they  could  not  accomplish  it,  because  there  was  a  pond 
To  which  our  men  retreated,  and  covered  all  the  rear; 
The  rogues  were  forced  to  face  them,  although  they  skulked 
for  fear. 

Two  logs  there  were  behind  them,  that  close  together  lay, 
Without  being  discovered,  they  could  not  get  away; 
Therefore  our  valiant  English  they  travelled  in  a  row. 
And  at  a  handsome  distance,  as  they  were  wont  to  go. 

'Twas  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  when  first  the  fight  begun, 
And  fiercely  did  continue  until  the  setting  sun; 
Excepting  that  the  Indians  some  hours  before  'twas  night 
Drew  off  into  the  bushes  and  ceased  awhile  to  fight; 

But  soon  again  returned,  in  fierce  and  furious  mood, 
Shouting  as  in  the  morning,  but  yet  not  half  so  loud; 
For  as  we  are  informed,  so  thick  and  fast  they  fell. 
Scarce  twenty  of  their  number  at  night  did  get  home  weU. 

And  that  our  valiant  English  till  midnight  there  did  stay, 

To  see  whether  the  rebels  would  have  another  fray; 

But  they  no  more  returning,  they  made  off  towards  their 

home. 
And  brought  away  their  wounded  as  far  as  they  could  come. 

Of  all  our  valiant  English  there  were  but  thirty-four, 
And  of  the  rebel  Indians  there  were  about  fourscore. 
And  sixteen  of  our  English  did  safely  home  return. 
The  rest  were  killed  and  wounded,  for  which  we  all  must 
mourn. 

Our  worthy  Captain  Lovewell  among  them  there  did  die. 
They  killed  Lieutenant  Robbins,  and  wounded  good  young 

Frye, 
Who  was  our  Enghsh  Chaplain;  he  many  Indians  slew, 
And  some  of  them  he  scalped  when  bullets  round  him  flew. 

Young  Fullam,  too,  I'll  mention,  because  he  fought  so  well; 
Endeavoring  to  save  a  man,  a  sacrifice  he  fell: 


Admiral   Hosier's  Ghost  2415 

Bu-t  yet  our  valiant  Englishmen  in  fight  were  ne'er  dis- 
mayed, 
But  still  they  kept  their  motion,  and  Wymans  Captain  made, 

Who  shot  the  old  chief  Paugus,  which  did  the  foe  defeat, 
Then  set  his  men  in  order,  and  brought  off  the  retreat; 
And,  braving  many  dangers  and  hardships  in  the  way. 
They  safe  arrived  at  Dunstable,  the  thirteenth  day  of  May. 

Unknown 

ADMIRAL  HOSIER'S   GHOST 

WRITTEN  ON  THE  TAKING  OF  CARTHAGENA  FROM  THE  SPAN- 
IARDS,   1739 

As  near  Portobello  lying 

On  the  gently-swelling  flood. 
At  midnight,  with  streamers  flying. 

Our  triumphant  navy  rode; 
There  while  Vernon  sat  all-glorious 

From  the  Spaniards'  late  defeat, 
And  his  crews,  with  shouts  victorious, 

Drank  success  to  England's  fleet: 

On  a  sudden,  shrilly  sounding, 

Hideous  yells  and  shrieks  were  heard; 
Then,  each  heart  with  fear  confounding, 

A  sad  troop  of  ghosts  appeared ; 
All  in  dreary  hammocks  shrouded, 

Which  for  winding-sheets  they  wore. 
And,  with  looks  by  sorrow  clouded. 

Frowning  on  that  hostile  shore. 

On  them  gleamed  the  moon's  wan  lustre, 

When  the  shade  of  Hosier  brave 
His  pale  bands  was  seen  to  muster, 

Rising  from  their  watery  grave: 
O'er  the  glimmering  wave  he  hied  him, 

Where  the  Burford  reared  her  sail. 
With  three  thousand  ghosts  beside  him, 

And  in  groans  did  Vernon  hail. 


2416  Poems  ot   History 

"Heed,  oh,  heed  our  fatal  story! 

I  am  Hosier's  injured  ghost; 
You  who  now  have  purchased  glory 

At  this  place  where  I  was  Tost: 
Though  in  Portobello's  ruin. 

You  now  triumph  free  from  fears. 
When  you  think  on  our  undoing, 

You  will  mix  your  joys  with  tears. 

"See  these  mournful  spectres  sweeping 

Ghastly  o'er  this  hated  wave. 
Whose  wan  cheeks  are  stained  with  weeping; 

These  were  English  captains  brave. 
Mark  those  numbers,  pale  and  horrid, 

Who  were  once  my  sailors  bold; 
Lo!  each  hangs  his  drooping  forehead, 

While  his  dismal  tale  is  told. 

"I,  by  twenty  sail  attended. 

Did  this  Spanish  town  affright; 
Nothing  then  its  wealth  defended 

But  my  orders — not  to  fight! 
Oh!  that  in  this  rolling  ocean 

I  had  cast  them  with  disdain, 
And  obeyed  my  heart's  warm  motion. 

To  have  quelled  the  pride  of  Spain! 

"For  resistance  I  could  fear  none; 

But  with  twenty  ships  had  done 
What  thou,  brave  and  happy  Vernon, 

Hast  achieved  with  six  alone. 
Then  the  Bastimentos  never 

Had  our  foul  dishonor  seen. 
Nor  the  sea  the  sad  receiver 

Of  this  gallant  train  had  been. 

"Thus,  like  thee,  proud  Spain  dismaying, 
And  her  galleons  leading  home. 

Though  condemned  for  disobeying, 
I  had  met  a  traitor's  doom: 


Fontenoy  2417 

To  have  fallen,  my  country  crying, 
'He  has  played  an  English  part,' 

Had  been  better  far  than  dying 
Of  a  grieved  and  broken  heart. 

"Unrepining  at  thy  glory. 

Thy  successful  arms  we  hail; 
But  remember  our  sad  story, 

And  let  Hosier's  wrongs  prevail. 
Sent  in  this  foul  clime  to  languish, 

Think  what  thousands  fell  in  vain, 
Wasted  with  disease  and  anguish, 

Not  in  glorious  battle  slain. 

"Hence  with  all  my  train  attending, 

From  their  oozy  tombs  below, 
Through  the  hoary  foam  ascending, 

Here  I  feed  my  constant  woe. 
Here  the  Bastimentos  viewing, 

We  recall  our  shameful  doom. 
And,  our  plaintive  cries  renewing, 

Wander  through  the  midnight  gloom. 

"O'er  these  waves  forever  mourning 

Shall  we  roam,  deprived  of  rest, 
If,  to  Britain's  shores  returning. 

You  neglect  my  just  request; 
After  this  proud  foe  subduing. 

When  your  patriot  friends  you  see, 
Think  on  vengeance  for  my  ruin, 

And  for  England — shamed  in  me." 

Richard  Glover  [1712-1785]  , 

FONTENOY 

[APRIL  3c,    1745] 

Thrice  at  the  huts  of  Fontenoy  the  English  column  failed, 
And  twice  the  lines  of  Saint  Antoine  the  Dutch  in  vain  as- 
sailed; 
For  town  and  slope  were  filled  with  fort  and  flanking  battery, 
And  well  they  swept  the  English  ranks  and  Dutch  auxiliary. 


2418  Poems  of  History 

As  vainly  through  De  Barri's  wood  the  British  soldiers  burst, 
The  French  artillery  drove  them  back,  diminished  and  dis- 
persed. 
The  bloody  Duke  of  Cumberland  beheld  with  anxious  eye. 
And  ordered  up  his  last  reserve,  his  latest  chance  to  try. 
On  Fontenoy,  on  Fontenoy,  how  fast  his  generals  ridel 
And  mustering  come  his  chosen  troops,  like  clouds  at  even- 
tide. 

Six  thousand  English  veterans  in  stately  column  tread; 

Their  cannon  blaze  in  front  and  flank,  Lord  Hay  is  at  their 
head. 

Steady  they  step  a-down  the  slope,  steady  they  climb  the 
hill. 

Steady  they  load,  steady  they  fire,  moving  right  onward  still, 

Betwixt  the  wood  and  Fontenoy,  as  through  a  furnace- 
blast. 

Through  rampart,  trench,  and  palisade,  and  bullets  shower- 
ing fast; 

And  on  the  open  plain  above  they  rose  and  kept  their  course. 

With  ready  fire  and  grim  resolve  that  mocked  at  hostile  force: 

Past  Fontenoy,  past  Fontenoy,  while  thinner  grow  their 
ranks. 

They  break,  as  broke  the  Zuyder  Zee  through  Holland's 
ocean-banks. 

More  idly  than  the  summer  flies,  French  tirailleurs  rush 
round ; 

As  stubble  to  the  lava-tide,  French  squadrons  strew  the 
ground ; 

Bombshell  and  grape  and  round-shot  tore,  still  on  they 
marched  and  fired; 

Fast,  from  each  volley,  grenadier  and  voltigeur  retired. 

"Push  on  my  household  cavalry!"  King  Louis  madly  cried. 

To  death  they  rush,  but  rude  their  shock;  not  unavenged 
they  died. 

On  through  the  camp  the  column  trod — King  Louis  turns 
his  rein. 

"Not  yet,  my  liege,"  Saxe  interposed;  "the  Irish  troops  re- 
main." 


Fontenoy  2419 

And  I'outenoy,  famed  Fontenoy,  had  been  a  Waterloo, 
Had   not   these   exiles  ready   been,  fresh,  vehement,  and 
true. 

"Lord  Clare,"  he  said,  "you  have  your  wish;  there  are  your 

Saxon  foes!" 
The  Marshal  almost  smiles  to  see,  so  furiously  he  goes. 
How  fierce  the  look  these  exiles  wear,  who're  wont  to  be  so 

gay! 
The  treasured  wrongs  of  fifty  years  are  in  their  hearts  to- 
day: 
The  treaty  broken,  ere  the  ink  wherewith  'twas  writ  could 

dry; 
Their  plundered  homes,  their  ruined  shrines,  their  women's 

parting  cry; 
Their  priesthood  hunted  down  like  wolves,  their  country 

overthrown — 
Each  looks  as  if  revenge  for  all  were  staked  on  him  alone. 
On  Fontenoy,  on  Fontenoy,  nor  ever  yet  elsewhere. 
Rushed  on  to  fight  a  nobler  band  than  these  proud  exiles 

were. 

O'Brien's  voice  is  hoarse  with  joy,  as,  halting,  he  com- 
mands: 

"Fix  bayonets — charge!"  Like  mountain-storm  rush  on 
those  fiery  bands. 

Thin  is  the  English  column  now,  and  faint  their  volleys 
grow. 

Yet,  mustering  all  the  strength  they  have,  they  make  a  gal- 
lant show. 

They  dress  their  ranks  upon  the  hill,  to  face  that  battle- 
wind! 

Their  bayonets  the  breakers'  foam,  like  rocks  the  men  be- 
hind! 

One  volley  crashes  from  their  line,  when,  through  the  surg- 
ing smoke. 

With  empty  guns  clutched  in  their  hands,  the  headlong 
Irish  broke. 

On  Fontenoy,  on  Fontenoy,  hark  to  that  fierce  huzza: 

"Revenge!  remember  Limerick!  dash  down  the  Sacsanagh! " 


2420  Poems  of  History- 

Like  lions  leaping  at  a  fold,  when  mad  with  hunger's  pang, 
Right  up  against  the  Enghsh  hne  the  Irish  exiles  sprang; 
Bright  was  their  steel,  'tis  bloody  now,  their  guns  are  filled 

with  gore; 
Through  shattered  ranks  and  severed  files  and  trampled 

flags  they  tore. 
The  English  strove  with  desperate  strength,  paused,  rallied, 

staggered,  fled; 
The  green  hillside  is  matted  close  with  dying  and  with 

dead. 
Across  the  plain  and  far  away  passed  on  that  hideous  wrack, 
While  cavalier  and  fantassin  dash  in  upon  their  track. 
On  Fontenoy,  on  Fontenoy,  like  eagles  in  the  sun. 
With  bloody  plumes,  the  Irish  stand — the  field  is  fought  and 

won! 

Thomas  Oshorne  Davis  [i 814- 1845] 


LAMENT  FOR  CULLODEN 

[APRIL   16,    1746] 

The  lovely  lass  o'  Inverness, 
Nae  joy  nor  pleasure  can  she  see; 
For  e'en  and  morn  she  cries,  Alas! 
And  aye  the  saut  tear  bhns  her  e'e: 
Drumossie  moor — Drumossie  day — 
A  waefu'  day  it  was  to  me! 
For  there  I  lost  my  father  dear, 
My  father  dear,  and  brethren  three. 


ivsilov  li'jf 


Their  winding-sheet  the  bluidy  clay, 
Their  graves  are  growing  green  to  see: 
And  by  them  lies  the  dearest  lad 
That  ever  blest  a  woman's  e'e! 
Now  wae  to  thee,  thou  cruel  lord, 
A  bluidy  man  I  trow  thou  be; 
For  mony  a  heart  thou  hast  made  sair 
That  ne'er  did  wrang  to  thine  or  thee. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


A   Ballad  of  the  French   Fleet      2421 
A  BALLAD  OF  THE  FRENCH   FLEET 

[OCTOBER    15-,    1746I 
MR.  THOMAS  PRINCE,  loquitUf 

A  FLEET  with  flags  arrayed 

Sailed  from  the  port  of  Brest, 
And  the  Admiral's  ship  displayed 

The  signal:  "Steer  southwest." 
For  this  Admiral  D'Anville 

Had  sworn  by  cross  and  crown 
To  ravage  with  fire  and  steel 

Our  helpless  Boston  Town. 

There  were  rumors  in  the  street, 

In  the  houses  there  was  fear 
Of  the  coming  of  the  fleet, 

And  the  danger  hovering  near. 
And  while  from  mouth  to  mouth 

Spread  the  tidings  of  dismay, 
I  stood  in  the  Old  South, 

Saying  humbly:  "Let  us  pray! 

"0  Lord!  we  would  not  advise; 

But  if  in  thy  Providence 
A  tempest  should  arise 

To  drive  the  French  Fleet  hence, 
And  scatter  it  far  and  wide. 

Or  sink  it  in  the  sea, 
We  should  be  satisfied. 

And  thine  the  glory  be." 

This  was  the  prayer  I  made, 

For  my  soul  was  all  oh  flame. 
And  even  as  I  prayed 

The  answering  tempest  came; 
It  came  with  a  mighty  power. 

Shaking  the  windows  and  walls, 
And  lolling  the  bell  in  the  tower. 

As  it  tolls  at  funerals. 


2422  Poems  of  History 


The  lightning  suddenly- 
Unsheathed  its  flaming  sword, 

And  I  cried:  "Stand  still,  and  see 
The  salvation  of  the  Lord!" 

The  heavens  were  black  with  cloud, 
The  sea  was  white  with  hail, 

And  ever  more  fierce  and  loud 
Blew  the  October  gale. 

The  fleet  it  overtook, 

And  the  broad  sails  in  the  van 
Like  the  tents  of  Cushan  shook, 

Or  the  curtains  of  Midian. 
Down  on  the  reeling  decks 

Crashed  the  o'erwhelming  seas: 
Ah,  never  were  there  wrecks 

So  pitiful  as  these! 

Like  a  potter's  vessel  broke 

The  great  ships  of  the  hne; 
They  were  carried  away  as  a  smoke, 

Or  sank  Hke  lead  in  the  brine. 
O  Lord!  before  thy  path 

They  vanished  and  ceased  to  be, 
When  thou  didst  walk  in  wrath 

With  thine  horses  through  the  sea! 

Henry  Wadsworth  Long  J  ell  ow  [1807- 


PAUL  REVERE'S  RIDE 

From  "  Tales  of  a  Wayside  Inn  " 
[APRIL   18-19,    1775] 

Listen,  my  children,  and  you  shall  hear 

Of  the  midnight  ride  of  Paul  Revere, 

On  the  eighteenth  of  April,  in  seventy-five; 

Hardly  a  man  is  now  alive 

Who  remembers  that  famous  day  and  year. 


^ 


Paul    Revere's   Ride  2423 

He  said  to  his  friend,  "If  the  British  march 
By  land  or  sea  from  the  town  to-night, 
Hang  a  lantern  aloft  in  the  belfry  arch 

f  the  North  Church  tower  as  a  signal  hght, — 
One,  if  by  land,  and  two,  if  by  sea; 
And  I  on  the  opposite  shore  will  be, 
Ready  to  ride  and  spread  the  alarm 
Through  every  Middlesex  village  and  farm. 
For  the  country  folk  to  be  up  and  to  arm." 

Then  he  said,  "Good  night!"  and  with  muffled  oar 

Silently  rowed  to  the  Charlestown  shore. 

Just  as  the  moon  rose  over  the  bay. 

Where  swinging  wide  at  her  moorings  lay 

The  Somerset,  British  man-of-war; 

A  phantom  ship,  with  each  mast  and  spar 

Across  the  moon  Hke  a  prison  bar. 

And  a  huge  black  hulk,  that  was  magnified 

By  its  own  reflection  in  the  tide. 

Meanwhile,  his  friend,  through  alley  and  street, 
Wanders  and  watches  with  eager  ears, 
Till  in  the  silence  around  him  he  hears 
The  muster  of  men  at  the  barrack  door, 
The  sound  of  arms,  and  the  tramp  of  feet, 
And  the  measured  tread  of  the  grenadiers, 
Marching  down  to  their  boats  on  the  shore. 

Then  he  climbed  the  tower  of  the  Old  North  Church 

By  the  wooden  stairs,  with  stealthy  tread, 

To  the  belfry-chamber  overhead. 

And  startled  the  pigeons  from  their  perch 

On  the  sombre  rafters,  that  round  him  made 

Masses  and  moving  shapes  of  shade, — 

By  the  trembling  ladder,  steep  and  tall, 

To  the  highest  window  in  the  wall, 

Where  he  paused  to  listen  and  look  down 

A  moment  on  the  roofs  of  the  town. 

And  the  moonlight  flowing  over  all. 


2424  Poems  of  History 

Beneath  in  the  churchyard,  lay  the  dead, 

In  their  night-encampment  on  the  hill. 

Wrapped  in  silence  so  deep  and  still 

That  he  could  hear,  like  a  sentinel's  tread, 

The  watchful  night-wind,  as  it  went 

Creeping  along  from  tent  to  tent. 

And  seeming  to  whisper,  "All  is  well!" 

A  moment  only  he  feels  the  spell 

Of  the  place  and  the  hour,  and  the  secret  dread      i.'! 

Of  the  lonely  belfry  and  the  dead; 

For  suddenly  all  his  thoughts  are  bent 

On  a  shadowy  something  far  away. 

Where  the  river  widens  to  meet  the  bay, — 

A  line  of  black  that  bends  and  floats 

On  the  rising  tide,  like  a  bridge  of  boats.  ,,.('|> 

Meanwhile,  impatient  to  mount  and  ride,  •  '  • 

Booted  and  spurred,  with  a  heavy  stride  ' 

On  the  opposite  shore  walked  Paul  Revere. 

Now  he  patted  his  horse's  side, 

Now  gazed  at  the  landscape  far  and  near. 

Then,  impetuous,  stamped  the  earth, 

And  turned  and  tightened  his  saddle-girth; 

But  mostly  he  watched  with  eager  search  [j  [' 

The  belfry-tower  of  the  Old  North  Church,  ,,|;- 

As  it  rose  above  the  graves  on  the  hill,  AT 

Lonely  and  spectral  and  sombre  and  still. 

And  lo!  as  he  looks,  on  the  belfry's  height 

A  glimmer,  and  then  a  gleam  of  light! 

He  springs  to  the  saddle,  the  bridle  he  turns, 

But  lingers  and  gazes,  till  full  on  his  sight 

A  second  lamp  in  the  belfry  burns!  ,^^ 

A  hurry  of  hoofs  in  a  village  street, 

A  shape  in  the  moonlight,  a  bulk  in  the  dark. 

And  beneath,  from  the  pebbles,  in  passing,  a  spark 

Struck  out  by  a  steed  flying  fearless  and  fleet: 

That  was  all !    And  yet ,  through  the  gloom  and  the  light, 

The  fate  of  a  nation  was  riding  that  night; 

And  the  spark  struck  out  by  that  steed,  in  his  flight 

Kindled  the  land  into  flame  with  its  heat. 


Paul   Revere's   Ride  2425 

He  has  left  the  village  and  mounted  the  steep, 
And  beneath  him,  tranquil  and  broad  and  deep. 
Is  the  Mystic,  meeting  the  ocean  tides; 
And  under  the  alders  that  skirt  its  edge, 
Now  soft  on  the  sand,  now  loud  on  the  ledge. 
Is  heard  the  tramp  of  his  steed  as  he  rides. 

It  was  twelve  by  the  village  clock. 

When  he  crossed  the  bridge  into  Medford  town. 

He  heard  the  crowing  of  the  cock, 

And  the  barking  of  the  farmer's  dog. 

And  felt  the  damp  of  the  river  fog, 

That  rises  after  the  sun  goes  down. 

It  was  one  by  the  village  clock. 

When  he  galloped  into  Lexington. 

He  saw  the  gilded  weathercock 

Swim  in  the  moonlight  as  he  passed. 

And  the  m.eeting-house  windows,  blank  and  bare, 

Gaze  at  him  with  a  spectral  glare, 

As  if  they  already  stood  aghast 

At  the  bloody  work  they  would  look  upon. 

It  was  two  by  the  village  clock, 

When  he  came  to  the  bridge  in  Concord  town. 

He  heard  the  bleating  of  the  flock, 

And  the  twitter  of  birds  among  the  trees, 

And  felt  the  breath  of  the  morning  breeze 

Blowing  over  the  meadows  jjrown. 

And  one  was  safe  and  asleep  in  his  bed 

Who  at  the  bridge  would  be  first  to  fall, 

Who  that  day  would  be  lying  dead. 

Pierced  by  a  British  musket-ball. 

You  know  the  rest.    In  the  books  you  have  read, 
How  the  British  Regulars  fired  and  fled, — 
How  the  farmers  gave  them  ball  for  ball, 
From  behind  each  fence  and  farmyard  wall, 
Chasing  the  red-coats  down  the  lane, 
Then  crossing  the  fields  to  emerge  again 
Under  the  trees  at  the  turn  of  the  road. 
And  only  pausing  to  fire  and  load. 


2426  Poems  of  History 

So  through  the  night  rode  Paul  Revere; 

And  so  through  the  night  went  his  cry  of  alarm 

To  every  Middlesex  village  and  farm, — 

A  cry  of  defiance  and  not  of  fear, 

A  voice  in  the  darkness,  a  knock  at  the  door, 

And  a  word  that  shall  echo  forevermore! 

For,  borne  on  the  night-wind  of  the  Past, 

Through  all  our  history,  to  the  last. 

In  the  hour  of  darkness  and  peril  and  need. 

The  people  will  waken  and  listen  to  hear 

The  hurrying  hoof-beats  of  that  steed. 

And  the  midnight  message  of  Paul  Revere. 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 


NEW  ENGLAND'S   CHEVY   CHASE 

[APRIL    19,     1775] 

'TwAS  the  dead  of  the  night.    By  the  pineknot's  red  light 
Brooks  lay,  half-asleep,  when  he  heard  the  alarm, — 

Only  this,  and  no  more,  from  a  voice  at  the  door: 

"The  Red-Coats  are  out,  and  have  passed  Phips's  farm." 

Brooks  was  booted  and  spurred;  he  said  never  a  word: 
Took  his  horn  from  its  peg,  and  his  gun  from  the  rack; 

To  the  cold  midnight  air  he  led  out  his  white  mare, 

Strapped  the  girths  and  the  bridle,  and  sprang  to  her 
back. 

Up  the  North  County  road  at  her  full  pace  she  strode. 
Till  Brooks  reined  her  up  at  John  Tarbell's  to  say, 

"We  have  got  the  alarm, — they  have  left  Phips's  farm; 
You  rouse  the  East  Precinct,  and  I'll  go  this  way." 

John  called  his  hired  man,  and  they  harnessed  the  span; 
They  roused  Abram  Garfield,  and  Abram  called  me: 
Turn  out  right  away;  let  no  minute-man  stay; 
The  Red-Coats  have  landed  at  Phips's,"  says  he. 


New   England's  Chevy  Chase       2427 

By  the  Powder-House  Green  seven  others  fell  in; 

At  Nahum's  the  men  from  the  Saw-MiU  came  down; 
So  that  when  Jabez  Bland  gave  the  word  of  command, 

And  said,  "Forward,  march!"  there  marched  forward 

THE  TOWN. 

Parson  Wilderspin  stood  by  the  side  of  the  road, 
And  he  took  off  his  hat,  and  he  said,  "Let  us  pray! 

O  Lord,  God  of  might,  let  thine  angels  of  light 
Lead  thy  children  to-night  to  the  glories  of  day! 

And  let  thy  stars  fight  all  the  foes  of  the  Right 
As  the  stars  fought  of  old  against  Sisera." 

And  from  heaven's  high  arch  those  stars  blessed  our  march, 

Till  the  last  of  them  faded  in  twilight  away; 
And  with  morning's  bright  beam,  by  the  banks  of  the  stream 

Half  the  county  marched  in,  and  we  heard  Davis  say: 

I 

"On  the  King's  own  highway  I  may  travel  all  day. 
And  no  man  hath  warrant  to  stop  me,"  says  he; 

"I've  no  man  that's  afraid,  and  I'll  march  at  their  head.""^ 
Then  he  turned  to  the  boys,  "Forward,  march!  FoUow 
me." 

And  we  marched  as  he  said,  and  the  Fifer  he  played 
The  old  "White  Cockade,"  and  he  played  it  right  well. 

We  saw  Davis  fall  dead,  but  no  man  was  afraid; 

That  bridge  we'd  have  had,  though  a  thousand  men  fell. 

This  opened  the  play,  and  it  lasted  all  day.  r  P 

We  made  Concord  too  hot  for  the  Red-Coats  to  stay; 

Down  the  Lexington  way  we  stormed,  black,  white,  and  gray 
We  were  first  in  the  feast,  and  were  last  in  the  fray. 

•  They  would  turn  in  dismay,  as  red  wolves  turn  at  bay. 
They  levelled,  they  fired,  they  charged  up  the  road. 
Cephas  Willard  feU  dead;  he  was  shot  in  the  head 
As  he  knelt  by  Aunt  Prudence's  well-sweep  to  load. 

John  Danforth  was  hit  just  in  Lexington  Street, 

John  Bridge  at  that  lane  where  you  cross  Beaver  Falls, 

And  Winch  and  the  Snows  just  above  John  Munroe's — 
Swept  away  by  one  swoop  of  the  big  cannon-balls. 


2428  Poems  of  History 

I  took  Bridge  on  my  knee,  but  he  said,  "Don't  mind  me; 

Fill  your  horn  from  mine, — let  me  he  where  I  be. 

Our  fathers,"  says  he,  "  that  their  sons  might  be  free,         , ; 

Left  their  king  on  his  throne,  and  came  over  the  sea; 

And  that  man  is  a  knave,  or  a  fool  who,  to  save 

His  hfe  for  a  minute,  would  live  like  a  slave." 

Well,  aU  would  not  do !     There  were  men  good  as  new, — 
From  Rumford,  from  Saugus,  from  towns  far  away, — 

Who  filled  up  quick  and  well  for  each  soldier  that  fell; 

And  we  drove  them,  and  drove  them,  and  drove  them, 
aU  day. 

We  knew,  every  one,  it  was  war  that  begun. 

When  that  morning's  marching  was  only  half  done. 

In  the  hazy  twilight,  at  the  coming  of  night, 

I  crowded  three  buckshot  and  one  bullet  down.  ,  if,.|^ 

'Twas  my  last  charge  of  lead;  and  I  aimed  her  and  said, 
"Good  luck  to  you,  lobsters,  in  old  Boston  Town." 

In  a  barn  at  Milk  Row,  Ephraim  Bates  and  Munroe, 

And  Baker,  and  Abram,  and  I  made  a  bed. 
We  had  mighty  sore  feet,  and  we'd  nothing  to  eat; 

But  we'd  driven  the  Red-Coats,  and  Amos,  he  said: 
"It's  the  first  time,"  says  he,  "that  it's  happened  to  me 

To  march  to  the  sea  by  this  road  where  we've  come; 
But  confound  this  whole  day,  but  we'd  all  of  us  say 

We'd  rather  have  spent  it  this  way  than  to  home." 

The  hunt  had  begun  with  the  dawn  of  the  sun, 

And  night  saw  the  wolf  driven  back  to  his  denr   '"  ' 

A-wA  never  since  then,  in  the  memory  of  men,         '     •'^^''^ 
Has  the  Old  Bay  State  seen  such  a  hunting  again. 

Edward  Everett  Hale  [1822-1909] 


WARREN'S  ADDRESS  AT  BUNKER  HILL 

[JUNE  16-17,  1775] 

Stand!  the  ground's  your  own,  my  braves! jf{o| 
WiU  ye  give  it  up  to  slaves? 
Will  ye  look  for  greener  graves? 


The   Maryland   Battalion  2429 

,eiLiiI  I'''  Hope  ye  mercy  slill? 

Whal's  the  mercy  despots  feel? 
Hear  it  in  that  battle-peal! 
Read  it  on  yon  bristling  steel! 
Ask  it, — ye  who  will. 

Fear  ye  foes  who  kill  for  hire? 
Will  ye  to  your  homes  retire? 
Look  behind  you! — they're  afire! 

And,  before  you,  see 
Who  have  done  it!     From  the  vale 
On  they  come — and  will  ye  quail? 
Leaden  rain  and  iron  hail 

Let  their  welcome  be! 

In  the  God  of  battles  trust! 
Die  we  may, — and  die  we  must: 
But,  O,  where  ran  dust  to  dust 

Be  consigned  so  well, 
As  where  heaven  its  dews  shall  shed 
On  the  martyred  patriot's  bed. 
And  the  rocks  shall  raise  their  head, 

Of  his  deeds  to  tell? 

John  Pierpont  [1785-1866] 


THE  MARYLAND   BATTALION 

[battle  of  long  island,  august  27,  1776] 

T 
Spruce  Macaronis,  and  pretty  to  see, 
Tidy  and  dapper  and  gallant  were  we; 
Blooded  fine  gentlemen,  proper  and  tall. 
Bold  in  a  fox-hunt,  and  gay  at  a  ball; 
Prancing  soldados,  so  martial  and  blulT, 
Billets  for  bullets,  in  scarlet  and  buiT — 
But    our    cockades    were    clasped    with    a    mother's    low 

prayer. 
And   the  sweethearts   that   braided   the   swordknots  were 

fair. 


2430  Poems  of  History 

There  was  grummer  of  drums  humming  hoarse  in  the  hills, 

And  the  bugles  sang  fanfaron  down  by  the  mills; 

By  Flatbush  the  bagpipes  were  droning  amain,  ■ 

And  keen  cracked  the  rifles  in  Mar  tense's  lane; 

For  the  Hessians  were  flecking  the  hedges  with  red, 

And  the  grenadiers'  tramp  marked  the  roll  of  the  dead. 

Three  to  one,  flank  and  rear,  flashed  the  files  of  St.  George, 

The  fierce  gleam  of  their  steel  as  the  glow  of  a  forge. 

The  brutal  boom-boom  of  their  swart  cannoneers 

Was  sweet  music  compared  with  the  taunt  of  their  cheers — - 

For  the  brunt  of  their  onset,  our  crippled  array. 

And  the  light  of  God's  leading  gone  out  in  the  fray! 

Oh,  the  rout  on  the  left  and  the  tug  on  the  right! 
The  mad  plunge  of  the  charge  and  the  wreck  of  the  flight! 
When  the  cohorts  of  Grant  held  stout  Stirling  at  strain, 
And  the  mongrels  of  Hesse  went  tearing  the  slain; 
When  at  Freeke's  MiU  the  flumes  and  the  sluices  ran  red. 
And  the  dead  choked  the  dyke  and  the  marsh  choked  the 
dead! 

"Oh,  Stirling,  good  Stirling!  how  long  must  we  wait? 
Shall  the  shout  of  your  trumpet  unleash  us  too  late? 
Have  you  never  a  dash  for  brave  Mordecai  Gist, 
With  his  heart  in  his  throat,  and  his  blade  in  his  fist? 
Are  we  good  for  no  more  than  to  prance  in  a  ball, 
When  the  drums  beat  the  charge  and  the  clarions  call?  " 

Tralara,  Tralara!     Now  praise  we  the  Lord, 
For  the  clang  of  His  call  and  the  flash  of  His  swordi  aouaqg 
Tralara!  Tralara!     Now  forward  to  die;  '  "■    /f'tT 

For  the  banner,  hurrah!  and  for  sweethearts,  good-by!  ■"ic! 
"Four  hundred  wild  lads!"  Maybe  so.  I'U  be  bound  <  '1 
'Twill  be  easy  to  count  us,  face  up,  on  the  ground.  i  I 

If  we  hold  the  road  open,  though  Death  take  the  toll,       i  :! 
We'll  be  rriissed  on  parade  when  the  States  call  the  roll — 
When  the  flags  meet  iji  peace  and  the  guns  are  at  rest, 
And  fair  Freedom  is  singing  Sweet  Home  in  the  West. 

John  Williamson  Palmer  [1825-1906] 


Seventy -Six  2431 


SEVENTY-SIX 

What  heroes  from  the  woodland  sprung, 
When,  through  the  fresh-awakened  land. 

The  thrilling  cry  of  freedom  rung 

And  to  the  work  of  warfare  strung 
The  yeoman's  iron  hand! 

HiUs  flung  the  cry  to  hills  around. 

And  ocean-mart  replied  to  mart. 
And  streams,  whose  springs  were  yet  unfound, 
Pealed  far  away  the  starthng  sound 

Into  the  forest's  heart. 

Then  marched  the  brave  from  rocky  steep. 

From  mountain-river  swift  and  cold; 
The  borders  of  the  stormy  deep, 
The  vales  where  gathered  waters  sleep, 
Sent  up  the  strong  and  bold, — - 

As  if  the  very  earth  again 

Grew  quick  with  God's  creating  breath, 
And,  from  the  sods  of  grove  and  glen, 
Rose  ranks  of  lion-hearted  men 

To  battle  to  the  death. 

The  wife,  whose  babe  first  smiled  that  day, 

The  fair  fond  bride  of  yestereve. 
And  aged  sire  and  matron  gray, 
Saw  the  loved  warriors  haste  away. 

And  deemed  it  sin  to  grieve. 

Already  had  the  strife  begun; 

Already  blood,  on  Concord's  plain, 
Along  the  springing  grass  had  run, 
And  blood  had  flowed  at  Lexington, 

Like  brooks  of  April  rain. 


2432  Poems  of   History 


That  death-stain  on  the  vernal  sward 
Hallowed  to  freedom  all  the  shore; 

In  fragments  fell  the  yoke  abhorred — 

The  footstep  of  a  foreign  lord 
Profaned  the  soil  no  more. 

William  Ciillen  Bryant  [i 794-1 878] 

SONG  OF  MARION'S  MEN 

[1780-1781] 

Our  band  is  few,  but  true  and  tried, 

Our  leader  frank  and  bold ; 
The  British  soldier  trembles 

When  Marion's  name  is  told. 
Our  fortress  is  the  good  greenwood, 

Our  tent  the  cypress-tree; 
We  know  the  forest  round  us 

As  seamen  know  the  sea. 
We  know  its  walls  of  thorny  vines, 

Its  glades  of  reedy  grass, 
Its  safe  and  silent  islands 

Within  the  dark  morass. 

Woe  to  the  English  soldiery 

That  little  dread  us  near! 
On  them  shall  light  at  midnight 

A  strange  and  sudden  fear: 
When,  waking  to  their  tents  on  fire. 

They  grasp  their  arms  in  vain. 
And  they  who  stand  to  face  us 

Are  beat  to  earth  again; 
And  they  who  fly  in  terror  deem 

A  mighty  host  behind. 

And  hear  the  tramp  of  thousands 

Upon  the  hollow  wind.     .    , 

JfiJ  bwi 

Then  sweet  the  hour  that  brings  release 

From  danger  and  from  toil; 
We  talk  the  battle  over, 

We  share  the  battle's  spoil. 


Carmen    Bellicosum  ^433 

The  woodland  rings  with  laugh  and  shout  , 

As  if  a  hunt  were  up, 
And  woodland  flowers  arc  gathered 

To  crown  the  soldier's  cup. 
With  merry  songs  we  mock  the  wind 

That  in  the  pine-top  grieves, 
And  slumber  long  and  sweetly 

On  beds  of  oaken  leaves. 

Well  knows  the  fair  and  friendly  moon 

The  band  that  Marion  leads — 
The  ghtter  of  their  rifles, 

The  scampering  of  their  steeds. 
'Tis  life  to  guide  the  fiery  barb 

Across  the  moonlight  plain; 
'Tis  hfe  to  feel  the  night-wind 

That  lifts  his  tossing  mane.  n/;^ 

A  moment  in  the  British  camp — 

A  moment — and  away, 
Back  to  the  pathless  forest 

Before  the  peep  of  day. 

Grave  men  there  are  by  broad  Santee, 

Grave  men  with  hoary  hairs; 
Their  hearts  are  all  with  Marion, 

For  Marion  are  their  prayers. 
And  lovely  ladies  greet  our  band 

With  kindliest  welcoming. 
With  smiles  Uke  those  of  summer, 

And  tears  like  those  of  spring. 
For  them  we  wear  these  trusty  arms, 

And  lay  them  down  no  more 
Till  we  have  driven  the  Briton, 

Forever,  from  our  shore.  .rf  rf  »tV,r 

William  Ciillcn  Bryant  [1794-1878] 

CARMEN  BELLICOSUM 

In  their  ragged  regimentals 
Stood  the  old  Continentals, 
Yielding  not, 


2434  Poems  of  History 

While  the  grenadiers  were  lunging, 
And  like  hail  fell  the  plunging 
Cannon-shot; 
When  the  files 
Of  the  isles, 
From  the  smoky  night-encampment,  bore  the  banner  of  the 
rampant 
Unicorn; 
And  grummer,  grummer,  grummer,  rolled  the  roll  of  the 
drummer. 
Through  the  morn! 

Then  with  eyes  to  the  front  all, 
And  with  guns  horizontal. 

Stood  our  sires; 
And  the  balls  whistled  deadly, 
And  in  streams  flashing  redly 

Blazed  the  fires; 

As  the  roar 

On  the  shore, 
Swept  the  strong  battle-breakers  o'er  the  green-sodded  acres 

Of  the  plain; 
And  louder,  louder,  louder,  cracked  the  black  gunpowder. 

Cracking  amain! 

Now  like  smiths  at  their  forges 
Worked  the  red  St.  George's 

Cannoneers ; 
And  the  villainous  saltpetre 
Rung  a  fierce,  discordant  metre 

Round  their  ears; 

As  the  swift 

Storm-drift, 
With  hot  sweeping  anger,  came  the  horseguards'  clangor 

On  our  flanks; 
Then  higher,  higher,  higher,  burned  the  old-fashioned  fire 

Through  the  ranks! 

Then  the  bare-headed  colonel 
Galloped  through  the  white  infernal 
Powder-cloud; 


On  the   Loss  of  the  "Royal   George"    "2435 

And  his  broad-sword  was  swinging, 
And  his  brazen  throat  was  ringing 
Trumpet-loud. 
Then  the  blue 
Bullets  flew, 
And  the  trooper-jackets  redden  at  the  touch  of  the  leaden 

Rifle-breath; 
And  rounder,  rounder,  rounder,  roared  the  iron  six-pounder, 
Hurhng  death! 

Guy  Humphreys  McMaslcr  [1829-1887] 


ON  THE  LOSS  OF  THE  "ROYAL  GEORGE" 

[august  29,  1782] 

Toll  for  the  brave! 
^  The  brave  that  are  no  more! 

All  sunk  beneath  the  wave, 
Fast  by  their  native  shore! 

Eight  hundred  of  the  brave. 
Whose  courage  well  was  tried, 

Had  made  the  vessel  heel, 
And  laid  her  on  her  side. 

A  land-breeze  shook  the  shrouds, 

And  she  was  overset; 
Down  went  the  "Royal  George," 

With  all  her  crew  complete. 

Toll  for  the  brave! 

Brave  Kempenfelt  is  gone; 
His  last  sea-fight  is  fought,  .    .^P 

His  work  of  glory  done. 

It  was  not  in  the  battle; 

No  tempest  gave  the  shock; 
She  sprang  no  fatal  leak; 

She  ran  upon  no  rock. 


2436'  Poems  of  History  -dl  nO 

His  sword  was  in  its  sheath; 

His  fingers  held  the  pen. 
When  Kempenfclt  went  down 

With  twice  four  hundred  men. 

Weigh  the  vessel  up, 

Once  dreaded  by  our  foes! 
And  mingle  with  our  cup 

The  tear  that  England  owes. 

Her  timbers  yet  are  sound, 

And  she  may  float  again. 
Full  charged  with  England's  thunder, 

And  plough  the  distant  main. 

But  Kempenfelt  is  gone, 

His  victories  are  o'er; 
And  he  and  his  eight  hundred 

Shall  plough  the  wave  no  more.  > 

William  Cow  per  [i  731-1800] 


CREMONA 

[FEBRUARY    I,    1702] 

The  Grenadiers  of  Austria  are  proper  men  and  tall; 
The  Grenadiers  of  Austria  have  scaled  the  city  wall; 

They  have  marched  from  far  away 

Ere  the  dawning  of  the  day, 
And  the  morning  saw  them  masters  of  Cremona. 

There's  not  a  man  to  whisper,  there's  not  a  horse  to  neigh, 
Of  the  footmen  of  Lorraine  and  the  riders  of  Dupres; 

They  have  crept  up  every  street. 

In  the  market-place  they  meet, 
They  are  holding  every  vantage  in  Cremona. 

The  Marshal  Villeroy  he  has  started  from  his  bed; 
The  Marshal  Villeroy  has  no  wig  upon  his  head; 

"I  have  lost  my  men!"  quoth  he, 

"And  my  men  they  have  lost  me, 
And  I  sorely  fear  v/e  both  have  lost  Cremona." 


Cremona  ^43  7 

Prince  Eugene  of  Austria  is  in  the  market-place; 
Prince  Eugene  of  Austria  has  smiles  upon  his  face; 

Says  he,  "Our  work  is  done, 

For  the  Citadel  is  won. 
And  the  black  and  yellow  flag  floats  o'er  Cremona." 

Major  Dan  O'Mahony  is  in  the  barrack  square, 

And  just  six  hundred  Irish  lads  are  waiting  for  him  there; 

Says  he,  "Come  in  your  shirt, 

And  you  won't  take  any  hurt, 
For  the  morning  air  is  pleasant  in  Cremona." 

Major  Dan  O'Mahony  is  at  the  barrack  gate. 

And  just  six  hundred  Irish  lads  will  neither  stay  nor  wait 

There's  Dillon  and  there's  Burke, 

And  there'll  be  some  bloody  work 
Ere  the  Kaiserlics  shall  boast  they  hold  Cremona. 

Major  Dan  O'Mahony  has  reached  the  river  fort, 
And  just  six  hundred  Irish  lads  are  joining  in  the  sport ; 

"Come,  take  a  hand!"  says  he, 

"And  if  you  will  stand  by  me, 
Then  it's  glory  to  the  man  who  takes  Cremona!" 

Prince  Eugene  of  Austria  has  frowns  upon  his  face. 
And  loud  he  calls  his  Galloper  of  Irish  blood  and  race: 

"MacDonnell,  ride,  I  pray, 

To  your  countrymen,  and  say 
That  only  they  are  left  in  all  Cremona!" 

MacDonnell  he  has  reined  his  mare  beside  the  river  dike. 
And  he  has  tied  the  parley  flag  upon  a  sergeant's  pike; 

Six  companies  were  there 

From  Limerick  and  Clare, 
The  last  of  all  the  guardians  of  Cremona. 

"Now,  Major  Dan  O'Mahony,  give  up  the  river  gate, 
Or,  Major  Dan  O'Mahony,  you'll  find  it  is  too  late; 

For  when  I  gallop  back 

'Tis  the  signal  for  attack, 
And  no  quarter  for  the  Irish  in  Cremona!" 


2438  Poems  of  History 

And  Major  Dan  he  laughed:  " Faith,  if  what  you  say  be  true, 
And  if  they  will  not  come  until  they  hear  again  from  you, 

Then  there  will  be  no  attack, 

For  you're  never  going  back, 
And  we'll  keep  you  snug  and  safely  in  Cremona." 

All  the  weary  day  the  German  stormers  came, 

All  the  weary  day  they  were  faced  by  fire  and  flame; 

They  have  filled  the  ditch  with  dead. 

And  the  river's  running  red, 
But  they  cannot  win  the  gateway  of  Cremona. 

All  the  weary  day,  again,  again,  again,  ' '  ['        "'i.' ■  ■ 

The  horsemen  of  Dupres  and  the  footmen  of  Lorraine, 

Taafe  and  Herberstein, 

And  the  riders  of  the  Rhine; 
It's  a  mighty  price  they're  paying  for  Cremona. 

Time  and  time  they  came  with  the  deep-mouthed  German 

roar. 
Time  and  time  they  broke  like  the  wave  upon  the  shore; 

For  better  men  were  there 

From  Limerick  and  Clare, 
And  who  will  take  the  gateway  of  Cremona? 

Prince  Eugene  has  watched,  and  he  gnaws  his  nether  lip; 
Prince  Eugene  has  cursed  as  he  saw  his  chances  slip;, , 

" Call  off!  Call  off! "  he  cried,  i-o  trrfT 

"It  is  nearing  eventide. 
And  I  fear  our  work  is  finished  in  Cremona." 

Says  Wauchop  to  McAuliffe,  "Their  fire  is  growing  slack." 
Says  Major  Dan  O'Mahony,  "It  is  their  last  attack; 

But  who  will  stop  the  game 

While  there's  light  to  play  the  same, 
And  to  walk  a  short  way  with  them  from  Cremona?  V''''*^'^" 

'■.:r  -0 

And  so  they  snarl  behind  them,  and  beg  them  turn  and  come. 
They   have  taken   Neuberg's   standard,    they  have   taken 
Diak's  drum; 


Casablanca  2439 

And  along  the  winding  Po, 
Beard  on  shoulder,  stern  and  slow, 
The  Kaiser] ics  are  riding  from  Cremona. 

Just  two  hundred  Irish  lads  are  shouting  on  the  wall; 

Four  hundred  more  are  lying  who  can  hear  no  slogan  call; 

But  what's  the  odds  of  that, 

For  it's  all  the  same  to  Pat 
If  he  pays  his  debt  in  Dublin  or  Cremona. 

Says  General  de  Vaudray,  "You've  done  a  soldier's  work! 
And  every  tongue  in  France  shall  talk  of  Dillon  and  of 
Burke! 

Ask  what  you  will  this  day, 

And  be  it  what  it  may, 
It  is  granted  to  the  heroes  of  Cremona." 

"Why,  then,"  says  Dan  O'lMahony,  "one  favor  we  entreat, 
We  were  called  a  little  early,  and  our  toilet's  not  complete. 

We'Ve  no  quarrel  with  the  shirt. 

But  the  breeches  v/ouldu't  hurt. 
For  the  evening  air  is  chilly  in  Cremona." 

Arthur  Conan  Doyle  [i8sg- 

CASABIANCA 

[battle  of  the  NILE,  AUGUST,  1 798] 

The  boy  stood  on  the  burning  deck,      , 

Whence  all  but  him  had  fled; 
The  flame  that  lit  the  battle's  wreck 

Shone  round  him  o'er  the  dead. 

Yet  beautiful  and  bright  he  stood, 

As  born  to  rule  the  storm ; 
A  creature  of  heroic  blood, 

A  proud,  though  child-like  form. 

The  flames  rolled  on;  he  would  not  go 

Without  his  father^  word; 
That  father,  faint  in  death  below. 

His  voice  no  longer  heard. 


2440  Poems  of  History 

He  called  aloud,  "Say,  father,  say, 

If  yet  my  task  be  done!" 
He  knew  not  that  the  chieftain  lay 

Unconscious  of  his  son. 

"Speak,  father!"  once  again  he  cried, 

"If  I  may  yet  be  gone!" 
And  but  the  booming  shots  replied, 

And  fast  the  flames  rolled  on. 

Upon  his  brow  he  felt  their  breath, 

And  in  his  waving  hair, 
And  looked  from  that  lone  post  of  death 

In  still,  yet  brave  despair; 

And  shouted  but  once  more  aloud, 

"My  father!  must  I  stay?" 
While  o'er  him,  fast,  through  sail  and  shroud. 

The  wreathing  fires  made  way. 

They  wrapped  the  ship  in  splendor  wild, 

They  caught  the  flag  on  high. 
And  streamed  above  the  gaUant  child. 

Like  banners  in  the  sky. 

There  came  a  burst  of  thunder  sound; 

The  boy, — oh !  where  was  he? 
Ask  of  the  winds,  that  far  around 

With  fragments  strewed  the  sea, — 

With  mast,  and  helm,  and  pennon  fair, 
That  well  had  borne  their  part, — 

But  the  noblest  thing  that  perished  there. 
Was  that  young,  faithful  heart. 

Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans  [1703^1835] 

HOHENLINDEN 

[DECEMBER  3,  1800] 

On  Linden,  when  the  sun  was  low. 
All  bloodless  lay  the  untrodden  snow; 
And  dark  as  winter  was  the  flow 
Of  Iser,  roUing  rapidly. 


Battle  of  the   Baltic  2441 

But  Linden  saw  another  sight, 
When  the  drum  beat,  at  dead  of  night, 
Commanding  fires  of  death  to  hght 
The  darkness  of  her  scenery. 

By  torch  and  trumpet  fast  arrayed 
Each  horseman  drew  his  battle-blade, 
And  furious  every  charger  neighed 
To  join  the  dreadful  revelry. 

Then  shook  the  hills  with  thunder  riven; 
Then  rushed  the  steed,  to  battle  driven; 
And  louder  than  the  bolts  of  heaven 
Far  flashed  the  red  artillery. 

But  redder  yet  that  light  shall  glow 
On  Linden's  hills  of  stained  snow; 
And  bloodier  yet  the  torrent  flow 
Of  Iser,  rolling  rapidly. 

'Tis  morn;  but  scarce  yon  level  sun 
Can  pierce  the  war-clouds,  rolling  dun, 
Where  furious  Frank  and  fiery  Hun 
Shout  in  their  sulphurous  canopy. 

The  combat  deepens.     On,  ye  Brave, 
W^ho  rush  to  glory,  or  the  grave! 
Wave,  Munich!  all  thy  banners  wave. 
And  charge  with  all  thy  chivalry! 

Few,  few  shall  part,  where  many  meet! 
The  snow  shall  be  their  winding-sheet, 
And  every  turf  beneath  their  feet 
Shall  be  a  soldier's  sepulchre. 

Thomas  Campbell  [ 1 7  7 7- 1 S44] 

BATTLE  OF  THE  BALTIC 

[APRIL  2,  1 801] 

Of  Nelson  and  the  North, 
Sing  the  glorious  day's  renown, 
When  to  battle  fierce  came  forth 
All  the  might  of  Denmark's  crown, 


244^  Poems  of  History 

And  her  arms  along  tlije  deep  proudly  shone; 
By  each  gun  the  lighted  brand, 
In  a  bold  determined  hand, 
And  the  Prince  of  all  the  land 
Led  them  on. 

Like  leviathans  afloat, 

Lay  their  bulwarks  on  the  brine; 

While  the  sign  of  battle  flew 

On  the  lofty  British  line; 

It  was  ten  of  April  morn  by  the  chime: 

As  they  drifted  on  their  path, 

There  was  silence  deep  as  death; 

And  the  boldest  held  his  breath. 

For  a  time. — 

But  the  might  of  England  flushed 

To  anticipate  the  scene; 

And  her  van  the  fleeter  rushed 

O'er  the  deadly  space  between. 

"Hearts  of  oak! "  our  captain  cried;  when  each  gun 

From  its  adamantine  lips 

Spread  a  death-shade  round  the  ships. 

Like  the  hurricane  eclipse 

Of  the  sun. 

Again!  again!  again! 

And  the  havoc  did  not  slack, 

Till  a  feeble  cheer  the  Dane 

To  our  cheering  sent  us  back; — 

Their  shots  along  the  deep  slowly  boom: — 

Then  ceased — and  all  is  wail. 

As  they  strike  the  shattered  sail; 

Or,  in  conflagration  pale. 

Light  the  gloom. — 

Outspoke  the  victor  then, 
As  he  hailed  them  o'er  the  wave: 
"Ye  are  brothers!  ye  are  men!' 
And  we  conquer  but  to  save: — 


Battle  of  the  Baltic  2443 

So  peace  instead  of  death  let  us  bring. 
But  yield,  proud  foe,  thy  fleet, 
With  the  crews,  at  England's  feet, 
And  make  submission  meet 
To  our  King." — 

Then  Denmark  blessed  our  chief. 

That  he  gave  her  wounds  repose; 

And  the  sounds  of  joy  and  grief, 

From  her  people  wildly  rose, 

As  death  withdrew  his  shades  from,  the  day; 

While  the  sun  looked  smiling  bright 

O'er  a  wide  and  woful  sight, 

Where  the  fires  of  funeral  light 

Died  away. 

Now  joy.  Old  England,  raise! 

For  the  tidings  of  thy  might. 

By  the  festal  cities'  blaze, 

Whilst  the  wine-cup  shines  in  light; 

And  yet,  amidst  that  joy  and  uproar, 

Let  us  think  of  them  that  sleep. 

Full  many  a  fathom  deep. 

By  thy  wild  and  stormy  steep, 

Elsinore ! — 

Brave  hearts!  to  Britain's  pride 

Once  so  faithful  and  so  true. 

On  the  deck  of  fame  that  died; — 

With  the  gallant  good  Riou: 

Soft  sigh  the  winds  of  Heaven  o'er  their  gravel 

While  the  billow  mournful  rolls. 

And  the  mermaid's  song  condoles, 

Singing  glory  to  the  souls 

Of  the  brave! 

TJionias  Campbell  [1777-1844] 


2444  Poems  of  History 

THE  FIGHTING  TfiMfiRAIRE 

[OCTOBER  21,  1805] 

It  was  eight  bells  ringing, 

For  the  morning  watch  was  done, 
And  the  gunner's  lads  were  singing 

As  they  polished  every  gun. 
It  was  eight  bells  ringing, 
And  the  gunner's  lads  were  singing, 
For  the  ship  she  rode  a-swinging. 
As  they  pohshed  every  gun. 

Oh !  to  sec  the  linstock  lighting, 

Temerairc !  Temeraire ! 
Oh  !  to  hear  the  round  shot  biting, 

Temerairc !  Temeraire  I 
Oh !  to  see  the  linstock  lighting, 
And  to  hear  the  round  shot  hiiing, 
For  we're  all  in  love  with  fighting 

On  the  Fighting  Temeraire. 

It  was  noontide  ringing. 

And  the  battle  just  begun, 
When  the  ship  her  way  was  winging, 

As  they  loaded  every  gun. 
It  was  noontide  ringing. 
When  the  ship  her  way  was  winging, 
And  the  gunner's  lads  were  singing, 
As  they  loaded  every  gun. 

There'll  be  many  grim  and  gory,^^^^  ^^^^ 
Temeraire  !  Temeraire  !  „„•  , ,,•,;; 

There'll  be  few  to  tell  the  story, 

Temeraire !  Temeraire ! 
There'll  be  many  grim  and  gory. 
There'll  be  few  to  tell  the  story. 
But  we'll  all  be  one  in  glory 
With  the  Fighting  Tim4raire. 


Skipper   Ireson  s   Ride  '2445 

There's  a  far  bell  ringing 

At  the  setting  of  the  sun, 
And  a  phantom  voice  is  singing 

Of  the  great  days  done. 
There's  a  far  bell  ringing, 
And  a  phantom  Voice  is  singing 
Of  renown  for  ever  clinging 

To  the  great  days  done. 

Now  the  sunset  breezes  shiver,  -V 

Temerairc  !  Temeraire  ! 
And  she's  Jading  down  the  river, 

Temerairc  !  Temerairc ! 
Now  the  sunset  breezes  shiver, 
And  she's  fading  down  the  river, 
But  in  England's  song  for  ever 

She's  the  Fighting  Temerairc. 

Henry  Newbolt  [1862- 

SKIPPER  IRESON'S  RIDE 


Of  all  the  rides  since  the  birth  of  time, 
Told  in  story  or  sung  in  rhyme, — 
On  Apuleius's  Golden  Ass, 
Or  one-eyed  Calender's  horse  of  brass, 
Witch  astride  of  a  human  back, 
Islam's  prophet  on  Al-Borak, — 
The  strangest  ride  that  ever  was  sped 
Was  Ireson's,  out  from  Marblehead! 

Old  Floj'd  Ireson,  for  his  hard  heart. 
Tarred  and  feathered  and  carried  in  a  cart 
By  the  women  of  Marblehead! 

Body  of  turkey,  head  of  fowl, 
-Wings  a-droop  like  a  rained-on  fowl. 
Feathered  and  ruffled  in  every  part. 
Skipper  Ireson  stood  in  the  cart. 
Scores  of  women,  old  and  young, 
Strong  of  muscle,  and  glib  of  tongue. 


2446  Poems  of  History'" 

Pushed  and  pulled  up  the  rocky  lane, 
Shouting  and  singing  the  shrill  refrain: 
"Here's  Flud  Oirson,  fur  his  horrd  horrt, 
Torr'd  an'  futherr'd  an'  corr'd  in  a  corrt 
By  the  women  o'  Morble'cad!" 

Wrinkled  scolds  with  hands  on  hips, 

Girls  in  bloom  of  cheek  and  lips, 

Wild-eyed,  free-limbed,  such  as  chase 

Bacchus  round  some  antique  vase, 

Brief  of  skirt,  with  ankles  bare. 

Loose  of  kerchief  and  loose  of  hair, 

With  conch-shells  blowing  and  fish-horns'  twang, 

Over  and  over  the  Maenads  sang: 

"Here's  Flud  Oirson,  fur  his  horrd  horrt, 
Torr'd  an'  futherr'd  an'  corr'd  in  a  corrt 
By  the  women  o'  Morble'ead!" 

Small  pity  for  him! — He  sailed  away 
From  a  leaking  ship  in  Chaleur  Bay, — 
Sailed  away  from  a  sinking  wreck, 
With  his  own  town's-people  on  her  deck! 
"Lay  by!  lay  by!"  they  called  to  him. 
Back  he  answered,  "Sink  or  swim! 
Brag  of  your  catch  of  fish  again!" 
And  ofi  he  sailed  through  the  fog  and  rain! 
Old  Floyd  Ireson,  for  hie  hard  heart, 
Tarred  and  feathered  and  carried  in  a  cart- 
By  the  women  of  Marblehead! 

Fathoms  deep  in  dark  Chaleur 
That  wreck  shall  lie  forevermore. 
Mother  and  sister,  wife  and  maid, 
Looked  from  the  rocks  of  Marblehead 
Over  the  moaning  and  rainy  sea, — 
Looked  for  the  coming  that  might  not  be! 
What  did  the  winds  and  the  sea-birds  say 
Of  the  cruel  captain  who  sailed  away? — 
Old  Floyd  Ireson,  for  his  hard  heart, 
Tarred  and  feathered  and  carried  in  a  cart 
By  the  women  of  Marblehead! 


Skipper   Ireson's    Ride  2447 

Through  the  street,  on  either  side, 

Up  flew  windows,  doors  swung  wide; 

Sharp-tongued  spinsters,  old  wives  gray, 

Treble  lent  the  fish-horn's  bray. 

Sea-worn  grandsires,  cripple-bound, 

Hulks  of  old  sailors  run  aground, 

Shook  head,  and  fist,  and  hat,  and  cane, 

And  cracked  with  curses  the  hoarse  refrain: 
"Here's  Flud  Oirson,  fur  his  horrd  horrt, 
Torr'd  an'  futherr'd  an'  corr'd  in  a  corrt 
By  the  women  o'  Morble'ead!" 

Sweetly  along  the  Salem  road 

Bloom  of  orchard  and  lilac  showed. 

Little  the  wicked  skipper  knew 

Of  the  fields  so  green  and  the  sky  so  blue. 

Riding  there  in  his  sorry  trim. 

Like  an  Indian  idol  glum  and  grim, 

Scarcely  he  seemed  the  sound  to  hear 

Of  voices  shouting,  far  and  near: 

"Here's  Flud  Oirson,  fur  his  horrd  horrt, 
Torr'd  an'  futherr'd  an'  corr'd  in  a  corrt 
By  the  women  0'  Morble'ead!" 

"Hear  me,  neighbors!"  at  last  he  cried, — 

"What  to  me  is  this  noisy  ride? 

What  is  the  shame  that  clothes  the  skin 

To  the  'nameless  horror  that  lives  within? 

Waking  or  sleeping,  I  see  a  wreck. 

And  hear  a  cry  from  a  reeling  deck! 

Hate  me  and  curse  me, — I  only  dread 

The  hand  of  God  and  the  face  of  the  dead!" 
Said  old  Floyd  Ireson,  for  his  hard  heart, 
Tarred  and  feathered,  and  carried  in  a  cart  '-^ 

By  the  women  of  Marblehead! 

Then  the  wife  of  the  skipper  lost  at  sea 
Said,  "God  has  touched  him!  why  should  we!" 
Said  an  old  wife  mourning  her  only  son, 
"Cut  the  rogue's  tether  and  let  him  run!" 


2448  Poems  of  History 

So  with  soft  relentings  and  rude  excuse, 
Half  scorn,  half  pity,  they  cut  him  loose. 
And  gave  him  a  cloak  to  hide  him  in. 
And  left  him  alone  with  his  shame  and  sin. 
Poor  Floyd  Ireson,  for  his  hard  heart, 
Tarred  and  feathered  and  carried  in  a  cart 
By  the  women  of  Marblehead ! 

John  Greenlcaf  Whilller  [i  807-1  { 


THE  BURIAL  OF  SIR  JOHN  MOORE  AFTER 
CORUNNA 

[JANUARY  16,  1809] 

Not  a  drum  was  heard,  not  a  funeral  note, 

As  his  corse  to  the  rampart  we  hurried; 
Not  a  soldier  discharged  his  farewell  shot 

O'er  the  grave  where  our  hero  we  buried. 

We  buried  him  darkly  at  dead  of  night, 

The  sods  with  our  bayonets  turning. 
By  the  struggling  moonbeam's  misty  light 

And  the  lanthorn  dimly  burning. 

No  useless  cofhn  enclosed  his  breast,  ji 

Not  in  sheet  or  in  shroud  we  wound  him; 
But  he  lay  hke  a  warrior  taking  his  rest  . , 

With  his  martial  cloak  around  him. 

■  ! 

Few  and  short  were  the  prayers  we  said,  ■  !' 

And  we  spoke  not  a  word  of  sorrow; 
But  we  steadfastly  gazed  on  the  face  that  was  dead, 

And  we  bitterly  thought  of  the  morrow. 

We  thought,  as  we  hollowed  his  narrow  bed 

And  smoothed  down  his  lonely  pillow. 
That  the  foe  and  the  stranger  would  tread  o'er  his  head, 

And  we  far  away  on  the  billow ! 


Incident  of  the   French   Camp       2449 

Lightly  they'll  talk  of  the  spirit  that'sgone, 
And  o'er  his  cold  ashes  upbraid  him — 

But  httle  he'll  reck,  if  they  let  him  sleep  on 
In  the  grave  where  a  Briton  has  laid  him. 

But  half  of  our  heavy  task  was  done 

When  the  clock  struck  the  hour  for  retiring; 

And  we  heard  the  distant  and  random  gun 
That  the  foe  was  sullenly  firing. 

Slowly  and  sadly  we  laid  him  down, 

From  the  field  of  his  fame  fresh  and  gory; 

We  carved  not  a  line,  and  we  raised  not  a  stone. 
But  we  left  him  alone  with  his  glory. 

Charles  Wolfe  [1791-1823] 


INCIDENT  OF  THE   FRENCH   CAMP 

[APRIL  23,  1S09] 

You  know,  we  French  stormed  Ratisbon: 

A  mile  or  so  away, 
On  a  little  mound,  Napoleon 

Stood  on  our  storming-day; 
With  neck  out-thrust,  you  fancy  how, 

Legs  wide,  arms  locked  behind, 
As  if  to  balance  the  prone  brow 

Oppressive  with  its  mind. 

Just  as  perhaps  he  mused,  "My  plans 

That  soar,  to  earth  may  fall. 
Let  once  my  army-leader  Lannes 

Waver  at  yonder  wall," — ■ 
Out  'twixt  the  battery-smokes  there  flew 

A  rider,  bound  on  bound  '' 

Full-galloping;  nor  bridle  drew 

Until  he  reached  the  mound. 

Then  oH  there  flung  in  smihng  joy, 

And  held  himself  erect 
By  just  his  horse's  mane,  a  boy: 

You  hardly  could  suspect — 


2450  Poems  of  History        r.  1 

(So  tight  be  kept  his  lips  compressed, 

Scarce  any  blood  came  through), 
You  looked  twice  ere  you  saw  his  breast 

Was  all  but  shot  in  two. 

"Well,"  cried  he,  "Emperor,  by  God's  grace 

We've  got  you  Ratisbon! 
The  Marshal's  in  the  market-place, 

And  you'll  be  there  anon 
To  see  your  flag-bird  flap  his  vans 

Where  I,  to  heart's  desire, 
Perched  him!"     The  chief's  eye  flashed;  his  plans 

Soared  up  again  like  fire. 

The  chief's  eye  flashed;  but  presently 

Softened  itself,  as  sheathes 
A  film  the  mother-eagle's  eye 

When  her  bruised  eaglet  breathes; 
"You're  wounded!"     "Nay,"  the  soldier's  pride 

Touched  to  the  quick,  he  said: 
"I'm  killed.  Sire!"     And  his  chief  beside, 

Smiling  the  boy  fell  dead. 

Robert  Browning  [i8i2-i8i 


THE  EVE  OF  WATERLOO 

From  "  Childe  Harold's  Pilgrimage  " 
[JUNE  18,  181 5] 

There  was  a  sound  of  revelry  by  night, 
And  Belgium's  capital  had  gathered  then 
Her  Beauty  and  her  Chivalry,  and  bright 
The  lamps  shone  o'er  fair  women  and  brave  men; 
A  thousand  hearts  beat  happily;  and  when 
Music  arose  with  its  voluptuous  swell, 
Soft  eyes  looked  love  to  eyes  which  spake  again, 
And  all  went  merry  as  a  marriage  bell; — 
But  hush!  hark!  a  deep  sound  strikes  like  a  rising  knell! 


The  Eve  of  Waterloo  2451 

Did  ye  not  hear  it? — No;  'twas  but  the  wind, 
Or  the  car  rattling  o'er  the  stony  street; 
On  with  the  dance!  let  joy  be  unconfined; 
No  sleep  till  morn,  when  Youth  and  Pleasure  meet 
To  chase  the  glowing  Hours  with  flying  feet — 
But  hark! — that  heavy  sound  breaks  in  once  more, 
As  if  the  clouds  its  echo  would  repeat ; 
And  nearer,  clearer,  deadlier  than  before! 
Arm!  Arm!  it  is — it  is — the  cannon's  opening  roar! 

Within  a  windowed  niche  of  that  high  wall 
Sate  Brunswick's  fated  chieftain;  he  did  hear 
That  sound  the  first  amidst  the  festival. 
And  caught  its  tone  with  Death's  prophetic  ear; 
And  when  they  smiled  because  he  deemed  it  near, 
His  heart  more  truly  knew  that  peal  too  well 
Which  stretched  his  father  on  a  bloody  bier, 
And  roused  the  vengeance  blood  alone  could  quell: 
He  rushed  into  the  field,  and,  foremost  fighting,  fell. 

Ah!  then  and  there  was  hurrying  to  and  fro. 
And  gathering  tears,  and  tremblings  of  distress, 
And  cheeks  all  pale,  which  but  an  hour  ago 
Blushed  at  the  praise  of  their  own  loveliness; 
And  there  were  sudden  partings,  such  as  press 
The  life  from  out  young  hearts,  and  choking  sighs 
Which  ne'er  might  be  repealed;  who  could  guess 
If  ever  more  should  meet  those  mutual  eyes, 
Since  upon  night  so  sweet  such  awful  morn  could  rise! 

And  there  was  mounting  in  hot  haste:  the  steed. 
The  mustering  squadron,  and  the  clattering  car, 
Went  pouring  forward  with  impetuous  speed,       -^Z 
And  swiftly  forming  in  the  ranks  of  war; 
And  the  deep  thunder  peal  on  peal  afar; 
And  near,  the  beat  of  the  alarming  drum 
Roused  up  the  soldier  ere  the  morning  star; 
While  thronged  the  citizens  with  terror  dumb, 
Or  whispering,  with  white  lips — "The  foe!  they  come!  they 
come!" 


2452  Poems  of  History 

And  wild  and  high  the  "Cameron's  gathering"  rose! 
The  war-note  of  Lochiel,  which  Albyn's  hills 
Have  heard,  and  heard,  too,  have  her  Saxon  foes: — 
How  in  the  noon  of  night  that  pibroch  thrills. 
Savage  and' shrill!     But  with  the  breath  which  fills 
Their  mountain-pipe,  so  fill  the  mountaineers 
With  the  fierce  native  daring  which  instils 
The  stirring  memory  of  a  thousand  years. 
And  Evan's,  Donald's  fame  rings  in  each  clansman's  ears! 

And  Ardennes  waves  above  them  her  green  leaves, 
Dewy  with  nature's  tear-drops  as  they  pass, 
Grieving,  if  aught  inanimate  e'er  grieves, 
Over  the  unreturning  brave, — alas! 
Ere  evening  to  be  trodden  like  the  grass 
Which  now  beneath  them,  but  above  shall  grow 
In  its  next  verdure,  when  this  fiery  mass  / 

Of  living  valor,  rolling  on  the  foe 
And  burning  with  high  hope,  shall  moulder  cold  and  low. 

Last  noon  beheld  them  full  of  lusty  life. 
Last  eve  in  Beauty's  circle  proudly  gay, 
The  midnight  brought  the  signal-sound  of  strife. 
The  morn  the  marshalling  in  arms, — the  day 
Battle's  magnificently  stern  array! 
The  thunder-clouds  close  o'er  it,  which  when  rent 
The  earth  is  covered  thick  with  other  clay. 
Which  her  own  clay  shall  cover,  heaped  and  pent, 
Rider  and  horse, — friend,  foe, — in  one  red  burial  blent! 
George  Gordon  Byron  [1788-1824] 

WATERLOO 

Why  have  the  Mighty  lived — why  have  they  died? 
Is  it  ever  thus  with  idle  wreck  to  strew 
Fields  such  as  thine,  remorseless  Waterloo? 
Hopeless  the  lesson!     Vainly  hath  ever  cried 
Stern  Fate  to  man — "So  perish  human  pride!  " 
Still  must  the  Many  combat  for  the  Few: 
Still  must  the  noblest  blood  fair  earth  bedew:  ' ' 

Tyrants,  slaves,  freemen,  mouldering  side  by  side! 


Marco   Bozzaris  ^453 

On  such  a  day  the  World  was  lost,  and  won, 
By  Pompey  at  Pharsalia:  such  a  day 
Saw  glorious  Hannibal  a  fugitive: 
So  faded  'neath  the  Macedonian  Sun 
Persia's  pale  star:  so  empire  passed  away 
From  Harold's  brow, — but  He  disdained  to  live! 

Aubrey  De  Vcrc  [1788-1846] 


MARCO  BOZZARIS 

[APRIL    20,    1823] 

At  midnight,  in  his  guarded  tent. 

The  Turk  was  dreaming  of  the  hour 
When  Greece,  her  knee  in  suppliance  bent, 

Should  tremble  at  his  power: 
In  dreams,  through  camp  and  court,  he  bore 
The  trophies  of  a  conqueror; 

In  dreams  his  song  of  triumph  heard; 
Then  wore  his  monarch's  signet  ring: 
Then  pressed  that  monarch's  throne — a  king; 
As  wild  his  thoughts,  and  gay  of  wing, 

As  Eden's  garden  bird. 

At  midnight,  in  the  forest  shades, 

Bozzaris  ranged  his  Suliote  band, 
True  as  the  steel  of  their  tried  blades, 

Heroes  in  heart  and  hand. 
There  had  the  Persian's  thousands  stood. 
There  had  the  glad  earth  drunk  their  blood 

On  old  Plata^a's  day; 
And  now  there  breathed  that  haunted  air 
The  sons  of  sires  who  conquered  there. 
With  arm  to  strike,  and  soul  to  dare, 

As  quick,  as  far  as  they. 

An  hour  passed  on — the  Turk  awoke; 

That  bright  dream  was  his  last; 
He  woke — to  hear  his  sentries  shriek, 
"To  arms!  they  come!  the  Greek!  the  Greek!" 


2454  Poems  of  History 

He  woke — to  die  midst  fliame,  and  smoke, 
And  shout,  and  groan,  and  sabre-stroke. 

And  death-shots  faUing  thick  and  fast 
As  Hghtnings  from  the  mountain-cloud; 
And  heard,  with  voice  as  trumpet  loud, 

Bozzaris  cheer  his  band: 
"Strike — till  the  last  armed  foe  expires; 
Strike — for  your  altars  and  your  fires; 
Strike — for  the  green  graves  of  your  sires; 

God — and  your  native  land!" 

They  fought — like  brave  men,  long  and  well; 

They  piled  that  ground  with  Moslem  slain, 
They  conquered — but  Bozzaris  fell. 

Bleeding  at  every  vein. 
His  few  surviving  comrades  saw 
His  smile  when  rang  their  proud  hurrah, 

And  the  red  field  was  won; 
Then  saw  in  death  his  eyehds  close 
Calmly,  as  to  a  night's  repose. 

Like  flowers  at  set  of  sun. 

Come  to  the  bridal-chamber.  Death! 

Come  to  the  mother's,  when  she  feels. 
For  the  first  time,  her  first-born's  breath; 

Come  when  the  blessed  seals 
That  close  the  pestilence  are  broke, 
And  crowded  cities  wail  its  stroke; 
Come  in  consumption's  ghastly  form. 
The  earthquake  shock,  the  ocean  storm; 
Come  when  the  heart  beats  high  and  warm 

With  banquet-song,  and  dance,  and  wine; 
And  thou  art  terrible,— the  tear. 
The  groan,  the  knell,  the  pall,  the  bier, 
And  all  we  know,  or  dream,  or  fear 

Of  agony,  are  thine. 

But  to  the  hero,  when  his  sword 
Has  won  the  battle  for  the  free, 
Thy  voice  sounds  like  a  prophet's  word; 
And  in  its  hollow  tones  are  heard 


Marco   Bozzaris  2455 

The  thanks  of  millions  yet  to  be. 
Come,  when  his  task  of  fame  is  wrought — 
Come,  with  her  laurel-leaf,  blood-bought— 

Come  in  her  crowning  hour — and  then 
Thy  sunken  eye's  unearthly  hght 
To  him  is  welcome  as  the  sight 

Of  sky  and  stars  to  prisoned  men: 
Thy  grasp  is  welcome  as  the  hand 
Of  brother  in  a  foreign  land; 
Thy  summons  welcome  as  the  cry 
That  told  the  Indian  isles  were  nigh 

To  the  world-seeking  Genoese, 
When  the  land  wind,  from  woods  of  palm, 
And  orange  groves,  and  fields  of  balm, 

Blew  o'er  the  Haytian  seas. 

Bozzaris!  with  the  storied  brave 

Greece  nurtured  in  her  glory's  time. 
Rest  thee — there  is  no  prouder  grave, 

Even  in  her  own  proud  clime. 
She  wore  no  funeral-weeds  for  thee, 

Nor  bade  the  dark  hearse  wave  its  plume 
Like  torn  branch  from  death's  leafless  tree 
In  sorrow's  pomp  and  pageantry. 

The  heartless  luxury  of  the  tomb: 
But  she  remembers  thee  as  one 
Long  loved,  and  for  a  season  gone; 
For  thee  her  poet's  lyre  is  wreathed. 
Her  marble  wrought,  her. music  breathed; 
For  thee  she  rings  the  birthday  bells; 
Of  thee  her  babes'  first  lisping  tells; 
For  thine  her  evening  prayer  is  said 
At  palace-couch  and  cottage-bed; 
Her  soldier,  closing  with  the  foe. 
Gives  for  thy  sake  a  deadlier  blow ; 
His  plighted  maiden,  when  she  fears 
For  him,  the  joy  of  her  young  years. 
Thinks  of  thy  fate,  and  checks  her  tears: 

And  she,  the  mother  of  thy  boys. 


2456  Poems  of  History 

Though  in  her  eye  and  faded  cheek 
Is  read  the  grief  she  will  not  speak, 

The  memory  of  her  buried  joys, 
And  even  she  who  gave  thee  birth. 
Will,  by  their  pilgrim-circled  hearth. 

Talk  of  thy  doom  without  a  sigh: 
For  thou  art  Freedom's  now,  and  Fame's: 
One  of  the  few,  the  immortal  names. 

That  were  not  born  to  die. 

Fitz-Grecne  Hallcck  [1790-1867] 

OLD  IRONSIDES 

[SEPTEMBER  1 4,  1830] 

Ay,  tear  her  tattered  ensign  down! 

Long  has  it  waved  on  high. 
And  many  an  eye  has  danced  to  see 

That  banner  in  the  sky; 
Beneath  it  rung  the  battle  shout, 

And  burst  the  cannon's  roar; — 
The  meteor  of  the  ocean  air 

Shall  sweep  the  clouds  no  more. 

Her  deck,  once  red  with  heroes'  blood. 

Where  knelt  the  vanquished  foe. 
When  winds  were  hurrying  o'er  the  flood, 

And  waves  were  white  below. 
No  more  shall  feel  the  victor's  tread. 

Or  know  the  conquered  knee; — 
The  harpies  of  the  shore  shall  pluck 

The  eagle  of  the  sea! 

Oh,  better  that  her  shattered  hulk 

Should  sink  beneath  the  wave; 
Her  thunders  shook  the  mighty  deep, 

And  there  should  be  her  grave; 
Nail  to  the  mast  her  holy  flag. 

Set  every  threadbare  sail. 
And  give  her  to  the  god  of  storms, 

The  lightning  and  the  gale! 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [1809-1894I 


The  Valor  of  Ben    Milam  2457 

THE   VALOR  OF   BEN   MILAM 

[DECEMBER  5-II,   1 83 5] 

Oh,  who  will  follow  old  Ben  Milam  into  San  Antonio? 

Such  was  the  thrilling  word  we  heard  in  the  chill  December 
glow; 

Such  was  the  thrilling  word  we  heard,  and  a  ringing,  answer- 
ing cry 

Went  up  from  the  dun  adobe  walls  to  the  cloudless  Texas 
sky. 

He  had  won  from  the  reek  of  a  Mexique  jail  back  without 
map  or  chart, 

With  his  mother-wit  and  his  hero-grit  and  his  stanch  Ken- 
tucky heart; 

He  had  trudged  by  vale  and  by  mountain  trail,  and  by  thorn 
and  thirsty  plain. 

And  now,  with  joy  on  his  grizzled  brow,  he  had  come  to  his 
own  again. 

They're  the  spawn  of  Hell!  we  heard  him  tell;  they  will  knife 

and  lie  and  cheat 
At  the  board  of  none  of  the  sivarthy  horde  would  I  deign  to  sit  at 

meat; 
They  hold  it  naught  that  I  bled  and  fought  ivhen  Spain  was 

their  ruthless  foe; 
Oh,  who  will  follow  old  Ben  Milam  into  San  Antonio? 

It  was  four  to  one,  not  gun  for  gun,  but  never  a  curse  cared 
we. 

Three  hundred  faithful  and  fearless  men  who  had  sworn  to 
make  Texas  free. 

It  was  mighty  odds,  by  all  the  gods,  this  brute  of  the  Mexi- 
que dam. 

But  it  was  not  much  for  heroes  such  as  followed  old  Ben 
Milam!  ---^  - 

With  rifle-crack  and  sabre-hack  we  drove  them  back'  in  the 

street; 
From  house  to  house  in  the  red  carouse  we  hastened  their 

flying  feet; 


2458  Poems  of  History 

And  ever  that  shout  kept  pealing  out  with  a  swift  and  sure 

death-blow : 
Oh,  who  will  follow  old  Ben  Milam  into  San  Antonio  ? 

Behind  the  walls  from  the  hurtling  balls  Cos  cowered  and 
swore  in  his  beard. 

While  we  slashed  and  slew  from  dawn  till  deWj  and,  Bexar, 
how  we  cheered! 

But  ere  failed  each  ruse,  and  the  white  of  truce  on  the  fail- 
ing day  was  thrown, 

Our  fearless  soul  had  gone  to  the  goal,  the  Land  of  the  Great 
Unknown. 

Death  brought  the  darksome  boon  too  soon  to  this  truest 

one  of  the  true, 
Or,  men  of  the  fated  Alamo,  Milam  had  died  with  you! 
So  when  their  names  that  now  are  Fame's — the  scorners  of 

braggard  sham; — 
In  song  be  praised,  let  a  rouse  be  raised  for  the  name  of  Ben 

Milam!  CUnlon  Scollard  [1860- 

THE  DEFENCE  OF  THE  ALAMO 

[march  6,  1836] 

Santa  Ana  came  storming,  as  a  storm  might  come; 

There  was  rumble  of  cannon;  there  was  rattle  of  blade; 
There  was  cavalry,  infantry,  bugle  and  drum, — 

Full  seven  thousand,  in  pomp  and  parade, 
The  chivalry,  flower  of  Mexico; 
And  a  gaunt  two  hundred  in  the  Alamo! 

And  thirty  lay  sick,  and  some  were  shot  through; 

For  the  siege  had  been  bitter,  and  bloody,  and  long. 
"Surrender,  or  die!" — "Men,  what  will  you  do?" 

And  Travis,  great  Travis,  drew  sword,  quick  and  strong; 
Drew  a  line  at  his  feet  .  .  .  "Will  you  come?  Will  you  go? 
/  die  with  my  wounded,  in  the  Alamo." 

The  Bowie  gasped,  "Lead  me  over  that  line!"  -l  :'TT 

Then  Crockett,  one  hand  to  the  sick,  one  hand  to  his  gun, 

Crossed  with  him;  then  never  a  word  or  a  sign 
Till  all,  sick  or  well,  all,  all  save  but  one, 


The   Fight  at  San  Jacinto  2459 

One  man.     Then  a  woman  stepped,  praying,  and  slow 
Across;  to  die  at  her  post  in  the  Alamo. 

Then  that  one  coward  fled,  in  the  night,  in  that  night 
When  all  men  silently  prayed  and  thought 

Of  home;  of  to-morrow;  of  God  and  the  right, 

Till  dawn:  and  with  dawn  came  Travis's  cannon-shot, 

In  answer  to  insolent  Mexico, 

From  the  old  bell-tower  of  the  Alamo, 

Then  came  Santa  Ana;  a  crescent  of  flame! 

Then  the  red  escalade;  then  the  fight  hand  to  hand; 
Such  an  unequal  fight  as  never  had  name 

Since  the  Persian  hordes  butchered  that  doomed  Spartan 
band. 
All  day — all  day  and  all  night;  and  the  morning?  so  slow, 
Through  the  battle-smoke  mantling  the  Alamo. 

Now  silence!     Such  silence!     Two  thousand  lay  dead 
In  a  crescent  outside!     And  within?     Not  a  breath 

Save  the  gasp  of  a  woman,  with  gory  gashed  head. 
All  alone,  all  alone  there,  v/aiting  for  death; 

And  she  but  a  nurse.     Yet  when  shall  we  know 

Another  like  this  of  the  Alamo? 

Shout  "Victory,  victory,  victory  ho!" 

I  say  'tis  not  always  to  the  hosts  that  win! 
I  say  that  the  victory,  high  or  low. 

Is  given  the  hero  who  grapples  with  sin, 
Or  legion  or  single;  just  asking  to  know 
When  duty  fronts  death  in  his  Alamo. 

Joaquin  Miller  [i84i-igi3] 


THE   FIGHT  AT   SAN  JACINTO 

[APRIL  21,   1836] 

"Now  for  a  brisk  and  cheerful  fight!"'! 

Said  Harman,  big  and  droll. 
As  he  coaxed  his  flint  and  steel  for  a  light. 

And  puffed  at  his  cold  clay  bowl; 


2460  Poems  of  History 

"For  we  are  a  skulking  lot,"  says  he, 
"Of  land-thieves  hereabout, 

And  the  bold  seiiores,  two  to  one, 
Have  come  to  smoke  us  out." 

Santa  Anna  and  Castrillon, 

Almonte  brave  and  gay, 
Portilla  red  from  GoHad, 

And  Cos  with  his  smart  array. 
Dulces  and  cigaritos, 

And  the  light  guitar,  ting-tum! 
Sant'  Anna  courts  siesta — 

And  Sam  Houston  taps  his  drum. 

The  buck  stands  still  in  the  timber — 

"  Is  it  patter  of  nuts  that  fall?  " 
The  foal  of  the  wild  mare  whinnies — 

Did  he  hear  the  Comanche  call? 
In  the  brake  by  the  crawling  bayou 

The  sUnking  she-wolves  howl, 
And  the  mustang's  snort  in  the  river  sedge 

Has  startled  the  paddHng  fowl. 

A  soft,  low  tap,  and  a  muffled  tap. 

And  a  roll  not  loud  nor  long — 
We  would  not  break  Sant'  Anna's  nap, 

Nor  spoil  Almonte's  song. 
Saddles  and  knives  and  rifles! 

Lord!  but  the  men  were  glad 
When  Deaf  Smith  muttered  "Alamo!" 

And  Karnes  hissed  "Goliad!" 

The  drummer  tucked  his  sticks  in  his  belt. 

And  the  fifer  gripped  his  gun. 
Oh,  for  one  free,  wild,  Texan  yell, 

As  we  took  the  slope  in  a  run ! 
But  never  a  shout  nor  a  shot  we  spent. 

Nor  an  oath  nor  a  prayer,  that  day, 
Till  we  faced  the  bravos,  eye  to  eye, 

And  then  we  blazed  away. 


The  Wreck  of  the   Hesperus       2461 

Then  we  knew  the  rapture  of  Ben  Milam, 

And  the  glory  that  Travis  made,  : ' 

With  Bowie's  lunge,  and  Crockett's  shot, 

And  Fannin's  dancing  blade;  , 

And  the  heart  of  the  fighter,  bounding  free 

In  his  joy  so  hot  and  mad — 
When  Millard  charged  for  Alamo, 

Lamar  for  Gohad. 

Deaf  Smith  rode  straight,  with  reeking  spur, 

Into  the  shock  and  rout : 
"I've  hacked  and  burned  the  bayou  bridge, 

There's  no  sneak's  back-way  out ! " 
Muzzle  or  butt  for  Goliad, 

Pistol  and  blade  and  fist! 
Oh,  for  the  knife  that  never  glanced, 

And  the  gun  that  never  missed! 

Dulces  and  cigaritos. 

Song  and  the  mandolin! 
That  gory  swamp  was  a  gruesome  grove 

To  dance  fandangos  in. 
We  bridged  the  bog  with  the  sprawling  herd 

That  fell  in  that  frantic  rout ; 
We  slew  and  slew  till  the  sun  set  red. 

And  the  Texan  star  flashed  out. 

John  Williamson  Palmer  [1825-1006] 


THE  WRECK  OF  THE  HESPERUS 

[DECEMBER  1 7,  1 839] 

It  was  the  schooner  Hesperus, 

That  sailed  the  wintry  sea; 
And  the  skipper  had  taken  his  little  daughter. 

To  bear  him  company. 

Blue  were  her  eyes  as  the  fairy-flax, 
Her  cheeks  Hke  the  dawn  of  day, 

And  her  bosom  white  as  the  hawthorn  buds 
That  ope  in  the  month  of  May. 


2462  Poems  of  History 

The  skipper  he  stood  beside  the  helrn^ 
His  pipe  was  in  his  mouth,  -j, ,{«  ^^jj  {jf,/ 

And  he  watched  how  the  veering  flaw  did  blow 
The  smoke  now  West,  now  South. 

Then  up  and  spake  an  old  Sailor, 

Had  sailed  to  the  Spanish  main, 
"I  pray  thee,  put  into  yonder  port, 

For  I  fear  a  hurricane. 

"Last  night,  the  moon  had  a  golden  ring, 

And  to-night  no  moon  we  see!" 
The  skipper,  he  blew  a  whiff  from  his  pipe, 

And  a  scornful  laugh  laughed  he. 

Colder  and  louder  blew  the  wind, 

A  gale  from  the  Northeast, 
The  snow  fell  hissing  in  the  brine. 

And  the  billows  frothed  hke  yeast. 

Down  came  the  storm,  and  smote  amain 

The  vessel  in  its  strength; 
She  shuddered  and  paused,  like  a  frighted  steed. 

Then  leaped  her  cable's  length. 

"Come  hither!  come  hither!  my  little  daughter, 

And  do  not  tremble  so; 
For  I  can  weather  the  roughest  gale 

That  ever  wind  did  blow." 

He  wrapped  her  warm  in  his  seaman's  coat 

Against  the  stinging  blast; 
He  cut  a  rope  from  a  broken  spar, 

And  bound  her  to  the  mast. 

"O  father!  I  hear  the  church-bells  ring,     - 

Oh  say,  what  may  it  be?" 
"  'Tis  a  fog-bell  on  a  rock-bound  coast!"— 

And  he  steered  for  the  open  sea. 


The  Wreck  of  the  Hesperus       2463 

"0  father!  I  hear  the  sound  of  guns, 

Oh  say,  what  may  it  be?" 
"Some  ship  in  distress,  that  cannot  Hve 

In  such  an  angry  sea!" 

"O  father!  I  see  a  gleaming  Hght, 

Oh  say,  what  may  it  be!" 
But  the  father  answered  never  a  word, 

A  frozen  corpse  was  he. 

Lashed  to  the  helm,  all  stiff  and  stark, 

With  his  face  turned  to  the  skies, 
The  lantern  gleamed  through  the  gleaming  snow 

On  his  fixed  and  glassy  eyes. 

Then  the  maiden  clasped  her  hands  and  prayed 

That  saved  she  might  be; 
And  she  thought  of  Christ,  who  stilled  the  wave, 

On  the  Lake  of  Galilee. 

And  fast  through  the  midnight  dark  and  drear. 
Through  the  whistling  sleet  and  snow. 

Like  a  sheeted  ghost,  the  vessel  swept 
Towards  the  reef  of  Norman's  Woe. 

And  ever  the  fitful  gusts  between 

A  sound  came  from  the  land; 
It  was  the  sound  of  the  trampling  surf 

On  the  rocks  and  the  hard  sea-sand. 

The  breakers  were  right  beneath  her  bows. 

She  drifted  a  dreary  wreck, 
And  a  whooping  billow  swept  the  crew 

Like  icicles  from  her  deck. 

She  struck  where  the  white  and  fleecy  waves 

Looked  soft  as  carded  wool, 
But  the  cruel  rocks,  they  gored  her  side 

Like  the  horns  of  an  angry  bull. 


2464  Poems  of  History 

Her  rattling  shrouds,  all  sheathed  in  ice, 
With  the  masts,  went  by  the  board;     '■' 

Like  a  vessel  of  glass,  she  stove  and  sank, 
Ho!  ho!  the  breakers  roared! 

At  daybreak,  on  the  bleak  sea-beach, 

A  fisherman  stood  aghast, 
To  see  the  form  of  a  maiden  fair, 

Lashed  close  to  a  drifting  mast. 

The  salt  sea  was  frozen  on  her  breast, 

The  salt  tears  in  her  eyes; 
And  he  saw  her  hair,  like  the  brown  sea-weed. 

On  the  billows  fall  and  rise. 

Such  was  the  wreck  of  the  Hesperus, 

In  the  midnight  and  the  snow! 
Christ  save  us  all  from  a  death  like  this. 

On  the  reef  of  Norman's  Woe! 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807-1S82] 


THE  LOST  COLORS 

[1843] 

Frowning,  the  mountain  stronghold  stood. 

Whose  front  no  mortal  could  assail; 

For  more  than  twice  three  hundred  years 

The  terror  of  the  Indian  vale. 

By  blood  and  fire  the  robber  band 

Answered  the  helpless  village  wail. 

Hot  was  his  heart  and  cool  his  thought. 
When  Napier  from  his  Englishmen 
Up  to  the  bandits'  rampart  glanced. 
And  down  upon  his  ranks  again. 
Summoned  to  dare  a  deed  like  that, 
Which  of  them  all  would  answer  then? 

What  sullen  regiment  is  this 

That  lifts  its  eyes  to  dread  Cutchee? 


A   Ballad  of  Sir  John    Franklin      2465 

Abased,  its  standard  bears  no  flag. 
For  thus  the  punishment  shall  be 
That  England  metes  to  Englishmen 
Who  shame  her  once  by  mutiny. 

From  out  the  disgraced  Sixty-Fourth 
There  stepped  a  hundred  men  of  might. 
Cried  Napier:  "Now  prove  to  me 
I  read  my  soldiers'  hearts  aright! 
Form!    Forward!    Charge,  my  volunteersi 
Your  colors  are  on  yonder  height ! " 

So  sad  is  shame,  so  wise  is  trust! 
The  challenge  echoed  bugle-clear. 
Like  fire  along  the  Sixty-Fourth 
From  rank  to  file  rang  cheer  on  cheer. 
In  death  and  glory  up  the  pass 
They  fought  for  all  to  brave  men  dear. 

Old  is  the  tale,  but  read  anew 

In  every  warring  human  heart, 

What  rebel  hours,  what  coward  shame, 

Upon  the  aching  memory  start! 

To  find  the  ideal  forfeited, 

— What  tears  can  teach  the  holy  art? 

Thou  great  Commander!  leading  on 

Through  weakest  darkness  to  strong  light; 

By  any  anguish,  give  us  back 

Our  life's  young  standard,  pure  and  bright. 

O  fair,  lost  Colors  of  the  soul! 

For  your  sake  storm  we  any  height. 

Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps  Ward  [1S44-1911] 


A  BALLAD   OF  SIR  JOHN   FRANKLIN 

[1845-47] 

O,  \VHITHER  sail  you.  Sir  John  Franklin? 

Cried  a  whaler  in  Baffin's  Bay. 
To  know  if  between  the  land  and  the  pole 

I  may  find  a  broad  sea-way. 


2466  Poems  of  History 

I  charge  you  back,  Sir  John  Franklin,        •■ 

As  you  would  live  and  thrive; 
For  between  the  land  and  the  frozen  pole 

No  man  may  sail  aUve. 

But  lightly  laughed  the  stout  Sir  John, 

And  spoke  unto  his  men: 
Half  England  is  wrong,  if  he  be  right; 

Bear  off  to  westward  then. 

O,  whither  sail  you,  brave  Englishman? 

Cried  the  little  Esquimau. 
Between  your  land  and  the  polar  star 

My  goodly  vessels  go. 

Come  down,  if  you  would  journey  there, 
The  Httle  Indian  said;  : 

And  change  your  cloth  for  fur  clothing, 
Your  vessel  for  a  sled. 

But  hghtly  laughed  the  stout  Sir  John, 
And  the  crew  laughed  with  him  too: — 

A  sailor  to  change  from  ship  to  sled, 
I  ween,  were  something  new. 

All  through  the  long,  long  polar  day, 

The  vessels  westward  sped; 
And  wherever  the  sail  of  Sir  John  was  blown. 

The  ice  gave  way  and  fled : — 

Gave  way  with  many  a  hollow  groan, 

And  with  many  a  surly  roar. 
But  it  murmured  and  threatened  on  every  side, 

And  closed  where  he  sailed  before. 

Hoi  see  ye  not,  my  merry  men. 

The  broad  and  open  sea? 
Bethink  ye  what  the  whaler  said, 
Think  of  the  little  Indian's  sled! 

The  crew  laughed  out  in  glee. 


A   Ballad  of  Sir  John   Franklin      2467 

Sir  John,  Sir  John,  'tis  bitter  cold. 

The  scud  drives  on  the  breeze, 
The  ice  comes  looming  from  the  north, 

The  very  sunbeams  freeze. 

Bright  summer  goes,  dark  winter  comes, — 

We  cannot  rule  the  year; 
But  long  ere  summer's  sun  goes  down, 

On  yonder  sea  we'll  steer. 

The  dripping  icebergs  dipped  and  rose, 

And  floundered  down  the  gale ; 
The  ships  were  stayed,  the  yards  were  manned, 

And  furled  the  useless  sail. 

The  summer's  gone,  the  winter's  come, — 

We  sail  not  on  yonder  sea: 
Why  sail  we  not.  Sir  John  Franklin? — 

A  silent  man  was  he. 

The  summer  goes,  the  winter  comes, — 

We  cannot  rule  the  year: 
I  ween  we  cannot  rule  the  ways. 

Sir  John,  wherein  we'd  steer. 

The  cruel  ice  came  floating  on. 

And  closed  beneath  the  lee. 
Till  the  thickening  waters  dashed  no  more: 
'Twas  ice  around,  behind,  before — 

My  God!  there  is  no  sea! 

What  think  you  of  the  whaler  now? 

What  of  the  Esquimau? 
A  sled  were  better  than  a  ship. 

To  cruise  through  ice  and  snow. 

Down  sank  the  baleful  crimson  sun, 

The  northern  Hght  came  out. 
And  glared  upon  the  ice-bound  ships. 

And  shook  its  spears  about. 


2468  Poems  of  History 

The  snow  came  down,  storm  breeding  storm, 

And  on  the  decks  was  laid. 
Till  the  weary  sailor,  sick  at  heart, 

Sank  down  beside  his  spade. 

Sir  John,  the  night  is  black  and  long, 

The  hissing  wind  is  bleak, 
The  hard,  green  ice  as  strong  as  death: — 

I  prithee.  Captain,  speak! 

The  night  is  neither  bright  nor  short, 

The  singing  breeze  is  cold, — 
The  ice  is  not  so  strong  as  hope, 

The  heart  of  man  is  bold! 

What  hope  can  scale  this  icy  wall, 

High  over  the  main  flag-staff? 
Above  the  ridges  the  wolf  and  bear 
Look  down,  with  a  patient,  settled  stare. 

Look  down  on  us  and  laugh. 

The  summer  went,  the  winter  came, — 

We  could  not  rule  the  year; 
But  summer  will  melt  the  ice  again. 
And  open  a  path  to  the  sunny  main, 

Whereon  our  ships  shall  steer. 

The  winter  went,  the  summer  went. 

The  winter  came  around; 
But  the  hard,  green  ice  was  strong  as  death, 
And  the  voice  of  hope  sank  to  a  breath, 

Yet  caught  at  every  sound. 

Hark!  heard  you  not  the  noise  of  guns? — 

And  there,  and  there,  again? 
'Tis  some  uneasy  iceberg's  roar. 

As  he  turns  in  the  frozen  main. 

Hurra!  Hurra!  the  Esquimaux 

Across  the  ice-fields  steal: 
God  give  them  grace  for  their  charity! — ■ 

Ye  pray  for  the  silly  seal. 


A   Ballad  of  Sir  John   Franklin      2469 

Sir  John,  where  are  the  EngHsh  fields, 

And  where  are  the  EngHsh  trees, 
And  where  are  the  httle  English  flowers 

That  open  in  the  breeze? 

Be  stiU,  be  still,  my  brave  sailors! 

You  shall  see  the  fields  again, 
And  smell  the  scent  of  the  opening  flowers, 

The  grass,  and  the  waving  grain. 

Oh!  when  shall  I  see  my  orphan  child? 

My  Mary  waits  for  me. 
Oh !  when  shall  I  see  my  old  mother, 

And  pray  at  her  trembling  knee? 

Be  still,  be  still,  my  brave  sailors! 

Think  not  such  thoughts  again. 
But  a  tear  froze  slowly  on  his  cheek: 

He  thought  of  Lady  Jane. 

Ah!  bitter,  bitter  grows  the  cold. 

The  ice  grows  more  and  more; 
More  settled  stare  the  wolf  and  bear. 

More  patient  than  before. 

Oh,  think  you,  good  Sir  John  Franklin, 

We'll  ever  see  the  land? 
'Twas  cruel  to  send  us  here  to  starve, 

Without  a  helping  hand. 

'Twas  cruel.  Sir  John,  to  send  us  here, 

So  far  from  help  or  home, 
To  starve  and  freeze  on  this  lonely  sea: 
I  ween  the  lords  of  the  Admiralty 

Would  rather  send  than  come. 

Oh!  whether  we  starve  to  death  alone, 

Or  sail  to  our  own  country. 
We  have  done  what  man  has  never  done — 
The  truth  is  founded,  the  secret  won — 

We  passed  the  Northern  Sea! 

George  Henry  Boker  [1823- 1890] 


2470  Poems   of  History 


MONTEREY 

[SEPTEMBER  23,  I 


We  were  not  many,  we  who  stood 

Before  the  iron  sleet  that  day: 
Yet  many  a  gallant  spirit-  would 
Give  half  his  years  if  but  he  could 

Have  been  with  us  at  Monterey. 

Now  here,  now  there,  the  shot  it  hailed 

In  deadly  drifts  of  fiery  spray. 
Yet  not  a  single  soldier  quailed 
When  wounded  comrades  round  them  wailed 

Their  dying  shout  at  Monterey.-   jn.     g 

:v 

And  on — still  on  our  cohunn  kept  ,, 

Through  walls  of  flame  its  withering  way; 
Where  fell  the  dead,  the  living  stepped, 
Still  charging  on  the  guns  which  swept :  n'A 

The  slippery  streets  of  Monterey.     ;  !' 

ol/. 
The  foe  himself  recoiled  aghast. 

When,  striking  where  he  strongest  lay, 
We  swooped  his  flanking  batteries  past, '"'  -^ 
And  braving  full  their  murderous  blast, 

Stormed  home  the  towers  of  Monterey. 

Our  banners  on  those  turrets  v/ave,  , ., 

And  there  our  evening  bugles  play:     , 

Where  orange-boughs  above  their  grave.,  , . 

Keep  green  the  memory  of  the  brave  ^ 
Who  fought  and  fell  at  Monterey.     ;, 

We  are  not  many— we  who  pressed        ,-fO 

Beside  the  brave  who  fell  that  day— 1 
But  who  of  us  has  not  confessed  .  // 

He'd  rather  share  their  warrior  rest  .p'T 
Than  not  have  been  at  Monterey? 

Charles  Fenno  Hoffman  [1806-1 


Peschiera  247 1 

PESCHIERA 

[may,  1848] 

What  voice  did  on  my  spirit  fall, 
Peschiera,  when  thy  bridge  I  crossed? 
'"Tis  better  to  have  fought  and  lost, 
Than  never  to  have  fought  at  all." 

The  tricolor — a  trampled  rag 
Lies,  dirt  and  dust ;  the  lines  I  track 
By  sentry  boxes,  yellow-black, 
Lead  up  to  no  Italian  flag. 

I  see  the  Croat  soldier  stand 
Upon  the  grass  of  your  redoubts; 
The  eagle  with  his  black  wing  flouts 
The  breath  and  beauty  of  your  land. 

Yet  not  in  vain,  although  in  vain, 
O  men  of  Brescia,  on  the  day 
Of  loss  past  hope,  I  heard  you  say 
Your  welcome  to  the  noble  pain. 

You  said:  "Since  so  it  is,  good-bye. 
Sweet  life,  high  hope;  but  whatsoe'er 
May  be,  or  must,  no  tongue  shall  dare 
To  tell,  'The  Lombard  feared  to  die!'" 

You  said  (there  shall  be  answer  fit) : 
"And  if  our  children  must  obey. 
They  must;  but,  thinking  on  this  day, 
'Twill  less  debase  them  to  submit." 

You  said  (O  not  in  vain  you  said) : 
"Haste,  brothers,  haste,  while  yet  we  may; 
The  hours  ebb  fast  of  this  one  day, 
While  blood  may  yet  be  nobly  shed." 

Ah!  not  for  idle  hatred,  not 
For  honor,  fame,  nor  self -applause, 
But  for  the  glory  of  the  cause, 
You  did,  what  will  not  be  forgot. 


2472  Poems  of  History 

And  though  the  stranger  stand,  'tis  true, 
By  force  and  fortune's  right  he  stands: 
By  fortune,  which  is  in  God's  hands, 
And  strength,  which  yet  shall  spring  in  you. 

This  voice  did  on  my  spirit  fall, 
Peschiera,  when  thy  bridge  I  crossed: 
"'Tis  better  to  have  fought  and  lost. 
Than  never  to  have  fought  at  all." 

Arthur  Hugh  Clough  [i8ig-i86i] 


THE  LOSS  OF  THE   BIRKENHEAD 

SUPPOSED    TO    BE    TOLD    BY    A    SOLDIER    WHO    SURVIVED 
[FEBRUARY  26,  1852] 

Right  on  our  flank  the  crimson  sun  went  down; 
The  deep  sea  rolled  around  in  dark  repose; 
When,  like  the  wild  shriek  from  some  captured  town, 
A  cry  of  women  rose. 

The  stout  ship  Birkenhead  lay  hard  and  fast. 
Caught  without  hope  upon  a  hidden  rock; 
Her  timbers  thrilled  as  nerves,  when  through  them  passed 
The  spirit  of  that  shock. 

And  ever  like  base  cowards,  who  leave  their  ranks 
In  danger's  hour,  before  the  rush  of  steel. 
Drifted  away  disorderly  the  planks 

From  underneath  her  keel.  ,  , 

■'''   X 

So  calm  the  air,  so  calm  and  still  the  flood,  -    i.// 
That  low  down  in  its  blue  translucent  glass  ir-' 
We  saw  the  great  fierce  fish,  that  thirst  for  blood, 
Pass  slowly,  then  repass. 

They  tarried,  the  waves  tarried,  for  their  prey! 
The  sea  turned  one  clear  smile!    Like  things  asleep 
Those  dark  shapes  in  the  azure  silence  lay. 
As  quiet  as  the  deep. 


The  Charge  of  the   Light   Brigade      2473 

Then  amidst  oath,  and  prayer,  and  rush,  and  wreck, 
Faint  screams,  faint  questions  waiting  no  reply, 
Our  Colonel  gave  the  word,  and  on  the  deck 
Formed  us  in  line  to  die. 

To  die! — 'twas  hard,  whilst  the  sleek  ocean  glowed 
Beneath  a  sky  as  fair  as  summer  flowers: — 
All  to  the  boats  !  cried  one: — he  was,  thank  God, 
No  officer  of  ours ! 

Our  EngHsh  hearts  beat  true: — we  would  not  stir: 
That  base  appeal  we  heard,  but  heeded  not: 
On  land,  on  sea,  we  had  our  Colors,  sir, 
To  keep  without  a  spot! 

They  shall  not  say  in  England,  that  we  fought 
With  shameful  strength,  unhonored  life  to  seek; 
Into  mean  safety,  mean  deserters,  brought 
By  trampling  down  the  weak. 

So  we  made  women  with  their  children  go, 
The  oars  ply  back  again,  and  yet  again; 
Whilst,  inch  by  inch,  the  drowning  ship  sank  low. 
Still  under  steadfast  men. 

— What  follows,  why  recall? — The  brave  who  died, 
Died  without  flinching  in  the  bloody  surf. 
They  sleep  as  well  beneath  that  purple  tide, 
As  others  under  turf: — 

They  sleep  as  well!  and,  roused  from  their  wild  grave, 
Wearing  their  wounds  like  stars,  shall  rise  again, 
Joint-heirs  with  Christ,  because  they  bled  to  save 
His  weak  ones,  not  in  vain. 

Francis  Hastings  Doyle  [1810-1888] 

THE   CHARGE  OF  THE   LIGHT  BRIGADE 

[balaclava,    OCTOBER    25,    1852] 

Half  a  league,  half  a  league. 

Half  a  league  onward. 
All  in  the  valley  of  Death 

Rode  the  six  hundred. 


2474  Poems   of  History  nrr)  griT 

"Forward,  the  Light  Brigade! 
Charge  for  the  guns! "  he  said: 
Into  the  valley  of  Death 
Rode  the  six  hundred. 

"  Forward,  the  Light  Brigade! " 
Was  there  a  man  dismayed? 
Not  though  the  soldier  Imew 

Some  one  had  blundered: 
Theirs  not  to  make  reply, 
Theirs  not  to  reason  why, 
Theirs  but  to  do  and  die :  ,,q 

Into  the  valley  of  Death 

Rode  the  six  hundred. 

Cannon  to  right  of  thern, 
Cannon  to  left  of  them. 
Cannon  in  front  of  them 

Volleyed  and  thundered; 
Stormed  at  with  shot  and  shell, 
Boldly  they  rode  and  well, 
Into  the  jaws  of  Death, 
Into  the  mouth  of  Hell 

Rode  the  six  hundred. 

Flashed  all  their  sabres  bare, 
Flashed  as  they  turned  in  air 
Sabring  the  gunners  there. 
Charging  an  army,  while 

All  the  world  wondered: 
Plunged  in  the  battery-smoke 
Right  through  the  line  they  broke: 
Cossack  and  Russian 
Reeled  from  the  sabre-stroke, 

Shattered  and  sundered. 
Then  they  rode  back,  but  not. 

Not  the  six  hundred. 

Cannon  to  right  of  them, 
Cannon  to  left  of  them, 
Cannon  behind  them 


The   Relief  of  Lucknow  ^475 

Volleyed  and  thundered; 
Stormed  at  with  shot  and  shell, 
While  horse  and  hero  feil, 
They  that  had  fought  so  well 
Came  through  the  jaws  of  Death, 
Back  from  the  mouth  of  HeU, 
All  that  was  left  of  them, 

Left  of  six  hundred. 


When  can  their  glory  fade? 
O  the  wild  charge  they  made! 

All  the  world  wondered. 
Honor  the  charge  they  made! 
Honor  the  Light  Brigade, 

Noble  six  hundred! 

Alfred  Tsnnyson  [iSog-iSga] 


THE  RELIEF  OF  LUCKNOW 

[SEPTElVrBER  26,  1857] 

Oh,  that  last  day  in  Lucknow  fort ! 

We  knew  that  it  was  the  last ; 
That  the  enemy's  lines  crept  surely  on, 

And  the  end  was  coming  fast. 

To  yield  to  that  foe  meant  worse  than  death; 

And  the  men  and  we  all  worked  on; 
It  was  one  day  more  of  smoke  and  roar, 

And  then  it  would  all  be  done. 

There  was  one  of  us,  a  corporal's  wife, 

A  fair,  young,  genilc  thing, 
Wasted  with  fever  in  the  siege. 

And  her  mind  was  wandering. 


2476  Poems  of  History 

She  lay  on  the  ground,  in  her  Scottish  plaid, 

And  I  took  her  head  on  my  knee; 
"When  my  father  comes  hame  frae  the  pleugh,"  she  said, 

"Oh!  then  please  wauken  me." 

She  slept  like  a  child  on  her  father's  floor, 

In  the  flecking  of  woodbine-shade, 
When  the  house-dog  sprawls  by  the  open  door, 

And  the  mother's  wheel  is  stayed. 

It  was  smoke  and  roar  and  powder-stench, 

And  hopeless  waiting  for  death; 
And  the  soldier's  wife,  like  a  full-tired  child, 

Seemed  scarce  to  draw  her  breath. 

I  sank  to  sleep;  and  I  had  my  dream 

Of  an  English  village-lane, 
And  wall  and  garden; — but  one  wild  scream 

Brought  me  back  to  the  roar  again. 

There  Jessie  Brown  stood  listening 

Till  a  sudden  gladness  broke 
All  over  her  face;  and  she  caught  my  hand 

And  drew  me  near  as  she  spoke:— 

"The  Hielanders!     O!  dinna  ye  hear 

The  slogan  far  awa'? 
The  McGregor's.     O!  I  ken  it  weel; 

It's  the  grandest  o'  them  a'! 

"God  bless  the  bonny  Hielanders! 

We're  saved!  we're  saved! "  she  cried; 
And  fell  on  her  knees;  and  thanks  to  God 

Flowed  forth  like  a  full  flood-tide. 

Along  the  battery-line  her  cry 

Had  fallen  among  the  men, 
And  they  started  back ; — they  were  there  to  die; 

But  was  life  so  near  them,  then? 


The   Relief  of  Lucknow  2477 

They  listened  for  life;  the  rattling  fire 

Far  off,  and  the  far-off  roar, 
Were  all;  and  the  colonel  shook  his  head. 

And  they  turned  to  their  guns  once  more. 

But  Jessie  said,  "The  slogan's  done; 

But  winna  ye  hear  it  noo, — 
The  Campbells  are  comin'?  It's  no  a  dream; 

Our  succors  hae  broken  through!" 

We  heard  the  roar  and  the  rattle  afar, 

But  the  pipes  we  could  not  hear; 
So  the  men  phed  their  work  of  hopeless  war, 

And  knew  that  the  end  was  near. 

It  was  not  long  ere  it  made  its  way, — 

A  thrilUng,  ceaseless  sound: 
It  was  no  noise  from  the  strife  afar, 

Or  the  sappers  under  ground. 

It  was  the  pipes  of  the  Highlanders! 

And  now  they  played  Auld  Lang  Syne, 
It  came  to  our  men  like  the  voice  of  God, 

And  they  shouted  along  the  line. 

And  they  wept,  and  shook  one  another's  hands, 

And  the  women  sobbed  in  a  crowd; 
And  every  one  knelt  down  where  he  stood. 

And  we  all  thanked  God  aloud. 

That  happy  time,  when  we  welcomed  them, 

Our  men  put  Jessie  first ; 
And  the  general  gave  her  his  hand,  and  cheers 

Like  a  storm,  from  the  soldiers  burst. 

And  the  pipers'  ribbons  and  tartans  streamed. 

Marching  round  and  round  our  line; 
And  our  joyful  cheers  were  broken  with  tears. 

As  the  pipes  played  .1  itld  Lang  Syne. 

Robert  Traill  Spence  Lowell  [1816-1891] 


2478  Poems  of  History 


THE  PRIVATE  OF  THE  BUFFS;  OR,  THE  BRITISH 
SOLDIER  IN  CHINA 

[1857] 

Last  night,  among  his  fellow  roughs, 

He  jested,  quaffed,  and  swore; 
A  drunken  private  of  the  Buffs, 

Who  never  looked  before. 
To-day,  beneath  the  foeman's  frown, 

He  stands  in  Elgin's  place, 
Ambassador  from  Britain's  crown, 

And  type  of  all  her  race. 

Poor,  reckless,  rude,  low-born,  untaught, 

Bewildered,  and  alone, 
A  heart,  with  EngHsh  instinct  fraught. 

He  yet  can  call  his  own. 
Ay,  tear  his  body  Umb  from  limb, 

Bring  cord,  or  axe,  or  flame, 
He  only  knows  that  not  through  him 

Shall  England  come  to  shame. 

Far  Kentish  hop-fields  round  him  seemed. 

Like  dreams,  to  come  and  go; 
Bright  leagues  of  cherry-blossom  gleamed, 

One  sheet  of  living  snow; 
The  smoke  above  his  father's  door 

In  gray  soft  eddyings  hung; 
Must  he  then  watch  it  rise  no  more. 

Doomed  by  himself,  so  young? 

Yes,  honor  calls! — with  strength  like  steel 

He  put  the  vision  by; 
Let  dusky  Indians  whine  and  kneel. 

An  English  lad  must  die. 
And  thus,  with  eyes  that  would  not  shrink, 

With  knee  to  man  unbent. 
Unfaltering  on  its  dreadful  brink. 

To  his  red  grave  he  went. 


How  Old  Brown  Took  Harper's  Ferry     2479 

Vain,  mightiest  fleets  of  iron  framed, 

Vain,  those  all-shattering  guns, 
Unless  proud  England  keep,  untamed, 

The  strong  heart  of  her  sons; 
So  let  his  name  through  Europe  ring, — 

A  man  of  mean  estate, 
Who  died,  as  firm  as  Sparta's  king. 

Because  his  soul  was  great. 

Francis  Hastings  Doyle  [i8io-i388] 


HOW  OLD   BROWN  TOOK  HARPER'S   FERRY 

[OCTOBER  16,  1859] 

John  Brown  in  Kansas  settled,  like  a  steadfast  Yankee 

farmer, 
,,., Brave  and  godly,  with  four  sons,  all  stalwart  men  of 

might. 
There  he  spoke  aloud  for  freedom,  and  the  Border-strife 
grew  warmer, 
Till  the  Rangers  fired  his  dweUing,  in  his  absence,  in  the 
night; 

And  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
Came  homeward  in  the  m.orning — to  find  his  house  burned 
down. 

Then  he  grasped  his  trusty  rifle  and  boldly  fought  for  free- 
dom; 
Smote   from   border   unto    border    the    fierce,   invading 
band ; 
And  he  and  his  brave  boys  vowed — so  might  Heaven  help 
and  speed  'em! — 
They  would  save  those  grand  old  prairies  from  the  curse 
that  bhghts  the  land; 

And  Old  Brown, 
'  Osawatomie  Brown, 
Said,  "Boys,  the  Lord  will  aid  us!"  and  he  shoved  his  ram- 
rod down. 


2480  Poems  of  History 

And  the  Lord  did  aid  these  men,  and  they  labored  day  and 
even, 
Saving  Kansas  from  its  peril;  and  their  very  Hves  seemed 
charmed. 
Till  the  ruffians  killed  one  son,  in  the  blessed  light  of 
Heaven: 
In  cold  blood  the  fellows  slew  him,  as  he  journeyed  all 
unarmed; 

Then  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
Shed  not  a  tear,  but  shut  his  teeth,  and  frowned  a  terrible 
frown ! 

Then  they  seized  another  brave  boy, — not  amid  the  heat  of 
battle. 
But  in  peace,  behind  his  ploughshare, — and  they  loaded 
him  with  chains, 
And  with  pikes,  before  their  horses,  even  as  they  goad  their 
cattle, 
Drove  him  cruelly,  for  their  sport,  and  at  last  blew  out 
his  brains; 

Then  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
Raised  his  right  hand  up  to  Heaven,  caUing  Heaven's  ven- 
geance down. 

And  he  swore  a  fearful  oath,  by  the  name  of  the  Almighty, 
He  would  hunt  this  ravening  evil  that  had  scathed  and 
torn  him  so; 
He  would  seize  it  by  the  vitals;  he  would  crush  it  day  and 
night;  he 
Would  so  pursue  its  footsteps,  so  return  it  blow  for  blow. 
That  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
Should  be  a  name  to  swear  by,  in  backwoods  or  in  town! 

Then  his  beard  became  more  grizzled,  and  his  wild  blue  eye 
grew  wilder, 
And  more  sharply  curved  his  hawk's-nose,  snuffing  battle 
from  afar; 


How  Old  Brown  Took  Harper's  Ferry     2481 

And  he  and  the  two  boys  left,  though  the  Kansas  strife 
waxed  milder, 
Grew  more  sullen,  till  was  over  the  bloody  Border  War, 
And  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown; 
Had  gone  crazy,  as  they  reckoned  by  his  fearful  glare  and 
frown. 

So  he  left  the  plains  of  Kansas  and  their  bitter  woes  behind 
him, 
Slipped  off  into  Virginia,  where  the  statesmen  all  are  born. 
Hired  a  farm  by  Harper's  Ferry,  and  no  one  knew  where  to 
fmd  him. 
Or  whether  he'd  turned  parson,  or  was  jacketed  and  shorn; 
For  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
Mad  as  he  was,  knew  texts  enough  to  wear  a  parson's  gown. 

He  bought  no  ploughs  and  harrows,  spades  and  shovels, 
and  such  trifles; 
But  quietly  to  his  rancho  there  came,  by  every  train, 
Boxes  full  of  pikes  and  pistols,  and  his  well-beloved  Sharp's 
rifles; 
And  eighteen  other  madmen  joined  their  leader  there  again. 
Says  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
"Boys,  we've  got  an  army  large  enough  to  march  and  take 
the  town! 

"Take  the  town,  and  seize  the  muskets,  free  the  negroes, 
and  then  arm  them; 
Carry  the  County  and  the  State,  ay,  and  all  the  potent 
South. 
On  their  own  heads  be  the  slaughter,  if  their  victims  rise  to 
harm  them — 
These  Virginians!  who  believed  not,  nor  would  heed  the 
warning  mouth." 

Says  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
"The  world  shall  see  a  Republic,  or  my  name  is  not  John 
Brown." 


2482  Poems  of  History 

'Twas  the  sixteenth  of  October,  on  the  evening  of  a  Sunday : 

"This  good  work,"  declared  the  captain,  ''shall  be  on  a 

holy  night!" 

It  was  on  a  Sunday  evening,  and  before  the  noon  of  Monday, 

With  two  sons,  and  Captain  Stephens,  fifteen  privates 

— black  and  white, 

Captain  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
Marched  across  the  bridged  Potomac,  and  knocked  the  sen- 
try down; 

Took  the  guarded  armory-building,  and  the  muskets  and 
the  cannon; 
Captured  all  the  county  majors  and  the  colonels,  one  by 
one; 
Scared  to  death  each  gallant  scion  of  Virginia  they  ran  on. 
And  before  the  noon  of  Monday,  I  say,  the  deed  was  done. 
Mad  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
With  his  eighteen  other  crazy  men,  went  in  and  took  the 
town. 

Very  little  noise  and  bluster,  little  smell  of  powder  made  he; 
It  was  all  done  in  the  midnight,  like  the  Emperor's  coup 
d'etat. 
"Cut  the  wires!     Stop  the  rail-cars!     Hold  the  streets  and 
bridges!"  said  he, 
Then  declared  the  new  Republic,  with  himself  for  guiding 
star, — 

This  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
And  the  bold  two  thousand  citizens  ran  off  and  left  the  town. 

Then  was  riding  and  railroading  and  expressing  here  and 
thither; 
And  the  Martinsburg  Sharpshooters  and  the  Charlestown 
Volunteers, 
And  the  Shepherdstown  and  Winchester  Militia  hastened 
whither 
Old  Brown  was  said  to  muster  his  ten  thousand  grenadiers. 


How  Old  Brown  Took  Harper's  Ferry     2483 

General  Brown! 
Osawatomie  Brown! 
Behind  whose  rampant  banner  all  the  North  was  pouring 
down. 

But  at   last,   'tis   said,   some   prisoners  escaped  from  Old 
Brown's  durance, 
And  the  effervescent  valor  of  the  Chivalry  broke  out, 
When  they  learned  that  nineteen  madmen  had  the  mar- 
vellous assurance — 
Only  nineteen — thus  to  seize  the  place  and  drive  them 
straight  about; 

And  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
Found  an  army  come  to  take  him,  encamped  around  the 
town. 

But  to  storm,  with  all  the  forces  I  have  mentioned,  was  too 
risky; 
So  they  hurried  off  to  Richmond  for  the  Government 
Marines, 
Tore  them  from  their  weeping  matrons,  fired  their  souls  with 
Bourbon  whiskey, 
Till  they  battered  down  Brown's  castle  with  their  ladders 
and  machines; 

And  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
Received  three  bayonet  stabs,  and  a  cut  on  his  brave  old 
crown. 

Tallyho!  the  old  Virginia  gentry  gather  to  the  baying! 
In  they  rushed  and    killed    the   game,  shooting  lustily 
away;  ;[ 

And  whene'er  they  slew  a  rebel,  those  who  came  too  late 
for  slaying, 
Not  to  lose  a  share  of  glory,  fired  their  bullets  in  his  clay; 
And  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
Saw  his  sons  fall  dead  beside  him,  and  between  them  laid 
him  down. 


2484  Poems  of  History 

How  the  conquerors  wore  their  laurels;  how  they  hastened 
on  the  trial; 
How  Old  Brown  was  placed,  half  dying,  on  the  Charles- 
town  court-house  floor; 
How  he  spoke  his  grand  oration,  in  the  scorn  of  all  denial; 
What  the  brave  old  madman  told  them, — these  are  known 
the  country  o'er. 

"Hang  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown," 
Said  the  judge,  "and  all  such  rebels!"  with  his  most  judicial 
frown. 

But,  Virginians,  don't  do  it!  for  I  tell  you  that  the  flagon, 
Filled  with  blood  of  Old  B^-own's  offspring,  was  first  poured 
by  Southern  hands; 
And  each  drop  from  Old  Brown's  life-veins,  like  the  red  gore 
of  the  dragon, 
May  spring  up  a  vengeful  Fury,  hissing  through  your 
slave-worn  lands! 

And  Old  Brown, 
Osawatomie  Brown, 
May  trouble  you  more  than  ever,  when  you've  nailed  his 
coffin  down! 

Edrmmd  Clarence  Stedman  [1833-1908] 


BROWN  OF  OSSAWATOMIE 

[DECEMBER  2,  1 8  59] 

John  Brown  of  Ossawatomie  spake  on  his  dying  day: ' 
"I  will  not  have  to  shrive  my  soul  a  priest  in  Slavery's  pay. 
But  let  some  poor  slave-mother  whom  I  have  striven  to 

free, 
With  her  children,  from  the  gallows-stair  put  up  a  prayer 

for  me!" 

John  Brown  of  Ossawatomie.  they  led  him  out  to  die; 
And  lo!  a  poor  slave-mother  with  her  little  child  pressed 
nigh. 


Brother  Jonathan's   Lament         2485 

Then  the  bold,  blue  eye  grew  tender,  and  the  old  harsh  face 
grew  mild,  )V/ 

As  he  stooped  between  the  jeering  ranks  and  kissed  the- 
negro's   child! 

The  shadows  of  his  stormy  life  that  moment  fell  apart; 
And  they  who  blamed  the  bloody  hand  forgave  the  loving 

heart. 
That  kiss  from  all  its  guilty  means  redeemed  the  good  intent, 
And  round  the  grisly  fighter's  hair  the  martyr's  aureole  bent! 

Perish  with  him  the  folly  that  seeks  through  evil  good! 

Long  live  the  generous  purpose  unstained  with  human  blood! 

Not  the  raid  of  midnight  terror,  but  the  thought  which  un- 
derlies; 

Not  the  borderer's  pride  of  daring,  but  the  Christian's  sacri- 
fice. 

Nevermore  may  yon  Blue  Ridges  the  Northern  rifle  hear, 
Nor  see  the  light  of  blazing  homes  flash  on  the  negro's  spear^ 
But  let  the  free-winged  angel  Truth  their  guarded  passes 

scale, 
To  teach  that  right  is  more  than  might,  and  justice  more 

than  mail! 

So  vainly  shall  Virginia  set  her  battle  in  array;  •'^ 

In  vain  her  trampling  squadrons  knead  the  winter  snow  with 

clay. 
She  may  strike  the  pouncing  eagle,  but  she  dares  not  harm 

the  dove;  '' 

And  every  gate  she  bars  to  Hate,  shall  open  wide  to  Love!'  ^ 
John  Grcenleaf  WhiUier  [1807-189  2] 


BROTHER  JONATHAN'S  LAMENT  FOR  SISTER 
CAROLINE 

[DECEMBER  20,  1860] 

She  has  gone, — she  has  left  us  in  passion  and  pride, — 
,oOur  stormy-browed  sister,  so  long  at  our  side! 

She  has  torn  her  own  star  from  our  firmament's  glow, 
And  turned  on  her  brother  the  face  of  a  foe! 


2486  Poems  of  History 

Oh,  Caroline,  Caroline,  child  of  the  sun,  r,  ^-.  .rf'y 

We  can  never  forget  that  our  hearts  have  been  one, — 
Our  foreheads  both  sprinkled  in  Liberty's  name,  • 

From  the  fountain  of  blood  with  the  finger  of  flame! 

You  were  always  too  ready  to  fire  at  a  touch ;  '■ ' 

But  we  said:  "She  is  hasty, — she  does  not  mean  much."  ''- 
We  have  scowled  when  you  uttered  some  turbulent  threat; 
But  Friendship  still  whispered:  "Forgive  and  forget!"       '^ 

Has  our  love  all  died  out?     Have  its  altars  grown  cold?  _^ 
Has  the  curse  come  at  last  which  the  fathers  foretoldPjj  ^c,^  j 
Then  Nature  must  teach  us  the  strength  of  the  chain 
That  her  petulant  children  would  sever  in  vain. 

They  may  fight  till  the  buzzards  are  gorged  with  their  spoil, 
Till  the  harvest  grows  black  as  it  rots  in  the  soil, 
Till  the  wolves  and  the  catamounts  troop  from  their  caves^ 
And  the  shark  tracks  the  pirate,  the  lord  of  the  waves: 

In  vain  is  the  strife!     When  its  fury  is  past. 
Their  fortunes  must  flow  in  one  channel  at  last, 
As  the  torrents  that  rush  from  the  mountains  of  snow 
Roll  mingled  in  peace  through  the  valleys  below. 


TrP 


Our  Union  is  river,  lake,  ocean,  and  sky; 
Man  breaks  not  the  medal,  when  God  cuts  the  die! 
Though  darkened  with  sulphur,  though  cloven  with  steel 
The  blue  arch  will  brighten,  the  waters  will  heal! 

Oh,  Caroline,  Carohne,  child  of  the  sun. 
There  are  battles  with  Fate  that  can  never  be  won ! 
The  star-flowering  banner  must  never  be  furled. 
For  its  blossoms  of  light  are  the  hope  of  the  world! 

Go,  then,  our  rash  sister!  afar  and  aloof. 

Run  wild  in  the  sunshine  away  from  our  roof; 

But  when  your  heart  aches  and  your  feet  have  grown  sore. 

Remember  the  pathway  that  leads  to  our  door! 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [i  809-1894] 


The   Reveille  2487 

■ri'uYJ-  i-i!  ;rri: .  '  i   i,'  lli'i' 

THE  REVEILLE 

[APRIL,    1 861] 

Hark!    I  hear  the  tramp  of  thousands, 

And  of  armed  men  the  hum; 
Lo!  a  nation's  hosts  have  gathered 
Round  the  quick  alarming  drum, — 
Saying,  "Come, 
Freemen,  come! 
Ere  your  heritage  be  wasted,"  said  the  quick  alarming  drum. 

"Let  me  of  my  heart  take  counsel: 

War  is  not  of  life  the  sum; 
Who  shall  stay  and  reap  the  harvest 
When  the  autumn  days  shall  come?" 
But  the  drum 
Echoed,  "Come! 
Death  shall  reap  the  braver  harvest,"  said  the  solemn- 
sounding  drum. 

"But  when  won  the  coming  battle. 
What  of  profit  springs  therefrom? 
What  if  conquest,  subjugation. 
Even  greater  ills  become?" 
But  the  drum 
Answered,  "Come! 
You  must  do  the  sum  to  prove  it,"  said  the  Yankee  answer- 
ing drum. 

"What  if,  'mid  the  cannons'  thunder. 
Whistling  shot  and  bursting  bomb. 
When  my  brothers  fall  around  me. 

Should  my  heart  grow  cold  and  numb?  ' 
But  the  drum 
Answered,  "Come! 
Better  there  in  death  united,  than  in  life  a  recreant. — 
Come!" 

Thus  they  answered, — hoping,  fearing. 
Some  in  faith,  and  doubting  some, 


2488  Poems  of  History 

Till  a  trumpet-voice  proclaiming, 

Said,  "My  chosen  people,  come!" 

Then  the  drum, 

Lo!  was  dumb. 

For  the  great  heart  of  the  nation,  throbbing,  answered, 

"Lord,  we  come!" 

Bret  Harte  [1839-1902] 


THE  WASHERS  OF  THE  SHROUD 

[OCTOBER,    1861] 

Along  a  river-side,  I  know  not  where, 
I  walked  one  night  in  mystery  of  dream ; 
A  chill  creeps  curdling  yet  beneath  my  hair. 
To  think  what  chanced  me  by  the  pallid  gleam 
Of  a  moon-wraith  that  waned  through  haunted  air. 

Pale  fireflies  pulsed  within  the  meadow-mist 
Their  halos,  wavering  thistledowns  of  light; 
The  loon,  that  seemed  to  mock  some  goblin  tryst. 
Laughed;  and  the  echoes,  huddling  in  affright, 
Like  Odin's  hounds,  fled  baying  down  the  night. 

Then  all  was  silent,  till  there  smote  my  ear 

A  movement  in  the  stream  that  checked  my  breath: 

Was  it  the  slow  plash  of  a  wading  deer? 

But  something  said,  "This  water  is  of  Death! 

The  Sisters  wash  a  shroud, — ill  thing  to  hear!" 

I,  looking  then,  beheld  the  ancient  Three 

Known  to  the  Greek's  and  to  the  Northman's  creed. 

That  sit  in  shadow  of  the  mystic  Tree, 

Still  crooning,  as  they  weave  their  endless  brede. 

One  song:  "Time  was,  Time  is,  and  Time  shall  be." 

No  wrinkled  crones  were  they,  as  I  had  deemed,         ;^ij[ 
But  fair  as  yesterday,  to-day,  to-morrow,  > 

To  mourner,  lover,  poet,  ever  seemed; 
Something  too  high  for  joy,  too  deep  for  sorrow, 
Thrifled  in  their  tones,  and  from  their  faces  gleamed. 


The  Washers  of  the   Shroud       2489 

"Still  men  and  nations  reap  as  they  have  strawn," 

So  sang  they,  working  at  their  task  the  while; 

"The  fatal  raiment  must  be  cleansed  ere  dawn: 

For  Austria?    Italy?  the  Sea-Queen's  isle? 

O'er  what  quenched  grandeur  must  our  shroud  be  drawn? 

"Or  is  it  for  a  younger,  fairer  corse, 
That  gathered  States  like  children  round  his  knees, 
That  tamed  the  wave  to  be  his  posting-horse, 
Feller  of  forests,  linker  of  the  seas, 
Bridge-builder,  hammerer,  youngest  son  of  Thor's? 

"What  make  we,  murmurest  thou?    and  what  are  we? 
When  empires  must  be  wound,  we  bring  the  shroud, 
The  time-old  web  of  the  implacable  Three: 
Is  it  too  coarse  for  him,  the  young  and  proud? 
Earth's  mightiest  deigned  to  wear  it, — why  not  he?";  ,7 

"Is  there  no  hope?"  I  moaned,  "so  strong,  so  fair! 
Our  Fowler  whose  proud  bird  would  brook  erewhile 
No  rival's  swoop  in  all  our  western  air! 
Gather  the  ravens,  then,  in  funeral  file 
For  him,  life's  morn  yet  golden  in  his  hair? 

"Leave  me  not  hopeless,  ye  unpitying  dames! 
I  see,  half  seeing.    Tell  me,  ye  who  scanned 
The  stars.  Earth's  elders,  still  must  noblest  aims 
Be  traced  upon  oblivious  ocean-sands? 
Must  Hesper  join  the  wailing  ghosts  of  names?" 

"  When  grass-blades  stiffen  with  red  battle-dew, 
Ye  deem  we  choose  the  victor  and  the  slain:  it 

Say,  choose  we  them  that  shall  be  leal  and  true         ;  // 
To  the  heart's  longing,  the  high  faith  of  brain?  .;  r 

Yet  there  the  victory  lies,  if  ye  but  knew. 

"Three  roots  bear  up  Dominion:  Knowledge,  Will, — \  •> 

These  twain  are  strong,  but  stronger  yet  the  third, — ■  1 

Obedience, — 'tis  the  great  tap-root  that  still, 

Knit  round  the  rock  of  Duty,  is  not  stirred, 

Though  Heaven-loosed  tempests  spend  their  utmost  skill. 


2490  Poems  of  History 

"Is  the  doom  sealed  for  Hesper?    'Tis  not  we''  "'"  "" 

Denounce  it,  but  the  Law  before  all  time: 

The  brave  makes  danger  opportunity; 

The  waverer,  paltering  with  the  chance  subHme, 

Dwarfs  it  to  peril:  which  shall  Hesper  be? 

"Hath  he  let  vultures  climb  his  eagle's  seat  *  *"' 

To  make  Jove's  bolts  purveyors  of  their  maw?  f'l 

Hath  he  the  Many's  plaudits  found  more  sweet  ^ 

Than  Wisdom?  held  Opinion's  wind  for  Law? 
Then  let  him  hearken  for  the  doomster's  feet! 

"Rough  are  the  steps,  slow-hewn  in  flintiest  rock, 
States  climb  to  power  by;  slippery  those  with  gold     '*^-' 
Down  which  they  stumble  to  eternal  mock: 
No  chafferer's  hand  shall  long  the  sceptre  hold. 
Who,  given  a  Fate  to  shape,  would  sell  the  block. 

"We  sing  old  Sagas,  songs  of  weal  and  woe, 

Mystic  because  too  cheaply  understood;  -"■/ 

Dark  sayings  are  not  ours;  men  hear  and  know, 

See  Evil  weak,  see  strength  alone  in  Good, 

Yet  hope  to  stem  God's  fire  with  walls  of  tow. 

"Time  Was  unlocks  the  riddle  of  Time  Is,  - 

That  offers  choice  of  glory  or  of  gloom;  '•  ^ 

The  solver  makes  Time  Shall  Be  surely  his. 
But  hasten,  Sisters!  for  even  now  the  tomb         -  ■-   ■■■ 
Grates  its  slow  hinge  and  calls  from  the  abyss, "^^  JauM 

"But  not  for  him,"  I  cried,  "not  yet  for  him. 

Whose  large  horizon,  westering,  star  by  star 

Wins  from  the  void  to  where  on  Ocean's  rim 

The  sunset  shuts  the  world  with  golden  bar,  >>T 

Nor  yet  his  thews  shall  fail,  his  eye  grow  dim!  '^ 

"His  shall  be  larger  manhood,  saved  for  those  T'' 

That  walk  unblenching  through  the  trial-fires;  'T 

Not  suffering,  but  faint  heart,  is  worst  of  woes. 
And  he  no  base-born  son  of  craven  sires, 
Whose  eye  need  blench  confronted  with  his  foes. 


The   Picket-Guard  2491 

"Tears  may  be  ours,  but  proud,  for  those  who  win 
Death's  royal  purple  in  the  foeman's  lines; 
Peace,  too,  brings  tears;  and  mid  the  battle-din, 
The  wiser  ear  some  text  of  God  divines, 
For  the  sheathed  blade  may  rust  with  darker  sin. 

"God,  give  us  peace!  not  such  as  lulls  to  sleep, 

But  sword  on  thigh,  and  brow  with  purpose  knit! 

And  let  our  Ship  of  State  to  harbor  sweep, 

Her  ports  all  up,  her  battle-lanterns  lit, 

And  her  leashed  thunders  gathering  for  their  leap!" 

So  cried  I  with  clenched  hands  and  passionate  pain. 
Thinking  of  dear  ones  by  Potomac's  side; 
Again  the  loon  laughed  mocking,  and  again 
The  echoes  bayed  far  down  the  night  and  died. 
While  waking  I  recalled  my  wandering  brain. 

James  Russell  Lowell  [iSig-iSgi] 


THE   PICKET-GUARD 

[NOVEMBER,  1861] 

"All  quiet  along  the  Potomac,"  they  say, 

"Except  now  and  then  a  stray  picket 
Is  shot,  as  he  walks  on  his  beat  to  and  fro, 

By  a  rifleman  hid  in  the  thicket. 
'Tis  nothing:  a  private  or  two,  now  and  then. 

Will  not  count  in  the  news  of  the  battle; 
Not  an  officer  lost — only  one  of  the  men. 

Moaning  out,  all  alone,  the  death-rattle." 

All  quiet  along  the  Potomac  to-night, 

Where  the  soldiers  He  peacefully  dreaming; 
Their  tents  in  the  rays  of  the  clear  autumn  moon, 

Or  the  light  of  the  watch-fire,  are  gleaming. 
A  tremulous  sigh  of  the  gentle  night-wind 

Through  the  forest  leaves  softly  is  creeping, 
While  the  stars  up  above,  with  their  glittering  eyes, 

Keep  guard,  for  the  army  is  sleeping. 


249^  Poems  of  History 

There's  only  the  sound  of  the  lone  sentry's  tread, 

As  he  tramps  from  the  rock  to  the  fountain, 
And  thinks  of  the  two  in  the  low  trundle-bed 

Far  away  in  the  cot  on  the  mountain.         ,      ;] 
His  musket  falls  slack;  his  face,  dark  and  grim, ,,;rf 

Grows  gentle  with  memories  tender, 
As  he  mutters  a  prayer  for  the  children  asleep —    ' 

For  their  mother — may  Heaven  defend  her! 

/  ■ 
The  moon  seems  to  shine  just  as  brightly  as  thei^,f 

That  night,  when  the  love  yet  unspoken 
Leaped  up  to  his  lips — when  low-murmured  vows 

Were  pledged  to  be  ever  unbroken. 
Then  drawing  his'  sleeve  roughly  over  his  eyes, 

He  dashes  off  tears  that  are  welling. 
And  gathers  his  gun  closer  up  to  its  place 

As  if  to  keep  down  the  heart-swelling. 

He  passes  the  fountain,  the  blasted  pine-tree; 

The  footstep  is  lagging  and  weary; 
Yet  onward  he  goes,  through  the  broad  belt  of  light, 

Towards  the  shade  of  the  forest  so  dreary. 
Hark!  was  it  the  night-wind  that  rustled  the  leaves? 

Was  it  moonlight  so  wondrously  flashing? 
It  looked  like  a  rifle  .  .  .  "Ha!  Mary,  good-by!" 

The  red  hfe -blood  is  ebbing  and  plashing. 

All  quiet  along  the  Potomac  to-night; 

No  sound  save  the  rush  of  the  river; 
While  soft  falls  the  dew  on  the  face  of  the  dead — 

The  picket's  off  duty  forever. 

Elhel  Lynn  Beers  [1827-1879] 


CIVIL  WAR 

[i86r] 

"  Rifleman,  shoot  me  a  fancy  shot 

Straight  at  the  heart  of  yon  prowling  vidette; 
Ring  me  a  ball  in  the  glittering  spot 

That  shines  on  his  breast  like  an  amulet!" 


Kearny  at   Seven  Jr'ines  ^493 

jJ'jAh,  captain!  here  goes  for  a  fine-drawn  bead, 
f  ii    There's  music  around  when  my  barrel's  in  tune!" 
Crack!  went  the  rifle,  the  messenger  sped, 
And  dead  from  his  horse  fell  the  ringing  dragoon. 

"Now,  rifleman,  steal  through  the  bushes,  and  snatch 
From  your  victim  some  trinket  to  handsel  first  blood; 
•"^'A  button,  a  loop,  or  that  luminous  patch 

That  gleams  in  the  moon  like  a  diamond  stud!" 

"O  captain!  I  staggered,  and  sunk  on  my  track, 
When  I  gazed  on  the  face  of  that  fallen  vidette, 

For  he  looked  so  like  you,  as  he  lay  on  his  back, 
That  my  heart  rose  upon  me,  and  masters  me  yet. 

"But  I  snatched  off  the  trinket, — this  locket  of  gold; 

An  inch  from  the  center  my  lead  broke  its  way, 
Scarce  grazing  the  picture,  so  fair  to  behold, 

Of  a  beautiful  lady  in  bridal  array." 

"Ha!  rifleman,  fling  me  the  locket! — 'tis  she, 

My  brother's  young  bride, — and  the  fallen  dragoon 

Was  her  husband — Hush!  soldier,  'twas  Heaven's  decree; 
We  must  bury  him  there,  by  the  light  of  the  moon! 

"But,  hark!  the  far  bugles  their  warnings  unite; 

War  is  a  virtue, — weakness  a  sin; 
There's  a  lurking  and  loping  around  us  to-night; 

Load  again,  rifleman,  keep  your  hand  in!" 

Charles  Daiuson  Sha)ily  [1811-1875] 


KEARNY  AT  SEVEN  PINES 

[may  31,  1862] 

So  that  soldierly  legend  is  still  on  its  journey, — 
That  story  of  Kearny  who  knew  not  to  yield! 

'Twas  the  day  when  with  Jameson,  fierce  Berry,  and  Bimey, 
Against  twenty  thousand  he  rallied  the  field. 


2494  Poems  of  History 

Where  the  red  volleys  poured,  where  the  clamor  rose  highest, 
Where  the  dead  lay  in  clumps  through  the  dwarf  oak  and 
pine,  ^'^3'^  iAorn  ) 

Where  the  aim  from  the  thicket  was  surest  and'trighe^t',^^ 
No  charge  like  Phil  Kearny's  along  the  whole  line. 

When  the  battle  went  ill,  and  the  bravest  were  solemn,  . 

Near  the  dark  Seven  Pines,  where  we  still  held  our  ground. 
He  rode  down  the  length  of  the  withering  column, 

And  his  heart  at  our  war-cry  leapt  up  with  a  bound; 
He  snuffed,  like  his  charger,  the  wind  of  the  powder, —    , .. 

His  sword  waved  us  on  and  we  answered  the  sign; 
Loud  our  cheer  as  we  rushed,  but  his  laugh  rang  the  louder, 

"There's  the  devil's  own  fun,  boys,  along  the  whole  line! " 

How  he  strode  his  brown  steed!     How  we  saw  his  blade 
brighten 

In  the  one  hand  still  left, — and  the  reins  in  his  teeth! 
He  laughed  like  a  boy  when  the  holidays  heighten. 

But  a  soldier's  glance  shot  from  his  visor  beneath. 
Up  came  the  reserves  to  the  mellay  infernal, 

Asking  where  to  go  in, — through  the  clearing  or  pine? 
"Oh,  anywhere!  Forward!  'Tis  all  the  same,  Colonel: 

You'll  find  lovely  fighting  along  the  whole  line ! "  '^ 

Oh,  evil  the  black  shroud  of  night  at  Chantilly, 

That  hid  him  from  sight  of  his  brave  men  and  tried!    i" 
Foul,  foul  sped  the  bullet  that  clipped  the  white  lily. 

The  flower  of  our  knighthood,  the  whole  army's  pride! 
Yet  we  dream  that  he  still, — in  that  shadowy  region 

Where  the  dead  form  their  ranks  at  the  wan  drummer's 
sign,— 
Rides  on,  as  of  old,  down  the  length  of  his  legion. 

And  the  word  still  is  " Forward!"  along  the  whole  line. 
Edmund  Clarence  Sledman  [1833-1908] 

BARBARA  FRIETCHIE 

[SEPTEMBER  13,  1 86 2] 

Up  from  the  meadows  rich  with  corn,    'U  r-iv/i" 
Clear  in  the  cool  September  morn,  niugA 


Barbara   Frietchie  ^495 

The  clustered  spires  of  Frederick  stand 
Green-walled  by  the  hills  of  Maryland. 

Round  about  them  orchards  sweep, 
Apple  and  peach  tree  fruited  deep, 

Fair  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord 

To  the  eyes  of  the  famished  rebel  horde. 

On  that  pleasant  morn  of  the  early  fall 
When  Lee  marched  over  the  mountain-wall; 

Over  the  mountains  winding  down. 
Horse  and  foot,  into  Frederick  town. 

Forty  flags  with  their  silver  stars, 
Forty  flags  with  their  crimson  bars. 

Flapped  in  the  morning  wind:  the  sun 
Of  noon  looked  down,  and  saw  not  one. 

Up  rose  old  Barbara  Frietchie  then. 
Bowed  with  her  fourscore  years  and  ten; 

Bravest  of  all  in  Frederick  town, 

She  took  up  the  flag  the  men  hauled  down  5 

In  her  attic  window  the  staff  she  set, 
To  show  that  one  heart  was  loyal  yet. 

Up  the  street  came  the  rebel  tread, 
Stonewall  Jackson  riding  ahead. 

Under  his  slouched  hat  left  and  right 
He  glanced;  the  old  flag  met  his  sight. 

o 

"Halt!" — the  dust-brown  ranks  stood  fast, 
"Fire!" — out  blazed  the  rifle -blast. 

It  shivered  the  window,  pane  and  sash; 
It  rent  the  banner  with  seam  and  gash. 


2496  Poems  of  History 

Quick  as  it  fell,  from  the  broken  staff 
Dame  Barbara  snatched  the  silken  scarf. 

She  leaned  far  out  on  the  window-sill, 
And  shook  it  forth  with  a  royal  will. 

"Shoot,  if  you  must,  this  old  gray  head, 
But  spare  your  country's  flag,"  she  said. 

A  shade  of  sadness,  a  blush  of  shame, 
Over  the  face  of  the  leader  came; 

The  nobler  nature  within  him  stirred 
To  life  at  that  woman's  deed  and  word; 

"Who  touches  a  hair  of  yon  gray  head 
Dies  like  a  dog!    March  on!"  he  said. 

All  day  long  through  Frederick  street 
Sounded  the  tread  of  marching  feet: 

All  day  long  that  free  flag  tossed 
Over  the  heads  of  the  rebel  host. 

Ever  its  torn  folds  rose  and  fell  ..  , 

On  the  loyal  winds  that  loved  it  well; 

And  through  the  hill-gaps  sunset  light     , 
Shone  over  it  with  a  warm  good-night, 

Barbara  Frietchie's  work  is  o'er, 

\nd  the  Rebel  rides  on  his  raids  no  mors 

Honor  to  her!  and  let  a  tear 

Fall,  for  her  sake,  on  Stonewall's  bier.     : 

Over  Barbara  Frietchie's  grave, 
Flag  of  Freedom  and  Union,  wave! 

Peace  and  order  and  beauty  draw 
Round  thy  symbol  of  light  and  law; 


Keenan's  Charge  ^497 

And  ever  the  stars  above  look  down 
CJn  thy  stars  below  in  Frederick  town  I 

Jolin  GrccnlcaJ  WhUticr  [1807-1802] 


KEENAN'S   CHARGE 

[]VIAY  2,  1S63] 
I 

The  sun  had  set; 

The  leaves  with  dew  were  wet: — 

Down  fell  a  bloody  dusk 

On  the  woods,  that  second  of  May, 

Where  "Stonewall's"  corps,  like  a  beast  of  prey, ;  (^ 

Tore  through,  with  angry  tusk.  , 

"They've  trapped  us,  boys!" 
Rose  from  our  flank  a  voice. 
With  rush  of  steel  and  smoke 
On  came  the  rebels  straight, 
Eager  as  love  and  wild  as  hate; 
And  our  line  reeled  and  broke; 

Broke  and  fled. 

Not  one  stayed, —  but  the  dead! 

With  curses,  shrieks,  and  cries. 

Horses  and  wagons  and  men 

Tumbled  back  through  the  shuddering  glen, 

And  above  us  the  fading  skies. 

There's  one  hope,  still, — 

Those  batteries,  parked  on  the  hill!  1 

"Battery,  wheel!"  ('mid  tlie  roar),  '-^ 

"Pass  pieces;  fix  prolonge  to  fire 

Retiring.    Trot!"    In  the  panic  dire 

A  bugle  rings  "Trot!" — and  no  more. 

The  horses  plunged,  '"' 

The  cannon  lurched  and  lunged, 


2498  Poems  of  History 

To  join  the  hopeless  rout. 

But  suddenly  rose  a  form 

Calmly  in  front  of  the  human  storm, 

With  a  stern,  commanding  shout: 

"Align  those  guns!" 

(We  knew  it  was  Pleasonton's.) 

The  cannoneers  bent  to  obey, 

And  worked  with  a  will  at  his  word, 

And  the  black  guns  moved  as  if  they  had  heard. 

But,  ah,  the  dread  delay! 

"To  wait  is  crime; 
O  God,  for  ten  minutes'  time!" 
The  General  looked  around. 
There  Keenan  sat,  like  a  stone, 
With  his  three  hundred  horse  alone, 
Less  shaken  than  the  ground. 

"Major,  your  men?" 

"Are  soldiers.  General."    "Then, 

Charge,  Major!    Do  your  best; 

Hold  the  enemy  back,  at  all  cost, 

Tih  my  guns  are  placed; — else  the  army  is  lost. 

You  die  to  save  the  rest!" 


By  tie  shrouded  gleam  of  the  western  skies, 
BraveKeenan  looked  into  Pleasonton's  eyes  ^: 

For  ai  instant — clear,  and  cool,  and  still;  i 

Then,  vith  a  smile,  he  said:  "I  will." 

"Cavaly,  charge!"    Not  a  man  of  them  shrank. 
Their  shrp,  full  cheer,  from  rank  on  rank, 
Rose  jo>>usly,  with  a  willing  breath, — 
Rose  likej,  greeting  hail  to  death. 

Then  forwrd  they  sprang,  and  spurred,  and  clashed; 

Shouted  th  officers,  crimson-sashed; 

Rode  well  Ve  men,  each  brave  as  his  fellow, 

In  their  faad  coats  of  the  blue  and  yellow;  ,1. 


Keenan's   Charge  ^499 


And  above  in  the  air,  with  an  instinct  true, 
Like  a  bird  of  war  their  pennon  flew. 

With  clank  of  scabbards  and  thunder  of  steeds, 
And  blades  that  shine  like  sunlit  reeds, 
And  strong  brown  faces  bravely  pale 
For  fear  their  proud  attempt  shall  fail, 
Three  hundred  Pennsylvanians  close 
On  twice  ten  thousand  gallant  foes. 

Line  after  line  the  troopers  came 

To  the  edge  of  the  wood  that  was  ringed  with  flame; 

Rode  in,  and  sabred,  and  shot, — and  fell: 

Nor  came  one  back  his  wounds  to  tell. 

And  full  in  the  midst  rose  Keenan,  tall. 

In  the  gloom,  like  a  martyr  awaiting  his  fall, 

While  the  circle-stroke  of  his  sabre,  swung 

'Round  his  head,  like  a  halo  there,  luminous  hung. 

Line  after  Une,  aye,  whole  platoons, 
Struck  dead  in  their  saddles,  of  brave  dragoons 
By  the  maddened  horses  were  onward  borne 
And  into  the  vortex  flung,  trampled  and  torn; 
As  Keenan  fought  with  his  men,  side  by  side. 

So  they  rode,  till  there  were  no  more  to  ride. 

But  over  them,  lying  there  shattered  and  mute. 
What  deep  echo  rolls?    'Tis  a  death-salute 
From  the  cannon  in  place;  for,  heroes,  you  braved 
Your  fate  not  in  vain :  the  army  was  saved ! 

Over  them  now, — year  following  year, — 

Over  their  graves  the  pine-cones  fall. 

And  the  whippoorwill  chants  his  si)ectre-call; 

But  they  stir  not  again;  they  raise  no  cheer; 

They  have  ceased.    But  their  glory  shall  never  cease, 

Nor  their  light  be  quenched  in  the  light  of  peace. 

The  rush  of  their  charge  is  resounding  still. 

That  saved  the  army  at  Chancellors ville. 

George  Parsons  Lathrop  [i8si-i8g8] 


2500  Poems  of  History 

-'cfii  bnA 
THE  BLACK  REGIMENT  biid  s  siliJ 

[port   HUDSON,    MAY    27,  1 863]  ^^^^^  ^^.^ 

.    Dark  as  the  clouds  of  even,  eabBld  bxiA 

Ranked  in  the  western  heaven,  gnoiJe  bnA 
Waiting  the  breath  that  Ufts  'H  ^'^'^^^  iJ^al  lol 
All  the  dead  mass,  and  drifts^  fv  r  -nn  .nrfT 
Tempest  and  falling  brand  ^^ 

Over  a  ruined  land, — 
So  still  and  orderly, 
Arm  to  arm,  knee  to  knee, 
Waiting  the  great  event. 


■[ 

Stands  the  black  regiment.  '^ 

•  'v 

ij. 
7 


Down  the  long  dusky  line 

Teeth  gleam  and  eyeballs  shine; 

And  the  bright  bayonet, 

Bristling  and  firmly  set. 

Flashed  with  a  purpose  grand,  ^ 

Long  ere  the  sharp  command 

Of  the  fierce  rolling  drum 

Told  them  their  time  had  come, 

Told  them  what  w-ork  was  sent 

For  the  black  regiment. 

"Now,"  the  flag-sergeant  cried, 

"Though  death  and  hell  betide,  j 

Let  the  whole  nation  see 

If  we  are  fit  to  be 

Free  in  this  land;  or  bound 

Down,  like  the  whining  hound, — 

Bound  with  red  stripes  of  pain  tj/U 

In  our  old  chains  again!"  i  bnA 

Oh,  what  a  shout  there  went         '?  x^di  iuS 

From  the  black  regiment!  ■     ■    ••'■I'l 

"Charge!"    Trump  and  drum  awoke;  ;i  uiil 
Onward  the  bondmen  broke;  -:  JBfiT 

Bayonet  and  saber-stroke 


The   Black   Regiment  2501 

Vainly  opposed  their  rush. 
Through  the  wild  battle's  crush, 
With  but  one  thought  ailush, 
Driving  their  lords  like  chafi, 
In  the  guns'  mouths  they  laugh; 
Or  at  the  slippery  brands, 
Leaping  with  open  hands, 
Down  they  tear  man  and  horse, 
Down  in  their  awful  course; 
Trampling  with  bloody  heel 
Over  the  crashing  steel. 
All  their  eyes  forward  bent, 
Rushed  the  black  regiment. 

"Freedom!"  their  battle-cry, — 
"Freedom!  or  leave  to  die!" 
Ah!  and  they  meant  the  word, 
Not  as  with  us  'tis  heard. 
Not  a  mere  party  shout: 
They  gave  their  spirits  out; 
Trusted  the  end  to  God, 
And  on  the  gory  sod 
Rolled  in  triumphant  blood. 
Glad  to  strike  one  free  blow, 
Whether  for  weal  or  woe; 
Glad  to  breathe  one  free  breath, 
Though  on  the  lips  of  death; 
Praying, — alas!  in  vain! — 
That  they  might  fall  again. 
So  they  could  once  more  see 
That  burst  to  liberty! 
This  was  what  ''freedom"  lent 
To  the  black  regiment. 

Hundreds  on  hundreds  fell; 
But  they  are  resting  well; 
Scourges  and  shackles  strong 
Never  shall  do  them  wrong. 
Oh,  to  the  living  few, 
Soldiers,  be  just  and  true! 


2502  Poems  of  History- 


Hail  them  as  comrades  tried; 
Fight  with  them  side  by  side; 
Never,  in  field  or  tent, 
Scorn  the  black  regiment! 

George  Henry  Boker  [1823-1890] 


THE  HIGH  TIDE  AT   GETTYSBURG 

[JULY  3,  1863] 

A  CLOUD  possessed  the  hollow  field. 

The  gathering  battle's  smoky  shield: 

Athwart  the  gloom  the  lightning  flashed. 
And  through  the  cloud  some  horsemen  dashed, 

And  from  the  heights  the  thunder  pealed. 

Then,  at  the  brief  command  of  Lee, 
Moved  out  that  matchless  infantry, 

With  Pickett  leading  grandly  down, 

To  rush  against  the  roaring  crown 
Of  those  dread  heights  of  destiny. 

Far  heard  above  the  angry  guns, 
A  cry  across  the  tumult  runs: 

The  voice  that  rang  through  Shiloh's  woods, 

And  Chickamauga's  solitudes: 
The  fierce  South  cheering  on  her  sons! 

Ah,  how  the  withering  tempest  blew 

Against  the  front  of  Pettigrew! 

A  Khamsin  wind  that  scorched  and  singed, 
I,ike  that  infernal  flame  that  fringed 

The  British  squares  at  Waterloo! 

;  no  i.U-3''  I  ■:         ' 

A  thousand  fall  where  Kemper  led; 

A  thousand  died  where  Garnett  bled; 
In  blinding  flame  and  strangling  smoke. 
The  remnant  through  the  batteries  broke, 

And  crossed  the  works  with  Armistead. 


The   High   Tide  at  Gettysburg     2503 

'*Once  more  in  Glory's  van  with  me!" 

Virginia  cried  to  Tennessee: 

"We  two  together,  come  what  may, 
Shall  stand  upon  those  works  to-day!" 

The  reddest  day  in  history. 

Brave  Tennessee!  In  reckless  way 
Virginia  heard  her  comrade  say: 

"Close  round  this  rent  and  riddled  rag!" 

What  time  she  set  her  battle-flag 
Amid  the  guns  of  Doubleday. 

But  who  shall  break  the  guards  that  wait 
Before  the  awful  face  of  Fate? 

The  tattered  standards  of  the  South 
.  Were  shrivelled  at  the  cannon's  mouth, 
And  all  her  hopes  were  desolate. 

In  vain  the  Tennesseean  set 
His  breast  against  the  bayonet; 

In  vain  Virginia  charged  and  raged, 

A  tigress  in  her  wrath  uncaged. 
Till  all  the  hill  was  red  and  wet ! 

Above  the  bayonets,  mixed  and  crossed, 
Men  saw  a  gray,  gigantic  ghost 

Receding  through  the  battle-cloud, 

And  heard  across  the  tempest  loud 
The  death-cry  of  a  nation  lost! 

The  brave  went  down!    Without  disgrace 

They  leaped  to  Ruin's  red  embrace; 

They  only  heard  Fame's  thunders  wake, 
And  saw  the  dazzling  sun-burst  break 

In  smiles  on  Glory's  bloody  face! 

They  fell,  who  lifted  up  a  hand 

And  bade  the  sun  in  heaven  to  stand; 

They  smote  and  fell,  who  set  the  bars 

Against  the  progress  of  the  stars. 
And  stayed  the  march  of  Motherland! 


2504  Poems  of  History 


They  stood,  who  saw  the  future  come 

On  through  the  fight's  delirium; 

They  smote  and  stood,  who  held  the  hope 
Of  nations  on  that  slippery  slope, 

Amid  the  cheers  of  Christendom ! 

God  lives!    He  forged  the  iron  will, 
That  clutched  and  held  that  trembhng  hill! 
God  lives  and  reigns!    He  built  and  lent 
The  heights  for  Freedom's  battlement, 
Where  floats  her  flag  in  triumph  still! 

Fold  up  the  banners!    Smelt  the  guns! 
Love  rules.    Her  gentler  purpose  runs. 

A  mighty  mother  turns  in  tears. 

The  pages  of  her  battle  years, 
Lamenting  all  her  fallen  sons! 

Will  Henry  Tliompsou  [1848- 


JOHN  BURNS  OF   GETTYSBURG 

Have  you  heard  the  story  that  gossips  tell 

Of  Burns  of  Gettysburg?    No?    Ah,  well: 

Brief  is  the  glory  that  hero  earns. 

Briefer  the  story  of  poor  John  Burns: 

He  was  the  fellow  who  won  renown, — 

The  only  man  who  didn't  back  down 

When  the  rebels  rode  through  his  native  town; 

But  held  his  own  in  the  fight  next  day. 

When  all  his  townsfolk  ran  away. 

That  was  in  July,  sixty-three, — 

The  very  day  that  General  Lee, 

Flower  of  Southern  chivalry. 

Baffled  and  beaten,  backward  reeled 

From  a  stubborn  Meade  and  a  barren  field. 

I  might  tell  how,  but  the  day  before, 
John  Burns  stood  at  his  cottage  door, 
Looking  down  the  village  street. 


John   Burns  of  Gettysburg         ^S^S 

Where,  in  the  shade  of  his  peaceful  vine, 
He  heard  the  low  of  his  gathered  kine. 
And  felt  their  breath  with  incense  sweet; 
Or  I  might  say,  when  the  sunset  burned 
The  old  farm  gable,  he  thought  it  turned 
The  milk  that  fell  like  a  babbling  Hood 
Into  the  milk -pail,  red  as  blood! 
Or  how  he  fancied  the  hum  of  bees 
Were  bullets  buzzing  among  the  trees. 
But  all  such  fanciful  thoughts  as  these 
Were  strange  to  a  practical  man  like  Burns, 
Who  minded  only  his  own  concerns. 
Troubled  no  more  by  fancies  fine 
Than  one  of  his  calm-eyed,  long-tailed  kine, — 
Quite  old-fashioned  and  matter-of-fact. 
Slow  to  argue,  but  quick  to  act. 
That  was  the  reason,  as  some  folks  say. 
He  fought  so  well  on  that  terrible  day. 

And  it  was  terrible.    On  the  right 

Raged  for  hours  the  heady  fight. 

Thundered  the  battery's  double  bass, — 

Difficult  music  for  men  to  face; 

While  on  the  left — where  now  the  graves 

Undulate  like  the  living  waves 

That  all  that  day  unceasing  swept 

Up  to  the  pits  the  rebels  kept — 

Round-shot  ploughed  the  upland  glades, 

Sown  with  bullets,  reaped  with  blades; 

Shattered  fences  here  and  there 

Tossed  their  splinters  in  the  air; 

The  very  trees  were  stripped  and  bare; 

The  barns  that  once  held  yellow  grain 

Were  heaped  with  harvests  of  the  slain; 

The  cattle  bellowed  on  the  plain, 

The  turkeys  screamed  with  might  and  main. 

The  brooding  barn-fowl  left  their  rest 

With  strange  shells  bursting  in  each  nest. 

Just  where  the  tide  of  battle  turns, 
Erect  and  lonely,  stood  old  John  Burns. 


2506  Poems  of  History 

How  do  you  think  the  man  was  dressed? 

He  wore  an  ancient  long  buff  vest, 

Yellow  as  saffron, — but  his  best; 

And,  buttoned  over  his  manly  breast, 

Was  a  bright  blue  coat,  with  a  rolling  collar, 

And  large  gilt  buttons, — size  of  a  dollar, — 

With  tails  that  the  country-folk  called  "swaller." 

He  wore  a  broad-brimmed,  bell-crowned  hat,     ' 

White  as  the  locks  on  which  it  sat.  ' 

Never  had  such  a  sight  been  seen 

For  forty  years  on  the  village  green, 

Since  old  John  Burns  was  a  country  beau, 

And  went  to  the  "quiltings"  long  ago. 

Close  at  his  elbows  all  that  day, 

Veterans  of  the  Peninsula, 

Sunburnt  and  bearded,  charged  away; 

And  striplings,  downy  of  lip  and  chin, — 

Clerks  that  the  Home-Guard  mustered  in, — 

Glanced,  as  they  passed,  at  the  hat  he  wore, 

Then  at  the  rifle  his  right  hand  bore ; 

And  hailed  him,  from  out  their  youthful  lore. 

With  scraps  of  a  slangy  repertoire: 

"How  are  you.  White  Hat?"    "Put  her  through!" 

"Your  head's  level!"  and  "Bully  for  you!" 

Called  him  "Daddy," — begged  he'd  disclose 

The  name  of  the  tailor  who  made  his  clothes, 

And  what  was  the  value  he  set  on  those; 

While  Burns,  unmindful  of  jeer  or  scoff, 

Stood  there  picking  the  rebels  off, — 

With  his  long  brown  rifle,  and  bell-crowned  hat, 

And  the  swallow-tails  they  were  laughing  at. 

'Twas  but  a  moment,  for  that  respect  , 

Which  clothes  all  courage  their  voices  checked; 
And  something  the  wildest  could  understand 
Spake  in  the  old  man's  strong  right  hand. 
And  his  corded  throat,  and  the  lurking  frown 
Of  his  eyebrows  under  his  old  bell-crown; 
Until,  as  they  gazed,  there  crept  an  awe 
Through  the  ranks  in  whispers,  and  some  men  saw, 


Farragut  2507 


In  the  antique  vestments  and  long  white  hair, 
The  Past  of  the  Nation  in  battle  there; 
And  some  of  the  soldiers  since  declare 
That  the  gleam  of  his  old  white  hat  afar, 
Like  the  crested  plume  of  the  brave  Navarre, 
That  day  was  their  oriflamme  of  war. 

So  raged  the  battle.    You  know  the  rest: 
How  the  rebels,  beaten  and  backward  pressed, 
Broke  at  the  final  charge  and  ran. 
At  which  John  Burns—a  practical  man — ^* 
Shouldered  his  rifle,  unbent  his  brows, 
And  then  went  back  to  his  bees  and  cows. 

That  is  the  story  of  old  John  Burns; 
This  is  the  moral  the  reader  learns: 
In  fighting  the  battle,  the  question's  whether 
You'll  show  a  hat  that's  white,  or  a  feather! 

Bret  II arte  [183  9- 190  2] 

FARRAGUT 

[mobile  bay,  august  5,  1864] 

Farragut,  Farragut, 

Old  Heart  of  Oak, 
Daring  Dave  Farragut, 

Thunderbolt  stroke, 
Watches  the  hoary  mist 

Lift  from  the  bay. 
Till  his  flag,  glory-kissed. 

Greets  the  young  day. 

Far,  by  gray  Morgan's  walls, 

Looms  the  black  fleet. 
Hark,  deck  to  rampart  calls 

With  the  drums'  beat! 
Buoy  your  chains  overboard. 

While  the  steam  hums; 
Men!  to  the  battlement, 

Farragut  comes. 


2508  Poems  of  History 

See,  as  the  hurricane 

Hurtles  in  wrath 
Squadrons  of  clouds  amain 

Back  from  its  path! 
Back  to  the  parapet, 

To  the  guns'  Ups, 
Thunderbolt  Farragut 

Hurls  the  black  ships. 

Now  through  the  battle's  roar 
*  Clear  the  boy  sings, 

"By  the  mark  fathoms  four," 

While  his  lead  swings. 
Steady  the  wheelmen  five 

"Nor'  by  East  keep  her," 
"Steady,"  but  two  alive: 

How  the  shells  sweep  her! 

Lashed  to  the  mast  that  sways 

Over  red  decks, 
Over  the  flame  that  plays 

Round  the  torn  wrecks, 
Over  the  dying  lips 

Framed  for  a  cheer, 
Farragut  leads  his  ships. 

Guides  the  line  clear. 

On  by  heights  cannon-browed, 

While  the  spars  quiver; 
Onward  still  flames  the  cloud 

Where  the  hulks  shiver. 
See,  yon  fort's  star  is  set, 

Stormi  and  fire  past. 
Cheer  him,  lads — Farragut, 

Lashed  to  the  mast! 

Oh!  while  Atlantic's  breast 
Bears  a  white  sail, 

While  the  Gulf's  towering  crest 
Tops  a  green  vale. 


Craven  ^5^9 

Men  thy  bold  deeds  shall  tell, 

Old  Heart  of  Oak, 
Daring  Dave  Farragut, 

Thunderbolt  stroke! 

William  Tucker  Meredith  11839- 


CRAVEN 

[mobile  bay,  august  5,  1864] 

Over  the  turret,  shut  in  his  ironclad  tower, 

Craven  was  conning  his  ship  through  smoke  and  flame; 

Gun  to  gun  he  had  battered  the  fort  for  an  hour. 
Now  was  the  time  for  a  charge  to  end  the  game. 

There  lay  the  narrowing  channel,  smooth  and  grim, 
A  hundred  deaths  beneath  it,  and  never  a  sign: 

There  lay  the  enemy's  ships,  and  sink  or  swim 
The  flag  was  flying,  and  he  was  head  of  the  hne. 

The  fleet  behind  was  jamming:  the  monitor  hung 
Beating  the  stream;  the  roar  for  a  moment  hushed; 

Craven  spoke  to  the  pilot;  slow  she  swung; 
Again  he  spoke,  and  right  for  the  foe  she  rushed         | 

Into  the  narrowing  channel,  between  the  shore 
And  the  sunk  torpedoes  lying  in  treacherous  rank; 

She  turned  but  a  yard  too  short;  a  muffled  roar, 
A  mountainous  wave,  and  she  rolled,  righted,  and  sank. 

Over  the  manhole,  up  in  the  ironclad  tower. 
Pilot  and  captain  met  as  they  turned  to  fly: 

The  hundredth  part  of  a  moment  seemed  an  hour, 
For  one  could  pass  to  be  saved,  and  one  must  die. 

They  stood  like  men  in  a  dream;  Craven  spoke, — 
Spoke  as  he  lived  and  fought,  with  a  captain's  pride: 

"After  you,  Pilot."    The  pilot  woke, 
Down  the  ladder  he  went,  and  Craven  died. 


2510  Poems  of  History 

All  men  praise  the  deed  and  the  manner;  but  we — 

We  set  it  apart  from  the  pride  that  stoops  to  the  proud, 

The  strength  that  is  supple  to  serve  the  strong  and  free, 
The  grave  of  the  empty  hands  and  promises  loud; 

Sidney  thirsting  a  humbler  need  to  slake, 

Nelson  waiting  his  turn  for  the  surgeon's  hand, 

Lucas  crushed  with  chains  for  a  comrade's  sake, 
Outram  coveting  right  before  command. 

These  were  paladins,  these  were  Craven's  peers. 
These  with  him  shall  be  crowned  in  story  and  song, 

Crowned  with  the  glitter  of  steel  and. the  glimmer  of  tears^ 
Princes  of  courtesy,  merciful,  proud,  and  strong. 

Henry  Newbolt  [1862- 


SHERIDAN'S   RIDE 

[OCTOBER  19,  1864] 

Up  from  the  South,  at  break  of  day. 

Bringing  to  Winchester  fresh  dismay. 

The  affrighted  air  with  a  shudder  bore. 

Like  a  herald  in  haste,  to  the  chieftain's  door, 

The  terrible  grumble,  and  rumble,  and  roar, 

Telling  the  battle  was  on  once  more. 

And  Sheridan  twenty  miles  away. 

j'jrfJoJfil 

And  wider  still  those  billows  of  war 

Thundered  along  the  horizon's  bar; 

And  louder  yet  into  Winchester  rolled 

The  roar  of  that  red  sea  uncontrolled. 

Making  the  blood  of  the  Hstener  cold,         fnrarT  orlt 

As  he  thought  of  the  stake  in  that  fiery  fray,  '    ■ 

And  Sheridan  twenty  miles  away.  • 

But  there  is  a  road  from  Winchester  town, 

A  good,  broad  highway  leading  down: 

And  there,  through  the  flush  of  the  morning  light,     ^r, 

A  steed  as  black  as  the  steeds  of  night  ;/ / 

Was  seen  to  pass,  as  with  eagle  flight; 


Sheridan's  Ride  251 1 

As  if  he  knew  the  terrible  need, 
He  stretched  away  with  his  utmost  speed; 
Hills  rose  and  fell,  but  his  heart  was  gay, 
With  Sheridan  fifteen  miles  away. 

Still  sprang  from  those  swift  hoofs,  thundering  south, 
The  dust,  like  smoke  from  the  cannon's  mouth. 
Or  the  trail  of  a  comet,  sweeping  faster  and  faster, 
Foreboding  to  traitors  the  doom  of  disaster. 
The  heart  of  the  steed  and  the  heart  of  the  master 
Were  beating  like  prisoners  assaulting  their  walls, 
Impatient  to  be  where  the  battle-field  calls; 
Every  nerve  of  the  charger  was  strained  to  full  play. 
With  Sheridan  only  ten  miles  away. 

Under  his  spurning  feet,  the  road 
Like  an  arrowy  Alpine  river  flowed. 
And  the  landscape  sped  away  behind 
Like  an  ocean  flying  before  the  wind; 
And  the  steed,  like  a  bark  fed  with  furnace  ire, 
Swept  on,  with  his  wild  eye  full  of  fire; 
But,  lo!  he  is  nearing  his  heart's  desire; 
He  is  snufling  the  smoke  of  the  roaring  fray, 
W'ith  Sheridan  only  five  miles  away. 

The  first  that  the  general  saw  were  the  groups 
Of  stragglers,  and  then  the  retreating  troops; 
What  was  done?  what  to  do?  a  glance  told  him  both. 
Then,  striking  his  spurs,  with  a  terrible  oath, 
He  dashed  down  the  line,  'mid  a  storm  of  huzzas, 
And  the  wave  of  retreat  checked  its  course  there,  because 
The  sight  of  the  master  compelled  it  to  pause. 
W'ith  foam  and  with  dust  the  black  charger  was  gray; 
By  the  flash  of  his  eye,  and  the  red  nostril's  play, 
He  seemed  to  the  whole  great  army  to  say: 
"I  have  brought  you  Sheridan  all  the  way 
From  Winchester  town  to  save  the  day!" 

Hurrah',  hurrah  for  Sheridan! 
Hurrah!  hurrah  for  horse  and  man! 


2512  Poems  of  History" 

And  when  their  statues  are  placed  on  high, 
Under  the  dome  of  the  Union  sky,  ''i 

The  American  soldier's  Temple  of  Fame,  ' ' 

There,  with  the  glorious  general's  name, 
Be  it  said,  in  letters  both  bold  and  bright: 
"Here  is  the  steed  that  saved  the  day 
By  carrying  Sheridan  into  the  fight,  '^b  odT 

From  Winchester — twenty  miles  away!" 

Thomas  Buchanan  Read  [1822-1872] 

i 

SONG  OF  SHERMAN'S  MARCH  TO  THE  SEA 

[NOVEMBER,  1 864] 

Our  camp-fires  shone  bright  on  the  mountains 

That  frowned  on  the  river  below,  .  ..  j 

While  we  stood  by  our  guns  in  the  morning,, £  o^J 

And  eagerly  watched  for  the  foe; 
When  a  rider  came  out  from  the  darknes? 

That  hung  over  mountain  and  tree,  ,/, 

And  shouted:  "Boys,  up  and  be  ready,  .r'r^ 

For  Sherman  will  march  to  the  sea."  j-a 

■}] 
Then  cheer  upon  cheer  for  bold  Sherman 

Went  up  from  each  valley  and  glen, 
And  the  bugles  reechoed  the  music 

That  came  from  the  lips  of  the  men: 
For  we  knew^  that  the  stars  in  our  banner 

More  bright  in  their  splendor  would  be, 
And  that  blessings  from  Northland  would  greet  us 

When  Sherman  marched  down  to  the  sea. 

Then  forward,  boys,  forward  to  battle!  /'/ 

We  marched  on  our  wearisomxC  way,  <'" 

And  we  stormed  the  wild  hills  of  Resaca; 

God  bless  those  who  fell  on  that  day! 
Then  Kenesaw,  dark  in  its  glory. 

Frowned  down  on  the  flag  of  the  free, 
But  the  East  and  the  West  bore  our  standards, 

And  Sherman  marched  on  to  the  sea.  ''H 


A  Second  Review  of  the  Grand  Army      2513 

Still  onward  we  pressed,  till  our  banners 

Swept  out  from  Atlanta's  grim  walls, 
And  the  blood  of  the  patriot  dampened 

The  soil  where  the  traitor  Hag  falls; 
Yet  we  paused  not  to  weep  for  the  fallen, 

Who  slept  by  each  river  and  tree; 
We  twined  them  a  wreath  of  the  laurel 

As  Sherman  marched  down  to  the  sea. 

Oh!  proud  was  our  army  that  morning, 

That  stood  where  the  pine  darkly  towers, 
When  Sherman  said:  "Boys,  you  are  weary; 

This  day  fair  Savannah  is  ours!" 
Then  sang  we  a  song  for  our  chieftain, 

That  echoed  o'er  river  and  lea. 
And  the  stars  in  our  banner  shone  brighter 

When  Sherman  marched  down  to  the  sea. 
Samuel  H.  M.  Byers  [1S38- 

A  SECOND  REVIEW  OF  THE   GRAND   ARMY 

[jMAY  24,  1865] 

I  READ  last  night  of  the  Grand  Reviovv 
In  Washington's  chiefest  avenue, — 
Two  hundred  thousand  men  in  blue, 

I  think  they  said  was  the  number, — 
Till  I  seemed  to  hear  their  trampling  feet. 
The  bugle  blast  and  the  drum's  quick  beat, 
The  clatter  of  hoofs  in  the  stony  street. 
The  cheers  of  people  who  came  to  greet. 
And  the  thousand  details  that  to  repeat 

Would  only  my  verse  encumber, — 
Till  I  fell  in  a  revery,  sad  and  sweet, 

And  then  to  a  fitful  slumber. 

When,  lo!  in  a  vision  I  seemed  to  stand 
In  the  lonely  Capitol.     On  each  hand 
Far  stretched  the  portico,  dim  and  grand 
Its  columns  ranged  like  a  martial  band 


2514  Poems  of  History 

Of  sheeted  spectres,  whom  some  command 

Had  called  to  a  last  reviewing. 
And  the  streets  of  the  city  were  white  and  bare; 
No  footfall  echoed  across  the  square; 
But  out  of  the  misty  midnight  air 
I  heard  in  the  distance  a  trumpet  blare, 
And  the  wandering  night-winds  seemed  to  bear 

The  sound  of  a  far  tattooing. 

Then  I  held  my  breath  with  fear  and  dread; 
For  into  the  square,  with  a  brazen  tread, 
There  rode  a  figure  whose  stately  head 

O'erlooked  the  review  that  morning, 
That  never  bowed  from  its  firm-set  seat 
When  the  living  column  passed  its  feet, 
Yet  now  rode  steadily  up  the  street 

To  the  phantom  bugle's  warning: 

Till  it  reached  the  Capitol  square,  and  wheeled, 
And  there  in  the  moonlight  stood  revealed 
A  well-known  form  that  in  State  and  field 

Had  led  our  patriot  sires: 
Whose  face  was  turned  to  the  sleeping  camp, 
Afar  through  the  river's  fog  and  damp, 
That  showed  no  flicker,  nor  waning  lamp, 

Nor  wasted  bivouac  fires. 

And  I  saw  a  phantom  army  come. 
With  never  a  sound  of  fife  or  drum. 
But  keeping  time  to  a  throbbing  hum 

Of  wailing  and  lamentation : 
The  martyred  heroes  of  Malvern  Hill, 
Of  Gettysburg  and  Chancellorsville, 
The  men  whose  wasted  figures  fill 

The  patriot  graves  of  the  nation. 

And  there  came  the  nameless  dead, — the  men 
Who  perished  in  fever-swamp  and  fen. 
The  slowly-starved  of  the  prison-pen; 
And,  marching  beside  the  others, 


The  Conquered  Banner     2515 

Came  the  dusky  martyrs  of  Pillow's  fight, 
With  limbs  enfranchised  and  bearing  bright; 
I  thought — perhaps  'twas  the  pale  moonlight — 
They  looked  as  white  as  their  brothers! 

And  so  all  night  marched  the  Nation's  dead, 
With  neyer.a  banner  above  them  spread, 
Nor  a  badge,  nor  a  motto  branchshed; 
No  mark — save  the  bare  uncovered  head 

Of  the  silent  bronze  Reviewer; 
With  never  an  arch  save  the  vaulted  sky; 
With  never  a  flower  save  those  that  he 
On  the  distant  graves — for  love  could  buy 

No  gift  that  was  purer  or  truer. 

So  all  night  long  swept  the  strange  array; 
So  all  night  long,  till  the  morning  gray, 
I  watched  for  one  who  had  passed  away, 

With  a  reverent  awe  and  wonder, — 
Till  a  blue  cap  waved  in  the  lengthening  line, 
And  I  knew  that  one  who  was  kin  of  mine 
Had  come;  and  I  spake — and  lo!  that  sign 

Awakened  me  froin  my  slumber. 

Bret  II arte  [183Q-1902] 


THE   CONQUERED  BANNER 

Furl  that  Banner,  for  'tis  weary; 
Round  its  staff  'tis  drooping  dreary; 

Furl  it,  fold  it — it  is  best; 
For  there's  not  a  man  to  wave  it. 
And  there's  not  a  sword  to  save  it. 
And  there's  not  one  left  to  lave  it 
In  "the  blood  which  heroes  gave  it; 
And  its  foes  now  scorn  and  brave  it; 

Furl  it,  hide  it — let  it  rest! 

Take  that  Banner  down!  'tis  tattered; 
Broken  is  its  shaft  and  shattered; 
And  the  valiant  hosts  are  scattered 


2516  '■    Poems  of  History 


Over  whom  it  floated  high. 
Oh,  'tis  hard  for  us  to  fold  it, 
Hard  to  think  there's  none  to  hold  it, 
Hard  that  those  who  once  unrolled  it 

Now  must  furl  it  with  a  sigh ! 

Furl  that  Banner — furl  it  sadly; 
Once  ten  thousands  hailed  it  gladly, 
And  ten  thousands  wildly,  madly, 

Swore  it  should  forever  wave — 
Swore  that  foeman's  sword  should  never 
Hearts  like  theirs  entwined  dissever, 
And  that  flag  should  float  forever 

O'er  their  freedom,  or  their  grave! 

Furl  it!  for  the  hands  that  grasped  it. 
And  the  hearts  that  fondly  clasped  it. 

Cold  and  dead  are  lying  low; 
And  that  Banner — it  is  trailing. 
While  around  it  sounds  the  wailing 

Of  its  people  in  their  woe. 

For,  though  conquered,  they  adore  it — 
Love  the  cold,  dead  hands  that  bore  it! 
Weep  for  those  who  fell  before  it! 
Pardon  those  who  trailed  and  tore  it! 
But,  oh,  wfldly  they  deplore  it. 
Now  who  furl  and  fold  it  so! 

Furl  that  Banner!   True,  'tis  gory, 
Yet  'tis  wreathed  around  with  glory, 
And  'twill  live  in  song  and  story 

Though  its  folds  are  in  the  dust! 
For  its  fame  on  brightest  pages. 
Penned  by  poets  and  by  sages. 
Shall  go  sounding  down  the  ages — 

Furl  its  folds  though  now  we  must! 

Furl  that  Banner,  softly,  slowly; 
Treat  it  gently — it  is  holy. 


Driving  Home  the  Cows  2517 

For  it  droops  above  the  dead; 
Touch  it  not — unfold  it  never; 
Let  it  droop  there,  furled  forever, — 

For  its  people's  hopes  are  fled. 

Abram  J.  Ryan  [1839-1888] 


DRIVING  HOME  THE   COWS 

Out  of  the  clover  and  blue -eyed  grass, 
He  turned  them  into  the  river-lane; 

One  after  another  he  let  them  pass. 
Then  fastened  the  meadow-bars  again. 

Under  the  willows,  and  over  the  hill, 
He  patiently  followed  their  sober  pace; 

The  merry  whistle  for  once  was  still, 

And  something  shadowed  the  sunny  face. 

Only  a  boy!  and  his  father  had  said 

He  never  could  let  his  youngest  go: 
Two  already  were  lying  dead 

Under  the  feet  of  the  trampling  foe. 

But  after  the  evening  work  was  done. 

And  the  frogs  were  loud  in  the  meadow-swamp, 
Over  his  shoulder  he  slung  his  gun. 

And  stealthily  followed  the  foot-path  damp. 

Across  the  clover,  and  through  the  wheat. 
With  resolute  heart  and  purpose  grim, 

Though  cold  was  the  dew  on  his  hurrying  feet, 
And  the  blind  bat's  flitting  startled  him. 

Thrice  since  then  had  the  lanes  been  white, 
And  the  orchards  sweet  with  apple-bloom; 

And  now,  when  the  cows  came  back  at  night, 
The  feeble  father  drove  them  home. 

For  news  had  come  to  the  lonely  farm 
That  three  were  lying  where  two  had  Iain; 

And  the  old  man's  tremulous,  palsied  arm 
Could  never  lean  on  a  son's  again. 


2518  Poems  of  History 

The  summer  day  grew  cold  and  late. 

He  went  for  the  cows  when  the  work  was  done; 
But  down  the  lane,  as  he  opened  the  gate, 

He  saw  them  coming,  one  by  one, — 

Brindle,  Ebony,  Speckle,  and  Bess, 

Shaking  their  horns  in  the  evening  wind; 

Cropping  the  buttercups  out  of  the  grass, — 
But  who  was  it  following  close  behind? 

Loosely  swung  in  the  idle  air 

The  empty  sleeve  of  army  blue; 
And  worn  and  pale,  from  the  crisping  hair, 

Looked  out  a  face  that  the  father  knew. 

For  Southern  prisons  will  sometimes  yawn. 
And  yield  their  dead  unto  hfe  again; 

And  the  day  that  comes  with  a  cloudy  dawn 
In  golden  glory  at  last  may  wane. 

The  great  tears  sprang  to  their  meeting  eyes; 

For  the  heart  must  speak  when  the  lips  are  dumb ; 
And  under  the  silent  evening  skies, 

Together  they  followed  the  cattle  home. 

Kate  Putnam  Osgood  [1S41- 

ODE  RECITED  AT  THE  HARVARD 
COMMEMORATION 

July  21,  1865 

I 

Weak-winged  is  song, 

Nor  aims  at  that  clear  cthered  height 

Whither  the  brave  deed  chmbs  for  light : 

We  seem  to  do  them  wrong. 
Bringing  our  robin's-leaf  to  deck  their  hearse 
Who  in  warm  life-blood  wrote  their  nobler  verse. 
Our  trivial  song  to  honor  those  who  come 
With  ears  attuned  to  strenuous  trump  and  drum, 
And  shaped  in  squadron-strophes  their  desire. 
Live  battle-odes  whose  hnes  were  steel  and  fire: 

Yet  sometimes  feathered  words  are  strong, 


Commemoration  Ode  2519 

A  gracious  memory  to  buoy  up  and  save 
From  Lethe's  dreamless  ooze,  the  common  grave 
Of  the  unventurous  throng. 

n 

To-day  our  Reverend  Mother  welcomes  back 
Her  wisest  Scholars,  those  who  understood 
The  deeper  teaching  of  her  mystic  tome, 

And  offered  their  fresh  lives  to  make  it  good: 
No  lore  of  Greece  or  Rome, 
No  science  peddling  with  the  names  of  things, 
Or  reading  stars  to  find  inglorious  fates, 

Can  lift  our  life  with  wings 
Far  from  Death's  idle  gulf  that  for  the  many  waits, 

And  lengthen  out  our  dates 
With  that  clear  fame  whose  memory  sings 
In  manly  hearts  to  come,  and  nerves  them  and  dilates: 
Nor  such  thy  teaching.  Mother  of  us  all! 
Not  such  the  trumpet-call 
Of  thy  diviner  mood, 
That  could  thy  sons  entice 
From  happy  homes  and  toils,  the  fruitful  nest 
Of  those  half -virtues  which  the  world  calls  best, 
Into  War's  tumult  rude; 
But  rather  far  that  stern  device 
The  sponsors  chose  that  round  thy  cradle  stood 
In  the  dim,  unventured  wood. 
The  Veritas  that  lurks  beneath 
The  letter's  unprolific  sheath. 
Life  of  whate'er  makes  life  worth  living. 
Seed-grain  of  high  emprise,  immortal  food. 

One  heavenly  thing  whereof  earth  hath  the  giving. 


Many  loved  Truth,  and  lavished  life's  best  oil 

Amid  the  dust  of  books  to  find  her, 
Content  at  last,  for  guerdon  of  their  toil, 
With  the  cast  mantle  she  hath  left  behind  her. 
Many  in  sad  faith  sought  for  her; 
Many  with  crossed  hands  sighed  for  her; 


2520  Poems  of  History 

But  these,  our  brothers,  fought  for  her;  ,\ 

At  life's  dear  peril  wrought  for  her,  4 

So  loved  her  that  they  died  for  her, 

Tasting  the  raptured  fleetuess 

Of  her  divine  completeness: 

Their  higher  instinct  knew  p 

Those  love  her  best  who  to  themselves  are  true, 
And  what  they  dare  to  dream  of,  dare  to  do; 

They  followed  her  and  found  her 

Where  all  may  hope  to  find, 
Not  in  the  ashes  of  the  burnt-out  mind, 
But  beautiful,  with  danger's  sweetness  round  her. 

Where  faith  made  whole  with  deed 

Breathes  its  awakening  breath 

Into  the  lifeless  creed. 

They  saw  her  plumed  and  mailed. 

With  sweet,  stern  face  unveiled. 
And  all-repaying  eyes,  look  proud  on  them  in  death. 

IV 

Our  slender  life  runs  rippling  by,  and  glides 
Into  the  silent  hollow  of  the  past; 

What  is  there  that  abides 
To  make  the  next  age  better  for  the  last? 

Is  earth  too  poor  to  give  us 
Something  to  live  for  here  that  shall  outlive  us? 
Some  more  substantial  boon 
Than  such  as  flows  and  ebbs  with  Fortune's  fickle  moon? 
The  little  that  we  see 
From  doubt  is  never  free; 
The  little  that  we  do 
Is  but  half -nobly  true; 
With  our  laborious  hiving 
What  men  call  treasure,  and  the  gods  call  dross, 
Life  seems  a  jest  of  Fate's  contriving. 
Only  secure  in  every  one's  conniving, 
A  long  account  of  nothings  paid  with  loss, 
Where  we  poor  puppets,  jerked  by  unseen  wires, 

After  our  little  hour  of  strut  and  rave. 
With  all  our  pasteboard  passions  and  desires. 


Commemoration   Ode  2521 

Loves,  hates,  ambitions,  and  immortal  fires, 
Are  tossed  pell-mell  together  in  the  grave. 
But  stay!  no  age  was  e'er  degenerate, 
Unless  men  held  it  at  too  cheap  a  rate, 
For  in  our  likeness  still  we  shape  our  fate. 

Ah,  there  is  something  here 
Unfathomed  by  the  cynic's  sneer, 

Something  that  gives  our  feeble  light 
A  high  immunity  from  Night, 
Something  that  leaps  life's  narrov*^  bars 
To  claim  its  birthright  with  the  hosts  of  heaven; 
A  seed  of  sunshine  that  can  leaven 
Our  earthly  dulness  with  the  beams  of  stars, 

And  glorify  our  clay 
With  light  from  fountains  elder  than  the  Day; 
A  conscience  more  divine  than  we, 
A  gladness  fed  with  secret  tears, 
A  vexing,  forward-reaching  sense 
Of  some  more  noble  permanence; 
A  hght  across  the  sea. 
Which  haunts  the  soul  and  will  not  let  it  be, 
Still  beaconing  from  the  heights  of  undegenerate  years. 


Whither  leads  the  path 
To  ampler  fates  that  leads? 
Not  down  through  flowery  meads, 
To  reap  an  aftermath 
Of  youth's  vainglorious  weeds. 
But  up  the  steep,  amid  the  wrath 
And  shock  of  deadly-hostile  creeds, 
Where  the  world's  best  hope  and  stay 
By  battle's  flashes  gropes  a  desperate  way. 
And  every  turf  the  fierce  foot  clings  to  bleeds. 
Peace  hath  her  not  ignoble  wreath, 
Ere  yet  the  sharp,  decisive  word 
Light  the  black  lips  of  cannon,  and  the  sword 

Dreams  in  its  easeful  sheath; 
But  some  day  the  live  coal  behind  the  thought. 
Whether  from  Baiil's  stone  obscene, 


2522  Poems  of  History 

Or  from  the  shrine  serene 
Of  God's  pure  altar  brought, 
Bursts  up  in  flame;  the  war  of  tongue  and  pen 
Learns  with  what  deadly  purpose  it  was  fraught, 
And,  helpless  in  the  fiery  passion  caught, 
Shakes  all  the  pillared  state  with  shock  of  men: 
Some  day  the  soft  Ideal  that  we  wooed 
Confronts  us  fiercely,  foe-beset,  pursued, 
And  cries  reproachful:  "Was  it,  then,  my  praise, 
And  not  myself  was  loved?    Prove  now  thy  truth; 
I  claim  of  thee  the  promise  of  thy  youth; 
Give  me  thy  life,  or  cower  in  empty  phrase, 
The  victim  of  thy  genius,  not  its  mate!" 
Life  may  be  given  in  many  ways. 
And  loyalty  to  Truth  be  sealed 
As  bravely  in  the  closet  as  the  field, 
So  bountiful  is  Fate; 
But  then  to  stand  beside  her. 
When  craven  churls  deride  her, 
To  front  a  lie  in  arms  and  not  to  yield. 
This  shows,  methinks,  God's  plan 
And  measure  of  a  stalwart  man. 
Limbed  like  the  old  heroic  breeds. 
Who  stands  self-poised  on  manhood's  solid  earth, 
Not  forced  to  frame  excuses  for  his  birth, 
Fed  from  within  with  all  the  strength  he  needs. 

VI 

Such  was  he,  our  Martyr-Chief, 

Whom  late  the  Nation  he  had  led. 
With  ashes  on  her  head, 
Wept  w?th  the  passion  of  an  angry  grief: 
Forgive  me,  if  from  present  things  I  turn 
To  speak  what  in  my  heart  will  beat  and  burn, 
Ami  hang  my  wreath  on  his  world-honored  urn. 
Nature,  they  say,  doth  dote, 
And  cannot  make  a  man 
Save  on  some  worn-out  plan, 
Repeating  us  by  rote: 
For  him  her  Old-World  moulds  aside  she  threw, 
And,  choosing  sweet  clay  from  the  breast 


Commemoration   Ode  ^5^3 

Of  the  unexhausted  West, 
With  stuff  untainted  shaped  a  hero  new, 
Wise,  steadfast  in  the  strength  of  God,  and  true. 

How  beautiful  to  see 
Once  more  a  shepherd  of  mankind  indeed. 
Who  loved  his  charge,  but  never  loved  to  lead; 
One  whose  meek  flock  the  people  joyed  to  be, 
Not  lured  by  any  cheat  of  birth, 
But  by  his  clear-grained  human  worth, 
And  brave  old  wisdom  of  sincerity! 

They  knew  that  outward  grace  is  dust; 
They  could  not  choose  but  trust 
In  that  sure-footed  mind's  unfaltering  skill, 

And  supple-tempered  will 
That  bent  like  perfect  steel  to  spring  again  and  thrust. 
His  was  no  lonely  mountain-peak  of  mind, 
Thrusting  to  thin  air  o'er  our  cloudy  bars, 
A  sea-mark  now,  now  lost  in  vapors  blind; 
Broad  prairie  rather,  genial,  level-lined, 
Fruitful  and  friendly  for  all  human  kind, 
Yet  also  nigh  to  heaven  and  loved  of  loftiest  stars. 

Nothing  of  Europe  here, 
Or,  then,  of  Europe  fronting  mornward  still, 
Ere  any  names  of  Serf  and  Peer 
Could  Nature's  equal  scheme  deface 
And  thwart  her  genial  will; 
Here  was  a  type  of  the  true  elder  race. 
And  one  of  Plutarch's  men  talked  with  us  face  to  face. 

I  praise  him  not;  it  were  too  late; 
And  some  innative  weakness  there  must  be 
In  him  who  condescends  to  victory 
Such  as  the  Present  gives,  and  cannot  wait, 
Safe  in  himself  as  in  a  fate. 
So  always  firmly  he: 
He  knew  to  bide  his  time. 
And  can  his  fame  abide, 
Still  patient  in  his  simple  faith  sublime, 
Till  the  wise  years  decide. 
Great  captains,  with  their  guns  and  drums, 
Disturb  our  judgment  for  the  hour. 
But  at  last  silence  comes; 


252.4  Poems  of  History 

These  all  are  gone,  and,  standing  like  a  tower, 

Our  children  shall  behold  his  fame. 

The  kindly-earnest,  brave,  foreseeing  man, 
Sagacious,  patient,  dreading  praise,  not  blame. 

New  birth  of  our  new  soil,  the  first  American. 

VII 

Long  as  man's  hope  insatiate  can  discern 
Or  only  guess  some  more  inspiring  goal 
Outside  of  Self,  enduring  as  the  pole, 

Along  whose  course  the  flying  axles  burn 

Of  spirits  bravely-pitched,  earth's  manlier  brood; 
Long  as  below  we  cannot  find 
The  meed  that  stills  the  inexorable  mind; 
So  long  this  faith  to  some  ideal  Good, 
Under  whatever  mortal  names  it  masks. 
Freedom,  Law,  Country,  this  ethereal  mood 

That  thanks  the  Fates  for  their  severer  tasks, 
Feeling  its  challenged  pulses  leap. 
While  others  skulk  in  subterfuges  cheap, 

And,  set  in  Danger's  van,  has  all  the  boon  it  asks 
Shall  win  man's  praise  and  woman's  love, 
Shall  be. a  wisdom  that  we  set  above 

All  other  skills  and  gifts  to  culture  dear, 

A  virtue  round  whose  forehead  we  inwreathe 
Laurels  that  with  a  living  passion  breathe 

When  other  crowns  grow,  while  we  twine  them,  sear. 
What  brings  us  thronging  these  high  rites  to  pay. 

And  seal  these  hours  the  noblest  of  our  year. 
Save  that  our  brothers  found  this  better  way? 

VIII 

We  sit  here  in  the  Promised  Land 

That  flows  with  Freedom's  honey  and  milk; 

But  'twas  they  won  it,  sword  in  hand, 

Making  the  nettle  danger  soft  for  us  as  silk. 
We  welcome  back  our  bravest  and  our  best; — 
Ah  me!  not  all!  some  come  not  with  the  rest, 

Who  went  forth  brave  and  bright  as  any  here! 

I  strive  to  mix  some  gladness  with  my  strain, 
But  the  sad  strings  complain, 
And  will  not  please  the  ear: 


Commemoration   Ode  ^5^5 

I  sweep  them  for  a  paean,  but  they  wane 

Again  and  yet  again 
Into  a  dirge,  and  die  away,  in  pain. 
In  these  brave  ranks  I  only  see  the  gaps, 
Thinking  of  dear  ones  whom  the  dumb  turf  wraps, 
Dark  to  the  triumph  which  they  died  to  gain: 
Fither  may  others  greet  the  Hving, 
For  me  the  past  is  unforgiving; 

I  with  uncovered  head 

Salute  the  sacred  dead. 
Who  went,  and  who  return  not. — Say  not  so! 
'Tis  not  the  grapes  of  Canaan  that  repay. 
But  the  high  faith  that  failed  not  by  the  way; 
Virtue  treads  paths  that  end  not  in  the  grave; 
No  ban  of  endless  night  exiles  the  brave; 

And  to  the  saner  mind 
We  rather  seem  the  dead  that  stayed  behind. 
Blow,  trumpets,  all  your  exultations  blow! 
For  never  shall  their  aureoled  presence  lack: 
I  see  them  muster  in  a  gleaming  row. 
With  ever-youthful  brows  that  nobler  show; 
We  find  in  our  dull  road  their  shining  track; 

In  every  nobler  mood 
We  feel  the  orient  of  their  spirit  glow, 
Part  of  our  hfe's  unalterable  good, 
Of  all  our  saintlier  aspiration ; 

They  come  transfigured  back, 
Secure  from  change  in  their  high-hearted  ways, 
Beautiful  evermore,  and  with  the  rays 
Of  morn  on  their  white  Shields  of  Expectation! 

IX 

But  is  there  hope  to  save 
Even  this  ethereal  essence  from  the  grave? 
What  ever  'scaped  Oblivion's  subtle  wrong 
Save  a  few  clarion  names,  or  golden  threads  of  song? 
Before  my  musing  eye 
The  mighty  ones  of  old  sweep  by, 
Disvoiced  now  and  insubstantial  things, 
As  noisy  once  as  we;  poor  ghosts  of  kings. 


2526  Poems  of  History 

Shadows  of  empire  wholly  gone  to  dust, 

And  many  races,  nameless  long  ago. 

To  darkness  driven  by  that  imperious  gust 

Of  ever-rushing  Time  that  here  doth  blow: 

O  visionary  world,  condition  strange, 

Where  naught  abiding  is  but  only  Change, 
Where  the  deep-bolted  stars  themselves  still  shift  and  range! 

Shall  we  to  more  continuance  make  pretence? 
Renown  builds  tombs;  a  life-estate  is  Wit; 

And,  bit  by  bit, 
The  cunning  years  steal  all  from  us  but  woe; 

Leaves  are  we,  whose  decays  no  harvest  sow. 
But,  when  we  vanish  hence. 

Shall  they  lie  forceless  in  the  dark  below, 

Save  to  make  green  their  little  length  of  sods, 

Or  deepen  pansies  for  a  year  or  two, 

Who  now  to  us  are  shining-sweet  as  gods? 

Was  dying  all  they  had  the  skill  to  do? 

That  were  not  fruitless:  but  the  Soul  resents 

Such  short-lived  service,  as  if  blind  events 

Ruled  without  her,  or  earth  could  so  endure; 

She  claims  a  more  divine  investiture 

Of  longer  tenure  than  Fame's  airy  rents; 

Whate'er  she  touches  doth  her  nature  share; 

Her  inspiration  haunts  the  ennobled  air. 
Gives  eyes  to  mountains  blind. 

Ears  to  the  deaf  earth,  voices  to  the  wind, 

And  her  clear  trump  sings  succor  everywhere 

By  lonely  bivouacs  to  the  wakeful  mind; 

For  soul  inherits  all  that  soul  could  dare: 
Yea,  Manhood  hath  a  wider  span 

And  larger  privilege  of  life  than  man. 

The  single  deed,  the  private  sacrifice. 

So  radiant  now  through  proudly-hidden  tears, 

Is  covered  up  erelong  from  mortal  eyes 

With  thoughtless  drift  of  the  deciduous  years; 

But  that  high  privilege  that  makes  all  men  peers, 

That  leap  of  heart  whereby  a  people  rise 
Up  to  a  noble  anger's  height, 
And,  flamed  on  by  the  Fates,  not  shrink,  but  grow  more 

bright, 


Commemoration   Ode  ^5^7 

That  swift  validity  in  noble  veins, 
Of  choosing  danger  and  disdaining  shame, 
Of  being  set  on  flame 
By  the  pure  fire  that  flies  all  contact  base, 
But  wraps  its  chosen  with  angelic  might. 
These  are  imperishable  gains, 
Sure  as  the  sun,  medicinal  as  light, 
These  hold  great  futures  in  their  lusty  reins 
And  certify  to  earth  a  new  imperial  race. 

X 

Who  now  shall  sneer? 
.    Who  dare  again  to  say  we  trace 
Our  lines  to  a  plebeian  race? 
Roundhead  and  Cavalier! 
Dumb  are  those  names  erewhile  in  battle  loud; 
Dream-footed  as  the  shadow  of  a  cloud, 

They  flit  across  the  ear: 
That  is  best  blood  that  hath  most  iron  in't. 
To  edge  resolve  with,  pouring  without  stint 
For  what  makes  manhood  dear. 
Tell  us  not  of  Plantagenets, 
Hapsburgs,  and  Guelfs,  whose  thin  bloods  crawl 
Down  from  some  victor  in  a  border-brawl! 

How  poor  their  outworn  coronets, 
Matched  with  one  leaf  of  that  plain  civic  wreath 
Our  brave  for  honor's  blazon  shall  bequeath, 

Through  whose  desert  a  rescued  Nation  sets 
Her  heel  on  treason,  and  the  trumpet  hears 
Shout  victory,  tingling  Europe's  sullen  ears 
With  vain  resentments  and  more  vain  regrets! 

XI 

Not  in  anger,  not  in  pride, 

Pure  from  passion's  mixture  rude 

Ever  to  base  earth  allied, 

But  with  far-heard  gratitude. 

Still  with  heart  and  voice  renewed, 
To  heroes  living  and  dear  martyrs  dead. 
The  strain  should  close  that  consecrates  our  brave. 
Lift  the  heart  and  lift  the  head ! 

Lofty  be  its  mood  and  grave. 


2528  Poems  of  History 

Not  without  a  martial  ring, 

Not  without  a  prouder  tread 

And  a  peal  of  exultation: 

Little  right  has  he  to  sing 

Through  whose  heart  in  such  an  hour 

Beats  no  march  of  conscious  power, 

Sweeps  no  tumult  of  elation! 

'Tis  no  Man  we  celebrate, 

By  his  country's  victories  great, 

A  hero  half,  and  half  the  whim  of  Fate, 

But  the  pith  and  marrow  of  a  Nation 

Drawing  force  from  all  her  men, 

Highest,  humblest,  weakest,  all, 

For  her  time  of  need,  and  then 

Pulsing  it  again  through  them. 
Till  the  basest  can  no  longer  cower, 
FeeUng  his  soul  spring  up  divinely  tall. 
Touched  l)ut  in  passing  by  her  mantle-hem. 
Come  back,  then,  noble  pride,  for  'tis  her  dower! 

How  could  poet  ever  tower, 

If  his  passions,  hopes,  and  fears, 

If  his  triumphs  and  his  tears. 

Kept  not  measure  with  his  people? 
Boom,  cannon,  boom  to  all  the  winds  and  waves! 
Clash  out,  glad  bells,  from  every  rocking  steeple! 
Banners,  adance  with  triumph,  bend  your  staves! 

And  from  every  mountain-peak 

Let  beacon-fire  to  answering  beacon  speak, 

Katahdin  tell  Monadnock,  Whiteface  he, 
And  so  leap  on  in  light  from  sea  to  sea, 
Till  the  glad  news  be  sent 
Across  a  kindling  continent. 
Making  earth  feel  more  firm  and  air  breathe  braver: 
"Be  proud!  for  she  is  saved,  and  all  have  helped  to  save  her! 
She  that  lifts  up  the  manhood  of  the  poor. 
She  of  the  open  soul  and  open  door. 
With  room  about  her  hearth  for  all  mankind! 
The  fire  is  dreadful  in  her  eyes  no  more; 
From  her  bold  front  the  helm  she  doth  unbind, 
Sends  all  her  handmaid  armies  back  to  spin. 


Custer's   Last  Charge  ^5^9 

And  bids  her  navies,  that  so  lately  hurled 
Their  crashing  battle,  hold  their  thunders  in, 
Swimming  like  birds  of  calm  along  the  unharmful  shore. 
No  challenge  sends  she  to  the  elder  world, 
That  looked  askance  and  hated ;  a  light  scorn 
Plays  o'er  her  mouth,  as  round  her  mighty  knees 
She  calls  her  children  back,  and  waits  the  morn 
Of  nobler  day,  enthroned  between  her  subject  seas." 

XII 

Bow  down,  dear  Land,  for  thou  hast  found  release! 
Thy  God,  in  these  distempered  days. 
Hath  taught  thee  the  sure  wisdom  of  His  ways. 
And  through  thine  enemies  hath  wrought  thy  peace! 

Bow  down  in  prayer  and  praise! 
No  poorest  in  thy  borders  but  may  now 
Lift  to  the  juster  skies  a  man's  enfranchised  brow. 
O  Beautiful!  my  Country!  ours  once  more! 
Smoothing  thy  gold  of  war-dishevelled  hair 
O'er  such  sweet  brows  as  never  other  wore, 
And  letting  thy  set  lips. 
Freed  from  wrath's  pale  eclipse. 
The  rosy  edges  of  their  smile  lay  bare. 
What  words  divine  of  lover  or  of  poet 
Could  tell  our  love  and  make  thee  know  it, 
Among  the  Nations  bright  beyond  compare? 
What  were  our  lives  without  thee? 
What  all  our  lives  to  save  thee? 
We  reck  not  what  we  gave  thee; 
We  will  not  dare  to  doubt  thee. 
But  ask  whatever  else,  and  we  will  dare! 

James  Russell  Lowell  [1819-1891] 

CUSTER'S  LAST  CHARGE 

(June  25,  1876) 

Dead!  Is  it  possible?  He,  the  bold  rider, 
Custer,  our  hero,  the  first  in  the  fight. 

Charming  the  bullets  of  yore  to  fly  wider. 
Far  from  our  battle-king's  ringlets  of  light! 


1^2'^  Poems  of  History 

Dead,  our  young  chieftain,  and  dead,  all  forsaken!  ' 

No  one  to  tell  us  the  way  of  his  fall! 
Slain  in  the  desert,  and  never  to  waken, 

Never,  not  even  to  victory's  call! 

'i 
Proud  for  his  fame  that  last  day  that  he  met  them!  i 

All  the  night  long  he  had  been  on  their  track, 
Scorning  their  traps  and  the  men  that  had  set  them, 

Wild  for  a  charge  that  should  never  give  back. 
There  on  the  hilltop  he  halted  and  saw  them. — 

Lodges  all  loosened  and  ready  to  fly; 
Hurrying  scouts  with  the  tidings  to  awe  them, 

Told  of  his  coming  before  he  was  nigh. 

All  the  wide  valley  was  full  of  their  forces, 

Gathered  to  cover  the  lodges'  retreat! — 
Warriors  running  in  haste  to  their  horses. 

Thousands  of  enemies  close  to  his  feet! 
Down  in  the  valleys  the  ages  had  hollowed, 

There  lay  the  Sitting  Bull's  camp  for  a  prey! 
Numbers!    What  recked  he?    What  recked  those  who 
followed — 

Men  who  had  fought  ten  to  one  ere  that  day? 

Out  swept  the  squadrons,  the  fated  three  hundred, 

Into  the  battle-line  steady  and  full; 
Then  down  the  hillside  exultingly  thundered. 

Into  the  hordes  of  the  old  Sitting  Bull! 
Wild  Ogalallah,  Arapahoe,  Cheyenne, 

Wild  Horse's  braves,  and  the  rest  of  their  crew. 
Shrank  from  that  charge  like  a  herd  from  a  lion, — 

Then  closed  around,  the  grim  horde  of  wild  Sioux! 

Right  to  their  centre  he  charged,  and  then  facing — 

Hark  to  those  yells!  and  around  them,  O  see! 
Over  the  hilltops  the  Indians  come  racing, 

Coming  as  fast  as  the  waves  of  the  sea! 
Red  was  the  circle  of  fire  around  them; 

No  hope  of  victory,  no  ray  of  hght, 
Shot  through  that  terrible  black  cloud  without  them. 

Brooding  in  death  over  Custer's  last  fight. 


The   Last   Redoubt  "^53^ 

Then  did  he  blench?    Did  he  die  like  a  craven, 

Begging  those  torturing  fiends  for  his  Ufe? 
Was  there  a  soldier  who  carried  the  Seven 

FHnched  like  a  coward  or  fled  from  the  strife? 
No,  by  the  blood  of  our  Custer,  no  quailing! 

There  in  the  midst  of  the  Indians  they  close, 
Hemmed  in  by  thousands,  but  ever  assailing, 

Fighting  like  tigers,  all  bayed  amid  foes! 

Thicker  and  thicker  the  bullets  came  singing; 

Down  go  the  horses  and  riders  and  all; 
Swiftly  the  warriors  round  them  were  ringing, 

Circling  like  buzzards  awaiting  their  fall. 
See  the  wild  steeds  of  the  mountain  and  prairie, 

Savage  ej^es  gleaming  from  forests  of  mane; 
Quivering  lances  with  pennons  so  airy, 

War-painted  warriors  charging  amain. 

Backward,  again  and  again,  they  were  driven, 

Shrinking  to  close  with  the  lost  little  band; 
Never  a  cap  that  had  worn  the  bright  Seven 

Bowed  till  its  wearer  was  dead  on  the  strand. 
Closer  and  closer  the  death-circle  growing, 

Ever  the  leader's  voice,  clarion  clear. 
Rang  out  his  words  of  encouragement  glowing, 

"We  can  but  die  once,  boys, — we'll  sell  our  lives  dear!" 

Dearly  they  sold  them  like  Berserkers  raging. 

Facing  the  death  that  encircled  them  round; 
Death's  bitter  pangs  by  their  vengeance  assuaging, 

Marking  their  tracks  by  their  dead  on  the  ground. 
Comrades,  our  children  shall  yet  tell  their  story, — 

Custer's  last  charge  on  the  old  Sitting  Bull; 
And  ages  shall  swear  that  the  cup  of  his  glory 

Needed  but  that  death  to  render  it  full. 

Frederick  Whitlaker  [1838-1017! 

THE  LAST   REDOUBT 

[SEPTEMBER,  1 87 7] 

Kacelyevo's  slope  still  felt 

The  cannons'  bolts  and  the  rifles'  pelt; 


2^22  Poems  of  History 

For  the  last  redoubt  up  the  hill  remained, 
By  the  Russ  yet  held,  by  the  Turk  not  gained. 

Mehemet  Ah  stroked  his  beard; 
His  lips  were  clinched  and  his  look  was  weird; 
Round  him  were  ranks  of  his  ragged  folk. 
Their  faces  blackened  with  blood  and  smoke. 

"Clear  me  the  Muscovite  out!"  he  cried; 

Then  the  name  of  "Allah!"  echoed  wide, 

And  the  fezzes  were  waved  and  the  bayonets  lowered. 

And  on  to  the  last  redoubt  they  poured. 

One  fell,  and  a  second  quickly  stopped 
The  gap  that  he  left  when  he  reeled  and  dropped; 
The  second, — a  third  straight  filled  his  place; 
The  third, — and  a  fourth  kept  up  the  race. 

Many  a  fez  in  the  mud  was  crushed, 
Many  a  throat  that  cheered  was  hushed, 
Many  a  heart  that  sought  the  crest 
Found  Allah's  arms  and  a  houri's  breast. 

Over  their  corpses  the  living  sprang, 
And  the  ridge  with  their  musket-rattle  rang, 
Till  the  faces  that  lined  the  last  redoubt 
Could  see  their  faces  and  hear  their  shout. 

In  the  redoubt  a  fair  form  towered, 

That  cheered  up  the  brave  and  chid  the  coward; 

Brandishing  blade  with  a  gaUant  air; 

His  head  erect  and  his  bosom  bare. 

"Fly!  they  are  on  us!"  his  men  implored; 
But  he  waved  them  on  with  his  waving  sword. 
"It  cannot  be  held;  'tis  no  shame  to  go!" 
But  he  stood  with  his  face  set  hard  to  the  foe. 

Then  clung  they  about  him,  and  tugged,  and  knelt; 
He  drew  a  pistol  from  out  his  belt, 
And  fired  it  blank  at  the  first  that  set 
Foot  on  the  edge  of  the  parapet 


"  Fuzzy- Wuzzy  "  "^533 

Over  that  first  one  toppled;  but  on 

Clambered  the  rest  till  their  bayonets  shone, 

As  hurriedly  fled  his  men  dismayed, 

Not  a  bayonet's  length  from  the  length  of  his  blade. 

"Yield!"    But  aloft  his  steel  he  flashed, 
And  down  on  their  steel  it  ringing  clashed; 
Then  back  he  reeled  with  a  bladeless  hilt, 
His  honor  full,  but  his  Hfe-blood  spilt,  s 

They  lifted  him  up  from  the  dabbled  ground; 
His  limbs  were  shapely  and  soft  and  round. 
No  down  on  his  lip,  on  his  cheek  no  shade, — 
"Bismillah!"  they  cried,  "'tis  an  infidel  maid!" 

Mehemet  Ali  came  and  saw 
The  riddled  breast  and  the  tender  jaw. 
"Make  her  a  bier  of  your  arms,"  he  said, 
"And  daintily  bury  this  dainty  dead! 

"Make  her  a  grave  where  she  stood  and  fell, 
'Gainst  the  jackal's  scratch  and  the  vulture's  smell 
Did  the  Muscovite  men  like  their  maidens  fight. 
In  their  Hues  we  had  scarcely  supped  to-night." 

So  a  deeper  trench  'mong  the  trenches  there 
Was  dug,  for  the  form  as  brave  as  fair; 
And  none,  till  the  judgment  trump  and  shout, 
Shall  drive  her  out  of  the  last  redoubt. 

Alfred  Austin  [i835-igi3] 


"FUZZY-WUZZY" 

(SOUDAN   EXPEDITIONARY   FORCE,    I 

We've  fought  with  many  men  acrost  the  seas. 

An'  some  of  em'  was  brave  an'  some  was  not: 

The  Paythan  an'  the  Zulu  an'  Burmese; 

But  the  Fuzzy  was  the  finest  o'  the  lot. 


2534  Poems  of  History 

We  never  got  a  ha'  porth's  change  of  'im: 

'E  squatted  in  the  scrub  an'  'ocked  our  'orses, 
'E  cut  our  sentries  up  at  Susikim, 

An'  'e  played  the  cat  an'  banjo  with  our  forces. 
So   'ere's  to  you,  Fuzzy-Wuzzy,  at  your  'ome  in 

the  Sowdan; 
You're  a  pore  benighted  'eathen  but  a  first-class 

fightin'  man; 
We  gives  you  your  certifikit,  an'  if  you  want  it 

signed 
We'll   come  an'  'ave  a  romp  with  you  whenever 
you're  inclined. 

We  took  our  chanst  among  the  Kyber  'ills, 

The  Boers  knocked  us  silly  at  a  mile, 
The  Burman  guv  us  Irriwaddy  chills. 

An'  a  Zulu  impi  dished  us  up  in  style: 
But  all  we  ever  got  from  such  as  they 

Was  pop  to  what  the  Fuzzy  made  us  swaller; 
We  'eld  our  bloornin'  own,  the  papers  say. 

But  man  for  man  the  Fuzzy  knocked  us  'oiler. 

Then  'ere's  to  you,  Fuzzy-Wuzzy,  an'   the  missis 

and  the  kid; 
Our  orders  was   to  break  you,  an'  of  course  we 

went  and  did. 
We  sloshed  you  with  Martinis,  an'  it  wasn't  'ardly 

fair; 
But  for  all  the  odds  agin  you,  Fuzzy-Wuz,  you 
bruk  the  square. 

'E  'asn't  got  no  papers  of  'is  own, 

'E  'asn't  got  no  medals  nor  rewards, 
So  we  most  certify  the  skill  'e's  shown 

In  usin'  of  'is  long  two-'anded  swords: 
When  'e's  'oppin'  in  an'  out  among  the  bush 

With  'is  cofBn-'eaded  shield  an'  shovel-spear, 
A  'appy  day  with  Fuzzy  on  the  rush 

Will  last  a  'ealthy  Tommy  for  a  year. 

So  'ere's  to  you,  Fuzzy-Wuzzy,  an'  your  friends 
which  is  no  more, 


The  Word  of  the  Lord  from   Havana     '^S3S 

If  we  'adn't  lost  some  messmates  we  would  'elp 

you  to  deplore; 
But  give  an'  take's  the  gospel,  an'  we'll  call  the 

bargain  fair, 
For  if  you  'ave  lost  more  than  us,  you  crumpled 

up  the  square! 

'E  rushes  at  the  smoke  when  we  let  drive, 

An',  before  we  know,  'e's  'ackin'  at  our  'ead; 
'E's  all  'ot  sand  an'  ginger  when  alive. 

An'  'e's  generally  shammin'  when  'e's  dead. 
'E's  a  daisy,  'e's  a  ducky,  'e's  a  lamb! 

'E's  a  injia-rubber  idiot  on  a  spree, 
'E's  the  only  thing  that  doesn't  care  a  damn 
For  the  Regiment  o'  British  Infantree. 

So  here's  to  you,  Fuzzy-Wuzzy,  at  your  'ome  in 

the  Sowdan; 
You're  a  pore  benighted  'eathen  but  a  first-class 

fiightin'  man; 
An'  'ere's  to  you,  Fuzzy-Wuzzy,  with  your  'ayrick 

'ead  of  hair — 
You  big  black  boundin'  beggar — for  you  br.uk  a 
British  square. 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 


THE  WORD   OF  THE  LORD   FROM  HAVANA 

[FEBRUARY  16,  li 


Thus  spake  the  Lord: 
Because  ye  have  not  heard, 
Because  ye  have  given  no  heed 
To  my  people  in  their  need. 

Because  the  oppressed  cried 
From  the  dust  where  he  died. 
And  ye  turned  your  face  away 
From  his  cry  in  that  day. 

Because  ye  have  bought  and  sold 
That  which  is  above  gold. 


2536  Poems  of  History  /  ^^-j^ 

Because  your  brother  is  slain 
While  ye  get  you  drunk  with  gain, 

(Behold,  these  are  my  people,  I  have  brought  them  to  birth 
On  whom  the  mighty  have  trod, 
The  kings  of  the  earth, 
Saith  the  Lord  God!) 

Because  ye  fawned  and  bowed  down 
Lest  the  spoiler  frown. 
And  the  wrongs  that  the  spoiled  have  borne 
Ye  have  held  in  scorn. 

Therefore  with  rending  and  flame 
I  have  marred  and  smitten  you. 
Therefore  I  have  given  you  to  shame, 
That  the  nations  shall  spit  on  you. 

Therefore  my  Angel  of  Death 
Ilath  stretched  out  his  hand  on  you, 
Therefore  I  speak  in  my  wrath, 
Laying  command  on  you; 

(Once  have  I  bared  my  sword. 

And  the  kings  of  the  earth  gave  a  cry; 

Twice  have  I  bared  my  sword. 

That  the  kings  of  the  earth  should  die; 

Thrice  shall  I  bare  my  sword, 

And  ye  shall  know  my  name,  that  it  is  I!) 

Ye  who  held  peace  less  than  right 
When  a  king  laid  a  pitiful  tax  on  you. 
Hold  not  your  hand  from  the  fight 
When  freedom  cries  under  the  axe  on  you! 

(I  who  called  France  to  you,  call  you  to  Cuba  in  turn! 
Repay — lest  I  cast  you  adrift  and  you  perish  astern!) 

Ye  who  made  war  that  your  ships 
Should  lay  to  at  the  beck  of  no  nation, 
Make  war  now  on  Murder,  that  slips 
The  leash  of  her  hounds  of  damnation! 


Dewey  at   Manila  ^537 

Ye  who  remembered  the  Alamo, 
Remember  the  INIaine! 

Richard  Hovcy  [i 864-1900] 


DEWEY  AT  MANILA 

[may  I,  1898] 

'TwAS  the  very  verge  of  May 
When  the  bold  Olympia  led 

Into  Bocagrande  Bay 

Dewey's  squadron,  dark  and  dread,- 

Creeping  past  Corregidor, 

Guardian  of  Manila's  shore. 

Do  they  sleep  who  wait  the  fray? 

Is  the  moon  so  dazzling  bright 
That  our  cruisers'  battle-gray 

Melts  into  the  misty  light?  .  .  . 
Ah!  the  red  flash  and  the  roar! 
Wakes  at  last  Corregidor! 

All  too  late  their  screaming  shell 
Tears  the  silence  with  its  track; 

This  is  but  the  gate  of  hell. 
We've  no  leisure  to  turn  back. 

Answer,  Concord! — then  once  more 

Slumber  on,  Corregidor! 

And  as,  like  a  slowing  tide. 
Onward  still  the  vessels  creep, 

Dewey,  watching,  falcon-eyed, 
Orders, — "Let  the  gunners  sleep; 

For  we  meet  a  foe  at  four 

Fiercer  than  Corregidor." 

Well  they  slept,  for  well  they  knew 
What  the  morrow  taught  us  all,— 

He  was  wise  (as  well  as  true) 
Thus  upon  the  foe  to  fall. 

Long  shall  Spain  the  day  deplore 

Dewey  ran  Corregidor. 


^S3^  Poems  of  History- 

May  is  dancing  into  light 

As  the  Spanish  Admiral 
From  a  dream  of  phantom  fight 

Wakens  at  his  sentry's  call. 
Shall  he  leave  Cavite's  lee, 
Hunt  the  Yankee  fleet  at  sea? 

O  Montojo,  to  thy  deck, 

That  to-day  shall  float  its  last! 

Quick!   To  quarters!   Yonder  speck 
Grows  a  hull  of  portent  vast. 

Hither,  toward  Cavite's  lee 

Comes  the  Yankee  hunting  thee! 

Not  for  fear  of  hidden  mine 
Halts  our  doughty  Commodore. 

He,  of  old  heroic  line. 

Follows  Farragut  once  more, 

Hazards  all  on  victory, 

Here  within  Cavite's  lee. 

If  he  loses,  all  is  gone; 

He  will  \An  because  he  must. 
And  the  shafts  of  yonder  dawn 

Are  not  quicker  than  his  thrust. 
Soon,  Montojo,  he  shall  be 
With  thee  in  Cavite's  lee. 

Now,  Manila,  to  the  fray! 

Show  the  hated  Yankee  host 
This  is  not  a  holiday, —  .j 

Spanish  blood  is  more  than  boast. 
Fleet  and  mine  and  battery, 
Crush  him  in  Cavite's  lee! 

Lo,  hell's  geysers  at  our  fore 

Pierce  the  plotted  path — in  vain. 

Nerving  every  man  the  more  •  [ 

With  the  memory  of  the  Maine! 

Now  at  last  our  guns  are  free 

Here  within  Cavite's  lee. 


Dewey   at    Manila  2539 

"  Gridley,"  says  the  Commodore, 
"You  may  fire  when  ready."     Then 

Long  and  loud,  hke  lions'  roar 
When  a  rival  dares  the  den, 

Breaks  the  awful  cannonry 

Full  across  Cavite's  lee. 

Who  shall  tell  the  daring  tale 

Of  our  Thunderbolt's  attack, 
Finding,  when  the  chart  should  fail, 

By  the  lead  his  dubious  track, 
Five  ships  following  faithfully 
Five  times  o'er  Cavite's  lee; 

Of  our  gunners'  deadly  aim; 

Of  the  gallant  foe  and  brave 
Who,  unconquered,  faced  with  flame, 

Seek  the  mercy  of  the  wave, — 
Choosing  honor  in  the  sea 
Underneath  Cavite's  lee? 

Let  the  meed  the  victors  gain 

Be  the  measure  of  their  task. 
Less  of  flinching,  stouter  strain, 

Fiercer  combat — who  could  ask? 
And  "surrender," — 'twas  a  word 
That  Cavite  ne'er  had  heard. 

Noon, — the  woful  work  is  done! 

Not  a. Spanish  ship  remains; 
But,  of  their  eleven,  none 

Ever  was  so  truly  Spain's! 
Which  is  prouder,  they  or  we, 
Thinking  of  Cavite's  lee? 

ENVOY 

But  remember,  when  we've  ceased 
Giving  praise  and  reckoning  odds, 

Man  shares  courage  with  the  beast, 
Wisdom  Cometh  from  the  gods: 


2540  ■    Poems  of  History 

Who  would  win,  on  land  or  wave, 
Must  be  wise  as  well  as  brave. 

Robert  Underwood  Johnson  [1853-= 

DEEDS  OF  VALOR  AT  SANTIAGO 

[JULY  I,  1898] 

Who  cries  that  the  days  of  daring  are  those  that  are  faded 

far. 
That  never  a  light  burns  planet-bright  to  be  hailed  as  the 

hero's  star? 
Let  the  deeds  of  the  dead  be  laureled,  the  brave  of  the  elder 

years, 
But  a  song,  we  say,  for  the  men  of  to-day,  who  have  proved 

themselves  their  peers! 

High  in  the  vault  of  the  tropic  sky  is  the  garish  eye  of  the 

sun. 
And  down  with  its  crown  of  guns  afrown  looks  the  hilltop 

to  be  won; 
There  is  the  trench  where  the  Spaniard  lurks,  his  hold  and 

his  hiding-place. 
And  he  who  would  cross  the  space  between  must  meet  death 

face  to  face. 

The  black  mouths  belch  and  thunder,  and  the  shrapnel 
shrieks  and  flies; 

Where  are  the  fain  and  the  fearless,  the  lads  with  the  daunt- 
less eyes? 

Will  the  moment  hnd  them  wanting!  Nay,  but  with  valor 
stirred ! 

Like  the  leashed  hound  on  the  coursing-ground  they  wait 
but  the  warning  word. 

"Charge!"  and  the  line  moves  forward,  moves  with  a  shout 
and  a  swing, 

While  sharper  far  than  the  cactus-thorn  is  the  spitelul  bul- 
let's sting. 


Breath  on   the  Oat  2541 

Now  they  arc  out  in  the  open,  and  now  they  are  breasting 

the  slope, 
While  into  the  eyes  of  death  they  gaze  as  into  the  eyes  of 

hope. 

o/l 
Never  they  wait  nor  waver,  but  on  they  clamber  and  on, 
With  "  Up  with  the  flag  of  the  Stripes  and  Stars,  and  down 

with  the  flag  of  the  Don!" 
What  should  they  bear  through  the  shot-rent  air  but  rout 

to  the  ranks  of  Spain, 
For  the  blood  that  throbs  in  their  hearts  is  the  blood  of  the 

boys  of  Anthony  Wayne! 

See,  they  have  taken  the  trenches!     Where  are  the  foemen? 

Gone! 
And  now  "Old  Glory"  waves  in  the  breeze  from  the  heights 

of  San  Juan! 
And  so,  while  the  dead  are  laureled,  the  brave  of  the  elder 

years, 
A  song,  we  say,  for  the  men  of  to-day,  who  have  proved 

themselves  their  peers. 

Clinton  Scollard  [1860- 


BREATH  ON  THE  OAT 

Free  are  the  Muses,  and  where  freedom  is 

They  follow,  as  the  thrushes  follow  spring. 

Leaving  the  old  lands  songless  there  behind; 

Parnassus  disenchanted  suns  its  woods, 

Empty  of  every  nymph;  wide  have  they  flown; 

And  now  on  new  sierras  think  to  set 

Their  wandering  court,  and  thrill  the  world  ancW; 

Where  the  Republic  babbling  waits  its  speech; 

For  but  the  prelude  of  its  mighty  song 

As  yet  has  sounded.     Therefore,  would  I  woo 

Apollo  to  the  land  I  love,  'tis  vain; 

Unknown  he  spies  on  us;  and  if  my  verse 

Ring  not  the  empyrean  round  and  round, 

'Tis  that  the  feeble  oat  is  few  of  stops. 


^54^  Poems  of  History 

The  noble  theme  awaits  the  nobler  bard. 
Then  how  all  air  will  quire  to  it,  and  all 
The  great  dead  listen,  America! — For  lo, 
Diana  of  the  nations  hath  she  lived 
Remote,  and  hoarding  her  own  happiness 
In  her  own  land,  the  land  that  seemed  her  first 

ii  An  exile,  where  her  bark  was  cast  away. 
Till  maiden  grew  the  backward-hearted  child, 
And  on  that  sea  whose  waves  were  memories 
Turned  her  young  shoulder,  looked  with  steadfast  eyes 
Upon  her  wilderness,  her  woods,  her  streams; 
Inland  she  ran,  and  gathering  virgin  joy 
Followed  her  shafts  afar  from  humankind. 
And  if  sometimes  her  isolation  drooped 
And  yearning  woke  in  her,  she  put  it  forth 
With  a  high  boast  and  with  a  sick  disdain; 
Actaeons  fleeing,  into  antlers  branched 

:  The  floating  tresses  of  her  fancy,  and  far 
Her  arrows  smote  them  with  a  bleeding  laugh. 

0  vain  and  virgin,  0  the  fool  of  love! 
Now  children  not  her  own  are  at  her  knee. 
For  stricken  by  her  path  lay  one  that  vexed 
Her  maiden  calm;  she  reached  a  petulant  hand; 
And  the  old  nations  drew  sharp  breath  and  looked. 
The  two-edged  sword,  how  came  it  in  her  hand? 
The  sword  that  slays  the  holder  if  he  withhold, 
That  none  can  take,  or  having  taken  drop. 

The  sword  is  in  thy  hand,  America! 

The  wrath  of  God,  that  fillets  thee  with  lightnings, 

America!  Strike  then;  the  sword  departs. 

Ah  God,  once  more  may  men  crown  drowsy  days 

With  glorious  death,  upholding  a  great  cause! 

1  deemed  it  fable;  not  of  them  am  I. 

Yet  if  they  loved  thee  on  the  loud  May-day 

Who  with  unexultant  thunder  wreathed  the  flag, 

With  thunder  and  with  victory,  if  they 

Who  on  the  third  most  famous  of  our  Fourths 

Along  the  seaboard  mountains  swept,  a  storm  ,  ^  ^ 

Unleashed,  whose  tread  spurned  not  the  wrecks  of  Spain, 

If  these  thy  sons  have  loved  thee,  and  have  set 


When  the  Great  Gray  Ships  Come  In     2543 

Santiago  and  Manila  like  new  stars 
Crowding  thy  field  of  blue,  new  terror  perched 
Like  eagles  on  thy  banners,  oh,  not  less 
I  love  thee,  who  but  prattle  in  the  prime 
Of  birds  of  passage  over  river  and  wood 
Thine  also,  piping  little  charms  to  lure, 
Uncaptured  and  unflying,  the  wings  of  song. 
Joseph  Russell  Taylor  [1868- 

WHEN  THE   GREAT   GRAY   SHIPS   COME  IN 

[new  YORK  HARBOR,  AUGUST  20,   1898] 

To  eastward  ringing,  to  westward  winging,  o'er  mapless 

miles  of  sea, 
On  winds  and  tides  the  gospel  rides  that  the  furthermost 

isles  are  free, 
And  the  furthermost  isles  make  answer,  harbor,  and  height, 

and  hill. 
Breaker  and  beach  cry  each  to  each,  '"Tis  the  Mother  who 

calls!     Be  still!" 
Mother!  new-found,  beloved,  and  strong  to  hold  from  harm. 
Stretching  to  these  across  the  seas  the  shield  of  her  sovereign 

arm. 
Who  summoned  the  guns  of  her  sailor  sons,  who  bade  her 

navies  roam. 
Who  calls  again  to  the  leagues  of  main,  and  who  calls  them 

this  time  Home! 

And  the  great  gray  ships  are  silent,  and  the  weary  watchers 

rest. 
The  black  cloud  dies  in  the  August  skies,  and  deep  in  the 

golden  west 
Invisible  hands  are  limning  a  glory  of  crimson  bars, 
And  far  above  is  the  wonder  of  a  myriad  wakened  stars! 
Peace!  As  the  tidings  silence  the  strenuous  cannonade, 
Peace  at  last !  is  the  bugle  blast  the  length  of  the  long  block- 
ade, 
And  eyes  of  vigil  weary  are  ht  with  the  glad  release. 
From  ship  to  ship  and  from  lip  to  lip  it  is  "Peace!   Thank 
God  for  peace." 

.J  iii  brJ. 


2  544  Poems  of  History 

Ah,  in  the  sweet  hereafter  Columbia  still  shall  show 

The  sons  of  these  who  swept  the  seas  how  she  bade  them 

rise  and  go, — 
How,  when  the  stirring  summons  smote  on  her  children's  car, 
South  and  North  at  the  call  stood  forth,  and  the  whole  land 

answered,  "Here!" 
For  the  soul  of  the  soldier's  story  and  the  heart  of  the  sailor's 

song 
Are  all  of  those  who  meet  their  foes  as  right  should  meet 

with  wrong, 
Who  fight  their  guns  till  the  foeman  runs,  and  then,  on  the 

decks  they  trod. 
Brave  faces  raise,  and  give  the  praise  to  the  grace  of  their 

country's  God! 

Yes,  it  is  good  to  battle,  and  good  to  be  strong  and  free. 
To  carry  the  hearts  of  a  people  to  the  uttermost  ends  of  the 

sea. 
To  see  the  day  steal  up  the  bay  where  the  enemy  lies  in  wait, 
To  run  your  ship  to  the  harbor's  Hp  and  sink  her  across  the 

strait : — 
But  better  the  golden  evening  when  the  ships  round  heads 

for  home. 
And  the  long  gray  miles  slip  swiftly  past  in  a  swirl  of 

seething  foam, 
And  the  people  wait  at  the  haven's  gate  to  greet  the  men 

who  win! 
Thank  God  for  peace!     Thank  God  for  peace,  when  the 

great  gray  ships  come  in! 

Guy  Wctinorc  Carryl  [1873-1904I 

1914 

I — Peace 

Now,  God  be  thanked  Who  has  matched  us  with  His  hour, 
And  caught  our  youth,  and  wakened  us  from  sleeping, 
With  hand  made  sure,  clear  eye,  and  sharpened  power. 
To  turn,  as  swimmers  into  cleanness  leaping, 
Glad  from  a  world  grown  old  and  cold  and  weary, 
Leave  the  sick  hearts  that  honor  could  not  move. 
And  half-men,  and  their  dirty  songs  and  dreary, 
And  all  the  little  emptiness  of  love! 


1914  ■"•  2545 

Oh !  wc,  who  have  known  shame,  we  have  found  release  there, 
Where  there's  no  ill,  no  grief,  but  sleep  has  mending. 
Naught  broken  save  this  body,  lost  but  breath; 
Nothing  to  shake  the  laughing  heart's  long  peace  there 
But  only  agony,  and  that  has  ending; 
And  the  worst  friend  and  enemy  is  but  Death. 

II — Safety 
Dear!  of  all  happy  in  the  hour,  most  blest 
He  who  has  found  our  hid  security, 
Assured  in  the  dark  tides  of  the  world  that  rest, 
And  heard  our  word,  "Who  is  so  safe  as  we?" 
We  have  found  safety  with  all  things  undying, 
The  winds,  and  morning,  tears  of  men  and  mirth, 
The  deep  night,  and  birds  singing,  and  clouds  flying, 
And  sleep,  and  freedom,  and  the  autumnal  earth. 
We  have  built  a  house  that  is  not  for  Time's  throwing. 
W^e  have  gained  a  peace  unshaken  by  pain  for  ever. 
W'ar  knows  no  power.    Safe  shall  be  my  going, 
Secretly  armed  against  all  death's  endeavor; 
Safe  though  all  safety's  lost;  safe  where  men  fall; 
And  if  these  poor  limbs  die,  safest  of  all. 

Ill— The  Dead 
Blow  out,  you  bugles,  over  the  rich  Dead! 
There's  none  of  these  so  lonely  and  poor  of  old, 
But,  dying,  has  made  us  rarer  gifts  than  gold. 
These  laid  the  world  away;  poured  out  the  red 
Sweet  wine  of  youth;  gave  up  the  years  to  be 
Of  work  and  joy,  and  that  unhoped  serene, 
That  men  call  age;  and  those  who  would  have  been. 
Their  sons,  they  gave,  their  immortality. 
Blow,  bugles,  blow!    They  brought  us,  for  our  dearth, 
HoUness,  lacked  so  long,  and  Love,  and  Pain. 
Honor  has  come  back,  as  a  king,  to  earth. 
And  paid  his  subjects  with  a  royal  wage; 
And  Nobleness  walks  in  our  ways  again; 
And  we  have  come  into  our  heritage. 

IV— The  Dead 
These  hearts  were  woven  of  human  joys  and  cares. 
Washed  marvellously  with  sorrow,  swift  to  mirth. 


2546  Poems  of  History 

The  years  had  given  them  kindness.    Dawn  was  theirs, 

And  sunset,  and  the  colors  of  the  earth. 

These  had  seen  movement,  and  heard  music;  known 

Slumber  and  waking;  loved;  gone  proudly  friended; 

Felt  the  quick  stir  of  wonder;  sat  alone; 

Touched  flowers  and  furs  and  cheeks.    All  this  is  ended. 

There  are  waters  blown  by  changing  winds  to  laughter 

And  lit  by  the  rich  skies,  all  day.    And  after, 

Frost,  with  a  gesture,  stays  the  waves  that  dance 

And  wandering  loveliness.    He  leaves  a  white 

Unbroken  glory,  a  gathered  radiance, 

A  width,  a  shining  peace,  under  the  night. 

V — The  Soldier 

If  I  should  die,  think  only  this  of  me: 

That  there's  some  corner  of  a  foreign  field 

That  is  forever  England.    There  shall  be 

In  that  rich  earth  a  richer  dust  concealed; 

A  dust  whom  England  bore,  shaped,  made  aware. 

Gave,  once,  her  flowers  to  love,  her  ways  to  roam; 

A  body  of  England's,  breathing  English  air, 

Washed  by  the  rivers,  blest  by  sims  of  home. 

And  think,  this  heart,  all  evil  shed  away, 

A  pulse  in  the  eternal  mind,  no  less 

Gives  somewhere  back  the  thoughts  by  England  given; 

Her  sights  and  sounds;  dreams  happy  as  her  day; 

And  laughter,  learnt  of  friends;  and  gentleness, 

In  hearts  at  peace,  under  an  English  heaven. 

Rupert  Brooke  [1887-1915] 

THE  FOURTH  OF  AUGUST 

Now  in  thy  splendor  go  before  us. 
Spirit  of  England,  ardent-eyed, 
Enkindle  this  dear  earth  that  bore  us, 
In  the  hour  of  peril  purified. 

The  cares  we  hugged  drop  out  of  vision, 
Our  hearts  with  deeper  thoughts  dilate. 
We  step  from  days  of  sour  division 
Into  the  grandeur  of  our  fate. 


August,    1914  2547 

For  us  the  glorious  dead  liavc  striven, 
They  battled  that  we  might  be  free. 
We  to  their  living  cause  are  given; 
We  arm  for  men  that  arc  to  be. 

Among  the  nations  nobliest  chartered, 
England  recalls  her  heritage. 
In  her  is  that  which  is  not  bartered, 
Which  force  can  neither  quell  nor  cage. 

For  her  immortal  stars  are  burning, 
With  her  the  hope  that's  never  done. 
The  seed  that's  in  the  Spring's  returning. 
The  very  flower  that  seeks  the  sun. 

She  fights  the  fraud  that  feeds  desire  on 
Lies,  in  a  lust  to  enslave  or  kill, 
The  barren  creed  of  blood  and  iron, 
Vampire  of  Europe's  wasted  will  .  .  . 

Endure,  O  Earth!  and  thou,  awaken,  p 

Purged  by  this  dreadful  winnowing-fan, 
O  wronged,  untameable,  unshaken 
Soul  of  divinely  suffering  man. 

Laurence  Binyon  [i86g- 

AUGUST,   1914 

How  still  this  quiet  corniield  is  to-night! 

By  an  intenser  glow  the  evening  falls, 
Bringing,  not  darkness,  but  a  deeper  light; 

Among  the  stooks  a  partridge  covey  calls. 

The  windows  glitter  on  the  distant  hill ; 

Beyond  the  hedge  the  sheep-bells  in  the  fold 
Stumble  on  sudden  music  and  are  still; 

The  forlorn  pinewoods  droop  above  the  wold. 

An  endless  quiet  valley  reaches  out 

Past  the  blue  hills  into  the  evening  sky; 

Over  the  stubble,  cawing,  goes  a  rout 

Of  rooks  from  harvest,  flagging  as  they  fly. 

So  beautiful  it  is,  I  never  saw  [ 

So  great  a  beauty  on  these  English  fields, 


2548  Poems  of  History 

Touched  by  the  twihght's  coming  into  awe, 
Ripe  to  the  soul  and  rich  with  summer's  yields.  . 

These  homes,  this  valley  spread  below  me  here, 
The  rooks,  the  tilted  stacks,  the  beasts  in  pen, 

Have  been  the  heartfelt  things,  past-speaking  dear 
To  unknown  generations  of  dead  men, 

Who,  century  after  century,  held  these  farms. 
And,  looking  out  to  watch  the  changing  sky, 

Heard,  as  we  hear,  the  rumors  and  alarms 
Of  war  at  hand  and  danger  pressing  nigh. 

And  knew,  as  we  know,  that  the  message  meant 
The  breaking  off  of  ties,  the  loss  of  friends, 

Death,  hke  a  miser  getting  in  his  rent. 

And  no  new  stones  laid  where  the  trackway  ends. 

The  harvest  not  yet  won,  the  empty  bin. 
The  friendly  horses  taken  from  the  stalls, 

The  fallow  on  the  hill  not  yet  brought  in, 
The  cracks  unplastered  in  the  leaking  walls. 

Yet  heard  the  news,  and  went  discouraged  home, 
And  brooded  by  the  fire  with  heavy  mind, 

With  such  dumb  loving  of  the  Berkshire  loam 
As  breaks  the  dumb  hearts  of  the  English  kind, 

Then  sadly  rose  and  left  the  well-loved  Downs, 
And  so  by  ship  to  sea,  and  knew  no  more 

The  fields  of  home,  the  byres,  the  market  towns, 
Nor  the  dear  outline  of  the  English  shore, 

But  knew  the  misery  of  the  soaking  trench. 
The  freezing  in  the  rigging,  the  despair 

In  the  revolting  second  of  the  wrench 

When  the  blind  soul  is  flung  upon  the  air. 

And  died  (uncouthly,  most)  in  foreign  lands 

For  some  idea  but  dimly  understood 
Of  an  English  city  never  built  by  hands 

Which  love  of  England  prompted  and  made  good. 

If  there  be  any  life  beyond  the  grave. 

It  must  be  near  the  men  and  things  we  love, 


A  Chant  of  Hate  Against  Kngland     2549 

Some  power  of  quick  suggestion  how  to  save, 
Touching  the  living  soul  as  from  above. 

An  influence  from  the  Earth  from  those  dead  hearts 
So  passionate  once,  so  deep,  so  truly  kind,  ij 

That  in  the  living  child  the  spirit  starts,  ,| 

Feeling  companioned  still,  not  left  behind.         ,j[ 

Surely  above  these  fields  a  spirit  broods, 
A  sense  of  many  watchers  muttering  near 

Of  the  lone  Downland  with  the  forlorn  woods 
Loved  to  the  death,  inestimably  dear. 

A  muttering  from  beyond  the  veils  of  Death  ) 

From  long-dead  men,  to  whom  this  quiet  scene   ' 

Came  among  blinding  tears  with  the  last  breath, 
The  dying  soldier's  vision  of  his  queen. 

All  the  unspoken  worship  of  those  lives 

Spent  in  forgotten  wars  at  other  calls 
Glimmers  upon  these  fields  where  evening  drives 

Beauty  like  breath,  so  gently  darkness  falls. 

Darkness  that  makes  the  meadows  holier  still. 
The  elm-trees  sadden  in  the  hedge,  a  sigh 

Moves  in  the  beech-clump  on  the  haunted  hill, 
The  rising  planets  deepen  in  the  sky, 

And  silence  broods  like  spirit  on  the  brae; 

A  glimmering  moon  begins,  the  moonlight  runs 
Over  the  grasses  of  the  ancient  way 

Rutted  this  morning  by  the  passing  guns.  '/ 

John  Masefield  [1874- 


A  CHANT  OF  HATE  AGAINST  ENGLAND  * 

French  and  Russian  they  matter  not, 

A  blow  for  a  blow  and  a  shot  for  a  shot , 

We  love  them  not, 

We  hate  them  not, 

We  hold  the  Weichsel  and  Vosges  gate, 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3846. 


2550  Poems  of  History       ;a£fi  j   a 

We  have  but  one  and  only  hate, 
We  love  as  one,  we  hate  as  one, 
We  have  one  foe  and  one  alone: — 

He  is  known  to  you  all,  he  is  known  to  you  all. 

He  crouches  behind  the  dark  gray  flood, 

Full  of  envy,  of  rage,  of  craft,  of  gall, 

Cut  off  by  waves  that  are  thicker  than  blood. 

Come  let  us  stand  at  the  Judgment  place 

An  oath  to  swear  to,  face  to  face. 

An  oath  of  bronze  no  wind  can  shake. 

An  oath  for  our  sons  and  their  sons  to  take, 

Come  hear  the  word,  repeat  the  word, 

Throughout  the  Fatherland  make  it  heard:  ,rroi  i 

We  will  never  forego  our  hate,  .rrrngrrrG') 

We  have  all  but  a  single  hate, 

We  love  as  one,  we  hate  as  one. 

We  have  one  foe  and  one  alone, 

England! 

-iieimmilO 

At  the  Captain's  mess,  in  the  Banquet-hall,' '^ 

Sat  feasting  the  officers,  one  and  all, — 

Like  a  sabre-blow,  like  the  swing  of  a  sail,  ,       ,™ 

One  raised  his  glass,  held  high  to  hail;  -r  ta 

Sharp-snapped  like  the  stroke  of  a  rudder's  pla^y^ 

Spoke  three  words  only:  "To  the  day!" 


Whose  glass  this  fate? 

They  had  all  but  a  single  hate.  ., ,  ^  ^^^ 

Who  was  thus  known?  ,  baJJuii 

They  had  one  foe  and  one  alone, 
England! 

Take  you  the  folk  of  the  earth  in  pay,        f.  jj['3  p^ 

With  bars  of  gold  your  ramparts  lay, 

Bedeck  the  ocean  with  bow  on  bow. 

Ye  reckon  well,  but  not  well  enough  now. 

French  and  Russian  they  matter  not. 

A  blow  for  a  blow,  a  shot  for  a  shot. 

We  fight  the  battle  with  bronze  and  steel, 

And  the  time  that  is  coming,  Peace  will  seal. 


A  Chant  of  Love  for  England     -551 

Yau  will  we  hate  with  a  lasting  hate, 
We  will  never  forego  our  hate. 
Hate  by  water  and  hate  by  land, 
Hate  of  the  head  and  hate  of  the  hand, 
Hate  of  the  hammer  and  hate  of  the  Crown. 
Hate  of  seventy  millions  choking  down. 
We  love  as  one,  we  hate  as  one. 
We  have  one  foe  and  one  alone: 
England ! 
From  the  German  of  Ernst  Lissaucr  by  Barbara  Henderson  [i8 

A  CHANT  OF  LOVE  FOR  ENGLAND 

A  SONG  of  hate  is  a  song  of  Hell; 
Some  there  be  that  sing  it  well. 
Let  them  sing  it  loud  and  long. 
We  Hft  our  hearts  in  a  loftier  song: 
We  lift  our  hearts  to  Heaven  above. 
Singing  the  glory  of  her  we  love, — 
England! 

Glory  of  thought  and  glory  of  deed, 
Glory  of  Hampden  and  Runny mede; 
Glory  of  ships  that  sought  far  goals, 
Glory  of  swords  aftd  glory  of  souls! 
Glory  of  songs  mounting  as  birds. 
Glory  immortal  of  magical  words;  'O^T 

Glory  of  Milton,  glory  of  Nelson, 
Tragical  glory  of  Gordon  and  Scott ; 
Glory  of  Shelley,  glory  of  Sidney, 
Glory  transcendent  that  perishes  not,-  - 
Hers  is  the  story,  hers  be  the  glory, 
England! 

Shatter  her  beauteous  breast  ye  may; 
The  Spirit  of  England  none  can  slay! 
Dash  the  bomb  on  the  dome  of  Paul's, — 
Deem  ye  the  fame  of  the  Admiral  falls? 
Pry  the  stone  from  the  chancel  floor, — 
Dream  ye  that  Shakespeare  shall  live  no  more? 
Where  is  the  giant  shot  that  kills        -,,;,ni  ■  ../ 


2552  Poems  of  History  r''^   A 

Wordsworth  walking  the  old  green  hills? 
Tramr:)le  the  red  rose  on  the  ground, — 
Keats  is  Beauty  while  earth  spins  round! 
Bind  her,  grind  her,  burn  her  with  fire, 
Cast  her  ashes  into  the  sea, — 
She  shall  escape,  she  shall  aspire. 
She  shall  arise  to  make  men  free: 
She  shall  arise  in  a  sacred  scorn, 
Lighting  the  lives  that  are  yet  unborn; 
Spirit  supernal,  Splendor  eternal,  >  "is^i  ««o-\'*5l 

England! 

Helen  Gray  Cone  [1859- 


SONNETS  WRITTEN  IN  THE  FALL  OF  19 14 

Awake,  ye  nations,  slumbering  supine. 

Who  round  enring  the  European  fray! 

Heard  ye  the  trumpet  sound?    "The  Day!  the  Day! 

The  last  that  shall  on  England's  empire  shine! 

The  Parliament  that  broke  the  Right  Divine 

Shall  see  her  realm  of  reason  swept  away. 

And  lesser  nations  shall  the  sword  obey — 

The  sword  o'er  all  carve  the  great  world's  design!" 

So  on  the  English  Channel  boasts  the  foe 

On  whose  imperial  brow  death's  helmet  nods. 

Look  where  his  hosts  o'er  bloody  Belgium  go, 

And  mix  a  nation's  past  with  blazing  sods! 

A  kingdom's  waste!  a  people's  homeless  woe!  ,  . 

Man's  broken  Word,  and  violated  gods!       h\\'0 

■  .'") 
Far  fall  the  day  when  England's  realm  shall  see 

The  sunset  of  dominion!    Her  increase 

Abolishes  the  man-dividing  seas. 

And  frames  the  brotherhood  on  earth  to  be!   ■!':'■ 

She,  in  free  peoples  planting  sovereignty,      a^n 

Orbs  half  the  civil  world  in  British  peace;        > ' 

And  though  time  dispossess  her,  and  she  cease, 

Rome-like  she  greatens  in  man's  memory. 

Oh,  many  a  crown  shall  sink  in  war's  turmoil,  ' 

And  many  a  new  republic  light  the  sky,      tI  // 


Sonnets  Written   in   the   Fall   of  19 14     2553 

Fleets  sweep  the  ocean,  nations  till  the  soil, 
Genius  be  born  and  generations  die, 
Orient  and  Occident  together  toil, 
Ere  such  a  mighty  work  man  rears  on  high! 

Hearken,  the  feet  of  the  Destroyer  tread 
The  wine-press  of  the  nations;  fast  the  blood 
Pours  from  the  side  of  Europe;  in  full  flood 
On  the  Septentrional  watershed 
The  rivers  of  fair  France  are  running  red! 
England,  the  mother-eyrie  of  our  brood, 
That  on  the  summit  of  dominion  stood. 
Shakes  in  the  blast:  heaven  battles  overhead! 
Lift  up  thy  head,  O  Rheims,  of  ages  heir 
That  treasured  up  in  thee  their  glorious  sum; 
Upon  whose  brow,  prophetically  fair. 
Flamed  the  great  morrow  of  the  world  to  come; 
Haunt  with  thy  beauty  this  volcanic  air 
Ere  yet  thou  close,  O  Flower  of  Christendom! 

As  when  the  shadow  of  the  sun's  eclipse 
Sweeps  on  the  earth,  and  spreads  a  spectral  air, 
As  if  the  universe  were  dying  there. 
On  continent  and  isle  the  darkness  dips, 
Unwonted  gloom,  and  on  the  Atlantic  slips; 
So  in  the  night  the  Belgian  cities  flare 
Horizon-\vide;  the  wandering  people  fare 
Along  the  roads,  and  load  the  fleeing  ships. 
And  westward  borne  that  planetary  sweep. 
Darkening  o'er  England  and  her  times  to  be, 
Already  steps  upon  the  ocean-deep! 
Watch  well,  my  country,  that  unearthly  sea, 
Lest  when  thou  thinkest  not,  and  in  thy  sleep, 
Unapt  for  war,  that  gloom  enshadow  thee! 

I  pray  for  peace;  yet  peace  is  but  a  prayer. 
How  many  wars  have  been  in  my  brief  years! 
All  races  and  all  faiths,  both  hemispheres, 
My  eyes  have  seen  embattled  everywhere  [  c 

The  wide  earth  through;  yet  do  I  not  despair 
Of  peace,  that  slowly  through  far  ages  nears, 


2554  Poems  of  History  'rino8 

Though  not  to  me  the  golden  morn  appears; 

My  faith  is  perfect  in  time's  issue  fair.  ' 

For  man  doth  build  on  an  eternal  scale, 

And  his  ideals  are  framed  of  hope  deferred; 

And  millennium  came  not;  yet  Christ  did  not  fail, 

Though  ever  unaccomplished  is  His  word; 

Him  Prince  of  Peace,  though  unenthroned,  we  hail. 

Supreme  when  in  all  bosoms  He  be  heard. 

This  is  my  faith,  and  my  mind's  heritage, 
Wherein  I  toil,  though  in  a  lonely  place, 
Who  yet  world-wide  survey  the  human  race 
Unequal  from  wild  nature  disengage 
Body  and  soul,  and  life's  old  strife  assuage; 
Still  must  abide,  till  heaven  perfect  its  grace. 
And  love  grown  wisdom  sweeten  in  man's  face, 
Alike  the  Christian  and  the  heathen  rage. 
The  tutelary  genius  of  mankind 
Ripens  by  slow  degrees  the  final  State, 
That  in  the  soul  shall  its  foundations  find 
And  only  in  victorious  love  grow  great ; 
Patient  the  heart  must  be,  humble  the  mind, 
That  doth  the  greater  births  of  time  await ! 

Whence  not  unmoved  I  see  the  nations  form 

From  Dover  to  the  fountains  of  the  Rhine, 

A  hundred  leagues,  the  scarlet  battle-line. 

And  by  the  Vistula  great  armies  swarm, 

A  vaster  flood;  rather  my  breast  grows  warm. 

Seeing  all  peoples  of  the  earth  combine 

Under  one  standard,  with  one  countersign. 

Grown  brothers  in  the  universal  storm. 

And  never  through  the  wide  world  yet  there  rang 

A  mightier  summons!    O  Thou  who  from  the  side 

Of  Athens  and  the  loins  of  Caesar  sprang, 

Strike,  Europe,  with  half  the  coming  world  allied. 

For  those  ideals  for  which,  since  Homer  sang. 

The  hosts  of  thirty  centuries  have  died. 

George  Edward  Woodberry  [1855- 


Youth  in   Arms  ^555 


YOUTH  IN  ARMS 

Happy  boy,  happy  boy, 
David  the  immortal-willed, 
Youth  a  thousand  thousand  times 
Slain,  but  not  once  killed, 
Swaggering  again  today 
In  the  old  contemptuous  way; 

Leaning  backward  from  your  thigh 
Up  against  the  tinselled  bar — 
Dust  and  ashes!  is  it  you? 
Laughing,  boasting,  there  you  are! 
First  we  hardly  recognized  you 
In  your  modern  avatar. 

Soldier,  rifle,  brown  khaki — 

Is  your  blood  as  happy  so? 

Where's  your  sling,  or  painted  shield, 

Helmet,  pike,  or  bow? 

Well,  you're  going  to  the  wars — 

That  is  all  you  need  to  know. 

Graybeards  plotted.    They  were  sad. 
Death  was  in  their  wrinkled  eyes. 
At  their  tables — with  their  maps. 
Plans  and  calculations — wise 
They  all  seemed;  for  well  they  knew 
How  ungrudgingly  Youth  dies. 

At  their  green  official  baize 
They  debated  all  the  night 
Plans  for  your  adventurous  days 
Which  you  followed  with  delight, 
Youth  in  all  your  wanderings, 
David  of  a  thousand  slings. 

Harold  Monro  [1879- 


2556  Poems  of  History 

MAGPIES  IN  PICARDY 

The  magpies  in  Picardy 

Are  more  than  I  can  tell. 
They  flicker  down  the  dusty  roads 

And  cast  a  magic  spell 
On  the  men  who  march  through  Picardy, 

Through  Picardy  to  hell. 

(The  blackbird  flies  with  panic, 
The  swallow  goes  like  light, 

The  finches  move  like  ladies, 
The  owl  floats  by  at  night; 

But  the  great  and  flashing  magpie 
He  flies  as  artists  might.) 

A  magpie  in  Picardy 

Told  me  secret  things — 
Of  the  music  in  white  feathers, 

And  the  sunlight  that  sings 
And  dances  in  deep  shadows — 

He  told  me  with  his  wings. 

(The  hawk  is  cruel  and  rigid, 
He  watches  from  a  height; 

The  rook  is  slow  and  somber. 
The  robin  loves  to  fight ; 

But  the  great  and  flashing  magpie 
He  flies  as  lovers  might.) 

He  told  me  that  in  Picardy, 

An  age  ago  or  more, 
While  all  his  fathers  still  were  eggs. 

These  dusty  highways  bore 
Brown,  singing  soldiers  marching  out 

Through  Picardy  to  war. 

He  said  that  still  through  chaos 
Works  on  the  ancient  plan, 

And  two  things  have  altered  not 
Since  first  the  world  began — 
■ '  '    'The  beauty  of  the  wild  green  earth 
And  the  bravery  of  man. 


Songs  from  an   Evil   Wood         ^557 

(For  the  sparrow  flics  unthinking 

And  quarrels  in  his  flight, 
The  heron  trails  his  legs  behind, 

The  lark  goes  out  of  sight ; 

But  the  great  and  flashing  magpie 

He  flies  as  poets  might.) 

Unknown 


SONGS  FROM  AN  EVIL  WOOD 
I 

There  is  no  wrath  in  the  stars, 
They  do  not  rage  in  the  sky; 

I  look  from  the  evil  wood 

And  find  myself  wondering  why. 

Why  do  they  not  scream  out 
And  grapple  star  against  star, 

Seeking  for  blood  in  the  wood 
As  all  things  round  me  are? 

They  do  not  glare  like  the  sky 

Or  flash  like  the  deeps  of  the  wood; 

But  they  shine  softly  on 
In  their  sacred  solitude. 

To  their  high,  happy  haunts 

Silence  from  us  has  flown, 
She  whom  we  loved  of  old 

And  know  it  now  she  is  gone. 

When  will  she  come  again. 
Though  for  one  second  only? 

She  whom  we  loved  is  gone 
And  the  whole  world  is  lonely. 


Somewhere  lost  in  the  haze 
The  sun  goes  down  in  the  cold, 

And  birds  in  this  evil  wood 
Chirrup  home  as  of  old; 


2558  Poems  of  History 

Chirrup,  stir,  and  are  still  f^^  i'^'*?^ 

On  the  high  twigs  frozen  and  thin. 

There  is  no  more  noise  of  them  now, 
And  the  long  night  sets  in. 

Of  all  the  wonderful  things  1 

That  I  have  seen  in  the  wood, 

I  marvel  most  at  the  birds 

And  their  wonderful  quietude.         )p 

For  a  giant  smites  with  his  club    - 

All  day  the  tops  of  the  hill. 
Sometimes  he  rests  at  night, 

Oftener  he  beats  them  still. 

And  a  dwarf  with  a  grim  black  mane 
Raps  with  repeated  rage  ;  y^ 

All  night  in  the  valley  below 
On  the  wooden  walls  of  his  cage. 

And  the  elder  giants  come 
Sometimes,  tramping  from  far 

Through  the  weird  and  flickering  light 
Made  by  an  earthly  star. 

And  the  giant  with  his  club. 

And  the  dwarf  with  rage  in  his  breath, 

And  the  elder  giants  from  far. 

They  are  all  the  children  of  Death. 

They  are  all  abroad  to-night 

And  are  breaking  the  hills  with  their  brood, 
And  the  birds  are  all  asleep 

Even  in  Plug  Street  Wood! 


The  great  guns  of  England,  they  listen  mile  on  mile 
To  the  boasts  of  a  broken  War-Lord;  they  lift  their  throats 
and  smile;  ' 

But  the  old  woods  are  fallen  /. 

For  a  while. 


Songs  from   an   Evil   Wood         "^559 

The  old  woods  are  fallen;  yet  will  they  come  again, 
They  will  come  back  some  springtime  with  the  warm  winds 
and  the  rain, 

For  Nature  guardeth  her  children 
Never  in  vain. 

They  will  come  back  some  season;  it  may  be  a  hundred  years; 
It  is  all  one  to  Nature  with  the  centuries  that  are  hers; 
She  shall  bring  back  her  children 
And  dry  all  their  tears. 

But  the  tears  of  a  would-be  War-Lord  shall  never  cease  to 

tlow, 
He  shall  weep  for  the  poisoned  armies  whenever  the  gas- 
winds  blow, 

He  shall  always  weep  for  his  widows, 
And  all  Hell  shall  know. 

The  tears  of  a  pitiless  Kaiser  shallow  they'll  flow  and  wide, 
Wide  as  the  desolation  made  by  his  silly  pride 
When  he  slaughtered  a  little  people 
To  stab  France  in  her  side. 

Over  the  ragged  cinders  they  shall  flow  on  and  on 
With  the  listless  falling  of  streams  that  find  not  Oblivion, 
For  ages  and  ages  of  years 
Till  the  last  star  is  gone. 


I  met  with  Death  in  his  country. 
With  his  scythe  and  his  hollow  eye, 

Walking  the  roads  of  Belgium. 
I  looked  and  he  passed  me  by. 

Since  he  passed  me  by  in  Plug  Street, 
In  the  wood  of  the  evil  name, 

I  shall  not  now  lie  with  the  heroes, 
I  shall  not  share  their  fame, 

I  shall  never  be  as  they  are, 

A  name  in  the  lands  of  the  Free, 

Since  I  looked  on  Death  in  Flanders 
And  he  did  not  look  at  me. 

Edward  J.  M.  D.  Pliinkdl  [li 


phn'iw 


2,560  Poems  of  History:2Tyno8 

ebffi'q  HAVE  A  RENDEZVOUS  WITH  DEATH"    ,,  , 

I  HAVE  a  rendezvous  with  Death  "' '  ^''^^ 

At  some  disputed  barricade, 

When  Spring  comes  back  with  rustling  shade 

And  apple-blossoms  iiU  the  air —  r.'.  P 

I  have  a  rendezvous  with  Death  i  il 

When  Spring  brings  back  blue  days  and  fair. 

It  may  be  he  shall  take  my  hand 

And  lead  me  into  his  dark  land  '      \"^ 

And  close  my  eyes  and  quench  my  breath — 

It  may  be  I  shall  pass  him  still. 

I  have  a  rendezvous  with  Death 

On  some  scarred  slope  of  battered  hill, 

When  Spring  comes  round  again  this  year 

And  the  first  meadow-flowers  appear.  ■■rr.ri  arfT 

■'in/f 
God  knows  'twere  better  to  be  deep 

Pillowed  in  silk  and  scented  down, 

Where  Love  throbs  out  in  bHssful  sleep, 

Pulse  nigh  to  pulse,  and  breath  to  breath, 

Where  hushed  awakenings  are  dear  .  .  . 

But  I've  a  rendezvous  with  Death 

At  midnight  in  some  flaming  town, 

When  Spring  trips  north  again  this  year. 

And  I  to  my  pledged  word  am  true, 

•   .         I  shall  not  fail  that  rendezvous. 

Alan  Seegcr  [i 888-191 6] 


THE  SPIRES  OF  OXFORD 

(as  seen  from  the  train) 

I  saw  the  spires  of  Oxford 

As  I  was  passing  by. 
The  gray  spires  of  Oxford 

Against  a  pearl-gray  sky. 
My  heart  was  with  the  Oxford  men 

Who  went  abroad  to  die.     ' 


All's   Well  2561 

The  years  go  fast  in  Oxford, 

The  golden  years  and  gay, 
The  hoary  Colleges  look  down 

On  careless  boys  at  play. 
But  when  the  bugles  sounded  war 

They  put  their  games  away. 

They  left  the  peaceful  river, 

The  cricket-field,  the  quad. 
The  shaven  lawns  of  Oxford 

To  seek  a  bloody  sod — 
They  gave  their  merry  youth  away 

For  country  and  for  God. 

God  rest  you,  happy  gentlemen. 

Who  laid  your  good  lives  down, 
Who  took  the  khaki  and  the  gun 

Instead  of  cap  and  gown. 
God  bring  you  to  a  fairer  place 

Than  even  Oxford  town. 

Winifred  M.  Letts  [18 


ALUS  WELL  .;[ 

Watchman,  watchman,  what  of  the  night, 

What  of  the  night  to  tell? 
There  are  widows  weeping,  and  babes  affright, 

And  a  ceaseless  burial  bell. 
But  the  hand  that  holds  the  gun 

Still  shakes  not;  ; 

And  the  line  drops  one  by  one. 

Yet  breaks  not. 
Of  the  blood  so  nobly  poured 
There  shall  surely  be  reward. 
In  the  name  of  the  Lord, 

All's  Well!  ' 

Francis  William  Boiirdillon  [1852- 


2562  Poems  of  History 

REVEILLfi 

[APRIL  6,   191 7] 

What  sudden  bugle  calls  us  in  the  night 

And  wakes  us  from  a  dream  that  we  had  shaped; 
FUnging  us  sharply  up  against  a  fight 
We  thought  we  had  escaped? 

It  is  no  easy  waking,  and  we  win 

No  final  peace;  our  victories  are  few. 
But  still  imperative  forces  pull  us  in 

And  sweep  us  somehow  through. 

Summoned  by  a  supreme  and  confident  power 
That  wakes  our  sleeping  courage  like  a  blow, 
We  rise,  half-shaken,  to  the  challenging  hour, 
And  answer  it — and  go.  .  .  . 

Louis  Untcrmeyer  [1885- 


TO  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 

Brothers  in  blood!    They  who  this  wrong  began 
To  wreck  our  commonwealth,  will  rue  the  day 
When  first  they  challenged  freemen  to  the  fray/' 
And  with  the  Briton  dared  the  American. 
Now  are  we  pledged  to  win  the  Rights  of  man;   ' 
Labor  and  Justice  now  shall  have  their  way, 
And  in  a  League  of  Peace — God  grant  we  may— ^' 
Transform  the  earth,  not  patch  up  the  old  plan. 


Sure  is  our  hope  since  he  who  led  your  nation  .  , 
Spake  for  mankind,  and  ye  arose  in  awe      "'     ,_ 
Of  that  high  call  to  work  the  world's  salvation; 
Clearing  your  minds  of  all  estranging  bhndness 
In  the  vision  of  Beauty  and  the  Spirit's  law, 
Freedom  and  Honor  and  sweet  Loving  kindness. 

Robert  Bridges  [1844- 


Your    Lad,  and    My    Lad  ^563 

,^r^^    fl  liv;      h:ni-T\      ;  •' v.rT,    Firrr   i'V'.,  -iMiir-  >    ,1  1^  ;' ^ 

YOUR  LAD,  AND  MY  LAD 

Down  toward  the  deep-blue  water,  marching  to  throb  of 
drum, 

From  city  street  and  country  lane  the  lines  of  khaki  come; 

The  rumbling  guns,  the  sturdy  tread,  are  full  of  grim  appeal. 

While  rays  of  western  sunshine  flash  back  from  burnished 
steel. 

With  eager  eyes  and  cheeks  aflame  the  serried  ranks  ad- 
vance; 

And  your  dear  lad,  and  my  dear  lad,  are  on  their  way  to 
France. 

A  sob  clings  choking  in  the  throat,  as  file  on  file  sweep  by, 

Between  those  cheering  multitudes,  to  where  the  great  ships 
lie; 

The  batteries  halt,  the  columns  wheel,  to  clear-toned  bugle- 
call. 

With  shoulders  squared  and  faces  front  they  stand  a  khaki 
wall. 

Tears  shine  on  every  watcher's  cheek,  love  speaks  in  every 
glance; 

For  your  dear  lad,  and  my  dear  lad,  are  on  their  way  to 
France.  ;  ,,,-^.^  ;j^.;  [ 

Before  them,  through  a  mist  of  years,  in  soldier  buff  or  blue. 
Brave  comrades  from  a  thousand  fields  watch  now  in  proud 

review ; 
The  same  old  Flag,  the  same  old  Faith — the  Freedom  of  the 

World- 
Spells  Duty  in  those  flapping  folds  above  long  ranks  un- 
furled. 
Strong  are  the  hearts  which  bear  along  Democracy's  ad- 
vance. 
As  your  dear  lad,  and  my  dear  lad,  go  on  their  way  to 
France. 

The  word  rings  out;  a  million  feet  tramp  forward  on  the 

road, 
Along  that  path  of  sacrifice  o'er  which  their  fathers  strode. 


2564  Poems  of  History 

With  eager  eyes  and  cheeks  aflame,  with  cheers  on  smiling 

lips. 
These  fighting  men  of  '17  move  onward  to  their  ships. 
Nor  even  love  may  hold  them  back,  or  halt  that  stern  ad- 

As  your  dear  lad,  and  my  dear  lad,  go  on  their  way  to 
France. 

Randall  Parrish  [1858- 


A  POET  ENLISTS 

sjj  luo^  bnA 
And  all  the  songs  that  I  might  sing — .oonBiT 
Madness  to  risk  them  so,  you  say? 

How  is  it  such  a  certain  thing  '"«  A 

That  I  can  sing  them  if  I  stay?  ''J^ 

,^ii 
The  winds  of  God  are  past  control,  -^"'-^  '•'''•'^ 

They  answer  to  no  human  call. 
And  if  I  lose  my  living  soul  '  <'i 

That  is — ^for  me — the  end  of  all. 

■rorihlc.  aiaoT 

Better  to  shout  one  last  great  song,       1  "u  ''^' 
Dying  myself,  to  dying  men,  'f'^ 

Than  crawl  the  bitter  years  along 
And  never  sing  again. 

Amelia  Jusephine  Burr  [1878- 


'■^  YJ'  iuov  gA 


ii  blow  arIT 

ii.^^OT 

q  M^i  gnoIA 


POEMS  OF  PLACES 

ON  THE   TROSPECT  OF   PLANTING   ARTS   AND 
LEARNING  IN  AMERICA 

The  Muse,  disgusted  at  an  age  and  clime 

Barren  of  every  glorious  theme, 
In  distant  lands  now  waits  a  better  time, 

Producing  subjects  worthy  fame: 

In  happy  climes,  where  from  the  genial  sun 

And  virgin  earth  such  scenes  ensue, 
The  force  of  Art  by  Nature  seems  outdone, 

And  fancied  beauties  by  the  true : 

In  happy  climes,  the  seat  of  Innocence, 
Where  Nature  guides  and  Virtue  rules, 

Where  men  shall  not  impose,  for  truth  and  sense, 
The  pedantry  of  courts  and  schools: 

There  shall  be  sung  another  golden  age. 

The  rise  of  empire  and  of  arts, 
The  good  and  great  inspiring  epic  rage, 

The  wisest  heads  and  noblest  hearts. 

Not  such  as  Europe  breeds  in  her  decay: 
Such  as  she  bred  when  fresh  aiul  young, 

When  heavenly  flame  did  animate  her  clay,  j 
By  future  poets  shall  be  sung. 

W^estward  the  course  of  em[)ire  takes  its  way; 

The  first  four  acts  already  past, 
A  fifth  shall  close  the  drama  with  the  day; 
Time's  noblest  offspring  is  the  last. 

George  Berkeley  [1685-1753] 
2565 


2^66  Poems  of  Places 


BERMUDAS 

Where  the  remote  Bermudas  ride 
In  the  ocean's  bosom  unespied, 
From  a  small  boat  that  rowed  along 
The  listening  winds  received  this  song: 

'TAA   c:i 

"What  should  we  do  but  sing  His  praise 
That  led  us  through  the  watery  maze 
Unto  an  isle  so  long  unknown, 
And  yet  far  kinder  than  our  own? 
V/here  He  the  huge  sea-monsters  wracks, 
That  lift  the  deep  upon  their  backs, 
He  lands  us  on  a  grassy  stage. 
Safe  from  the  storms'  and  prelates'  rage: 
He  gave  us  this  eternal  Spring 
Which  here  enamels  everything, 
And  sends  the  fowls  to  vis  in  care 
On  daily  visits  through  the  air: 
He  hangs  in  shades  the  orange  bright 
Like  golden  lamps  in  a  green  night. 
And  does  in  the  pomegranates  close 
Jewels  more  rich  than  Ormus  shows: 
He  makes  the  figs  our  mouths  to  meet 
And  throws  the  melons  at  our  feet; 
But  apples  plants  of  such  a  price. 
No  tree  could  ever  bear  them  twice. 
With  cedars  chosen  by  His  hand 
From  Lebanon  He  stores  the  land; 
And  makes  the  hollow  seas  that  roar 
Proclaim  the  ambergris  on  shore. 
He  cast  (of  which  we  rather  boast) 
The  Gospel's  pearl  upon  our  coast; 
And  in  these  rocks  for  us  did  frame 
A  temple  where  to  sound  His  name. 
O,  let  our  voice  His  praise  exalt 
Till  it  arrive  at  Heaven's  vault. 
Which  thence  (perhaps)  rebounding  may 
Echo  beyond  the  Mexique  bay!" 


Indian   Names  2567 

Thus  sung  they  in  the  EngHsh  boat 
A  holy  and  a  cheerful  note: 
And  all  the  way,  to  guide  their  chime, 
With  falhng  oars  they  kept  the  time. 

Andrew  Marvcll  [1621-167 8] 


INDIAN  NAMES 

Ye  say,  they  all  have  passed  away, 

That  noble  race  and  brave; 
That  their  light  canoes  have  vanished 

From  off  the  crested  wave; 
That,  'mid  the  forests  where  they  roamed, 

There  rings  no  hunter's  shout; 
But  their  name  is  on  your  waters, — 

Ye  may  not  wash  it  out. 

'Tis  where  Ontario's  billow 

Like  Ocean's  surge  is  curled; 
WTiere  strong  Niagara's  thunders  wake 

The  echo  of  the  world; 
Where  red  Missouri  bringeth 

Rich  tribute  from  the  West, 
And  Rappahannock  sweetly  sleeps 

On  green  Virginia's  breast. 

Ye  say,  their  cone-like  cabins. 
That  clustered  o'er  the  vale. 
Have  fled  away,  like  withered  leaves 
gniiiit  Before  the  Autumn  gale; 

But  their  memory  liveth  on  your  hills, 
&  Their  baptism  on  your  shore, 

Your  everlasting  rivers  speak 
Their  dialect  of  yore. 

Old  Massachusetts  wears  it 
-I"  ■  Within  her  lordly  crown. 

And  broad  Ohio  bears  it 
Amid  his  young  renown; 


2568  Poems  of  Places 

Connecticut  hath  wreathed  it 

Where  her  quiet  foliage  waves, 
And  bold  Kentucky  breathes  it  hoarse 

Througli  all  her  ancient  caves. 

Wachuset  hides  its  lingering  voice 

Within  its  rocky  heart. 
And  Alleghany  graves  its  tone 

Throughout  his  lofty  chart; 
Monadnock,  on  his  forehead  hoar, 

Doth  seal  the  sacred  trust; 
Your  mountains  build  their  monument, 

Though  ye  destroy  their  dust. 

Lydia  Hmitly  Sigourney  [1791-1865] 


MANNAHATTA 

I  WAS  asking  for  something  specific  and  perfect  for  my  city. 
Whereupon  lo!  upsprang  the  aboriginal  name. 

Now  I  see  what  there  is  in  a  name,  a  word,  liquid,  sane,  un- 
ruly, musical,  self-sufhcient, 

I  see  that  the  word  of  my  city  is  that  word  from  of  old, 

Because  I  see  that  word  nested  in  nests  of  water-bays, 
superb. 

Rich,  hemmed  thick  all  around  with  sail-ships  and  steam- 
ships, an  island  sixteen  miles  long,  solid-founded. 

Numberless  crowded  streets,  high  growths  of  iron,  slender, 
strong,  light,  splendidly  uprising  toward  clear  skies. 

Tides  swift  and  ample,  well-loved  by  me,  toward  sundown. 

The  flowing  sea-currents,  the  little  islands,  larger  adjoining 
islands,  the  heights,  the  villas, 

The  countless  masts,  the  white  shore-steamers,  the  lighters, 
the  ferry-boats,  the  black  sea-steamers  well -modelled, 

The  down-town  streets,  the  jobbers'  houses  of  business,  the 
houses  of  business  of  the  ship-merchants  and  money- 
brokers,  the  river-streets. 

Immigrants  arriving,  fifteen  or  twenty  thousand  in  a  week. 

The  carts  hauling  goods,  the  manly  race  of  drivers  of  horses, 
the  brown-faced  sailors, 


Gloucester   Moors  ^5^9 

The  summer  air,  the  bright  sun  shining,  and  the  sailing 

ilouds  aloft, 
The  winter  snows,  the  sleigh-bells,  the  broken  ice  in  the  river, 

passing  along  up  or  down  with  the  flood-tide  or  ebb-tide, 
The  mechanics  of  the  city,  the  masters,  well-formed,  beauti- 
ful-faced, looking  you  straight  in  the  eyes, 
Trottoirs  thronged,  vehicles,  Broadway,  the  women,  the 

shops  and  shows, 
A  milHon  people — manners  free  and  superb — open  voices — 

hospitahty — the  most  courageous  and  friendly  young 

men, 
City  of  hurried  and  sparkling  waters!  city  of  spires  and 

masts! 
City  nested  in  bays!  my  city! 

Wall  Whitman  [1819-1892] 

GLOUCESTER  MOORS 

A  MILE  behind  is  Gloucester  town 
Where  the  fishing  fleets  put  in, 
A  mile  ahead  the  land  dips  down 
And  the  woods  and  farms  begin. 
Here,  where  the  moors  stretch  free 
In  the  high  blue  afternoon, 
Are  the  marching  sun  and  talking  sea, 
And  the  racing  winds  that  wheel  and  flee 
On  the  flying  heels  of  June. 

Jill-o'er-the-ground  is  purple  blue, 

Blue  is  the  quaker-maid, 

The  wild  geranium  holds  its  dew 

Long  in  the  boulder's  shade. 

Wax-red  hangs  the  cup 

From  the  huckleberry  boughs, 

In  barberry  bells  the  gray  moths  sup, 

Or  where  the  choke-cherry  lifts  high  up 

Sweet  bowls  for  their  carouse. 

Over  the  shelf  of  the  sandy  cove 
Beach-peas  blossom  late. 
By  copse  and  cliff  the  swallows  rove 
Each  calling  to  his  mate. 


2570  Poems  of  Places 

^'■'         Seaward  the  sea-gulls  go, 

And  the  land-birds  all  are  here; 

That  green-gold  flash  was  a  vireo, 

And  yonder  flame  where  the  marsh-flags  grow 

Was  a  scarlet  tanager. 

This  earth  is  not  the  steadfast  place 
We  landsmen  build  upon; 
.  From  deep  to  deep  she  varies  pace, 
And  while  she  comes  is  gone. 
Beneath  my  feet  I  feel 
Her  smooth-  bulk  heave  and  dip; 
With  velvet  plunge  and  soft  upreel 
She  swings  and  steadies  to  her  keel 
Like  a  gallant,  gallant  ship. 

These  summer  clouds  she  sets  for  sail, 

The  sun  is  her  masthead  light. 

She  tows  the  moon  like  a  pinnace  frail 

Where  her  phosphor  wake  churns  bright. 

Now  hid,  now  looming  clear. 

On  the  face  of  the  dangerous  blue 

The  star  fleets  tack  and  wheel  and  veer, 

But  on,  but  on  does  the  old  earth  steer 

As  if  her  port  she  knew. 

God,  dear  God!    Does  she  know  her  port, 

Though  she  goes  so  far  about? 

Or  blind  astray,  does  she  make  her  sport 

To  brazen  and  chance  it  out? 

I  watched  when  her  captains  passed: 

She  were  better  captainless. 

Men  in  the  cabin,  before  the  mast. 

But  some  were  reckless  and  some  aghast, 

And  some  sat  gorged  at  mess. 

By  her  battened  hatch  I  leaned  and  caught 

Sounds  from  the  noisome  hold, — 

Cursing  and  sighing  of  souls  distraught 

And  cries  too  sad  to  be  told. 

Then  I  strove  to  go  down  and  see; 

But  they  said,  "Thou  art  not  of  us!"        '- 


The  Song  of  the  Colorado       2571 

I  turned  to  those  on  the  deck  with  me 

And  cried,  "Give  help!"    But  they  said,  "Let  be: 

Our  ship  sails  faster  thus." 

Jill-o'er-the-ground  is  purple  blue, 

Blue  is  the  quaker-maid, 

The  alder-clump  where  the  brook  comes  through 

Breeds  cresses  in  its  shade. 

To  be  out  of  the  moiling  street 

With  its  swelter  and  its  sin! 

Who  has  given  to  me  this  sweet, 

And  given  my  brother  dust  to  eat? 

And  when  will  his  wage  come  in? 

Scattering  wide  or  blown  in  ranks, 
Yellow  and  white  and  brown, 
Boats  and  boats  from  the  fishing  banks 
Come  home  to  Gloucester  town. 
There  is  cash  to  purse  and  spend, 
There  are  wives  to  be  embraced, 
Hearts  to  borrow  and  hearts  to  lend. 
And  hearts  to  take  and  keep  to  the  end,— 
O  little  sails,  make  haste! 

i>xi      But  thou,  vast  outbound  ship  of  souls. 
What  harbor  town  for  thee? 
What  shapes,  when  thy  arriving  tolls. 
Shall  crowd  the  banks  to  see? 
Shall  all  the  happy  shipmates  then 
Stand  singing  brotherly? 
Or  shall  a  haggard  ruthless  few 
Warp  her  over  and  bring  her  to, 
While  the  many  broken  souls  of  men 
Fester  down  in  the  slaver's  pen. 
And  nothing  to  say  or  do? 

William  Vaughn  Moody  [1869-1910] 

THE  SONG  OF  THE  COLORADO 

From  the  heart  of  the  mighty  mountains  strong-souled  for 
my  fate  I  came, 

My  far-drawn  track  to  a  nameless  sea  through  a  land  with- 
out a  name; 


2572  Poems   of  Places 

And  the  earth  rose  up  to  hold  me,  to  bid  me  hnger  and  stay; 
And  the  brawn  and  bone  of  my  mother's  race  were  set  to 
bar  my  way. 

Yet  I  stayed  not,  I  could  not  linger;  my  soul  was  tense  to 

the  call 
The  wet  winds  sing  when  the  long  waves  leap  and  beat  on 

the  far  sea  wall. 
I  stayed  not,  I  could  not  linger;  patient,  resistless,  alone, 
I  hewed  the  trail  of  my  destiny  deep  in  the  hindering  stone. 

How  narrow  that  first  dim  pathway — yet  deepening  hour  by 

hour! 
Years,  ages,  eons,  spent  and  forgot,  while  I  gathered  me 

might  and  power 
To  answer  the  call  that  led  me,  to  carve  my  road  to  the  sea. 
Till  my  flood  swept  out  with  that  greater  tide  as  tireless  and 

tameless  and  free.  n  jinuJ 

From  the  far,  wild  land  that  bore  me,  I  drew  my  bl6od  as 

wild — 

I,  born  of  the  glacier's  glory,  born  of  the  uplands  piled 

Like  stairs  to  the  door  of  heaven,  that  the  Maker  of  all 
.  ,  ,  'jijJii  U 

might  go 

Down  from  his  place  with  honor,  to  look  on  the  world  and 

know 
That  the  sun  and  the  wind  and  the  waters,  and  the  white  ice 

cold  and  still. 
Were  moving  aright  in  the  plan  he  had  made,  shaping  his 

wish  and  will. 

When  the  spirit  of  worship  was  on  me,  turning  alone, 

fl  frit; 7/ 
apart,  ,   ,  . 

I  stayed  and  carved  me  temples  deep  in  the  mountain's 

heart. 
Wide-domed  and  vast  and  silent,  meet  for  the  God  I  knew, 
With  shrines  that  were  shadowed  and  solemn  and  altars  of 

richest  hue;  r 

And  out  of  my  ceaseless  striving   I   wrought  a  victor's 

hymn, 
Flung  up  to  the  stars  in  greeting  from  my  far  track  deep  and 

dim. 


N 


ow 


^573 


For  the  earth  was,  pilt  behind  mc;  I  reckoned  no  more  with 

them 
That  come  or  go  at  her  bidding,  and  ding  to  her  garment's 

hem. 
Apart  in  my  rock-hewn  pathway,  where  the  great  chffs  shut 

me  in, 
The  storm-swept  clouds  were  my  brethren,  and  the  stars 

were  my  kind  and  kin. 

Tireless,  alone,  unstaying,  I  went  as  one  who  goes 

On  some  high  and  strong  adventure  that  only  his  own  heart 

knows. 
Tireless,  alone,  unstaying,  I  went  in  my  chosen  road — 
I  trafficked  with  no  man's  burden — I  bent  me  to  no  man's 

load. 

On  my  tawny,  sinuous  shoulders  no  salt-gray  ships  swung  in; 
I  washed  no  feet  of  cities,  like  a  slave  whipped  out  and  in ; 
My  will  was  the  law  of  my  moving  in  the  land  that  my  strife 

had  made — 
As  a  man  in  the  house  he  has  builded,  master  and  unafraid. 

O  ye  that  would  hedge  and  bind  me — remembering  whence  I 

came! 
I,  that  was,  and  was  mighty,  ere  your  race  had  breath  or 

name! 
Play  with  your  dreams  in  the  sunshine — delve  and  toil  and 

plot — 
¥et  I  keep  the  way  of  my  will  to  the  sea,  when  ye  and  your 

race  are  not! 

Sharlot  M.  Hall  [1870- 

NOW 

YOSEMITE   VALLEY 

It  is  creation's  morning — 

Freshly  the  rivers  run; 
The  chffs,  white  brows  adorning, 

Sing  to  the  shining  sun. 

The  forest,  plumed  and  crested. 
Scales  the  steep  granite  wall. 


2574 


Poems  of  Places 

The  ranged  peaks,  glacier-breasted, 
March  to  the  festival. 

The  mountains  dance  together. 
Lifting  their  domed  heads  high. 

The  cataract's  foamy  feather 
Flaunts  in  the  streaming  sky. 

Somewhere  a  babe  is  horning, 

Somewhere  a  maid  is  won. 
It  is  creation's  morning — 

Now  is  the  world  begun. 

Harriet  Monroe  [i860- 


OUT  WHERE  THE  WEST  BEGINS 

Out  where  the  handclasp's  a  little  stronger, 
Out  where  the  smile  dwells  a  little  longer, 

That's  where  the  West  begins; 
Out  where  the  sun  is  a  Uttle  brighter, 
Where  the  snows  that  fall  are  a  trifle  whiter, 
Where  the  bonds  of  home  are  a  wee  bit  tighter,  ,  f^ 

That's  where  the  West  begins. 

Out  where  the  skies  are  a  trifle  bluer, 
Out  where  friendship's  a  httle  truer, 

That's  where  the  West  begins; 
Out  where  a  fresher  breeze  is  blowing,  ,  -z 

Where  there's  laughter  in  every  streamlet  flowing, 
Where  there's  more  of  reaping  and  less  of  sowing. 

That's  where  the  West  begins. 

Out  where  the  world  is  in  the  making. 
Where  fewer  hearts  in  despair  are  aching. 

That's  where  the  West  begins; 
Where  there's  more  of  singing  and  less  of  sighing, 
Where  there's  more  of  giving  and  less  of  buying. 
And  a  man  makes  friends  without  half  trying — 

That's  where  the  West  begins. 

Arthur  Chapman  [1873- 


The   Law  of  the  Yukon  -575 

-It-    huh-  '"--''-  -;''   'i-r-'---'*    '-  ,    ' 

THE  LAW  OF  THE  YUKON 

This  is  the  law  of  the  Yukon,  and  ever  she  makes  it  plain: 
"Send  not  your  foolish  and  feeble;  send  me  your  strong  and 

your  sane — 
Strong  for  the  red  rage  of  battle;  sane,  for  I  harry  them  sore; 
Send  me  men  girt  for  the  combat,  men  who  are  grit  to  the 

core; 
Swift  as  the  panther  in  triumph,  fierce  as  the  bear  in  defeat, 
Sired  of  a  bulldog  parent,  steeled  in  the  furnace  heat. 
Send  me  the  best  of  your  breeding,  lend  me  your  chosen  ones; 
Them  will  I  take  to  my  bosom,  them  will  I  call  my  sons; 
Them  will  I  gild  with  my  treasure,  them  will  I  glut  with 

my  meat; 
But  the  others — the  misfits,  the  failures — I  trample  under 

my  feet. 
Dissolute,  damned  and  despairful,  crippled  and  palsied  and 

slain, 
Ye  would  scud  me  the  spawn  of  your  gutters — Go!  take 

back  your  spawn  again. 

"Wild  and  wide  are  my  borders,  stern  as  death  is  my  sway; 
From  my  ruthless  throne  I  have  ruled  alone  for  a  million 

years  and  a  day; 
Hugging  my  mighty  treasure,  waiting  for  man  to  come, 
Till  he  swept  like  a  turbid  torrent,  and  after  him  swept — ■ 

the  scum. 
The  pallid  pimp  of  the  dead-line,  the  enervate  of  the  pen, 
One  by  one  I  weeded  them  out,  for  all  that  I  sought  was — 

]\Ien. 
One  by  one  I  dismayed  them,  frighting  them  sore  with  my 

glooms; 
One  by  one  I  betrayed  them  unto  my  manifold  dooms. 
Drowned  them  like  rats  in  my  rivers,  starved  them  hke  curs 

on  my  plains. 
Rotted  the  flesh  that  was  left  them,  poisoned  the  blood  in 

their  veins; 
Burst  with  my  winter  upon  them,  searing  forever  their  sight, 
Lashed  them  with  fungus-white  faces,  whimpering  wild  in 

the  night; 


2576  Poems  of  Places 

Staggering  blind  through  the  storm-whirl,  stumbling  mad 
through  the  snow, 

Frozen  stiff  in  the  ice-pack,  brittle  and  bent  like  a  bow; 

Featureless,  formless,  forsaken,  scented  by  wolves  in  their 
flight, 

Left  for  the  wind  to  make  music  through  ribs  that  are  glit- 
tering white; 

Gnawing  the  black  crust  of  failure,  searching  the  pit  of  de- 
spair, 

Crooking  the  toe  in  the  trigger,  trying  to  patter  a  prayer;- 

Going  outside  with  an  escort,  raving  with  lips  all  afoam,    - 

Writing  a  cheque  for  a  million,  driveling  feebly  of  home; 

Lost  like  a  louse  in  the  burning  ...  or  else  in  the  tented 
town 

Seeking  a  drunkard's  solace,  sinking  and  sinking  down; 

Steeped  in  the  slime  at  the  bottom,  dead  to  a  decent  world, 

Lost  'mid  the  human  flotsam,  far  on  the  frontier  hurled j-j- 

In  the  camp  at  the  bend  of  the  river,  with  its  dozen  saloons 
aglare, 

Its  gambhng  dens  ariot,  its  gramophones  all  ablare; 

Crimped  ivith  the  crimes  of  a  city,  sin-ridden  and  bridled 
with  lies. 

In  the  hush  of  my  mountained  vastness,  in  the  flush  of  my 
midnight  skies. 

Plague-spots,  yet  tools  of  my  purpose,  so  natheless  I  suffer 
them  thrive, 

Crushing  my  Weak  in  tlieir  clutches,  that  only  my  Strong 
may  survive. 

"But  the  others,  the  men  of  my  mettle,  the  men  who  would 

'stablish  my  fame 
Unto  its  ultimate  issue,  winning  me  honor,  not  shame; 
Searching  my  uttermost  valleys,  fighting  each  step  as  they  go, 
Shooting  the  wrath  of  my  rapids,  scaling  my  ramparts  of 

snow; 
Ripping  the  guts  of  my  mountains,  looting  the  beds  of  my 

creeks,  .>•  ■li'irit 

Them  will  I  take  to  my  bosom,  and  speak  as  a  mother  speaks. 
I  am  the  land  that  listens,  I  am  the  land  that  broods; 
Steeped  in  eternal  beauty,  crystalline  waters  and  woods. 


The   Law  of  the  Yukon  2577 

Long  have  I  waited  lonely,  shunned  as  a  thing  accurst, 
Monstrous,  moody,  pathetic,  the  last  of  the  lands  and  the 

first; 
\'isioning  camp-fires  at  twilight,  sad  with  a  longing  forlorn, 
Feeling  my  womb  o'er-pregnant  with  the  seed  of  cities  un- 
born. 
Wild  and  wide  are  my  borders,  stern  as  death  is  my  sway, 
And  I  wait  for  the  men  who  will  win  me — and  I  will  not  be 

won  in  a  day; 
And  I  will  not  be  won  by  weaklings,  subtle,  suave  and  mild, 
But  by  men  with  the  hearts  of  vikings,  and  the  simple  faith 

of  a  child; 
Desperate,  strong  and  resistless,  unthrottled  by  fear  or  de- 
feat. 
Them  will  I  gild  with  my  treasure,  them  will  I  glut  with 
my  meat. 

"Lofty  I  stand  from  each  sister  land,  patient  and  wearily 
wise. 

With  the  weight  of  a  world  of  sadness  in  my  quiet,  passion- 
less eyes; 

Dreaming  alone  of  a  people,  dreaming  alone  of  a  day. 

When  men  shall  not  rape  my  riches,  and  curse  me  and  go 
away ; 

Making  a  bawd  of  my  bounty,  fouling  the  hand  that  gave — 

Till  I  rise  in  my  wrath  and  I  sweep  on  their  path  and  I 
stamp  them  into  a  grave. 

Dreaming  of  men  who  will  bless  me,  of  women  esteeming 
me  good. 

Of  children  born  in  my  borders  of  radiant  motherhood. 

Of  cities  leaping  to  stature,  of  fame  like  a  flag  unfurled. 

As  I  pour  the  tide  of  my  riches  in  the  eager  lap  of  the  world." 

This  is  the  Law  of  the  Yukon,  that  only  the  Strong  shall 

thrive; 
That  surely  the  Weak  shall  perish,  and  only  the  Fit  survive. 
Dissolute,  damned  and  despairful,  crippled  and  palsied  and 

slain. 
This  is  the  Will  of  the  Yukon. — Lo,  how  she  makes  it  plain! 

Robert  W.  Service  [1874- 


2578  Poems  of  Places 


LINES  COMPOSED  A  FEW  MILES  ABOVE  TIN- 
TERN  ABBEY,  ON  REVISITING  THE  BANKS 
OF   THE   WYE,   DURING   A   TOUR,   JULY    13, 

1798 

Five  years  have  passed;  five  summers,  with  the  length 

Of  five  long  winters!  and  again  I  hear 

These  waters,  rolling  from  their  mountain-springs  /, 

With  a  soft  inland  murmur. — Once  again  .1 

Do  I  behold  these  steep  and  lofty  diffs, 

Which  on  a  wild  secluded  scene  impress 

Thoughts  of  more  deep  seclusion;  and  connect 

The  landscape  with  the  quiet  of  the  sky.  ,  p 

The  day  is  come  when  I  again  repose 

Here,  under  this  dark  sycamore,  and  view 

These  plots  of  cottage-ground,  these  orchard-tufts 

Which  at  this  season,  with  their  unripe  fruits, 

Are  clad  in  one  green  hue,  and  lose  themselves 

'Mid  groves  and  copses.    Once  again  I  see 

These  hedge-rows,  hardly  hedge-rows,  little  Hnes 

Of  sportive  wood  run  wild:  these  pastoral  farms, 

Green  to  the  very  door;  and  wreaths  of  smoke 

Sent  up,  in  silence,  from  among  the  trees! 

With  some  uncertain  notice,  as  might  seem 

Of  vagrant  dwellers  in  the  houseless  woods. 

Or  of  some  Hermit's  cave,  where  by  his  fire 

The  Hermit  sits  alone. 

These  beauteous  forms, 
Through  a  long  absence,  have  not  been  to  me 
As  is  a  landscape  to  a  blind  man's  eye: 
But  oft,  in  lonely  rooms,  and  'mid  the  din 
Of  towns  and  cities,  I  have  owed  to  them, 
In  hours  of  weariness,  sensations  sweet. 
Felt  in  the  blood,  and  felt  along  the  heart; 
And  passing  even  into  my  purer  mind. 
With  tranquil  restoration: — feelings  too 
Of  unremembered  pleasure:  such,  perhaps. 
As  have  no  slight  or  trivial  influence 


The   Banks  of  the  Wye  2579 

On  that  best  portion  of  a  good  man's  life, 

His  little,  nameless,  unremembered,  acts  i ,) 

Of  kindness  and  of  love.    Nor  less,  I  trust, 

To  them  I  may  have  owed  another  gift, 

Of  aspect  more  sublime;  that  blessed  mood, 

In  which  the  burthen  of  the  mystery. 

In  which  the  heavy  and  the  weary  weight 

Of  aU  this  unintelligible  world. 

Is  lightened: — that  serene  and  blessed  mood, 

In  which  the  affections  gently  lead  us  on, — ■ 

Until,  the  breath  of  this  corporeal  frame 

And  even  the  motion  of  our  human  blood  mU 

Almost  suspended,  we  are  laid  asleep  1/. 

In  body,  and  become  a  Hving  soul:  ■/ 

While  with  an  eye  made  quiet  by  the  power 

Of  harmony,  and  the  deep  power  of  joy, 

We  see  into  the  life  of  things. 

If  this 
Be  but  a  vain  behef,  yet,  oh!  how  oft — 
In  darkness  and  amid  the  many  shapes 
Of  joyless  daylight;  when  the  fretful  stir 
Unprofitable,  and  the  fever  of  the  world, 
Have  hung  upon  the  beatings  of  my  heart — 
How  oft,  in  spirit,  have  I  turned  to  thee, 

0  sylvan  Wye!  thou  wanderer  through  the  woods,  ■■ 
How  often  has  my  spirit  turned  to  thee! 

And  now,  with  gleams  of  half-extinguished  thought, 
With  many  recognitions  dim  and  faint,  iiy^. 

And  somewhat  of  a  sad  perplexity,  .'  ," 

The  picture  of  the  mind  revives  again: 
While  here  I  stand,  not  only  with  the  sense 
Of  present  pleasure,  but  with  pleasing  thoughts 
That  in  this  moment  there  is  hfe  and  food 
For  future  years.    And  so  I  dare  to  hope, 
Though  changed  no  doubt,  from  what  I  was  when  first 

1  came  among  these  hills;  when  like  a  roe 

I  bounded  o'er  the  mountains,  by  the  sides 
Of  the  deep  rivers,  and  the  lonely  streams. 
Wherever  Nature  led:  more  Hke  a  man 
Flying  from  something  that  he  dreads,  than  one 


1 5  8o  Poems  of  Places  - '  T 

Who  sought  the  thing  he  loved.    For  Nature  then   ' 

(The  coarser  pleasures  of  my  boyish  days, 

And  their  glad  animal  movements  all  gone  by) 

To  me  was  all  in  all. — I  cannot  paint 

What  then  I  was.    The  sounding  cataract 

Haunted  me  hke  a  passion:  the  tall  rock, 

The  mountain,  and  the  deep  and  gloomy  woodjw  nl 

Their  colors  and  their  forms,  were  then  to  me         ' "* 

An  appetite;  a  feeling  and  a  love, 

That  had  no  need  of  a  remoter  charm, 

By  thought  supplied,  or  any  interest 

Unborrowed  from  the  eye. — That  time  is  past, 

And  all  its  aching  joys  are  now  no  more,     j^    itrni;. 

And  all  its  dizzy  raptures.    Not  for  this     ■:  vbod  nl 

Faint  I,  nor  mourn  nor  murmur;  other  gifts 

Have  followed;  for  such  loss,  I  would  believe, 

Abundant  recompense.    For  I  have  learned 

To  look  on  Nature,  not  as  in  the  hour 

Of  thoughtless  youth;  but  hearing  oftentimes 

The  still,  sad  music  of  humanity,  i 

Nor  harsh  nor  grating,  though  of  ample  power 

To  chasten  and  subdue.    And  I  have  felt 

A  presence  that  disturbs  me  with  the  joy  //jiii 

Of  elevated  thoughts;  a  sense  sublime  -  v/oH 

Of  something  far  more  deeply  interfused,  /  riEvI-^a  O 

Whose  dwelling  is  the  light  of  setting  suns,!3Jio  woH 

And  the  round  ocean  and  the  living  air,       on  boA 

And  the  blue  sky,  and  in  the  mind  of  man; 

A  motion  and  a  spirit,  that  impels 

All  thinking  things,  all  objects  of  all  thought. 

And  rolls  through  all  things.    Therefore  am  I  still 

A  lover  of  the  meadows  and  the  woods, 

And  mountains;  and  of  all  that  we  behold 

From  this  green  earth;  of  all  the  mighty  world 

Of  eye,  and  ear,- — both  what  they  half  create, 

And  what  perceive;  well  pleased  to  recognize 

In  Nature  and  the  language  of  the  sense. 

The  anchor  of  my  purest  thoughts,  the  nurse, 

The  guide,  the  guardian  of  my  heart,  and  soul 

Of  all  my  moral  being.  rliamoa  tnoi\  j 


The   Banks  ot  the   Wye  qc8i 

Nor  perchance, 
If  I  were  not  thus  taught,  should  I  the  more   .-f,  ,' 
Suffer  my  genial  spirits  to  decay : 
For  thou  art  with  me  here,  upon  the  banks 
Of  this  fair  river;  thou,  my  dearest  Friend,  ,,  ; 

My  dear,  dear  Friend;  and  in  thy  voice  I  catch 
The  language  of  my  former  heart,  and  read 
INIy  former  pleasure  in  the  shooting  lights 
Of  thy  wild  eyes.    Oh!  yet  a  little  while 
May  I  behold  in  thee  what  I  was  once. 
My  dear,  dear  Sister!  and  this  prayer  I  make, 
Knowing  that  Nature  never  did  betray 
The  heart  that  loved  her;  'tis  her  privilege. 
Through  all  the  years  of  this  our  life,  to  lead 
From  joy  to  joy:  for  she  can  so  inform 
The  mind  that  is  within  us,  so  impress 
With  quietness  and  beauty,  and  so  feed 
With  lofty  thoughts,  that  neither  evil  tongues, , , 
Rash  judgments,  nor  the  sneers  of  selfish  men, 
Nor  greetings  where  no  kindness  is,  nor  all 
The  dreary  intercourse  of  daily  life, 
Shall  e'er  prevail  against  us,  or  disturb 
Our  cheerful  faith,  that  all  which  we  behold 
Is  full  of  blessings.    Therefore  let  the  moon 
Shine  on  thee  in  thy  solitary  walk; 
And  let  the  misty  mountain-winds  be  free 
To  blow  against  thee:  and,  in  after  years, 
When  these  wild  ecstasies  shall  be  matured 
Into  a  sober  pleasure;  when  thy  mind 
Shall  be  a  mansion  for  all  lovely  forms, 
Thy  memory  be  as  a  dwelling-place 
For  all  sweet  sounds  and  harmonics;  oh!  then, 
If  solitude,  or  fear,  or  pain,  or  grief, 
Should  be  thy  portion,  with  what  healing  thoughts 
Of  tender  joy  wilt  thou  remember  me, 
And  these  my  exhortations!    Nor,  perchance —  , 
If  I  should  be  where  I  no  more  can  hear  ' 

Thy  voice,  nor  catch  from  thy  wild  eyes  these  gleams 
Of  past  existence — wilt  thou  then  forget 
That  on  the  banks  of  this  delightful  stream 


2582  Poems  of  Places 

We  stood  together;  and  that  I,  so  long 
A  worshipper  of  Nature,  hither  came 
Unwearied  in  that  service:  rather  say 
With  warmer  love — oh!  with  far  deeper  zeal 
Of  holier  love.    Nor  wilt  thou  then  forget, 
That  after  many  wanderings,  many  years 
Of  absence,  these  steep  woods  and  lofty  cliflFs, 
And  this  green  pastoral  landscape,  were  to  me 
More  dear,  both  for  themselves  and  for  thy  sake! 
William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 


THE   PASS  OF  KIRKSTONE 

Within  the  mind  strong  fancies  work. 

A  deep  delight  the  bosom  thrills 

Oft  as  I  pass  along  the  fork 

Of  these  fraternal  hills: 

Where,  save  the  rugged  road,  we  find 

No  appanage  of  human  kind. 

Nor  hint  of  man;  if  stone  or  rock 

Seem  not  his  handiwork  to  mock 

By  something  cognizably  shaped; 

Mockery — or  model  roughly  hewn, 

And  left  as  if  by  earthquake  strewn, 

Or  from  the  Flood  escaped: 

Altars  for  Druid  service  fit; 

(But  where  no  fire  was  ever  lit, 

Unless  the  glow-worm  to  the  skies 

Thence  offer  nightly  sacrifice) 

Wrinkled  Egyptian  monument ; 

Green  moss-grown  tower;  or  hoary  tent; 

Tents  of  a  camp  that  never  shall  be  razed — 

On  which  four  thousand  years  have  gazed! 

Ye  plough-shares  sparkling  on  the  slopes! 

Ye  snow-white  lambs  that  trip 

Imprisoned  'mid  the  formal  props 

Of  restless  ownership ! 

Ye  trees,  that  may  to-morrow  fall 

To  feed  the  insatiate  Prodigal! 


The  Pass  of  Kirkstone  ^5^3 

Lawns,  houses,  chattels,  groves,  and  fields. 

All  that  the  fertile  valley  shields; 

Wages  of  folly — baits  of  crime. 

Of  life's  uneasy  game  the  stake. 

Playthings  that  keep  the  eyes  awake 

Of  drowsy,  dotard  Time; — 

0  care!    0  guilt! — 0  vales  and  plains. 

Here,  'mid  his  own  unvexed  domains, 

A  Genius  dwells,  that  can  subdue 

At  once  all  memory  of  You, — 

Most  potent  when  mists  veil  the  sky, 

Mists  that  distort  and  magnify; 

While  the  coarse  rushes,  to  the  sweeping  breeze, 

Sigh  forth  their  ancient  melodies! 

List  to  those  shriller  notes! — that  march 

Perchance  was  on  the  blast. 

When,  through  this  Height's  inverted  arch, 

Rome's  earliest  legion  passed! 

— ^They  saw,  adventurously  impelled. 

And  older  eyes  than  theirs  beheld. 

This  block — and  yon,  whose  churchlike  frame 

Gives  to  this  savage  Pass  its  name. 

Aspiring  Road!  that  lov'st  to  hide 

Thy  darling  in  a  vapory  bourn. 

Not  seldom  may  the 'hour  return 

When  thou  shalt  be  my  guide : 

And  I  (as  all  men  may  find  cause. 

When  Ufe  is  at  a  weary  pause, 

And  they  have  panted  up  the  hill 

Of  duty  with  reluctant  will) 

Be  thankful,  even  though  tired  and  faint, 

For  the  rich  bounties  of  constraint ; 

Whence  oft  invigorating  transports  flow 

That  choice  lacked  courage  to  bestow! 

My  Soul  was  grateful  for  delight 
That  wore  a  threatening  brow; 
A  veil  is  hfted — can  she  slight 
The  scene  that  opens  now? 


2584  Poems  of  Places 

Though  habitation  none  appear, 

The  greenness  tells,  man  must  be  there; 

The  shelter — that  the  perspective 

Is  of  the  clime  in  which  we  live;  • 

Where  Toil  pursues  his  daily  round; 

Where  Pity  sheds  sweet  tears — and  Love, 

In  woodbine  bower  or  birchen  grove, 

Inflicts  his  tender  wound. 

— Who  comes  not  hither  ne'er  shall  know 

How  beautiful  the  world  below; 

Nor  can  he  guess  how  lightly  leaps 

The  brook  adown  the  rocky  steeps. 

Farewell,  thou  desolate  Domain! 

Hope,  pointing  to  the  cultured  plain, 

Carols  hke  a  shepherd-boy ; 

And  who  is  she? — Can  that  be  Joy! 

Who,  with  a  sunbeam  for  her  guide, 

Smoothly  skims  the  meadows  wide; 

While  Faith,  from  yonder  opening  cloud, 

To  hill  and  vale  proclaims  aloud, 

"Whate'er  the  weak  may  dread,  the  wicked  dare. 

Thy  lot,  0  Man,  is  good,  thy  portion,  fair!" 

William  Words-worth  [17  70- 1850] 


YARROW  UNVISITED 

From  Stirling  Castle  we  had  seen 
The  mazy  Forth  unravelled, 
Had  trod  the  banks  of  Clyde  and  Tay, 
And  with  the  Tweed  had  travelled; 
And  when  we  came  to  Clovenford, 
Then  said  my  "winsome  Marrow," 
"Whate'er  betide,  we'll  turn  aside. 
And  see  the  Braes  of  Yarrow." 

"Let  Yarrow  folk,  frae  Selkirk  town, 
Who  have  been  buying,  selling. 
Go  back  to  Yarrow,  'tis  their  own, 
Each  maiden  to  her  dwelling! 


Yarrow   Un visited  ^5^5 

On  Yarrow's  banks  let  herons  feed, 
Hares  couch,  and  rabbits  burrow; 
But  we  will  downward  with  the  Tweed, 
Nor  turn  aside  to  Yarrow. 

"There's  Galla  Water,  Leader  Haughs, 
Both  lying  right  before  us; 
And  Dryburgh,  where  with  chiming  Tweed 
The  lint  whites  sing  in  chorus; 
There's  pleasant  Tiviotdale,  a  land 
Made  blithe  with  plow  and  harrow: 
Why  throw  away  a  needful  day 
To  go  in  search  of  Yarrow? 

"W^hat's  Yarrow  but  a  river  bare 

That  glides  the  dark  hills,  under? 

There  are  a  thousand  such  elsewhere 

As  worthy  of  your  wonder." 

— Strange  words  they  seemed  of  slight  and  scorn; 

My  True-love  sighed  for  sorrow, 

And  looked  me  in  the  face,  to  think 

I  thus  could  speak  of  Yarrow! 

"O  green,"  said  I,  "are  Yarrow's  holms, 
And  sweet  is  Yarrow  flowing! 
Fair  hangs  the  apple  frae  the  rock, 
But  we  will  leave  it  growing. 
O'er  hilly  path,  and  open  strath 
We'll  wander  Scotland  thorough; 
But,  though  so  near,  we  will  not  turn 
Into  the  dale  of  Yarrow. 

"Let  beeves  and  home-bred  kine  partake 
The  sweets  of  Burn-mill  meadow; 
The  swan  on  still  Saint  Mary's  Lake 
Float  double,  swan  and  shadow! 
We  will  not  see  them;  will  not  go 
To-day,  nor  yet  to-morrow; 
Enough  if  in  our  hearts  we  know 
There's  such  a  place  as  Yarrow. 


^5^^  Poems  of  Places 

"Be  Yarrow  stream  unseen,  unknown! 
It  must,  or  we  shall  rue  it: 
We  have  a  vision  of  our  own, 
Ah!  why  should  we  undo  it? 
The  treasured  dreams  of  times  Jong  past, 
We'll  keep  them,  winsome  Marrow! 
For  when  we're  there,  although  'tis  fair, 
'Twill  be  another  Yarrow! 

"If  Care  with  freezing  years  should  come 

And  wandering  seem  but  folly, — 

Should  we  be  loth  to  stir  from  home, 

And  yet  be  melancholy; 

Should  life  be  dull,  and  spirits  low, 

'Twill  soothe  us  in  our  sorrow 

That  earth  has  something  yet  to  show. 

The  bonny  Holms  of  Yarrow!" 

William  Wordsworth  [i77c;--i8so] 


YARROW  VISITED 

And  is  this — Yarrow? — This  the  Stream 

Of  which  my  fancy  cherished 

So  faithfully,  a  waking  dream? 

An  image  that  hath  perished! 

O  that  some  minstrel's  harp  were  near 

To  utter  notes  of  gladness 

And  chase  this  silence  from  the  air. 

That  fills  my  heart  with  sadness! 

Yet  why? — a  silvery  current  flows 

With  uncontrolled  meanderings; 

Nor  have  these  eyes  by  greener  hills 

Been  soothed,  in  all  my  wanderings. 

And,  through  her  depths.  Saint  Mary's  Lake 

Is  visibly  delighted; 

For  not  a  feature  of  those  hills 

Is  in  the  mirror  slighted. 


Yarrow  Visited  2587 

A  blue  sky  bends  o'er  Yarrow  vale, 

Save  where  that  pearly  whiteness 

Is  round  the  rising  sun  diffused, 

A  tender  hazy  brightness ; 

Mild  dawn  of  promise !  that  excludes 

All  profitless  dejection; 

Though  not  unwilling  here  to  admit 

A  pensive  recollection. 

Where  was  it  that  the  famous  Flower 

Of  Yarrow  \'ale  lay  bleeding? 

His  bed  perchance  was  yon  smooth  mound 

On  which  the  herd  is  feeding: 

And  haply  from  this  crystal  pool. 

Now  peaceful  as  the  morning, 

The  water-wraith  ascended  thrice. 

And  gave  his  doleful  warning. 

Delicious  is  the  lay  that  sings 

The  haunts  of  happy  lovers, 

The  path  that  leads  them  to  the  grove, 

The  leafy  grove  that  covers: 

And  pity  sanctifies  the  verse 

That  paints,  by  strength  of  sorrow. 

The  unconquerable  strength  of  love; 

Bear  witness,  rueful  Yarrow! 

But  thou,  that  didst  appear  so  fair 

To  fond  imagination, 

Dost  rival  in  the  light  of  day 

Her  dehcate  creation: 

Meek  loveliness  is  round  thee  spread, 

A  softness  still  and  holy: 

The  grace  of  forest  charms  decayed. 

And  pastoral  melancholy. 

That  region  left,  the  vale  unfolds 
Rich  groves  of  lofty  stature. 
With  Yarrow  winding  through  the  pomp 
Of  cultivated  nature; 


2588  Poems  of  Places 

And,  rising  from  those  lofty  groves,     '  /. 
Behold  a  ruin  hoary,  ;■ 

The  shattered  front  of  Newark's  towers, 
Renowned  in  Border  story. 

Fair  scenes  for  childhood's  opening  bloonij 

For  sportive  youth  to  stray  in, 

For  manhood  to  enjoy  his  strength, 

And  age  to  wear  away  in! 

Yon  cottage  seems  a  bower  of  bliss, 

A  covert  for  protection 

Of  tender  thoughts  that  nestle  there — 

The  brood  of  chaste  affection. 

How  sweet,  on  this  autumnal  day, 

The  wildwood  fruits  to  gather. 

And  on  my  True-love's  forehead  plant 

A  crest  of  blooming  heather! 

And  what  if  I  en  wreathed  my  own? 

'Twere  no  offence  to  reason; 

The  sober  hills  thus  deck  their  brows 

To  meet  the  wintry  season. 

I  see, — but  not  by  sight  alone. 

Loved  Yarrow,  have  I  won  thee; 

A  ray  of  fancy  still  survives — 

Her  sunshine  plays  upon  thee! 

Thy  ever-youthful  waters  keep 

i\  course  of  lively  pleasure; 

And  gladsome  notes  my  lips  can  breathe 

Accordant  to  the  measure. 

The  vapors  linger  round  the  heights, 
They  melt,  and  soon  must  vanish; 
One  hour  is  theirs,  nor  more  is  mine — 
Sad  thought,  which  I  would  banish, 
But  that  I  know,  where'er  I  go, 
Thy  genuine  image,  Yarrow! 
Will  dwell  with  me, — to  heighten  joy. 
And  cheer  my  mind  in  sorrow. 

WUliam  Wordsworth  [17  70-1 850] 


On  a  Distant  Prospect  of  Eton  College     2589 


ON  A  DISTANT  PROSPECT  OF  ETON  COLLEGE 

Ye  distant  spires,  ye  antique  towers, 

That  crown  the  watery  glade, 
Where  grateful  Science  still  adores 

Her  Henry's  holy  shade; 
And  ye,  that  from  the  stately  brow 
Of  Windsor's  heights  the  expanse  below 

Of  grove,  of  lawn,  of  mead  survey, 
Whose  turf,  whose  shade,  whose  flowers  among 
Wanders  the  hoary  Thames  along 

His  silver- winding  way: 

Ah,  happy  hills!  ah,  pleasing  shade! 

Ah,  fields  beloved  in  vain! 
Where  once  my  careless  childhood  strayed, 

A  stranger  yet  to  pain! 
I  feel  the  gales  that  from  ye  blow 
A  momentary  bliss  bestow, 

As  waving  fresh  their  gladsome  wing. 
My  weary  soul  they  seem  to  soothe, 
And,  redolent  of  joy  and  youth. 

To  breathe  a  second  spring. 

Say,  Father  Thames,  for  thou  hast  seen 

Full  many  a  sprightly  race 
Disporting  on  thy  margent  green 

The  paths  of  pleasure  trace; 
Who  foremost  now  delight  to  cleave, 
With  pliant  arm,  thy  glassy  wave? 

The  captive  linnet  which  enthral? 
What  idl(i  progeny  succeed 
To  chase  the  rolling  circle's  speed. 

Or  urge  the  flying  ball? 

While  some  on  earnest  business  bent 

Their  murmuring  labors  ply 
'Gainst  graver  hours,  that  bring  constraint 

To  sweeten  liberty: 


2590  Poems  of  Places 

Some  bold  adventurers  disdain 
The  limits  of  their  little  reign, 

And  unknown  regions  dare  descry: 
Still  as  they  run  they  look  behind, 
They  hear  a  voice  in  every  wind, 

And  snatch  a  fearful  joy. 

Gay  Hope  is  theirs  by  fancy  fed, 

Less  pleasing  when  possessed; 
The  tear  forgot  as  soon  as  shed. 

The  sunshine  of  the  breast: 
Theirs  buxom  Health,  of  rosy  hue, 
Wild  Wit,  Invention  ever  new, 

And  hvely  Cheer,  of  Vigor  born; 
The  thoughtless  day,  the  easy  night, 
The  spirits  pure,  the  slumbers  light 

That  fly  the  approach  of  morn. 

Alas !  regardless  of  their  doom 

The  little  victims  play ; 
No  sense  have  they  of  ills  to  come, 

Nor  care  beyond  to-day: 
Yet  see,  how  all  around  them  wait 
The  ministers  of  human  fate 

And  black  Misfortune's  baleful  train! 
Ah,  show  them  where  in  ambush  stand. 
To  seize  their  prey,  the  murderous  band! 

Ah,  tell  them  they  are  men! 

These  shall  the  fury  Passions  tear, 

The  vultures  of  the  mind. 
Disdainful  Anger,  pallid  Fear, 

And  Shame  that  sculks  behind; 
Or  pining  Love  shall  waste  their  youth, 
Or  Jealousy,  with  rankling  tooth. 

That  inly  gnaws  the  secret  heart, 
And  Envy  wan,  and  faded  Care, 
•     Grim-visaged  comfortless  Despair, 

And  Sorrow's  piercing  dart. 


A  Song  of  Sherwood  ^59^ 

Ambition  this  shall  tempt  to  rise, 

Then  whirl  the  wretch  from  high, 
To  bitter  Scorn  a  sacrifice. 

And  grinning  Infamy. 
The  stings  of  Falsehood  those  shall  try 
And  hard  Unkindness'  altered  eye, 

That  mocks  the  tear  it  forced  to  flow; 
And  keen  Remorse  with  blood  defiled, 
And  moody  Madness  laughing  wild 

Amid  severest  woe. 

Lo !  in  the  Vale  of  Years  beneath 

A  grisly  troop  are  seen, 
The  painful  family  of  Death, 

More  hideous  than  their  Queen: 
This  racks  the  joints,  this  fires  the  veins, 
That  every  laboring  sinew  strains, 

Those  in  the  deeper  vitals  rage: 
Lo!  Poverty,  to  fill  the  band. 
That  numbs  the  soul  with  icy  hand. 

And  slow-consuming  Age. 

To  each  his  sufferings:  all  are  men. 

Condemned  alike  to  groan; 
The  tender  for  another's  pain. 

The  unfeeling  for  his  own. 
Yet,  ah!  why  should  they  know  their  fate, 
Since  sorrow  never  comes  too  late. 

And  happiness  too  swiftly  flies? 
Thought  would  destroy  their  paradise! 
No  more; — where  ignorance  is  bliss, 

'Tis  folly  to  be  wise. 

Thomas  Gray  [  1 7 1 6- 1 7  7 1  ] 

A  SONG  OF  SHERWOOD 

Sherwood  in  the  twilight,  is  Robin  Hood  awake? 
Gray  and  ghostly  shadows  are  gliding  through  the  brake; 
Shadows  of  the  dappled  deer,  dreaming  of  the  morn. 
Dreaming  of  a  shadowy  man  that  winds  a  shadowy  horn. 


2592  Poems  of  Places 

Robin  Hood  is  here  again :  all  'his  merry  thieves 

Hear  a  ghostly  bugle-note  shivering  through  the  leaves, 

Calling  as  he  used  to  call,  faint  and  far  away, 

In  Sherwood,  in  Sherwood,  about  the  break  of  day. 

Merry,  merry  England  has  kissed  the  lips  of  June: 
All  the  wings  of  fairyland  were  here  beneath  the  moon 
Like  a  ilight  of  rose-leaves  fluttering  in  a  mist 
Of  opal  and  ruby  and  pearl  and  amethyst. 

Merry,  merry  England  is  waking  as  of  old. 
With  eyes  of  blither  hazel  and  hair  of  brighter  gold: 
For  Robin  Hood  is  here  again  beneath  the  bursting  spray 
In  Sherwood,  in  Sherwood,  about  the  break  of  day. 

Love  is  in  the  greenwood  building  him  a  house 
Of  wild  rose  and  hawthorn  and  honeysuckle  boughs: 
Love  is  in  the  greenwood:  dawn  is  in  the  skies; 
And  Marian  is  waiting  with  a  glory  in  her  eyes. 

Hark!  The  dazzled  laverock  climbs  the  golden  steep: 

Marian  is  waiting:  is  Robin  Hood  asleep? 

Round  the  fairy  grass-rings  frolic  elf  and  fay, 

In  Sherwood,  in  Sherwood,  about  the  break  of  day. 

Oberon,  Oberon,  rake  away  the  gold. 
Rake  away  the  red  leaves,  roll  away  the  mould. 
Rake  away  the  gold  leaves,  roll  away  the  red. 
And  wake  Will  Scarlett  from  his  leafy  forest  bed. 

Friar  Tuck  and  Little  John  are  riding  down  together 
With  quarter-staff  and  drinking-can  and  gray  goose-feather; 
The  dead  are  coming  back  again;  the  years  are  rolled  away 
In  Sherwood,  in  Sherwood,  about  the  break  of  day. 

Softly  over  Sherwood  the  south  wind  blows; 

All  the  heart  of  England  hid  in  every  rose 

Hears  across  the  greenwood  the  sunny  whisper  leap, 

Sherwood  in  the  red  dawn,  is  Robin  Hood  asleep? 


Godiva  ^593 

Hark,  the  voice  of  England  ^^•■'kes  him  as  of  old 
And,  shattering  the  silence  with  a  cry  of  brighter  gold. 
Bugles  in  the  greenwood  echo  from  the  steep, 
Sherwood  in  the  red  dawn,  is  Robin  Hood  asleep  ? 

Where  the  deer  are  ghding  down  the  shadowy  glen 
All  across  the  glades  of  fern  he  calls  his  merry  men ; 
Doublets  of  the  Lincoln  green  glancing  through  the  May 
In  Sherwood,  in  Sherwood,  about  the  break  of  day; 

Calls  them  and  they  answer:  from  aisles  of  oak  and  ash 
Rings  the  Follow  !  Follow  !  and  the  boughs  begin  to  crash; 
The  ferns  begin  to  flutter  and  the  flowers  begin  to  fly; 
And  through  the  crimson  dawning  the  robber  band  goes  by. 

Robin  !  Robin  !  Robin  !  All  his  merry  thieves 
Answer  as  the  bugle-note  shivers  through  the  leaves: 
Calling  as  he  used  to  caU,  faint  and  far  away. 
In  Sherwood,  in  Sherwood,  about  the  break  of  day. 

Alfred  Noyes  [1880- 


GODIVA 

/  wailed  for  the  train  at  Coventry: 
I  hung  with  grooms  and  porters  on  the  bridge, 
To  watch  the  three  tall  spires;  and  there  I  shaped 
The  cily^s  amienl  legend  into  this: — 

Not  only  we,  the  latest  seed  of  Time, 
New  men,  that  in  the  flying  of  a  wheel 
Cry  down  the  past,  not  only  wc,  that  prate 
Of  rights  and  wrongs,  have  loved  the  people  well,   ■ 
And  loathed  to  see  them  overtaxed;  but  she 
Did  more,  and  underwent,  and  overcame. 
The  woman  of  a  thousand  summers  back, 
Godiva,  wife  to  that  grim  Earl,  who  ruled 
In  Coventry;  for  when  he  laid  a  tax 
Upon  his  town,  and  all  the  mothers  brought  ; 

Their  children,  clamoring,  "If  we  pay,  wc  starve!" 
She  sought  her  lord,  and  found  him,  where  he  strode 


2594  Poems  of  Places 

About  the  hall,  among  his  dogs,  alone. 

His  beard  a  foot  before  him,  and  his  hair 

A  yard  behind.     She  told  him  of  their  tears, 

And  prayed  him,  "If  they  pay  this  tax,  they  stai-ve." 

Whereat  he  stared,  replying,  half-amazed, 

"You  would  not  let  your  little  finger  ache 

For  such  as  these?" — "But  I  would  die,"  said  she. 

He  laughed,  and  swore  by  Peter  and  by  Paul: 

Then  filliped  at  the  diamond  in  her  ear: 

"O,  ay,  ay,  ay,  you  talk!" — "Alas!"  she  said, 

"But  prove  me  what  it  is  I  would  not  do." 

And  from  a  heart  as  rough  as  Esau's  hand, 

He  answered,  "Ride  you  naked  through  the  town, 

And  I  repeal  it";  and,  nodding,  as  in  scorn, 

He  parted,  with  great  strides  among  his  dogs. 

So  left  alone,  the  passions  of  her  mind, 
As  winds  from  all  the  compass  shift  and  blow, 
Made  war  upon  each  other  for  an  hour. 
Till  pity  won.     She  sent  a  herald  forth. 
And  bade  him  cry,  with  sound  of  trumpet,  all 
The  hard  condition,  but  that  she  would  loose 
The  people;  therefore,  as  they  loved  her  well, 
From  then  till  noon  no  foot  should  pace  the  street, 
No  eye  look  down,  she  passing,  but  that  all 
Shoidd  keep  within,  door  shut,  and  window  barred. 

Then  fled  she  to  her  inmost  bower,  and  there 
Unclasped  the  wedded  eagles  of  her  belt. 
The  grim  Earl's  gift ;  but  ever  at  a  breath 
She  lingered,  looking  like  a  summer  moon 
Half-dipped  in  cloud.    Anon  she  shook  her  head, 
And  showered  the  rippled  ringlets  to  her  knee; 
Unclad  herself  in  haste;  adown  the  stair 
Stole  on;  and,  like  a  creeping  sunbeam,  slid 
From  pillar  unto  pillar,  until  she  reached 
The  gateway;  there  she  found  her  palfrey  trapped 
In  purple  blazoned  with  armorial  gold. 

Then  she  rode  forth,  clothed  on  with  chastity: 
The  deep  air  Hstened  round  her  as  she  rode. 
And  all  the  low  wind  hardly  breathed  for  fear. 
The  little  wide-mouthed  heads  upon  the  spout  '-^''' 


Dover   Beach  '^595 

Had  cunning  eyes  to  see:  the  barking  cur. 
Made  her  cheek  flame:  her  palfrey's  footfall  shot 
Light  horrors  through  her  pulses:  the  blind  walls 
Were  full  of  chinks  and  holes;  and  overhead 
Fantastic  gables,  crowding,  stared:  but  she 
Not  less  through  all  bore  up,  till,  last,  she  saw 
The  whitc-flowcred  elder-thicket  from  the  field 
Gleam  through  the  Gothic  archway  in  the  wall. 

Then  she  rode  back,  clothed  on  with  chastity: 
And  one  low  churl,  compact  of  thankless  earth, 
The  fatal  byword  of  all  years  to  come, 
Boring  a  little  auger-hole  in  fear, 
Peeped — but  his  eyes,  before  they  had  their  will, 
Were  shrivelled  into  darkness  in  his  head. 
And  dropped  before  him.     So  the  Powers,  who  wait 
On  noble  deeds,  cancelled  a  sense  misused; 
And  she,  that  knew  not,  passed;  and  all  at  once. 
With  twelve  great  shocks  of  sound,  the  shameless  noon 
Was  clashed  and  hammered  from  a  hundred  towers. 
One  after  one;  but  even  then  she  gained 
Her  bower;  whence  reissuing,  robed  and  crowned. 
To  meet  her  lord,  she  took  the  tax  away 
And  built  herself  an  everlasting  name. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809- 189 2] 

DOVER  BEACH 

The  sea  is  calm  to-night. 

The  tide  is  full,  the  moon  lies  fair 

Upon  the  straits; — on  the  French  coast  the  light 

Gleams  and  is  gone;  the  clifJs  of  England  stand. 

Glimmering  and  vast,  out  in  the  tranquil  bay. 

Come  to  the  window,  sweet  is  the  night-air! 

Only,  from  the  long  line  of  spray 

Where  the  sea  meets  the  moon-blanched  land, 

Listen!  you  hear  the  grating  roar 

Of  pebbles  which  the  waves  draw  back,  and  fling, 

At  their  return,  up  the  high  strand, 

Begin,  and  cease,  and  then  again  begin, 

With  tremulous  cadence  slow,  and  bring 

The  etemo.l  note  of  sadness  in. 


-59^  Poems  of  Places 

Sophocles  long  ago 

Heard  it  on  the  ^gean,  and  it  brought 

Into  his  mind  the  turbid  ebb  and  flow 

Of  human  misery;  we 

Find  also  in  the  sound  a  thought, 

Hearing  it  by  this  distant  northern  sea. 

The  sea  of  faith 

Was  once,  too,  at  the  full,  and  round  earth's  shore 

Lay  like  the  folds  of  a  bright  girdle  furled. 

But  now  I  only  hear 

Its  melancholy,  long,  withdrawing  roar, 

Retreating,  to  the  breath 

Of  the  night-wind,  down  the  vast  edges  drear 

And  naked  shingles  of  the  world. 

Ah,  love,  let  us  be  true 

To  one  another!  for  the  world,  which  seems 

To  lie  before  us  like  a  land  of  dreams. 

So  various,  so  beautiful,  so  new, 

Hath  really  neither  joy,  nor  love,  nor  light, 

Nor  certitude,  nor  peace,  nor  help  for  pain; 

And  we  are  here  as  on  a  darkling  plain 

Swept  with  confused  alarms  of  struggle  and  flight. 

Where  ignorant  armies  clash  by  night. 

Mallhew  Arnold  [1822-188 


ST.   MICHAEL'S  MOUNT 

St.  Michael's  Mount,  the  tidal  isle, 

In  May  with  daffodils  and  lilies 
Is  kirtlcd  gorgeously  a  while 

As  ne'er  another  Enghsh  hill  is: 
About  the  precipices  cling 
The  rich  renascence  robes  of  Spring. 

Her  gold  and  silver,  nature's  gifts. 

The  prodigal  with  both  hands  showers; 

O  not  in  patches,  not  in  drifts 

But  round  and  round  a  mount  of  flowers-jf  1 


A  Song  of  Fleet  Street  2597 

Of  lilies  and  of  daffodils,  '^'^  ' '-  '^^^  ^^'-^^"^ 

The  envy  of  all  other  hills.  ' ' 

And  on  the  lofty  summit  looms  nifw 

The  castle:  None  could  build  or  plan  it. 

The  four-square  foliage  springs  and  blooms, 
The  piled  elaborate  flower  of  granite, 

That  not  the  sun  can  wither;  no, 

Nor  any  tempest  overthrow. 

John  Davidson  [1857-1009] 


SONNET  ' 

COMPOSED  UPON   WESTMINSTER   BRIDGE,  SEPTEMBER  3,   l8o2 

Earth  has  not  anything  to  show  more  fair: 
Dull  would  he  be  of  soul  who  could  pass  by 
A  sight  so  touching  in  its  majesty: 
This  City  now  doth,  like  a  garment,  wear 
The  beauty  of  the  morning;  silent,  bare. 
Ships,  towers,  domes,  theaters,  and  temples  He 
Open  unto  the  fields,  and  to  the  sky; 
All  bright  and  gUttering  in  the  smokeless  air. 
Never  did  sun  more  beautifully  steep 
In  his  first  splendor,  valley,  rock,  or  hill; 
Ne'er  saw  I,  never  felt,  a  calm  so  deep! 
The  river  glideth  at  his  own  sweet  will: 
Dear  God!  the  very  houses  seem  asleep; 
And  all  that  mighty  heart  is  lying  still! 

William  WorJuvort/i  [1770-1850] 


A  SONG  OF   FLEET   STREET 

Fleet  Street!  Fleet  Street!  Fleet  Street  in  the  morning, 
With   the  old    sun    laughing   out    behind   the  dome  of 
Paul's, 
Heavy  wains  a-driving,  merry  winds  a-striving. 

White  clouds   and    blue   sky   above  the  smoke-stained 
walls. 


2598  Poems  of  Places 

Fleet  Street!  Fleet  Street!  Fleet  Street  in  the  noontide, 
East  and  west  the  streets  packed  close,  and  roaring  like  the 
sea; 
With  laughter  and  with  sobbing  we  feel  the  world's  heart 
throbbing, 
And  know  that  what  is  throbbing  is  the  heart  of  you  and 
me. 

Fleet  Street!  Fleet  Street!  Fleet  Street  in  the  evening, 

Darkness  set  with  golden  lamps  down  Ludgate  Hill  a-row: 

Oh !  hark  the  voice  o'  th'  city  that  breaks  our  hearts  with  pity, 
That  crazes  us  with  shame  and  wrath,  and  makes  us  love 
her  so. 

Fleet  Street!  Fleet  Street!  morning,  noon,  and  starlight. 
Through  the  never-ceasing  roar  come  the  great  chimes 
clear  and  slow;  u.  Mm  cbn  hi^^^.i 

"  Good  are  hfe  and  laughter,  though  We  look 'tiefot^^aiid  after, 
And  good  to  love  the  race  of  men  a  little  ere  we  go." 

Alice  Werner  [1859- 

SONG 

Closes  and  courts  and  lanes. 

Devious,  clustered  thick. 
The  thoroughfare,  mains  and  drains, 

People  and  mortar  and  brick. 
Wood,  metal,  machinery,  brains. 
Pen  and  composing  stick: 
Fleet  Street,  but  exquisite  flame 

In  the  nebula  once  ere  day  and  night 
Began  their  travail,  or  earth  became, 
And  all  was  passionate  light. 

Networks  of  wire  overland,  ^  I 

Conduits  under  the  sea. 
Aerial  message  from  strand  to  strand 
By  lightning  that  travels  free, 
|-,,^^i ;.+■>.-'.  Hither  in  haste  to  hand 
Tidings  of  destiny, 


St.  James's  Street  ^599 

These  tingling  nerves  of  the  world's  affairs 
Deliver  remorseless,  rendering  still 

The  fall  of  empires,  the  price  of  shares, 
The  record  of  good  and  ill. 

Tidal  the  traffic  goes 

Citywards  out  of  the  town; 
Townwards  the  evening  ebb  o'erflows 

This  highway  of  old  renown. 
When  the  fog-woven  curtains  close, 
And  the  urban  night  comes  down. 

Where  souls  are  spilt  and  intellects  spent 

O'er  news  vociferant  near  and  far, 
From  Hesperus  hard  to  the  Orient, 
From  dawn  to  the  evening  star. 

This  is  the  royal  refrain 

That  burdens  the  boom  and  the  thud 
Of  omnibus,  mobus,  wain. 

And  the  hoofs  on  the  beaten  mud, 
From  the  Griffin  at  Chancery  Lane 
To  the  portal  of  old  King  Lud — 
Fleet  Street,  diligent  night  and  day. 

Of  news  of  the  mart  and  the  burnished  hearth, 
Seven  hundred  paces  of  narrow  way, 
A  notable  bit  of  the  earth. 

John  Davidson  [185  7- 1909] 


ST.   JAMES'S  STREET 

St.  James's  Street,  of  classic  fame, 

For  Fashion  still  is  seen  there: 
St.  James's  Street?    I  know  the  name, 

I  almost  think  I've  been  there! 
Why,  that's  where  Sacharissa  sighed 

When  Waller  read  his  ditty; 
Where  Byron  lived,  and  Gibbon  died, 

And  Alvanley  was  witty. 


26oo  Poems  of  Places 

A  famous  Street!    To  yonder  Park 

Young  Churchill  stole  in  class-time; 
Come,  gaze  on  fifty  men  of  mark, 

And  then  recall  the  past  time. 
The  plats  at  White's,  the  play  at  Crock's^ 

The  bumpers  to  Miss  Gunning; 
The  bonhomie  of  Charley  Fox, 

And  Selvvyn's  ghastly  funning. 

The  dear  old  Street  of  clubs  and  cribs, 

As  north  and  south  it  stretches, 
Still  seems  to  smack  of  Rolliad  squibs, 

And  Gillray's  fiercer  sketches; 
The  quaint  old  dress,  the  grand  old  style, 

The  mots,  the  racy  stories; 
The  wine,  the  dice,  the  wit,  the  bile — 

The  hate  of  Whigs  and  Tories. 

At  dusk,  when  I  am  strolling  there, 

Dim  forms  will  rise  around  me; 
Lepel  flits  past  me  in  her  chair. 

And  Congreve's  airs  astound  me! 
And  once  Nell  Gwynne,  a  frail  young  Sprite, 

Looked  kindly  when  I  met  her; 
I  shook  my  head,  perhaps, — but  quite 

Forgot  to  quite  forget  her. 

The  Street  is  still  a  lively  tomb 

For  rich,  and  gay,  and  clever; 
The  crops  of  dandies  bud  and  bloom, 

And  die  as  fast  as  ever. 
Now  gilded  youth  loves  cutty  pipes, 

And  slang  that's  rather  scaring; 
It  can't  approach  its  prototypes 

In  taste,  or  tone,  or  bearing. 

In  Brummell's  day  of  buckle  shoes, 
Lawn  cravats,  and  roll  collars. 

They'd  fight,  and  woo,  and  bet — and  lose. 
Like  gentlemen  and  scholars: 


The  South   Country  2601 

I'm  glad  young  men  should  go  the  pace, 
I  half  forgive  Old  Rapid!  . 

These  louts  disgrace  their  name  and  race — 
So  vicious  and  so  vapid! 

Worse  times  may  come.    Boii  ton,  indeed, 

Will  then  be  quite  forgotten, 
And  all  we  much  revere  will  speed 

From  ripe  to  worse  than  rotten : 
Let  grass  then  sprout  between  yon  stones, 

And  owls  then  roost  at  Boodle's, 
For  Echo  will  hurl  back  the  tones 

Of  screaming  Yankee  Doodles. 

I  love  the  haunts  of  old  Cockaigne, 

Where  wit  and  wealth  were  squandered; 
The  halls  that  tell  of  hoop  and  train, 

Where  grace  and  rank  have  wandered; 
Those  halls  where  ladies  fair  and  leal 

First  ventured  to  adore  me ! 
Something  of  that  old  love  I  feel 

For  this  old  Street  before  me. 

Frederick  Locker-Lam pson  [1821-1895] 


THE  SOUTH  COUNTRY 

When  I  am  living  in  the  Midlands 

That  are  sodden  and  unkind, 
I  light  my  lamp  in  the  evening: 

My  work  is  left  behind; 
And  the  great  hills  of  the  South  Country 

Come  back  into  my  mind. 

The  great  hills  of  the  South  Country 

They  stand  along  the  sea; 
And  it's  there  walking  in  the  high  woods 

That  I  could  wish  to  be, 
And  the  men  that  were  boys  when  I  was  a  boy 

Walking  along  with  me. 


26o2  Poems  of  Places 

The  men  that  hve  in  North  England       I 

I  saw  them  for  a  day: 
Their  hearts  are  set  upon  the  waste  fells, 

Their  skies  are  fast  and  gray; 
From  their  castle-walls  a  man  may  see 

The  mountains  far  away. 

The  men  that  live  in  West  England 

They  see  the  Severn  strong, 
A-rolling  on  rough  water  brown 

Light  aspen  leaves  along. 
They  have  the  secret  of  the  Rocks, 

And  the  oldest  kind  of  song. 

But  the  men  that  live  in  the  South  Country 

Are  the  kindest  and  most  wise, 
They  get  their  laughter  from  the  loud  surf, 

And  the  faith  in  their  happy  eyes 
Comes  surely  from  our  Sister  the  Spring 

When  over  the  sea  she  flies; 
The  violets  suddenly  bloom  at  her  feet, 

She  blesses  us  with  surprise. 

I  never  get  between  the  pines 

But  I  smell  the  Sussex  air; 
Nor  I  never  come  on  a  belt  of  sand 

But  my  home  is  there. 
And  along  the  sky  the  line  of  the  Downs  ^ ,  ■ 

So  noble  and  so  bare.  i  . 

A  lost  thing  could  I  never  find. 

Nor  a  broken  thing  mend: 
And  I  fear  I  shall  be  all  alone 

When  I  get  towards  the  end. 
Who  will  there  be  to  comfort  me 

Or  who  will  be  my  friend? 

I  will  gather  and  carefully  make  my  friends 
Of  the  men  of  the  Sussex  Weald, 

They  watch  the  stars  from  silent  folds. 
They  stiffly  plough  the  field 


Edinburgh  2603 

By  them  and  the  God  of  the  South  Country 
My  poor  soul  shall  be  healed. 

If  I  ever  become  a  rich  man, 

Or  if  ever  I  grow  to  be  old, 
I  will  build  a  house  with  deep  thatch 

To  shelter  me  from  the  cold, 
And  there  shall  the  Sussex  songs  be  sung 

And  the  story  of  Sussex  told. 

I  will  hold  my  house  in  the  high  wood  '^ 

Within  a  walk  of  the  sea, 
And  the  men  that  were  boys  when  I  was  a  boy 

Shall  sit  and  drink  with  me. 

Ililaire  Belloc  [1870- 


EDINBURGH 

City  of  mist  and  rain  and  blown  gray  spaces,  i. 

Dashed  with  wild  wet  color  and  gleam  of  tears, 
Dreaming  in  Holyrood  halls  of  the  passionate  faces 

Lifted  to  one  Queen's  face  that  has  conquered  the  years, 
Are  not  the  halls  of  thy  memory  haunted  places? 

Cometh  there  not  as  a  moon  (where  the  blood-rust  sears 
Floors  a-flutter  of  old  with  silks  and  laces) ,  ;      1  ■ 

Gliding,  a  ghostly  Queen,  through  a  mist  of  tears?,, 

Proudly  here,  with  a  loftier  pinnacled  splendor, 

Throned  in  his  northern  Athens,  what  spells  remain     ^ 
Still  on  the  marble  lips  of  the  Wizard,  and  render  .  y- 

Silent  the  gazer  on  glory  without  a  stain!  j 

Here  and  here,  do  we  whisper,  with  hearts  more  tender, 

Tusitala  wandered  through  mist  and  rain; 
Rainbow-eyed  and  frail  and  gallant  and  slender. 

Dreaming  of  pirate-isles  in  a  jewelled  main. 

Up  the  Cannongate  clirabeth,  cleft  asunder  f 

Raggedly  here,  with  a  glimpse  of  the  distant  sea  [ 

Plashed  through  a  crumbhng  alley,  a  glimpse  of  wonder, 
Nay,  for  the  City  is  throned  on  Eternity! 


2604  Poems  of  Places 

Hark!  from  the  soaring  castle  a  cannon's  thunder 
Closes  an  hour  for  the  world  and  an  aeon  for  me, 

Gazing  at  last  from  the  martial  heights  whereunder 
Deathless  memories  roll  to  an  ageless  sea. 

Alfred  Noyes  [1880- 

CORRYMEELA 

Over  here  in  England  I'm  helpin'  wi'  the  hay, 
An'  I  wisht  I  was  in  Ireland  the  livelong  day; 
Weary  on  the  English  hay,  an'  sorra  take  the  wheat! 
Och!    Corrymeela  an''  the  blue  sky  over  it. 

There's  a  deep  dumb  river  flowin'  by  beyont  the  heavy  trees. 
This  livin'  air  is  moithered  wi'  the  hummin'  o'  the  bees; 
I  wisht  I'd  hear  the  Claddagh  burn  go  runnin'  through  the 
heat 
Past  Corrymeela,  wi'  the  blue  sky  over  it. 

The  people  that's  in  England  is  richer  nor  the  Jews, 
There's  not  the  smallest  young  gosoon  but  thravels  in  his 

shoes! 
I'd  give  the  pipe  between  me  teeth  to  see  a  barefut  child,  . 
Och!    Corrymeela  an'  the  low  south  wind. 

Here's  hands  so  full  o'  money  an'  hearts  so  full  o'  care, 
By  the  luck  o'  love!    I'd  still  go  light  for  all  I  did  go  bare. 
"God  save  ye,  colleen  dhas,"  I  said:  the  girl  she  thought  me 
wild. 
Far  Corrymeela,  an'  the  low  south  wind.  , 

D'ye  mind  me  now,  the  song  at  night  is  mortail  hard  to  raise, 
The  girls  are  heavy  goin'  here,  the  boys  are  ill  to  plase;     '  ■ 
When  one'st  I'm  out  this  workin'  hive,  'tis  I'll  be  back 
again — ■ 
Ay,  Corrymeela,  in  the  same  soft  rain. 

The  puff  o'  smoke  from  one  ould  roof  before  an  English 

town! 
For  a  shaugh  wid  Andy  Feelan  here  I'd  give  a  silver  crown. 
For  a  curl  o'  hair  like  MoUie's  ye'U  ask  the  like  in  vain. 
Sweet  Corrymeela,  an'  the  same  soft  rain.  !'T 

Moira  O'Neill  I18     '    1' 


A  Song  of  Glenann  2605 


THE  LITTLE  WAVES  OF  BREFFNY 

The  grand  road  from  the  mountain  goes  shining  to  the  sea, 
And  there  is  traffic  in  it,  and  many  a  horse  and  cart; 

But  the  Httle  roads  of  Cloonagh  are  dearer  far  to  me, 
And  the  little  roads  of  Cloonagh  go  rambling  through  my 
heart. 

A  great  storm  from  the  ocean  goes  shouting  o'er  the  hill, 
And  there  is  glory  in  it,  and  terror  on  the  wind; 

But  the  haunted  air  of  twilight  is  very  strange  and  still, 
And  the  httle  winds  of  twilight  are  dearer  to  my  mind. 

The  great  waves  of  the  Atlantic  sweep  storming  on  their 
way, 
Shining  green  and  silver  with  the  hidden  herring  shoal; 
But  the  little  waves  of  Breffny  have  drenched  my  heart  in 
spray, 
And  the  little  waves  of  Breffny  go  stumbling  through  my 
soul.  Eva  Gore-Booth  [18 

A  SONG  OF  GLENANN 

OcH,  when  we  lived  in  ould  Glenann 

Meself  could  lift  a  song! 
An'  ne'er  an  hour  by  day  or  dark 

Would  I  be  thinkin'  long. 

The  weary  wind  might  take  the  roof, 

The  rain  might  lay  the  corn; 
We'd  up  an'  look  for  betther  luck 

About  the  morrow's  morn. 

But  since  we  come  away  from  there 

An'  far  across  the  say, 
I  still  have  wrought,  an'  still  have  thought 

The  way  I'm  doin'  the  day. 

An'  now  we're  quarely  betther  fixed. 

In  troth!  there's  nothin'  wrong: 
But  me  an'  mine,  by  rain  an'  shine 

We  do  be  thinkin'  long. 

Moira  O'Neill  [i8     - 


26o6  Poems  of  Places 


THE  MAIDEN  CITY 

Where  Foyle  his  swelling  waters  rolls  northward  to  the 

main, 
Here,  Queen  of  Erin's  daughters,  fair  Derry  fixed  her  reign. 
A  holy  temple  crowned  her,  and  commerce  graced  her  street, 
A  rampart  wall  was  round  her,  the  river  at  her  feet; 
And  here  she  sat  alone,  boys,  and  looking  from  the  hill 
Vowed  The  Maiden  on  her  throne,  boys,  would  be  a  n^aiden 

still.  ,,    ;, 

From  Antrim  crossing  over  in  famous  eighty-eight 
A  plumed  and  belted  lover  came  to  the  Ferry  gate: 
She  summoned  to  defend  her  our  sires — a  beardless  race — 
Who  shouted  No  Surrender!  and  slammed  it  in  his  face. 
Then  in  a  quiet  tone,  boys,  they  told  him  'twas  their  will 
That  The  Maiden  on  her  throne,  boys,  should  be  a  maiden 
still. 

Next,  crushing  all  before  him,  a  kingly  wooer  came 
(The  royal  banner  o'er  him  blushed  crimson  deep  for  shame) ; 
He  showed  the  Pope's  commission,  nor  dreamed  to  be  re- 
fused. 
She  pitied  his  condition,  but  begged  to  stand  excused. 
In  short,  the  fact  is  known,  boys,  she  chased  him  from  the  hill, 
For  The  Maiden  on  her  throne,  boys,  would  be  a  maiden  still. 

On  our  brave  sires  descending,  'twas  then  the  tempest  broke. 
Their  peaceful  dweUings  rending,  'mid  blood  and  flame  and 

smoke. 
That  hallowed  graveyard  yonder  swells  with  the  slaughtered 

dead  — 
Oh!  brothers!  pause  and  ponder,  it  was  for  us  they  bled; 
And  while  their  gift  we  own,  boys — the  fane  that  tops  our 

hill. 
Oh,  The  Maiden  on  her  throne,  boys,  shall  be  a  maiden  still. 

Nor  wily  tongue  shall  move  us,  nor  tyrant  arm  affright. 
We'll  look  to  One  above  us  Who  ne'er  forsook  the  right; 
Who  will,  may  crouch  and  tender  the  birthright  of  the  free, 
But,  brothers.  No  Surrender,  no  compromise  for  me! 


Sweet   Innisfallen  2607 

We  want  no  barrier  stone,  boys,  no  gates  to  guard  the  hill, 
Yet  The  Maiden  on  her  throne,  boys,  shall  be  a  maiden  still. 
Charlotte  Elizabeth  Tonna  [1790-1846J 

THE  DEAD  AT  CLONMACNOIS 

In  a  quiet  watered  land,  a  land  of  roses, 

Stands  Saint  Kieran's  city  fair; 
And  the  warriors  of  Erin  in  their  famous  generations 

Slumber  there. 

There  beneath  the  dewy  hillside  sleep  the  noblest 

Of  the  clan  of  Conn, 
Each  below  his  stone  with  name  in  branching  Ogham 

And  the  sacred  knot  thereon. 

There  they  laid  to  rest  the  seven  Kings  of  Tara, 

There  the  sons  of  Cairbre  sleep — 
Battle-banners  of  the  Gael  that  in  Kieran's  plain  of  crosses 

Now  their  final  hosting  ls:eep. 

And  in  Clonmacnois  they  laid  the  men  of  Teffia, 

And  right  many  a  lord  of  Breagh; 
Deep  the  sod  above  Clan  Creide  and  Clan  Conaill, 

Kind  in  hall  and  fierce  in  fray. 

Many  and  many  a  son  of  Conn  the  Hundred-Fighter 

In  the  red  earth  lies  at  rest; 
Many  a  blue  eye  of  Clan  Colman  the  turf  covers, 

Many  a  swan-white  breast. 

Thomas  William  Rolleslon  [1857- 

SWEET  INNISFALLEN 

Sweet  Innisfallen,  fare  thee  well. 
May  calm  and  sunshine  long  be  thine! 
How  fair  thou  art  let  others  tell, — 
To  feel  how  fair  shall  long  be  mine. 


sldrf 


Sweet  Innisfallen,  long  shall  dwell 
In  memory's  dream  that  sunny  smile, 
Which  o'er  thee  on  that  evening  fell, 
When  first  I  saw  thy  fairy  isle. 


26o8  Poems  of  Places 

'Twas  light,  indeed,  too  blest  for  one, 
Who  had  to  turn  to  paths  of  care — 
Through  crowded  haunts  again  to  run. 
And  leave  thee  bright  and  silent  there; 

No  more  unto  thy  shores  to  come. 
But,  on  the  world's  rude  ocean  tossed, 
Dream  of  thee  sometimes,  as  a  home 
Of  sunshine  he  had  seen  and  lost. 

Far  better  in  thy  weeping  hours 
To  part  from  thee,  as  I  do  now. 
When  mist  is  o'er  thy  blooming  bowers, 
Like  sorrow's  veil  on  beauty's  brow. 

For,  though  unrivalled  still  thy  grace, 
Thou  dost  not  look,  as  then,  too  blest. 
But  thus  in  shadow  seem'st  a  place 
Where  erring  m.an  might  hope  to  rest. — 

Might  hope  to  rest,  and  find  in  thee 
A  gloom  like  .Eden's,  on  the  day 
He  left  its  shade,  when  every  tree. 
Like  thine,  hung  weeping  o'er  his  way. 

Weeping  or  smihng,  lovely  isle! 
And  all  the  lovelier  for  thy  tears, 
For  though  but  rare  thy  sunny  smile, 
'Tis  heaven's  own  glance  when  it  appears. 

Like  feeling  hearts,  whose  joys  are  few. 
But,  when  indeed  they  come,  divine — 
The  brightest  Hght  the  sun  e'er  threw 
Is  lifeless  to  one  gleam  of  thine! 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 

"AH,   SWEET  IS  TIPPERARY" 

Ah,  sweet  is  Tipperary  in  the  springtime  of  the  year. 
When  the  hawthorn's  whiter  than  the  snow, 

When  the  feathered  folk  assemble  and  the  air  is  all  a-tremble 
With  their  singing  and  their  winging  to  and  fro; 


The  Groves  of  Blarney  2609 

When  queenly  Slievenamon  puts  her  verdant  vesture  on, 
And  smiles  to  hear  the  news  the  breezes  bring; 

When  the  sun  begins  to  glance  on  the  rivulets  that  dance — 
Ah,  sweet  is  Tipperary  in  the  spring! 

Ah,  sweet  is  Tipperary  in  the  springtime  of  the  year. 

When  the  mists  are  rising  from  the  lea, 
When  the  Golden  Vale  is  smiling  with  a  beauty  all  beguiling. 

And  the  Suir  goes  crooning  to  the  sea; 
When  the  shadows  and  the  showers  only  multiply  the  flowers 

That  the  lavish  hand  of  May  will  fling; 
When  in  unfrequented  ways,  fairy  music  softly  plays — 

Ah,  sweet  is  Tipperary  in  the  spring! 

Ah,  sweet  is  Tipperary  in  the  springtime  of  the  year. 

When  life  like  the  year  is  young, 
When  the  soul  is  just  awaking  like  a  lily  blossom  breaking, 

And  love  words  linger  on  the  tongue; 
When  the  blue  of  Irish  skies  is  the  hue  of  Irish  eyes. 

And  love-dreams  cluster  and  cling 
Round  the  heart  and  round  the  brain,  half  of  pleasure,  half 
of  pain — 

Ah,  sweet  is  Tipperary  in  the  spring! 

Denis  Aloysiiis  McCarthy  [1871- 


THE   GROVES  OF  BLARNEY 

The  groves  of  Blarney  they  look  so  charming, 

Down  by  the  purHng  of  sweet,  silent  brooks. 
All  decked  with  posies,  that  spontaneous  grow  there 

Planted  in  order  in  the  rocky  nooks. 
'Tis  there  the  daisy,  and  the  sweet  carnation, 

The  blooming  pink,  and  the  rose  so  fair; 
Likewise  the  lily,  and  the  daffodilly — 

All  flowers  that  scent  the  sweet,  fragrant  air. 

'Tis  Lady  Jeffers  owns  this  plantation, 

Like  Alexander,  or  like  Helen  fair; 
There's  no  commander  in  all  the  nation 

For  regulation  can  with  her  compare. 


25 lo  Poems  of  Places 

Such  walls  surround  her,  that  no  nine-pounder 
Could  ever  plunder  her  place  of  strength; 

But  Oliver  Cromwell,  he  did  her  pommel, 
And  made  a  breach  in  her  battlement. 

There's  gravel  walks  there  for  speculation 

And  conversation,  in  sweet  solitude; 
'Tis  there  the  lover  may  hear  the  dove,  or 

The  gentle  plover,  in  the  afternoon. 
And  if  a  lady  should  be  so  engaging 

As  to  walk  alone  in  those  shady  bowers, 
'Tis  there  her  courtier,  he  may  transport  her 

Into  some  fort,  or  all  under  ground. 

For  'tis  there's  a  cave  where  no  daylight  enters, 

But  cats  and  badgers  are  forever  bred; 
Being  mossed  by  nature  which  makes  it  sweeter 

Than  a  coach-and-six,  or  a  feather  bed. 
'Tis  there  the  lake  is,  well-stored  with  perches, 

And  comely  eels  in  the  verdant  mud; 
Besides  the  leeches,  and  the  groves  of  beeches, 

All  standing  in  order  for  to  guard  the  flood. 

There's  statues  gracing  this  noble  place  in, 

All  heathen  gods  and  nymphs  so  fair: 
Bold  Neptune,  Plutarch,  and  Nicodemus, 

All  standing  naked  in  the  open  air. 
So  now  to  finish  this  brave  narration. 

Which  my  poor  genii  could  not  entwine; 
But  were  I  Homer  or  Nebuchadnezzar, 
,  'Tis  in  every  feature  I  would  make  it  shine. 

Richard  Alfred  MiUikin  [1767-1815] 

THE  BELLS  OF   SHANDON 

Sabbata  pango; 
Funera  plango; 
Solemnia  clango. 

Inscription  on  an  old  bell 

With  deep  affection  and  recollection 

I  often  think  of  the  Shandon  bells, 

Whose  sounds  so  wild  would,  in  the  days  of  childhood, 

Fling  round  my  cradle  their  magic  spells. 


"  De  Gustibus — "  261 1 

On  this  I  ponder  where'er  I  wander, 

And  thus  grow  fonder,  Sweet  Cork,  of  thee, — 

With  thy  bells  of  Shandon, 

That  sound  so  grand  on 
The  pleasant  waters  of  the  river  Lee. 

I've  heard  bells  chiming  full  many  a  clime  in, 
Tolling  sublime  in  cathedral  shrine, 
While  at  a  glib  rate  brass  tongues  would  vibrate; 
But  all  their  music  spoke  naught  to  thine. 
For  memory,  dwelling  on  each  proud  swelling 
Of  thy  belfry,  knelling  its  bold  notes  free, 

Made  the  bells  of  Shandon 

Sound  far  more  grand  on 
The  pleasant  waters  of  the  river  Lee. 

I've  heard  bells  tolling  "Old  Adrian's  Mole"  in, 

Their  thunder  rolling  from  the  Vatican, — • 

And  cymbals  glorious,  swinging  uproarious 

In  the  gorgeous  turrets  of  Notre  Dame; 

But  thy  sounds  were  sweeter  than  the  dome  of  Peter 

Flings  o'er  the  Tiber,  pealing  solemnly. 

O,  the  bells  of  Shandon 

Sound  far  more  grand  on 
The  pleasant  waters  of  the  river  Lee. 

There's  a  bell  in  Moscow,  while  on  tower  and  Kiosko 

In  St.  Sophia  the  Turkman  gets. 

And  loud  in  air,  calls  men  to  prayer, 

From  the  tapering  summit  of  tall  minarets. 

Such  empty  phantom  I  freely  grant  them; 

But  there's  an  anthem  more  dear  to  me, — 

'Tis  the  bells  of  Shandon, 

That  sound  so  grand  on 
The  pleasant  waters  of  the  river  Lee. 

Francis  Sylvester  Mahoity  [1804-1866] 

"DE   GUSTIBUS—" 

Your  ghost  will  walk,  you  lover  of  trees, 
(If  our  loves  remain) 
In  an  English  lane. 


26 1 2  Poems  of  Places 

By  a  corniield-side  a-flutter  with  poppies^ 
Hark,  those  two  in  the  hazel  coppice — 
A  boy  and  a  girl,  if  the  good  fates  please, 

Making  love,  say, — 

The  happier  they! 
Draw  yourself  up  from  the  Hght  of  the  moon 
And  let  them  pass,  as  they  will  too  soon, 

With  the  bcanflowers'  boon, 

And  the  blarkbird's  tunc. 

And  May,  and  June! 

What  I  love  best  in  all  the  world 

Is  a  castle,  precipice-encurled, 

In  a  gash  of  the  wind -grieved  Apennine. 

Or  look  for  me,  old  fellow  of  mine, 

(If  I  get  my  head  from  out  the  mouth 

O'  the  grave,  and  loose  my  spirit's  bands, 

And  come  again  to  the  land  of  lands) — 

In  a  sea-side  house  to  the  farther  South, 

Where  the  baked  cicala  dies  of  drouth. 

And  one  sharp  tree — 'tis  a  cypress — stands, 

By  the  many  hundred  years  red-rusted. 

Rough  iron-spiked,  ripe  fruit-o'ercrusted. 

My  sentinel  to  guard  the  sands 

To  the  water's  edge.     For,  what  expands 

Before  the  house,  but  the  great  opaque 

Blue  breadth  of  sea  without  a  break? 

While,  in  the  house,  forever  crumbles 

Some  fragment  of  the  frescoed  walls, 

From,  blisters  where  a  scorpion  sprawls. 

A  girl  bare-footed  brings,  and  tumbles 

Down  on  the  pavement,  green-flesh  melons, 

And  says  there's  news  to-day — the  king 

Was  shot  at,  touched  in  the  liver- wing. 

Goes  with  his  Bourbon  arm  in  a  sling: 

— She  hopes  they  have  not  caught  the  felons 

Italy,  my  Italy! 

Queen  Mary's  saying  serves  for  me — 

(When  fortune's  malice 

Lost  her  Calais) 


Jtalian   Rhapsody  2613 

Open  my  heart  and  you  will  see 
Graved  inside  of  it,  "Italy." 
Such  lovers  old  are  I  and  she: 
So  it  always  was,  so  shall  ever  be! 

Robert  Brownins  [1812-1889] 


ITALIAN  RHAPSODY 

Dear  Italy!     The  sound  of  thy  soft  name 
Soothes  me  with  balm  of  Memory  and  Hope. 
Mine,  for  the  moment,  height  and  sweep  and  slope 
That  once  were  mine.     Supreme  is  still  the  aim 
To  flee  the  cold  and  gray 
Of  our  December  day. 
And  rest  where  thy  clear  spirit  burns  with  unconsuming 
flame. 

There  are  who  deem  remembered  beauty  best, 

And  thine,  imagined,  fairer  is  than  sight 
Of  all  the  charms  of  other  realms  confessed, 
Thou  miracle  of  sea  and  land  and  light. 
Was  it  lest,  envying  thee, 
The  world  unhappy  be. 
Benignant  Heaven  gave  to  all  the  all-consoling  Night? 

Remembered  beauty  best?     Who  reason  so? 
Not  lovers,  yearning  to  the  same  dumb  star 
That  doth  disdain  their  passion — who,  afar, 
Seek  touch  and  voice  in  velvet  winds  and  low. 
No,  storied  Italy, 
Not  thine  that  heresy, 
Thou  who  thyself  art  fairer  far  than  Fancy  e'er  can  show. 

To  me  thou  art  an  ever-brooding  spell; 
An  old  enchantment,  exorcised  of  wrong; 
A  beacon,  where-against  the  wings  of  Song 
Are  bruised  so,  they  cannot  l^y  to  tell; 
A  mistress,  at  whose  feet 
A  myriad  singers  meet, 
To  find  thy  beauty  the  despair  of  measures  full  and  sweet. 


2614  Poems  of  Places 

Of  old,  ere  caste  or  custom  froze  the  heart, 
What  tales  of  thine  did  Chaucer  re-indite, — 
Of  Constance,  and  Griselda,  and  the  plight 
Of  pure  CecUia, — all  with  joyous  art ! 
Oh,  to  have  journeyed  down 
To  Canterbury  town, 
And  known,  from  lips  that  touched  thy  robe,  that  triad  of 
renown ! 

Fount  of  Romance  whereat  our  Shakespeare  drank! 
Through  him  the  loves  of  all  are  linked  to  thee 
By  Romeo's  ardor,  Juliet's  constancy. 
He  sets  the  peasant  in  the  royal  rank; 
Shows  under  mask  and  paint 
Kinship  of  knave  and  saint. 
And  plays  on  stolid  man  with  Prospero's  wand  and  Ariel's 
prank. 

Another  English  foster-child  hadst  thou 

When  Milton  from  the  breast  of  thy  dehght 
Drew  inspiration.     With  a  vestal's  vow 

He  fed  the  flame  caught  from  thy  sacred  light. 
And  when  upon  him  lay 
The  long  eclipse  of  day. 
Thou  wert  the  memory-hoarded  treasure  of  his  doomed 
sight. 

Name  me  a  poet  who  has  trod  thy  soil: 
He  is  thy  lover,  ever  hastening  back. 
With  thee  forgetting  weariness  and  toil,  » 

The  nightly  sorrow  for  the  daily  lack. 
How  oft  our  lyric  race 
Looked  last  upon  thy  face! 
Oh,  would  that  I  were  worthy  thus  to  die  in  thine  embrace! 

Oh,  to  be  kin  to  Keats  as  urn  with  urn  -,t 

Shares  the  same  Roman  earth! — to  sleep,  apart, 
Near  to  the  bloom  that  once  was  Shelley's  heart, 
Where  bees,  like  lingering  lovers,  re-return; 
Where  the  proud  pyramid. 
To  brighter  glory  bid, 
Gives  Cestius  his  longed-for  fame,  marking  immortal  Art. 


Italian    Rhapsody  2615 

Or,  in  loved  Florence,  to  repose  beside 
Our  trinity  of  singers!     Fame  enough 
To  neighbor  lordly  Landor,  noble  Clough, 
And  her,  our  later  sibyl,  sorrow-eyed. 
Oh,  tell  me — not  their  arts, 
But  their  Italian  hearts 
Won  for  their  dust  that  narrow  oval,  than  the  world  more 
wide ! 

So  might  I  lie  where  Browning  should  have  lain, 

My  "Italy"  for  all  the  world  to  read. 

Like  his  on  the  palazzo.     For  thy  pain 

In  losing  from  thy  rosary  that  bead, 

England  accords  thee  room 

Around  his  minster  tomb — 

A  province  conquered  of  thy  soul,  and  not  an  Arab  slain! 

Then  take  these  lines,  and  add  to  them  the  lay, 

All  inarticulate,  I  to  thee  indite: 
The  sudden  longing  on  the  sunniest  day. 
The  happy  sighing  in  the  stormiest  night, 
The  tears  of  love  that  creep 
From  eyes  unwont  to  weep. 
Full  with  remembrance,  bhnd  with  joy,  and  with  devotion 
deep. 

Absence  from  thee  is  such  as  men  endure 

Between  the  glad  betrothal  and  the  bride; 
Or  like  the  years  that  Youth,  intense  and  sure, 
From  his  ambition  to  his  goal  must  bide. 
And  if  no  more  I  may 
Mount  to  Fiesole  .  .  . 
Oh,  then  were  Memory  meant  for  those  to  whom  is  Hope 
denied. 

Show  me  a  lover  who  hath  drunk  by  night 
Thy  beauty-potion,  as  the  grape  the  dew: 
'Twere  little  wonder  he  were  poet  too. 
With  wine  of  song  in  unexpected  might. 
While  moonlit  cloister  calls 
With  plashy  fountain-falls. 
Or  darkened  Amo  moves  to  music  with  its  mirrored  light. 


a6i6  Poems  of  Places 

Who  can  withstand  thee?     What  distress  or  care 

But  yields  to  Naples,  or  that  long  day-dream 
We  know  as  Venice,  where  alone  more  fair 

Noon  is  than  night;  where  every  lapping  stream 
Wooes  with  a  soft  caress 
Our  new-world  weariness, 
■And  every  ripple  smiles  with  joy  at  sight  of  scene  so  rare. 

The  mystery  of  thy  charm — ah,  who  hath  guessed? 
'Twas  ne'er  divined  by  day  or  shown  in  sleep; 
Yet  sometimes  Music,  floating  from  her  steep, 
Holds  to  our  lips  a  chalice  brimmed  and  blest: 
Then  know  we  that  thou  art 
Of  the  Ideal  part— 
Of  Man's  one  thirst  that  is  not  quenched,  drink  he  howe'er 
so  deep. 

Thou  human-hearted  land,  whose  revels  hold  '  ■' 

Man  in  communion  with  the  antique  days. 
And  summon  him  from  prosy  greed  to  ways 
Where  Youth  is  beckoning  to  the  Age  of  Gold ; 
How  thou  dost  hold  him  near 
And  whisper  in  his  ear 
Of  the  lost  Paradise  that  lies  beyond  the  alluring  haze! 

In  tears  I  tossed  my  coin  from  Trevi's  edge, — 
A  coin  unsordid  as  a  bond  of  love, — • 
And,  with  the  instinct  of  the  homing  dove, 
I  gave  to  Rome  my  rendezvous  and  pledge. 
And  when  imperious  Death 
Has  quenched  my  flame  of  breath, 
Oh,  let  me  join  the  faithful  shades  that  throng  that  fount 
""  above. 

Robert  Underwood  Johnson  [1853- 

ABOVE  SALERNO 

Silvery  the  olives  on  Ravello's  steeps, 

Terraced  the  verdure  of  her  nurtured  hills; 
Far,  far  below  the  blue  Salerno  sweeps, 
■  ■  And  on  the  shore  her  emerald  largesse  spills. 


Above  Salerno  2617 

Lost  in  the  haze  of  melting  hills  and  skies 
Sad  Psestum's  plain  in  shadowy  distance  lies. 

How  the  Spring  flings  her  tribute  to  the  breeze 
Through  every  slit  in  these  long,  winding  walls! 

Shunning  the  screen  of  flowery  tapestries, 
The  slim  gray  lizard,  turquoise-vested,  crawls — 

Blind  worshipper  of  the  unconscious  sun, 

His  pagan  shrine,  his  splendid  eidolon. 

Here  Scala  lifts  upon  her  furrowed  breast 
Twin  cities  of  the  Hving  and  the  dead. 

Where  toil  the  quick  and  where  the  buried  rest, 
With  Roman  tombs  low  vaulted  overhead: 

In  these  strange  dwelUngs  hfe  must  surely  seem 

To  hold  the  secret  of  its  final  dream. 

The  nectarine,  peach  and  almond  trees  in  flower, 
Play  on  the  hues  from  deep  to  palest  rose. 

Shy  druid  birches  guard  a  secret  bower 
Where  many  a  home-like  English  blossom  blows; 

With  daisy,  primrose,  and  narcissus  shine 

The  lavish  stars  of  Wordsw'orth's  celandine. 

On  rocky,  wave-girt  slopes,  where  buds  the  vine, 
Golden  and  green  the  trellised  orchards  grow. 

Beyond  the  beach's  pale,  receding  line 
Roam  dusky  herds  of  sullen  buffalo. 

The  distant  Apennines'  dark  ranges  wear 

Halos  of  snow  and  amethystine  air.  « 

Can  this  be  Italy,  or  but  a  dream 

Emerging  from  the  broken  waves  of  sleep? 

Since  even  the  rudest  works  of  peasants  seem 
Some  spell  of  ancient  miracles  to  keep: 

As  when  against  old  Barbarossa's  power 

The  Romans  threw  the  grim  rock  of  this  tower. 

More  exquisite  than  our  imagining. 

In  silent  hours  how  often  shall  arise — 
Erom  the  dim  waters  of  that  mystic  spring 

Where  the  soul  keeps  her  anchored  memories — 


a6i8  Poems  of  Places 

This  world  of  beauty,  color,  and  perfume; 
Hoary  with  age,  yet  of  unaging  bloom. 

Ada  Foster  Murray  [i8    - 

VENICE 

From  "  Childe  Harold's  Pilgrimage  " 

I  STOOD  in  Venice  on  the  Bridge  of  Sighs, 
A  palace  and  a  prison  on  each  hand: 
I  saw  from  out  the  wave  her  structures  rise 
As  from  the  stroke  of  the  enchanter's  wand; 
A  thousand  years  their  cloudy  wings  expand 
Around  me,  and  a  dying  Glory  smiles 
O'er  the  far  times,  when  many  a  subject  land 
Looked  to  the  winged  Lion's  marble  piles. 
Where  Venice  sate  in  state,  throned  on  her  hundred  isles! 

She  looks  a  sea  Cybele,  fresh  from  ocean, 
Rising  with  her  tiara  of  proud  towers 
At  airy  distance,  with  majestic  motion. 
And  such  she  was;  her  daughters  had  their  dowers 
From  spoils  of  nations,  and  the  exhaustless  East 
Poured  in  her  lap  all  gems  in  sparkling  showers : 
In  purple  was  she  robed,  and  of  her  feast 
Monarchs  partook,  and  deemed  their  dignity  increased. 

In  Venice  Tasso's  echoes  are  no  more. 
And  silent  rows  the  songless  gondoUer; 
Her  palaces  are  crumbling  to  the  shore, 
And  music  meets  not  always  now  the  ear: 
Those  days  are  gone,  but  Beauty  still  is  here; 
States  fall,  arts  fade,  but  Nature  doth  not  die, 
Nor  yet  forget  how  Venice  once  was  dear, 
The  pleasant  place  of  all  festivity, 
The  revel  of  the  earth,  the  masque  of  Italy! 

But  unto  us  she  hath  a  spell  beyond 
Her  name  is  story,  and  her  long  array 
Of  mighty  shadows,  whose  dim  forms  despond 
Above  the  Dogeless  city's  vanished  sway: 


Extinction  of  the  Venetian   Republic     2619 

r  - 

Ours  is  a  trophy  which  will  not  decay 
With  the  Rialto;  Shylock  and  the  Moor, 
And  Pierre,  cannot  be  swept  or  worn  away, — 
The  keystones  of  the  arch! — though  all  were  o'er, 
For  us  repeopled  were  the  solitary  shore. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [i 788-1 824] 


VENICE 

Venice,  thou  Siren  of  sea-cities,  wrought 
By  mirage,  built  on  water,  stair  o'er  stair, 
Of  sunbeams  and  cloud-shadows,  phantom-fair, 
With  naught  of  earth  to  mar  thy  sea-born  thought! 
Thou  floating  film  upon  the  wonder-fraught 
Ocean  of  dreams!    Thou  hast  no  dream  so  rare 
As  are  thy  sons  and  daughters,  they  who  wear 
Foam-flakes  of  charm  from  thine  enchantment  caught ! 
O  dark  brown  eyes!    0  tangles  of  dark  hair! 
O  heaven-blue  eyes,  blonde  tresses  where  the  breeze 
Plays  over  sun-burned  cheeks  in  sea-blown  air! 
Firm  limbs  of  moulded  bronze !  frank  debonair 
Smiles  of  deep-bosomed  women!     Loves  that  seize 
Man's  soul,  and  waft  her  on  storm-melodies! 

John  Addinglon  Symonds  [i  840-1 893] 


ON  THE  EXTINCTION  OF  THE  VENETIAN 
REPUBLIC 

Once  did  She  hold  the  gorgeous  East  in  fee, 

And  was  the  safeguard  of  the  West;  the  worth 

Of  Venice  did  not  fall  below  her  birth, 

Venice,  the  eldest  child  of  liberty. 

She  was  a  maiden  city,  bright  and  free; 

No  guile  seduced,  no  force  could  violate; 

And,  when  she  took  unto  herself  a  mate, 

She  must  espouse  the  everlasting  Sea. 

And  what  if  she  had  seen  those  glories  fade. 

Those  titles  vanish,  and  that  strength  decay; 


2620  Poems  of  Places 

Yet  shall  some  tribute  of  regret  be  paid 
When  her  long  life  hath  reached  its  final  day:   ry 
Men  are  we,  and  must  grieve  when  even  the  shade 
Of  that  which  once  was  great,  is  passed  away. 

William  Wordsworth  [i 770-1850] 

THE  GUARDIAN-ANGEL 

A  PICTURE  AT  FANO 

Dear  and  great  Angel,  wouldst  thou  only  leave 
That  child,  when  thou  hast  done  with  him,  for  me! 

Let  me  sit  all  the  day  here,  that  when  eve 
Shall  find  performed  thy  special  ministry, 

And  time  come  for  departure,  thou,  suspending 

Thy  flight,  may'st  see  another  child  for  tending, 
Another  still,  to  quiet  and  retrieve. 

Then  I  shall  feel  thee  step  one  step,  no  more. 
From  where  thou  standest  now,  to  where  I  gaze, 

— And  suddenly  my  head  is  covered  o'er 

With  those  wings,  white  above  the  child  who  prays 

Now  on  that  tomb — and  I  shall  feel  thee  guarding 

Me,  out  of  all  the  world;  for  me,  discarding 

Yon  heaven  thy  home,  that  waits  and  opes  its  door. 

I  would  not  look  up  thither  past  thy  head 

Because  the  door  opes,  like  that  child,  I  know, 

For  I  should  have  thy  gracious  face  instead. 
Thou  bird  of  God!    And  wilt  thou  bend  me  low 

Like  him,  and  lay,  like  his,  my  hands  together. 

And  lift  them  up  to  pray,  and  gently  tether 

Me,  as  thy  lamb  there,  with  thy  garment's  spread? 

If  this  was  ever  granted,  I  would  rest 

My  head  beneath  thine,  while  thy  healing  hands 
Close-covered  both  my  eyes  beside  thy  breast. 

Pressing  the  brain,  which  too  much  thought  expands, 
Back  to  its  proper  size  again,  and  smoothing 
Distortion  down  till  every  nerve  had  soothing, 
.     And  all  lay  quiet,  happy  and  suppressed. 


Perugia  2621 

How  soon  all  worldly  wrong  would  be  repaired! 

I  think  how  I  should  view  the  earth  and  skies 
And  sea,  when  once  again  my  brow  was  bared 

After  thy  healing,  with  such  different  eyes. 

0  world,  as  God  has  made  it!    All  is  beauty: 
And  knowing  this,  is  love,  and  love  is  duty. 

What  further  may  be  sought  for  or  declared? 

Guercino  drew  this  angel  I  saw  teach 

(Alfred,  dear  friend!) — that  little  child  to  pray, 

Holding  the  little  hands  up,  each  to  each 

Pressed  gently, — with  his  own  head  turned  away 

Over  the  earth  where  so  much  lay  before  him 

Of  work  to  do,  though  heaven  was  opening  o'er  him, 
And  he  was  left  at  Fano  by  the  beach. 

We  were  at  Fano,  and  three  times  we  went 
To  sit  and  see  him  in  his  chapel  there, 

And  drink  his  beauty  to  our  souls'  content 
—My  angel  with  me  too:  and  since  I  care 

For  dear  Guercino 's  fame  (to  which  in  power 

And  glory  comes  this  picture  for  a  dower. 
Fraught  with  a  pathos  so  magnificent) — 

And  since  he  did  not  work  thus  earnestly 

At  all  times,  and  has  else  endured  some  wrong — 

1  took  one  thought  his  picture  struck  from  me, 
And  spread  it  out,  translating  it  to  song. 

My  love  is  here.    Where  are  you,  dear  old  friend? 
How  rolls  the  Wairoa  at  your  world's  far  end? 
This  is  Ancona,  yonder  is  the  sea. 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1889] 

PERUGIA 

For  the  sake  of  a  weathered  gray  city  set  high  on  a  hill 

To  the  northward  I  go. 

Where  Umbria's  valley  lies  mile  upon  emerald  mile 

Outspread  like  a  chart. 

The  wind  in  her  steep  narrow  streets  is  eternally  chill 

From  the  neighboring  snow, 


2622  Poems   of  Places 

But  linger  who  will  in  the  lure  of  a  southerly  smile, 
Here  is  my  heart. 

Wrought  to  a  mutual  blueness  are  mountains  and  sky; 

Intermingling  they  meet. 

Little  gray  breathings  of  olive  arise  from  the  plain 

Like  sighs  that  are  seen, 

For  man  and  his  maker  harmonious  toil,  and  the  sigh 

Of  such  labor  is  sweet, 

And  the  fruits  of  their  patience  are  vistas  of  vineyards  and 

grain 
In  a  glory  of  green. 

No  wind  from  the  valley  that  passes  the  casement  but  flings 

Invisible  flowers. 

The  carol  of  birds  is  a  gossamer  tissue  of  gold 

On  a  background  of  bells. 

Sweetest  of  all  in  the  silence  the  nightingale  sings 

Through  the  silver-pure  hours, 

Till  the  stars  disappear  like  a  dream  that  may  never  be  told. 

That  the  dawning  dispels. 

Never  so  darkling  an  alley  but  opens  at  last 

On  unlimited  space, 

Each  gate  is  the  frame  of  a  vision  that  stretches  away 

To  the  rims  of  the  sky. 

Never  a  scar  that  was  left  by  the  pitiless  past 

But  has  taken  a  grace 

Like  the  mark  of  a  smile  that  was  turned  upon  children  at 

play 
In  a  summer  gone  by. 

Many  the  tyrants,  my  city,  that  held  thee  in  thrall. 

What  remains  of  them  now? 

Names  whispered  back  from  the  dark  through  a  portal  ajar — 

They  come  not  again. 

By  men  thou  wert  made  and  wert  marred,  but  outlasting 

them  all 
Is  the  soul  that  is  thou — 

A  soul  that  shall  speak  to  my  soul  till  I  too  pass  afar, 
And  perchance,  even  then. 

Amelia  Josephine  Burr  [1878- 


Chorus  2623 


"THERE  IS  A  POOL  ON  GARDA" 

There  is  a  pool  on  Garda, 

'Tis  fashioned  by  the  moon 
That  climbs  above  the  mountain's  crest 

What  time  the  night  birds  croon; 
The  pool  is  paved  with  silver 

Inwrought  with  burnished  gold, 
And  in  its  deeps  a  treasure  sleeps 

The  gobUns  stored  of  old. 

There  is  a  pool  on  Garda, 

It  will  elude  you  still 
Ply  you  the  oar  from  shore  to  shore 

With  howe'er  strong  a  will; 
'TwiU  flee  you  like  a  phantom, 

'Twill  lead  you  on  and  on; 
A  luring  light,  'twill  fade  from  sight 

What  time  the  moon  is  gone. 

There  is  a  pool  on  Garda, 

You'll  see  it  in  your  dreams; 
'Tis  shaped  of  silvery  glamor, 

'Tis  fused  of  golden  beams. 
Once  you  have  caught  the  vision, 

The  fair  elusive  ray, 
'Twill  haunt  your  brain  like  some  sweet  strain 

Forever  and  a  day! 

Clinloii  Scollard  [1S60- 


CHORUS 

From  "  Hellas  " 

The  world's  great  age  begins  anew, 
The  golden  years  return. 

The  earth  doth  like  a  snake  renew 
Her  winter  weeds  outworn: 


2624  Poems  of  Places 

Heaven  smiles,  and  faiths  and  empires  gleam, 
Like  wrecks  of  a  dissolving  dream. 

A  brighter  Hellas  rears  its  mountains 

From  waves  serener  far; 
A  new  Peneus  rolls  his  fountains 

Against  the  morning-star; 
Where  fairer  Tempes  bloom,  there  sleep 
Young  Cyclads  on  a  sunnier  deep. 

A  loftier  Argo  cleaves  the  main. 

Fraught  with  a  later  prize; 
Another  Orpheus  sings  again. 

And  loves,  and  weeps,  and  dies; 
A  new  Ulysses  leaves  once  more 
Calypso  for  his  native  shore. 

0  write  no  more  the  tale  of  Troy, 
If  earth  Death's  scroll  must  be! 

Nor  mix  with  Laian  rage  the  joy 
Which  dawns  upon  the  free, 

Although  a  subtler  Sphinx  renew 

Riddles  of  death  Thebes  never  knew. 

Another  Athens  shall  arise. 

And  to  remoter  time 
Bequeath,  like  sunset  to  the  skies. 

The  splendor  of  its  prime; 
And  leave,  if  naught  so  bright  may  live, 
All  earth  can  take  or  Heaven  can  give. 

Saturn  and  Love  their  long  repose 
Shall  burst,  more  bright  and  good 

Than  all  who  fell,  than  One  who  rose, 
Than  many  unsubdued : 

Not  gold,  not  blood,  their  altar  dowers 

But  votive  tears  and  symbol  flowers. 

O  cease!  must  hate  and  death  return? 

Cease!  must  men  kill  and  die? 
Cease!  drain  not  to  its  dregs  the  urn 

Of  bitter  prophecy! 


The   Isles  of  Greece  2625 

The  world  is  weary  of  the  past — 
O  might  it  die  or  rest  at  last! 

Percy  Bysske  Shelley  [1792-1822] 


THE  ISLES  OF  GREECE 

From  • '  Don  Juan  " 

The  isles  of  Greece!  the  isles  of  Greece! 

Where  burning  Sappho  loved  and  sung, 
Where  grew  the  arts  of  war  and  peace, 

Where  Delos  rose,  and  Phoebus  sprung! 
Eternal  summer  gilds  them  yet. 
But  all,  except  their  sun,  is  set, 

The  Scian  and  the  Teian  muse. 
The  hero's  harp,  the  lover's  lute. 

Have  found  the  fame  your  shores  refuse: 
Their  place  of  birth  alone  is  mute 

To  sounds  which  echo  further  west 

Than  your  sires'  "Islands  of  the  Blest." 

The  mountains  look  on  Marathon — 
And  Marathon  looks  on  the  sea; 

And  musing  there  an  hour  alone, 

I  dreamed  that  Greece  might  still  be  free; 

For  standing  on  the  Persians'  grave, 

I  could  not  deem  myself  a  slave. 

A  king  sate  on  the  rocky  brow 

Which  looks  o'er  sea-born  Salamis; 

And  ships,  by  thousands,  lay  below. 
And  men  in  nations; — all  were  his! 

He  counted  them  at  break  of  day — 

And  when  the  sun  set,  where  were  they? 

And  where  are  they?  and  where  art  thou, 
My  country?    On  thy  voiceless  shore 

The  heroic  lay  is  tuneless  now —  : ' 

The  heroic  bosom  beats  no  more! 

And  must  thy  lyre,  so  long  divine, 

Degenerate  into  hands  like  mine? 


2626  Poems  of  Places  r 

'Tis  something,  in  the  dearth  of  fame, 
Though  Knked  among  a  fettered  race, 

To  feel  at  least  a  patriot's  shame, 
Even  as  I  sing,  suffuse  my  face; 

For  what  is  left  the  poet  here? 

For  Greeks  a  blush — for  Greece  a  tear. 

Must  we  but  weep  o'er  days  more  blest? 

Must  we  but  blush? — Our  fathers  bled. 
Earth!  render  back  from  out  thy  breast  , 

A  remnant  of  our  Spartan  dead ! 
Of  the  three  hundred  grant  but  three. 
To  make  a  new  Thermopylae! 

What,  silent  still?  and  silent  all? 

Ah!  no; — the  voices  of  the  dead 
Sound  like  a  distant  torrent's  fall. 

And  answer,  "Let  one  living  head,  , 
But  one,  arise, — we  come,  we  come!"      r 
'Tis  but  the  living  who  are  dumb. 

In  vain — in  vain:  strike  other  chords; 

Fill  high  the  cup  with  Samian  wine! 
Leave  battles  to  the  Turkish  hordes. 

And  shed  the  blood  of  Scio's  vine! 
Hark!  rising  to  the  ignoble  call — 
How  answers  each  bold  Bacchanal! 

You  have  the  Pyrrhic  dance  as  yet; 

Where  is  the  Pyrrhic  phalanx  gone? 
Of  two  such  lessons,  why  forget 

The  nobler  and  the  manlier  one? 
You  have  the  letters  Cadmus  gave — 
Think  ye  he  meant  them  for  a  slave?    riA 

Fill  high  the  bowl  with  Samian  wine! 

We  will  not  think  of  themes  like  these! 
It  made  Anacreon's  song  divine: 

He  served — but  served  Polycrates — ' 
A  tyrant;  but  our  masters  then  ■  ' ' 

Were  still,  at  least,  our  countrymen. 


The   Belfry  of  Bruges  2627 

The  tyrant  of  the  Chersonese 
Was  freedom's  best  and  bravest  friend; 

That  tyrant  was  Miltiades! 
O  that  the  present  hour  would  lend 

Another  despot  of  the  kind! 

Such  chains  as  his  were  sure  to  bind. 

Fill  high  the  bowl  with  Samian  wine! 

On  Suli's  rock,  and  Parga's  shore, 
Exists  the  remnant  of  a  hne 

Such  as  the  Doric  mothers  bore; 
And  there,  perhaps,  some  seed  is  sown, 
The  Heracleidan  blood  might  own. 

Trust  not  for  freedom  to  the  Franks — 
They  have  a  king  who  buys  and  sells; 

In  native  swords  and  native  ranks 
The  only  hope  of  courage  dwells: 

But  Turkish  force  and  Latin  fraud 

Would  break  your  shield,  however  broad. 

Fill  high  the  bowl  with  Samian  wine! 

Our  virgins  dance  beneath  the  shade — 
I  see  their  glorious  black  eyes  shine; 

But,  gazing  on  each  glowing  maid. 
My  own  the  burning  tear-drop  laves. 
To  think  such  breasts  must  suckle  slaves. 

Place  me  on  Sunium's  marbled  steep, 
Where  nothing,  save  the  waves  and  I, 

May  hear  our  mutual  murmurs  sweep; 
There,  swan-like,  let  me  sing  and  die: 

A  land  of  slaves  shall  ne'er  be  mine — 

Dash  down  yon  cup  of  Samian  wine! 

George  Gordon  Byron  [17S8-1824] 

THE  BELFRY  OF  BRUGES 

CARILLON 

In  the  ancient  town  of  Bruges, 
In  the  quaint  old  Flemish  city, 
As  the  evening  shades  descended, 
Low  and  loud  and  sweetly  blended, 


2628  Poems  of  Places 

Low  at  times  and  loud  at  times, 
And  changing  like  a  poet's  rhymes, 
Rang  the  beautiful  wild  chimes 
From  the  Belfry  in  the  market 
Of  the  ancient  town  of  Bruges. 

Then,  with  deep  sonorous  clangor 
Calmly  answering  their  sweet  anger. 
When  the  wrangUng  bells  had  ended, 
Slowly  struck  the  clock  eleven. 
And,  from  out  the  silent  heaven, 
Silence  on  the  town  descended. 
Silence,  silence  everywhere. 
On  the  earth  and  in  the  air. 
Save  that  footsteps  here  and  there 
Of  some  burgher  home  returning. 
By  the  street  lamps  faintly  burning. 
For  a  moment  woke  the  echoes 
Of  the  ancient  town  of  Bruges. 

But  amid  my  broken  slumbers 
Still  I  heard  those  magic  numbers. 
As  they  loud  proclaimed  the  flight 
And  stolen  marches  of  the  night; 
Till  their  cliimes  in  sweet  collision 
Mingled  with  each  wandering  vision, 
Mingled  with  the  fortune-telling 
Gypsy-bands  of  dreams  and  fancies, 
Which  amid  the  waste  expanses 
Of  the  silent  land  of  trances 
Have  their  solitary  dwelling; 
All  else  seemed  asleep  in  Bruges, 
In  the  quaint  old  Flemish  city. 

And  I  thought  how  like  these  chimes 
Are  the  poet's  airy  rhymes. 
All  his  rhymes  and  roundelays, 
His  conceits,  and  songs,  and  ditties. 
From  the  belfry  of  his  brain. 
Scattered  downward,  though  in  vain. 


The   Belfry  of  Bruges  2629 

On  the  roofs  and  stones  of  cities! 
For  by  night  the  drowsy  ear 
Under  its  curtains  cannot  hear, 
And  by  day  men  go  their  ways, 
Hearing  the  music  as  they  pass, 
But  deeming  it  no  more,  alas! 
Than  the  hollow  sound  of  brass. 

Yet  perchance  a  sleepless  wight, 

Lodging  at  some  humble  inn 

In  the  narrow  lanes  of  life, 

When  the  dusk  and  hush  of  night 

Shut  out  the  incessant  din 

Of  daylight  and  its  toil  and  strife, 

May  listen  with  a  calm  delight 

To  the  poet's  melodies, 

Till  he  hears,  or  dreams  he  hears, 

Intermingled  with  the  song, 

Thoughts  that  he  has  cherished  long; 

Hears  amid  the  chime  and  singing 

The  bells  of  his  own  village  ringing. 

And  wakes,  and  finds  his  slumberous  eyes 

Wet  with  most  delicious  tears. 

Thus  dreamed  I,  as  by  night  I  lay 
In  Bruges,  at  the  Fleur-de-Ble, 
Listening  with  a  wild  delight 
To  the  chimes  that,  through  the  night, 
Rang  their  changes  from  the  Belfry 
Of  that  quaint  old  Flemish  city. 

THE  BELFRY    OF    BRUGES 

In  the  market-place  of  Bruges  stands  the  belfry  old  and 

brown ; 
Thrice  consumed  and  thrice  rebuilded,  still  it  watches  o'er 

the   town. 

As  the  summer  morn  was  breaking,  on  that  lofty  tower  I 
stood. 

And  the  world  threw  off  its  darkness,  like  the  weeds  of  widow- 
hood. 


2630  Poems  of  Places 

Thick  with  towns  and  hamlets  studded,  and  with  streams 
and  vapors  gray, 

Like  a  shield  embossed  with  silver,  round  and  vast  the  land- 
scape lay. 

At  my  feet  the  city  slumbered.  From  its  chimneys,  here 
and  there. 

Wreaths  of  snow-white  smoke,  ascending,  vanished,  ghost- 
like, into  air. 

Not  a  sound  rose  from  the  city  at  that  early  morning  hour, 
But  I  heard  a  heart  of  iron  beating  in  the  ancient  tower. 

From  their  nests  beneath  the  rafters  sang  the  swallows  wild 

and  high 
And  the  world,  beneath  me  sleeping,  seemed  more  distant 

than  the  sky. 

Then  most  musical  and  solemn,  bringing  back  the  olden 

times, 
With  their  strange,  unearthly  changes,  rang  the  melancholy 

chimes. 

Like  the  psalms  from  some  old  cloister,  when  the  nuns  sing 

in  the  choir; 
And  the  great  bell  tolled  among  them,  like  the  chanting  of  a 

friar. 

Visions  of  the  days  departed,  shadowy  phantoms  filled  my 

brain ; 
They  who  live  in  history  only  seemed  to  walk  the  earth 

again ; 

All  the  Foresters  of  Flanders, — mighty  Baldwin  Bras  de  Fer, 
Lyderick  du  Bucq  and  Cressy,  Philip,  Guy  de  Dampierre. 

I  beheld  the  pageants  splendid  that  adorned  those  days  of 

old; 
Stately  dames,  like  queens  attended,  knights  who  bore  the 

Fleece  of  Gold; 


The  Belfry  of  Bruges  2631 

Lombard  and  Venetian  merchants  with  deep-laden  argosies; 
Ministers  from  twenty  nations;  more  than  royal  pomp  and 
ease. 

I  beheld  proud  Maximilian,  kneeling  humbly  on  the  ground; 
I  beheld  the  gentle  Mary,  hunting  with  her  hawk  and  hound; 

And  her  lighted  bridal-chamber,  where  a  duke  slept  with  the 
queen, 

And  the  armed  guard  around  them,  and  the  sword  un- 
sheathed between. 

I  beheld  the  Flemish  weavers,  with  Namur  and  Juliers  bold. 

Marching  homeward  from  the  bloody  battle  of  the  Spurs 

of  Gold;  '' 

Saw  the  fight  at  Minnewater,  saw  the  White  Hoods  moving 

west, 
Saw  great  Artevelde  victorious  scale  the  Golden  Dragon's 

nest. 

And  again  the  whiskered  Spaniard  all  the  land  with  terror 

smote; 
And  again  the  wild  alarum  sounded  from  the  tocsin's  throat; 

Till  the  bell  of  Ghent  responded  o'er  lagoon  and  dike  of  sand, 
"I  am  Roland!  I  am  Roland!  there  is  victory  in  the  land!" 

Then  the  sound  of  drums  aroused  me.    The  awakened  city's 

roar 
Chased  the  phantoms  I  had  summoned  back  into  their  graves 

once  more. 

Hours  had  passed  away  like  minutes;  and,  before  I  was 

aware, 
Lo!  the  shadow  of  the  belfry  crossed  the  sun-illumined 

square. 

Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  [1807- 1882] 


2632  Poems  of  Places 


NUREMBERG 

In  the  valley  of  the  Pegnitz,  where  across  broad  meadow- 
lands 

Rise  the  blue  Franconian  mountains,  Nuremberg,  the  an- 
cient, stands. 

Quaint  old  town  of  toil  and  trafhc,  quaint  old  town  of  art 

and  song, 
Memories  haunt  thy  pointed  gables,  like  the  rooks  that 

round  them  throng: 

Memories  of  the  Middle  Ages,  when  the  emperors,  rough 

and  bold. 
Had  their  dwelling  in  thy  castle,  time-defying,  centuries 

old; 

And  thy  brave  and  thrifty  burghers  boasted,  in  their  un- 
couth rhyme. 

That  their  great  imperial  city  stretched  its  hand  through 
every  cHme. 

In  the  court-yard  of  the  castle,  bound  with  many  an  iron 

band, 
Stands  the  mighty  linden  planted  by  Queen  Cunigunde's 

hand; 

On  the  square,  the  oriel  window,  where  in  old  heroic  days 
Sat  the  poet  Melchior  singing  Kaiser  Maximilian's  praise. 

Everywhere  I  see  around  me  rise  the  wondrous  world  of  Art : 
Fountains  wrought  with  richest  sculpture  standing  in  the 
common  mart ; 

And  above  cathedral  doorways  saints  and  bishops  carved 

in  stone, 
By  a  former  age  commissioned  as  apostles  to  our  own. 

In  the  church  of  sainted  Sebald  sleeps  enshrined  his  holy 

dust, 
And  in  bronze  the  Twelve  Apostles  guard  from  age  to  age 

their  trust; 


Nuremberg  2633 

In  the  church  of  sainted  Lawrence  stands  a  pix  of  sculpture 

rare, 
Like  the  foamy  sheaf  of  fountains,  rising  through  the  painted 

a'ir. 

Here,  when  Art  was  still  religion,  with  a  simple,  reverent 

heart. 
Lived  and  labored  Albrecht  Diirer,  the  Evangelist  of  Art; 

Hence  in  silence  and  in  sorrow,  toiUng  still  with  busy  hand. 
Like  an  emigrant  he  wandered,  seeking  for  the  Better  Land. 

Emigravit  is  the  inscription  on  the  tombstone  where  he  lies; 
Dead  he  is  not,  but  departed, — for  the  artist  never  dies. 

Fairer  seems  the  ancient  city,  and  the  sunshine  seems  more 

fair 
That   he   once   has  trod   its  pavement,  that  he  once  has 

breathed  its  air! 

Through  these  streets  so  broad  and  stately,  these  obscure 

and  dismal  lanes, 
Walked  of  yore  the   Mastersingers,  chanting  rude  poetic 

strains. 

From  remote  and  sunless  suburbs  came  they  to  the  friendly 
guild. 

Building  nests  in  Fame's  great  temple,  as  in  spouts  the  swal- 
lows build. 

As  the  weaver  plied  the  shuttle,  wove  he  too  the  mystic 

rhyme. 
And  the  smith  his  iron  measures  hammered  to  the  anvil's 

chime; 

Thanking  God,  whose  boundless  wisdom  makes  the  flowers 

of  poesy  bloom 
In  the  forge's  dust  and  cinders,  in  the  tissues  of  the  loom. 

Here  Hans  Sachs,  the  cobbler-poet,  laureate  of  the  gentle 

craft, 
Wisest  of  the  Twelve  Wise  Masters,  in  huge  folios  sang  and 

laughed. 


2634  Poems  of  Places 

But  his  house  is  now  an  alehouse,  with  a  nicely  sanded  floor, 
And  a  garland  in  the  window,  and  his  face  above  the  door, 

Painted  by  some  humble  artist,  as  in  Adam  Puschman's 

song, 
As  the  old  man  gray  and  dovelike,  with  his  great  beard  white 

and  long. 

And  at  night  the  swart  mechanic  comes  to  drown  his  cark 

and  care, 
Quaffing  ale  from  pewfer  tankards,  in  the  master's  antique 

chair. 

Vanished  is  the  ancient  splendor,  and  before  my  dreamy  eye 
Wave  these  mingled  shapes  and  figures,  like  a  faded  tapestry. 

Not  thy  Councils,  not  thy  Kaisers,  win  for  thee  the  world's 
regard, 

But  thy  painter,  Albrecht  Diirer,  and  Hans  Sachs,  thy  cob- 
bler-bard. 

Thus,  O  Nuremberg,  a  wanderer  from  a  region  far  away, 
As  he  paced  thy  streets  and  court-yards,  sang  in  thought 
his  careless  lay: 

Gathering  from  the  pavement's  crevice,  as  a  floweret  of  the 

soil. 
The  nobility  of  labor, — the  long  pedigree  of  toil. 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 


BINGEN  ON   THE  RHINE 

A  SOLDIER  of  the  Legion  lay  dying  in  Algiers, 

There  was  lack  of  woman's  nursing,  there  was  dearth  of 

woman's  tears; 
But  a  comrade  stood  beside  him,  while  his  life-blood  ebbed 

away, 
And  bent,  with  pitying  glances,  to  hear  what  he  might  say. 
The  dying  soldier  faltered,  as  he  took  that  comrade's  hand, 
And  he  said,  "  I  nevermore  shall  see  my  own,  my  native 

land;  ri 


Bingen   on   the   Rhine  2635 

Take  a  message,  and  a  token,  to  some  distant  friends  of  mine, 
For  I  was  born  at  Bingen, — at  Bingen  on  the  Rhine. 

"Tell  my  brothers  and  companions,  when  they  meet  and 
crowd  around, 

To  hear  my  mournful  story,  in  the  pleasant  vineyard  ground. 

That  we  fought  the  battle  bravely,  and  when  the  day  was 
done. 

Full  many  a  corse  lay  ghastly  pale  beneath  the  setting 
sun: 

And,  'mid  the  dead  and  dying,  were  some  grown  old  in 
wars, — 

The  death-wound  on  their  gallant  breasts,  the  last  of  many 
scars; 

And  some  were  young,  and  suddenly  beheld  life's  morn  de- 
cline,— 

And  one  had  come  from  Bingen, — fair  Bingen  on  the  Rhine. 

"Tell  my  mother  that  her  other  sons  shall  comfort  her  old 

age; 
For  I  was  aye  a  truant  bird,  that  thought  his  home  a  cage; 
For  my  father  was  a  soldier,  and  even  as  a  child 
My  heart  leaped  forth  to  hear  him  tell  of  struggles  fierce  and 

wild ; 
And  when  he  died,  and  left  us  to  divide  his  scanty  hoard, 
I  let  them  take  whate'er  they  would, — but  kept  my  father's 

sword; 
And  with  boyish  love  I  hung  it  where- the  bright  light  used  to 

shine, 
On  the  cottage  wall  at  Bingen, — calm  Bingen  on  the  Rhine. 

"Tell  my  sister  not  to  weep  for  me,  and  sob  with  drooping 

head, 
When  the  troops  come  marching  home  again  with  glad  and 

gallant  tread. 
But  to  look  upon  them  proudly,  with  a  calm  and  steadfast 

eye, 
For  her  brother  was  a  soldier  too,  and  not  afraid  to  die; 
And  if  a  comrade  seek  her  love,  I  ask  her  in  my  name 
To  listen  to  him  kindly,  without  regret  or  shame, 


2636  Poems  of  Places 

And  to  hang  the  old  sword  in  its  place  (my  father's  sword 

and  mine) , 
For  the  honor  of  old  Bingen — dear  Bingen  on  the  Rhine. 

"There's  another, — not  a  sister;  in  the  happy  days  gone  by 
You'd  have  known  her  by  the  merriment  that  sparkled  in 

her  eye; 
Too  innocent  for  coquetry, — too  fond  for  idle  scorning, — 

0  friend!  I  fear  the  lightest  heart  makes  sometimes  heaviest 

mourning! 
Tell  her  the  last  night  of  my  life  (for,  ere  the  moon  be  risen. 
My  body  will  be  out  of  pain,  my  soul  be  out  of  prison), — 

1  dreamed  I  stood  with  her,  and  saw  the  yellow  sunlight  shine 
On  the  vine-clad  hills  of  Bingen, — fair  Bingen  on  the  Rhine. 

"I  saw  the  blue  Rhine  sweep  along, — I  heard,  or  seemed  to 

hear, 
The  German  songs  we  used  to  sing,  in  chorus  sweet  and  clear; 
And  down  the  pleasant  river,  and  up  the  slanting  hill^ 
The  echoing  chorus  sounded,  through  the  evening  calm  and 

still; 
And  her  glad  blue  eyes  were  on  me,  as  we  passed,  with 

friendly  talk, 
Down  many  a  path  beloved  of  yore,  and  well-remembered 

walk. 
And  her  little  hand  lay  lightly,  confidingly  in  mine, — 
But  we'll  meet  no  more  at  Bingen, — loved  Bingen  on  the 

Rhine." 

His  trembling  voice  grew  faint  and  hoarse, — his  grasp  was 

childish  weak, — 
His  eyes  put  on  a  dying  look, — he  sighed  and  ceased  to  speak; 
His  comrade  bent  to  lift  him,  but  the  spark  of  life  had  fled, — 
The  soldier  of  the  Legion  in  a  foreign  land  was  dead! 
And  the  soft  moon  rose  up  slowly,  and  calmly  she  looked 

down 

On  the  red  sand  of  the  battle-field,  with  bloody  corses  strown; 
Yes,  calmly  on  that  dreadful  scene  her  pale  light  seemed  to 

shine, 

As  it  shone  on  distant  Bingen, — fair  Bingen  on  the  Rhine. 
Caroline  Elizabeth  Sarah  Norton  [1808-1877] 


*  As   I   Came   Down  from   Lebanon"    2637 


"AS  I   CAME  DOWN   FROM  LEBANON" 

As  I  came  down  from  Lebanon, 
Came  winding,  wandering  slowly  down 
Through  mountain-passes  bleak  and  brown, 
The  cloudless  day  was  well-nigh  done. 
The  city,  like  an  opal,  set 
In  emerald,  showed  each  minaret 
Afire  with  radiant  beams  of  sun, 
■     And  glistened  orange,  fig,  and  lime, 
Where  song-birds  made  melodious  chime, 
As  I  came  down  from  Lebanon. 

As  I  came  down  from  Lebanon, 
Like  lava  in  the  dying  glow. 
Through  olive  orchards  far  below 
I  saw  the  murmuring  river  run; 
And  'neath  the  wall  upon  the  sand 
Swart  sheiks  from  distant  Samarcand, 
With  precious  spices  they  had  won, 
Lay  long  and  languidly  in  wait 
Till  they  might  pass  the  guarded  gate, 
As  I  came  down  from  Lebanon. 

As  I  came  down  from  Lebanon, 

I  saw  strange  men  from  lands  afar. 

In  mosque  and  square  and  gay  bazar, 

The  Magi  that  the  Moslem  shun. 

And  grave  Effendi  from  Stamboul,  '   o  r 

Who  sherbet  sipped  in  corners  cool; 

And,  from  the  balconies  o'errun 

With  roses,  gleamed  the  eyes  of  those 

Who  dwell  in  still  seraglios, 

As  I  came  down  from  Lebanon.  -flJ  y9 

As  I  came  down  from  Lebanon,  ' 

The  flaming  flower  of  daytime  died. 

And  Night,  arrayed  as  is  a  bride 

Of  some  great  king,  in  garments  spun 


2638  Poems  of  Places         '    I   zA  ' 

Of  purple  and  the  finest  gold, 
Outbloomed  in  glories  manifold ! 
Until  the  moon,  above  the  dun 
And  darkening  desert,  void  of  shade, 
Shone  like  a  keen  Damascus  blade, 
As  I  came  down  from  Lebanon. 

Clinton  Scollard  [1860- 

CEYLON 

I  HEAR  a  whisper  in  the  heated  air — 

"Rest!     Rest!    give  over  care!" 

Long  level  breakers  on  the  golden  beach 

ISIurmur  in  silver  speech — 

"Sleep  in  the  palm-tree  shadows  on  the  shore; — 

Work,  work  no  more! 

Rest  here  and  work  no  more." 

Where  half  unburied  cities  of  dead  kings 

Breed  poisonous  creeping  things 

I  learn  the  poor  mortality  of  man — 

Seek  vaini}-  for  some  plan — 

KnoT\-  that  great  empires  pass  as  I  must  pass 

Like  withered  blades  of  grass — 

Dead  blades  of  Patna  grass. 

"Breathe — breathe  the  odorous  sweetness  that  is  ours,'' 

Cry  Frangipani  flowers. 

"Forget!  Forget!  and  know  no  more  distress. 

But  languorous  idleness: 

Dream  where  dead  leaves  fall  ever  from  green  trees 

To  float  on  sapphire  seas — 

Dream!  and  be  one  with  these." 

A.  Hugh  Fisher  [1867- 

MANDALAY 

By  the  old  Moulmein  Pagoda,  lookin'  eastward  to  the  sea, 
There's  a  Burma  girl  a-settin',  an'  I  know  she  thinks  o'  me; 
For  the  wind  is  in  the  palm  trees,  an'  the  temple  bells  they 

say: 
"Come  you  back,  you  British  soldier;  come  you  back  to 

MandaJay  1 "  ,  moe  iO 


Mandalay  2639 

Come  you  back  to  Mandalay,     ftnol  'lulUBVf  '0  Ao'i- 
Wherc  the  old  Flotilla  lay:  inAl  \vji<i.\ti  -nTI  'i;'. 

Can't  3'ou  'ear  their  paddles  chunkin'  from  Rangoon  to 

Mandalay? 
Oh,  the  road  to  Mandalay, 
Where  the  flyin '-fishes  play, 
An'  the  dawn  comes  up  like  thunder  outer  China  'crost  the 

Bay! 

'Er  petticut  was  yaller  an'  'er  little  cap  was  green, 

An'  'er  name  was  Supi-yaw-lat — jes'  the  same  as  Theebaw's 

Queen, 
An'  I  seed  her  fust  a-smokin'  of  a  whackin'  white  cheroot, 
An'  a-wastin'  Christian  kisses  on  an  'eathen  idol's  foot: 

Bloomin'  idol  made  o'  mud — 

Wot  they  called  the  Great  Gawd  Budd — 

Plucky  lot  she  cared  for  idols  when  I  kissed  'er  where  she 
stud! 

On  the  road  to  Mandalay —  -  '^^ 

When  the  mist  was  on  the  rice-fields  an'  the  sun  was  droppin' 

slow, 
She'd  git  'er  little  banjo  an'  she'd  aing"  Kulla-lo-lo  /" 
With  'er  arm  upon  my  shoulder,  an'  'er  cheek  agin  my  cheek. 
We  useter  watch  the  steamers  an'  the  hathis  pUin'  teak. 

Elephints  a-pilin'  teak 

In  the  sludgy,  squdgy  creek-, 

Where  the  silence  'ung  that  'eavy  you  was  'arf  afraid  to 
speak! 

On  the  road  to  Mandalay — 

But  that's  all  shove  be'ind  me — long  ago  an'  fur  away. 
An'  there  ain't  no  'buses  runnin'  from  the  Benk  to  Mandalay; 
An'  I'm  learnin'  'ere  in  London  what  the  ten-year sodger  tells: 
"If  you've  'eard  the  East  a-callin',  why,  you  won't  'eed 
nothin'  else." 
No!  you  won't  'eed  nothin'  else  ',^iy. 

But  them  spicy  garlic  srnells  .  ;  t 

An'  the  sunshine  an'  the  palm  trees  an'  the  tinkly  temple 

bells! 
On  the  road  to  Mandalay — 


2640  Poems  of  Places 

I  am  sick  o'  wastiu'  leather  on  these  gutty  pavin'-stones, 
An'  the  blasted  Henglish  drizzle  wakes  the  fever  in  my  bones; 
Though  I  walks  with  fifty  'ousemaids  outer  Chelsea  to  the 

Strand, 
An'  they  talks  a  lot  o'  lovin',  but  wot  do  they  understand? 

Beefy  face  an'  grubby'and — 

Law!  wot  do  they  understand? 

I've  a  neater,  sweeter  maiden  in  a  cleaner,  greener  land! 

On  the  road  to  IVIandalay — ■ 

Ship  me  somewheres  east  of  Suez  where  the  best  is  like  the 

worst, 
Where  there  aren't  no  Ten  Commandments,  an'  a  man  can 

raise  a  thirst;  ,5.,,.^,  '„/ 

For  the  temple  bells  are  callin' ,  an'  it's  there  that  I  would  be — 
By  the  old  Moulmein  Pagoda,  lookin'  lazy  at  the  sea — 
On  the  road  to  Mandalay, 
Where  the  old  Flotilla  lay, 
With  our  sick  beneath  the  awnings  when  we  went  to 

Mandalay! 
Oh,  the  road  to  Mandalay, 
Where  the  flyin'-fishes  play, 

An'  the  dawn  comes  up  like  thunder  outer  China  crost  the 
Bay!  Riidyard  Kipling    [1865- 

NUBIA 

A  LAND  of  Dreams  and-  Sleep, — a  poppied  land! 
With  skies  of  endless  calm  above  her  head, 
The  drowsy  warmth  of  summer  noonday  shed 
Upon  her  hills,  and  silence  stern  and  grand 
Throughout  her  Desert's  temple-burying  sand. 
Before  her  threshold,  in  their  ancient  place, 
With  closed  lips,  and  fixed,  majestic  face, 
Noteless  of  Time,  her  dumb  colossi  stand.    ''  '^'  ^  '" 
Oh,  pass  them  not  with  light,  irreverent  tr'ead';* ' 
Respect  the  dream  that  builds  her  fallen  throne, 
And  soothes  her  to  oblivion  of  her  woes. 
Hush!  for  she  does  but  sleep;  she  is  not  dead: 
Action  and  Toil  have  made  the  world  their  own, 
But  she  hath  built  an  altar  to  Repose. 

Bayard  Taylor  [1825-1878] 


BALLADS  OLD  AND  NEW 

THOMAS  THE   RHYMER 

True  Thomas  lay  on  Huntlie  bank; 

A  ferlie  he  spied  \vi'  his  e'c; 
And  there  he  saw  a  lady  bright, 

Come  riding  down  by  the  Eildon  Tree. 

Her  skirt  was  o'  the  grass-green  silk, 

Her  mantle  o'  the  velvet  line; 
At  ilka  tett  o'  her  horse's  mane 

Hung  fifty  siller  bells  and  nine. 

True  Thomas  he  pu'd  aff  his  cap, 
And  louted  low  down  on  his  knee: 

"Hail  to  thee,  Mary,  Queen  of  Heaven! 
For  thy  peer  on  earth  could  never  be." 

"O  no,  O  no,  Thomas!"  she  said, 
"That  name  does  not  belang  to  me; 

I'm  but  the  Queen  o'  fair  Elfland, 
That  am  hither  come  to  visit  thee. 

"Harp  and  carp,  Thomas!"  she  said, 

"Ilarp  and  carp  along  wi'  mc; 
And  if  ye  dare  to  kiss  my  lips, 

Sure  of  your  body  I  will  be." 

"Betide  me  weal,  betide  me  woe, 
That  weird  shall  never  daunten  me.' 

Syne  he  has  kissed  her  rosy  lips, 
All  underneath  the  Eildon  Tree. 

"Now,  ye  maun  go  wi'  me,"  she  said; 

"True  Thomas,  ye  maun  go  wi'  me; 
And  ye  maun  serve  me  seven  years, 

Through  weal  or  woe  as  may  chance  to  be." 
2641 


2642  Ballads   Old  and   New 

She's  mounted  on  her  milk-white  steed; 

She's  ta'en  true  Thomas  up  behind; 
And  aye,  whene'er  her  bridle  rang, 

The  steed  gaed  swifter  than  the  wind. 

O  they  rade  on,  and  farther  on, 

The  steed  gaed  swifter  than  the  wind; 

Until  they  reached  a  desert  wide, 
And  living  land  was  left  behind. 

"Light  down,  hght  down  now,  true  Thomas, 
And  lean  your  head  upon  my  knee; 

Abide  ye  there  a  little  space, 

And  I  will  show  you  ferlies  three. 

"O  see  ye  not  yon  narrow  road, 

So  thick  beset  wi'  thorns  and  briers? 

That  is  the  Path  of  Righteousness, 
Though  after  it  but  few  inquires. 

"And  see  ye  not  yon  braid,  braid  road, 
That  Hes  across  the  lily  leven? 

That  is  the  Path  of  Wickedness, 

Though  some  call  it  the  Road  to  Heaven. 

"And  see  yet  not  yon  bonny  road, 
That  winds  about  the  fernie  brae? 

That  is  the  Road  to  fair  Elfland, 

Where  thou  and  I  this  night  maun  gae. 

"But,  Thomas,  ye  sail  baud  your  tongue, 
Whatever  ye  may  hear  or  see; 

For  speak  ye  word  in  Elfyn-land, 

Ye'll  ne'er  win  back  to  your  ain  countrie." 

O  they  rade  on,  and  farther  on. 

And  they  waded  rivers  abune  the  knee; 

And  they  saw  neither  sun  nor  moon. 
But  they  heard  the  roaring  of  the  sea. 


Earl    Mar's    Daughter  ^643 

It  was  mirk,  mirk  night,  there  was  nae  starHght, 
They  waded  through  red  blude  to  the  knee; 

For  a'  the  blude  that's  shed  on  earth 

Rins  through  the  springs  o'  that  countrie. 

Syne  they  came  to  a  garden  green, 

And  she  pu'd  an  apple  frae  a  tree: 
"Take  this  for  thy  wages,  true  Thomas; 

It  will  give  thee  tongue  that  can  never  lee." 

"My  tongue  is  mine  ain,"  true  Thomas  he  said; 

"A  gudely  gift  ye  wad  gie  to  me! 
I  neither  dought  to  buy  nor  sell, 

At  fair  or  tryst  where  I  might  be. 

"I  dought  neither  speak  to  prince  or  peer. 

Nor  ask  of  grace  from  fair  lady!  " 
"Now  baud  thy  peace!"  the  lady  said, 

"For  as  I  say,  so  must  it  be." 

He  has  gotten  a  coat  of  the  even  cloth, 
And  a  pair  o'  shoon  of  the  velvet  green; 

And  till  seven  years  were  gane  and  past, 
True  Thomas  on  earth  was  never  seen. 


Unknown 


EARL  MAR'S  DAUGHTER 

It  was  intill  a  pleasant  time. 

Upon  a  simmer's  day. 
The  noble  Earl  Mar's  daughter 

Went  forth  to  sport  and  play. 

And  as  she  played  and  sported         '^' 

Below  a  green  aik  tree, 
There  she  saw  a  sprightly  doo  ' 

Set  on  a  branch  sae  hie. 

"O  Coo-my-doo,  my  love  sae  true, 

If  ye'll  come  doun  to  me, 
Ye'se  hae  a  cage  o'  gude  red  gowd 

Instead  o'  simple  tree. 


2644  Ballads   Old  and   New 

"I'll  tak'  ye  hame  and  pet  ye  weel, 

Within  my  bower  and  ha' ; 
I'll  gar  ye  shine  as  fair  a  bird 

As  ony  o'  them  a'!" 

And  she  had  nae  these  words  weel  spoke, 

Nor  yet  these  words  weel  said, 
Till  Coo-my-doo  flew  frae  the  branch, 

And  lighted  on  her  head. 

Then  she  has  brought  this  pretty  bird 

Hame  to  her  bower  and  ha', 
And  made  him  shine  as  fair  a  bird 

As  ony  o'  them  a'. 

When  day  was  gane,  and  night  was  come. 

About  the  evening-tide, 
This  lady  spied  a  bonny  youth 

Stand  straight  up  by  her  side. 

"Now  whence  come  ye,  young  man,"  she  said, 
"To  put  me  into  fear? 
*.,,,.,      My  door  was  bolted  right  secure. 
And  what  way  cam'  ye  here?" 

"O  baud  your  tongue,  my  lady  fair, 

Lat  a'  your  folly  be; 
Mind  ye  not  o'  your  turtle-doo 

Ye  wiled  from,  aff  the  tree?" 

"O  wha  are  ye,  young  man?"  she  said, 

"What  country  come  ye  frae?" 
"I  flew  across  the  sea,"  he  said, 

"  'Twas  but  this  verra  day. 

"My  mither  is  a  queen,"  he  says, 

"Likewise  of  magic  skill; 
'Twas  she  that  turned  me  in  a  doo, 

To  fly  where'er  I  will. 


Ear]    Mar's   Daughter  2645 

"And  it  was  but  this  verra  day 

That  I  cam'  owre  the  sea: 
I  loved  you  at  a  single  look; 

With  you  I'll  live  and  dee." 

"O  Coo-my-doo,  my  love  sae  true, 

Nae  mair  frae  me  ye'se  gae." 
"That's  never  my  intent,  my  love; 

As  ye  said,  it  sail  be  sae." 

There  he  has  lived  in  bower  wi'  her. 

For  six  lang  years  and  ane; 
Till  sax  young  sons  to  him  she  bare, 

And  the  seventh  she's  brought  hame. 

But  aye,  as  soon's  a  child  was  barn. 

He  carried  them  away, 
And  brought  them  to  his  mithcr's  care, 

As  fast  as  he  could  fly.  ,  ; 

When  he  had  stayed  in  bower  wi^  her 

For  seven  lang  years  an'  mair; 
There  cam'  a  lord  o'  hie  renown 

To  court  that  lady  fair. 

But  still  his  proft'cr  she  refused. 

And  a'  his  presents  too; 
Says,  "I'm  content  to  hve  alane 

Wi'  my  bird  Coo-my-doo!" 

Her  father  sware  a  michty  oath. 

He  sware  it  wi'  ill-will: 
"To-morrow,  ere  I  eat  or  drink, 

That  bird  I'll  surely  kill." 

The  bird  was  sitting  in  his  cage. 

And  heard  what  he  did  say; 
He  jumped  upon  the^vindow-sill: 

"  'Tis  time  I  was  away." 


2646  Ballads   Old  and   New 

Then  Coo-my-doo  took  flight  and  flew 

Beyond  the  raging  sea, 
And  lichted  at  his  mither's  castle, 

Upon  a  tower  sac  hie. 

The  Queen  his  mither  was  walking  out, 
To  see  what  she  could  see, 

And  there  she  saw  her  darling  son 
Set  on  the  tower  sae  hie. 

"Get  dancers- here  to  dance,"  she  said, 
"And  minstrels  for  to  play; 

For  here's  my  dear  son  Florentine 
Come  back  wi'  me  to  stay." 

"Get  nae  dancers  to  dance,  mither. 
Nor  minstrels  for  to  play; 

For  the  mither  o'  my  seven  sons. 
The  morn's  her  wedding  day." 

"Now  tell  me,  dear  son  Florentine, 

O  tell,  and  tell  me  true; 
Tell  me  this  day,  without  delay. 

What  sail  I  do  for  you?" 

"Instead  of  dancers  to  dance,  mither, 

Or  minstrels  for  to  play. 
Turn  four-and-twcnty  well-wight  men, 

Like  storks,  in  feathers  gray; 

"My  seven  sons  in  seven  swans, 

Aboon  their  heads  to  flee; 
And  I  mysel'  a  gay  gos-hawk, 

A  bird  o'  high  degree." 

Then,  sighing,  said  the  Queen  to  hersel', 
"That  thing's  too  high  for  me!" 

But  she  applied  to  an  auld  woman,     11 
Wha  had  mair  skill  than  she. 


Earl    Mar's   Daughter  ^647 

Instead  o'  dancers  to  dance  a  dance, 

Or  minstrels  for  to  play, 
Were  four-and-twenty  well-wight  men 

Turned  birds  o'  feathers  gray; 

Her  seven  sons  in  seven  swans, 

Aboon  their  heads  to  flee; 
And  he  himsel'  a  gay  gos-hawk, 

A  bird  o'  high  degree. 

This  flock  o'  birds  took  flight  and  flew 

Beyond  the  raging  sea; 
They  landed  near  the  Earl  Mar's  castle, 

And  took  shelter  in  every  tree. 

They  were  a  flock  o'  pretty  birds, 

Right  wondrous  to  be  seen ; 
The  weddin'eers  they  looked  at  them 

Whflst  walking  on  the  green. 

These  birds  flew  out  frae  bush  and  tree, 

And  lichted  on  the  ha'; 
And,  when  the  wedding-train  cam'  forth, 

Flew  down  amang  them  a'. 

The  storks  they  seized  the  boldest  men, 

That  they  could  not  fight  or  flee ; 
The  swans  they  bound  the  bridegroom  fast 

Unto  a  green  aik  tree. 

They  flew  around  the  bride-maidens, 

Around  the  bride's  own  head ; 
And,  wi'  the  twinkling  o'  an  ee. 

The  bride  and  they  were  fled. 

There's  ancient  men  at  weddings  been 

For  eighty  years  or  more; 
But  siccan  a  curious  wedding-day 

They  never  saw  before. 


2648  Ballads  Old  and  New 

For  naething  could  the  company  do, 
Nor  naething  could  they  say; 

But  they  saw  a  flock  o'  pretty  birds 
That  took  their  bride  away. 


Unknown 


THE  TWA   SISTERS 

There  was  twa  sisters  in  a  bower, 

Binnoric,  0  Binnoric; 
There  was  twa  sisters  in  a  bower, 

Binnoric,  0  Binnorie; 
There  was  twa  sisters  in  a  bower, 
There  came  a  knight  to  be  their  wooer. 

By  the  bonny  mill-dams  0'  Binnorie. 

He  courted  the  eldest  wi'  glove  and  ring. 
But  he  lo'ed  the  youngest  abune  a'  thing; 

He  courted  the  eldest  wi'  brooch  and  knife, 
But  he  lo'ed  the  youngest  abune  his  life; 

The  eldest  she  is  vexed  sair. 
And  much  envied  her  sister  fair. 

Into  her  bower  she  couldna  rest, 
Wi'  grief  and  spite  she  almost  brast. 

Upon  a  morning  fair  and  clear. 
She  cried  upon  her  sister  dear: 

"O  sister,  come  to  yon  sea-strand, 

And  see  our  father's  ships  come  to  land." 

She's  ta'en  her  by  the  lily  hand. 
And  led  her  down  to  yon  sea-strand; 

The  youngest  stude  upon  a  stane, 
The  eldest  came  and  pushed  her  in; 

She  took  her  by  the  middle  sma', 

And  dashed  her  bonny  back  to  the  jaw. 


The  Twa  Sisters  2649 

"O  sister,  sister,  reach  your  hand, 
And  ye  shall  be  heir  of  half  my  land." 

"O  sister,  I'll  not  reach  my  hand, 
y\nd  I'll  be  heir  of  a'  your  land ; 

"  Shame  fa'  the  hand  that  I  should  take. 
It's  twined  me  and  my  world's  mate." 

"O  sister,  reach  me  but  your  glove, 
And  sweet  Wilham  shall  be  your  love." 

"Sink  on,  nor  hope  for  hand  or  glove! 
And  sweet  William  shall  be  my  love. 

"Your  cherry  cheeks  and  your  yellow  hair, 
Garred  me  gang  maiden  evermair." 

Sometimes  she  sunk,  and  sometimes  she  swam, 
Until  she  cam  to  the  miller's  dam. 

O,  out  it  cam  the  miller's  son, 
And  saw  the  fair  maid  swimmin'  in. 

"O  father,  father,  draw  your  dam! 

Here's  either  a  mermaid,  or  a  milk-white  swan." 

The  miller  hasted  and  drew  his  dam, 
And  there  he  found  a  drowned  woman; 

You  couldna  see  her  yellow  hair. 

For  gowd  and  pearls  that  were  so  rare: 

You  couldna  see  her  middle  sma'. 
Her  gowden  girdle  was  sae  bra'; 

You  couldna  see  her  fingers  white. 
For  gowden  rings  that  were  sac  gryte. 

A  famous  harper  passing  by, 

The  sweet  pale  face  he  chanced  to  spy; 


2650  Ballads  Old  and  New 

And  when  he  looked  that  lady  on, 
He  sighed  and  made  a  heavy  moan; 

He  made  a  harp  of  her  breast-bane, 
Whose  sounds  would  melt  a  heart  of  stane; 

The  strings  he  framed  of  her  yellow  hair, 
Whose  notes  made  sad  the  listening  ear; 

He  brought  it  to  her  father's  ha'. 
And  there  was  the  court  assembled  a' ; 

He  laid  his  harp  upon  a  stane, 

And  straight  it  began  to  play  alane: 

"O  yonder  sits  my  father,  the  king, 
And  yonder  sits  my  mother,  the  queen; 

"And  yonder  stands  my  brother  Hugh, 
And  by  him  my  William,  sweet  and  true." 

But  the  last  tune  that  the  harp  played  then, 

Binnorie,  O  Biniiorie; 
Was — "Wae  to  my  sister,  false  Helen!" 

By  the  bonny  mill-dams  0'  Binnorie. 

Unknown 

'     THE  WIFE  OF  USHER'S  WELL 

There  lived  a  wife  at  Usher's  Well, 

And  a  wealthy  wife  was  she; 
She  had  three  stout  and  stalwart  sons. 

And  sent  them  o'er  the  sea. 

They  hadna  been  a  week  from  her 

A  week  but  barely  ane. 
Whan  word  came  to  the  carline  wife,     i  < 

That  her  three  sons  were  gane. 

-  They  hadna  been  a  week  from  her, 

A  week  but  barely  three, 
Whan  word  came  to  the  carline  wife, 
That  her  sons  she'd  never  see. 


The  Wife  of  Usher's   Well        2651 

"I  wish  the  wind  may  never  cease,'. '-' oi  I" 

Nor  fashes  in  the  flood, 
Till  my  three  sons  come  hame  to  me, 

In  earthly  flesh  and  blood!" 

, /vgrf +  O 
It  fell  about  the  Martinmas, 

When  nights  are  lang  and  mirk, 

The  carline  wife's  three  sons  came  hame, 

And  their  hats  were  o'  the  birk. 


It  neither  grew  in  syke  nor  ditch,  : 

Nor  yet  in  ony  sheugh;  ■■(■■* 

But  at  the  gates  o'  Paradise, 
That  birk  grew  fair  eneugh. 

"Blow  up  the  fire,  my  maidens! 

Bring  water  from  the  well! 

For  a'  my  house  shall  feast  this  night, 

Since  my  three  sons  are  well." 

•  Ah  bnx;  o:    • 

And  she  had  made  to  them  a  bed, 

She's  made  it  large  and  wide;  , 

And  she's  ta'en  her  mantle  her  about, 
Sat  down  at  the  bed-side. 

Up  then  crew  the  red,  red  cock, 

And  up  and  crew  the  gray; 
The  eldest  to  the  youngest  said, 

'"Tis  time  we  were  awa'." 

The  cock  he  hadna  era  wed  but  once,    •  jj 
And  clapf:)ed  his  wings  at  a', 
^)ji  Whan  the  youngest  to  the  eldest  said,    '  ■ 
"Brother,  we  must  awa'. 

'^  "The  cock  doth  craw,  the  day  doth  daw', 
The  channerin'  worm  doth  chide; 
Gin  We  be  missed  out  o'  our  place, 
A  sair  pain  we  maun  bide." 


'.6^2  Ballads   Old  and  New 

"Lie  still,  lie  still,  a  little  wee  while, 

Lie  still  but  if  we  may; 
Gin  my  mother  should  miss  us  when  she  wakes, 

She'll  go  mad  ere  it  be  day." 

O  they've  ta'en  up  their  mother's  mantle, 
And  they've  hinged  it  on  the  pin: 

"O  lang  may  ye  hing,  my  mother's  mantle, 
Ere  ye  hap  us  again! 

"Fare-ye-weel,  my  mother  dear! 

Fareweel  to  barn  and  byre! 
And  fare-ye-weel,  the  bonny  lass 

That  kindles  my  mother's  fire." 


Unknown 


A  LYKE-WAKE  DIRGE 

This  ae  nighte,  this  ae  nighte, 

■ — Every  nighte  and  alle, 
Fire  and  sleet  and  candle-lighte, 

And  Christe  receive  thy  saiile. 

When  thou  from  hence  away  art  passed, 

— Every  nighte  and  alle, 
To  Whinny-muir  thou  com'st  at  last; 

And  Christe  receive  thy  saule. 

If  ever  thou  gavest  hosen  and  shoon, 
— Every  nighte  and  alle,  ,.., 

Sit  thee  down  and  put  them  on; 
And  Christe  receive  thy  saule. 

If  hosen  and  shoon  thou  ne'er  gav'st  nane, 

— Every  nighte  and  alle. 
The  whinnes  sail  prick  thee  to  the  bare  bane; 

And  Christe  receive  thy  sanle. 

From  Whinny-muir  when  thou  may'st  pass, 

— Every  nighte  and  alle. 
To  Brig  o'  Dread  thou  com'st  at  last; 

And  Christe  receive  thy  saule. 


The   Douglas   Tragedy  2653 

From  Brig  o'  Dread  when  thou  may'st  pass, 

— Every  nighte  and  allc, 
To  Purgatory  fire  thou  com'st  at  last; 

And  Christe  receive  thy  sank. 

If  ever  thou  gavest  meat  or  drink, 

— Every  nighte  and  alle, 
The  fire  sail  never  make  thee  shrink; 

And  Christe  receive  thy  saule. 

If  meat  or  drink  thou  ne'er  gav'st  nane, 

— Every  nighte  and  alle, 
The  fire  will  burn  thee  to  the  bare  bane; 

And  Christe  receive  thy  saule. 

This  ae  nighte,  this  ae  nighte, 

— Every  nighte  and  alle, 
Fire  and  sleet  and  candle-lighte. 

And  Christe  receive  thy  saule. 


Unknown 


THE  DOUGLAS  TRAGEDY 


"Rise  up,  rise  up,  now,  Lord  Douglas,"  she  says, 
"And  put  on  your  armor  so  bright; 

Let  it  never  be  said  that  a  daughter  of  thine 
Was  married  to  a  lord  under  night. 

"Rise  up,  rise  up,  my  seven  bold  sons, 

And  put  on  your  armor  so  bright. 
And  take  better  care  of  your  youngest  sister, 

For  your  eldest's  awa  the  lust  night." 

He's  mounted  her  on  a  milk-white  steed. 

And  himself  on  a  dapple  gray. 
With  a  bugelet-horn  hung  down  by  his  side, 

And  lightly  they  rode  away. 

Lord  William  lookit  o'er  his  left  shoulder. 

To  see  what  he  could  see, 
And  there  he  spied  her  seven  brethren  bold, 

Come  riding  o'er  the  lea. 


2654  Ballads   Old  and   New 

"Light  down,  light  down,  Lady  Marg'ret,"  he  said, 

"And  hold  my  steed  in  your  hand. 
Until  that  against  your  seven  brethren  bold, 

And  your  father,  I  mak'  a  stand." 

She  held  his  steed  in  her  milk-white  hand. 

And  never  did  shed  one  tear, 
Until  that  she  saw  her  seven  brethren  fa', 

And  her  father  hard  fighting,  who  loved  her  so  dear. 

"O  hand  your  hand,  Lord  William!"  she  said, 
"For  your  strokes  they  are  wondroussair;: 

True  lovers  I  can  get  many  an  ane,  \'3  iiwK 
But  a  father  I  can  never  get  mair." 

O  she's  ta'en  out  her  handkerchief, 
It  was  o'  the  Holland  sae  fine, 
, ,.. And  aye  she  dighted  her  father's  wounds, 
That  were  redder  than  the  wine. 

"O  chuse,  O  chuse,  Lady  Marg'ret,"  he  said, 
.'•■     "O  whether  will  ye  gang  or  bide?" 
"I'll  gang,  I'll  gang,  Lord  WiUiam,"  she  said, 
"  For  ye've  left  me  no  other  guidej'iv'-jn  ji  iaj 

He's  Hfted  her  on  a  milk-white  steed, 

And  himself  on  a  dapple  gray. 
With  a  bugelet-horn  hung  down  by  his  side, 

And  slowly  they  baith  rade  away. 

O  they  rade  on,  and  on  they  rade,  ' 

And  a'  by  the  light  of  the  moon, 
Until  they  cam'  to  yon  wan  water, 

And  there  they  lighted  doun. 

They  lighted  doun  to  tak'  a  drink 

Of  the  spring  that  ran  sae  clear; 
And  doun  the  stream  ran  his  gude  heart's  blood, 

And  sair  she  gan  to  fear. 


The    Douglas   Tragedy  -655 

"Haud  up,  baud  up,  Lord  William,"  she  says, 

"For  I  fear  that  you  are  slain!" 
"  'Tis  naething  but  the  shadow  of  my  scarlet  cloak, 

That  shines  in  the  water  sae  plain." 

O  they  rade  on,  and  on  they  rade. 

And  a'  by  the  light  of  the  moon, 
Until  they  cam'  to  his  mother's  ha'  door, 

And  there  they  lighted  doun. 

"Get  up,  get  up,  lady  mother,"  he  says, 

"Get  up  and  let  me  in! — 
Get  up,  get  up,  lady  mother,"  he  says, 

"For  this  night  my  fair  lady  I've  win.      ;  ,, 

"O  mak  my  bed,  lady  mother,"  he  says, 

"O  mak  it  braid  and  deep! 
And  lay  Lady  Marg'ret  close  at  my  back, 

And  the  sounder  I  will  sleep." 

Lord  William  was  dead  lang  ere  midnight. 

Lady  Marg'ret  lang  ere  day; 
And  all  true  lovers  that  go  thegither. 

May  they  have  mair  luck  than  they! 

Lord  William  was  buried  in  St.  Mary's  kirk, 

Lady  Marg'ret  in  Mary's  quire; 
Out  o'  the  lady's  grave  grew  a  bonny  red  rose. 

And  out  o'  the  knight's  a  brier. 

And  they  twamet,  and  they  twa  plat, 

And  fain  they  wad  be  near; 
And  a'  the  warld  might  ken  right  weel 

They  were  twa  lovers  dear. 

But  by  and  rade  the  Black  Douglas, 

And  wow  but  he  was  rough ! 
For  he  pu'ed  up  the  bonny  brier, 

And  fiang't  in  St.  Mary's  Lough. 

Unknown 


2656  Ballads  Old  and  New 


FAIR  ANNIE 

The  reivers  they  stole  Fair  Annie, 

As  she  walked  by  the  sea; 
But  a  noble  knight  was  her  ransom  soon, 

Wi'  gowd  and  white  monie. 

She  bided  in  strangers'  land  wi'  him, 
And  none  knew  whence  she  cam; 

She  lived  in  the  castle  wi'  her  love, 
But  never  told  her  name. 

"It's  narrow,  narrow,  mak  your  bed, 

And  learn  to  lie  your  lane; 
For  I'm  gaun  owre  the  sea,  Fair  Annie, 

A  braw  Bride  to  bring  hame. 
Wi'  her  I  will  get  gowd  and  gear, 

Wi'  you  I  ne'er  gat  nane. 

"But  wha  will  bake  my  bridal  bread, 

Or  brew  my  bridal  ale? 
And  wha  will  welcome  my  bright  Bride, 

That  I  bring  owre  the  dale?" 

"It's  I  will  bake  your  bridal  bread. 

And  brew  your  bridal  ale; 
And  I  will  welcome  your  bright  Bride, 

That  you  bring  owre  the  dale." 

"But  she  that  welcomes  my  bright  Bride 

Maun  gang  like  maiden  fair; 
She  maun  lace  on  her  robe  sae  jimp, 

And  comely  braid  her  hair. 

"Bind  up,  bind  up  your  yellow  hair, 

And  tie  it  on  your  neck; 
And  see  you  look  as  maiden-like 

As  the  day  that  first  we  met." 


iiO 


Fair  Annie  2657 


"O  how  can  I  gang  maiden-like, 

When  maiden  I  am  nane? 
Have  I  not  borne  six  sons  to  thee, 

And  am  wi'  child  again?" 

"I'll  put  cooks'into  my  kitchen,'"'''  '"  ' 

And  stewards  in  my  hall, 
And  I'll  have  bakers  for  my  bread, 

And  brewers  for  my  ale; 
But  you're  to  welcome  my  bright  Bride, 

That  I  bring  owre  the  dale." 

Three  months  and  a  day  were  ganc  and  past, 

Fair  Annie  she  gat  word 
That  her  love's  ship  was  come  at  last, 

Wi'  his  bright  young  Bride  aboard. 

She's  ta'en  her  young  son  in  her  arms, 

Anither  in  her  hand; 
And  she's  ganc  up  to  the  highest  tower, 

Looks  owre  sea  and  land. 

"Come  doun,  come  doun,  my  mother  clear, 

Come  afif  the  castle  wa'! 
I  fear  if  langer  ye  stand  there, 

Ye'll  let  yoursell  doun  fa'." 

She's  ta'en  a  cake  o'  the  best  bread, 

A  stoup  o'  the  best  wine, 
And  a'  the  keys  upon  her  arm, 

And  to  the  yctt  is  gane. 

"O  ye're  welcome  hamc,  my  ain  gudc  lord, 
To  your  castles  and  your  towers; 

Ye're  welcome  hame,  my  ain  gude  lord,>  ' 
To  your  ha's,  but  and  your  bowers. 

And  welcome  to  your  hame,  fair  lady! 
For  a'  that's  here  is  yours." 


2658  Ballads   Old  and   New 

"O  whatna  lady's  that,  my  lord, 
That  welcomes  you  and  me? 

Gin  I  be  lang  about  this  place, 
Her  friend  I  mean  to  be." 


Fair  Annie  served  the  lang  tables  j  • 
Wi'  the  white  bread  and  the  wine;/ 

But  ay  she  drank  the  wan  water n'X  fonA 
To  keep  her  color  fine.  i  :.,.  / 

And  she  gaed  by  the  first  table, 

And  smiled  upon  them  a'; 
But  ere  she  reached  the  second  table,,  .  :• 

The  tears  began  to  fa'. 

She  took  a  napkin  lang  and  white, 

And  hung  it  on  a  pin; 
It  was  to  wipe  away  the  tears, 

As  she  gaed  out  and  in. 

When  bells  were  rung  and  mass  was  sung, 

And  a'  men  bound  for  bed, 
The  bridegroom  and  the  bonny  Bride 

In  ae  chamber  were  laid. 

Fair  Annie's  ta'en  a  harp  in  her  hand,, 

To  harp  thir  twa  asleep; 
But  ay,  as  she  harpit  and  she  sang, 

Fu'  sairly  did  she  weep. 

"O  gin  my  sons  were  seven  rats, 

Rinnin'  on  the  castle  wa'. 
And  I  mysell  a  great  gray  cat, 

I  soon  wad  worry  them  a' ! 

"O  gin  my  sons  were  seven  hares, 
Rinnin'  owre  yon  lily  lea,  ' 

And  I  mysell  a  good  greyhound,  '  ' 
Soon  worried  they  a'  should  be!" 


Fair  Annie  2659 

Then  oul  and  spak  the  bonuy  young  Bride, 

In  bride-bed  where  she  lay : 
"That's  like  my  sister  Annie,"  she  says; 

"Wha  is  it  doth  sing  and  play? 

"I'll  put  on  my  gown,"  said  the  new-come  Bride, 

"And  my  shoes  upon  my  feet; 
I  will  sec  wha  doth  sac  sadly  sing, 

And  what  is  it  gars  her  greet. 

"What  ails  you,  what  ails  you,  my  housekeeper, 

That  ye  mak  sic  a  mane? 
Has  ony  wine-barrel  cast  its  girds, 

Or  is  a'  your  white  bread  gane?" 

"It  isna  because  my  wine  is  spilt. 

Or  that  my  white  bread's  gane; 
But  because  I've  lost  my  true  love's  love, 

And  he's  wed  to  anithcr  ane." 

"Noo  tell  mc  wha  was  your  father?"  she  says, 

"Noo  tell  mc  wha  was  your  mither? 
And  had  ye  ony  sister?"  she  says, 

"And  had  ye  ever  a  brither?" 

"The  Earl  of  Wemyss  was  my  father. 

The  Countess  of  Wemyss  my  mither, 
Young  Elinor  she  was  my  sister  dear, 

And  Lord  John  he  was  my  brither." 

"If  the  Earl  of  Wemyss  was  your  father, 

I  wot  sae  was  he  mine; 
And  it's  0  my  sister  Annie! 

Your  love  ye  saUna  tyne. 

"Tak  your  husband,  my  sister  dear; 

You  ne'er  were  wranged  for  me, 
Beyond  a  kiss  o'  his  merry  mouth 

As  we  cam  owre  the  sea. 


266b  Ballads  Old  and   New 

"Seven  ships,  loaded  weel, 
Cam  owre  the  sea  wi'  me; 

Ane  o'  them  will  tak  me  hame, 
And  six  I'll  gie  to  thee." 


THE  LASS   OF  LOCHROYAN 


Unknown 


Ir.fi  il 


"O  WHA  will  shoe  my  bonny  foot? 

And  wha  will  glove  my  hand? 
And  wha  will  bind  my  middle  jimp 

Wi'  a  lang,  lang  linen  band? 

,:  UAT 
"O  wha  will  kame  my  yellow  hair,  \no  sbH 

With  a  haw  bayberry  kame?  -'  <<"■' 

And  wha  will  be  my  babe's  father 

Till  Gregory  come  hame?" 

"Thy  father,  he  will  shoe  thy  foot, 
Thy  brother  will  glove  thy  hand. 

Thy  mither  will  bind  thy  middle  jimp 
Wi'  a  lang,  lang  linen  band. 

"Thy  sister  will  kame  thy  yellow  hair, 

Wi'  a  haw  bayberry  kame; 
The  Almighty  will  be  thy  babe's  father 

Till  Gregory  come  hame." 

"And  wha  will  build  a  bonny  ship, 

And  set  it  on  the  sea? 
For  I  will  go  to  seek  my  love,  / 

My  ain  love  Gregory." 

11" 
Up  then  spak  her  father  dear, 

A  wafu'  man  was  he : 

"And  I  will  build  a  bonny  ship. 

And  set  her  on  the  sea. 

"And  I  will  build  a  bonny  ship,        ov  JbT" 

And  set  her  on  the  sea, 
And  ye  sal  gae  and  seek  your  love, 

Your  ain  love  Gregory." 


The   Lass  of  Lochroyan  2661 

Then  he's  gart  build  a  bonny  ship, 

And  set  it  on  the  sea, 
Wi'  four-and-twenty  mariners, 

To  bear  her  company. 

O  he's  gart  build  a  bonny  ship. 

To  sail  on  the  salt  sea; 
The  mast  was  o'  the  beaten  gold, 

The  sails  o'  cramoisie. 

The  sides  were  o'  the  gude  stout  aik, 

The  deck  o'  mountain  pine, 
The  anchor  o'  the  silver  shene, 

The  ropes  o'  silken  twine. 

She  hadna  sailed  but  twenty  leagues. 

But  twenty  leagues  and  three, 
When  she  met  wi'  a  rank  reiver. 

And  a'  his  companie. 

"Now  are  ye  Queen  of  Heaven  hie, 

Come  to  pardon  a'  our  sin? 
Or  are  ye  Mary  Magdalane, 

Was  born  in  Bethlehem? ''iii  urno_> 

"I'm  no  the  Queen  of  Heaven  hie, 

Come  to  pardon  ye  your  sin, 
Nor  am  I  Mary  Magdalane, 

Was  born  in  Bethlehem. 

"But  I'm  the  lass  of  Lochroyan, 

That's  sailing  on  the  sea 
To  see  if  I  can  find  my  love. 

My  ain  love  Gregory." 

"0  see  na  ye  yon  bonny  bower? 

It's  a'  covered  owre  wi'  tin; 
When  thou  hast  sailed  it  round  about, 

Lord  Gregory  is  within." 


662  Ballads   Old  and  New 

And  when  she  saw  the  stately  tower, 
Shining  both  clear  and  bright, 

Whilk  stood  aboon  the  jawing  wave, 
Built  on  a  rock  of  height, 

Says,  "Row  the  boat,  my  mariners, 

And  bring  me  to  the  land. 
For  yonder  I  see  my  love's  castle,         i 

Close  by  the  salt  sea  strand." 

She  sailed  it  round,  and  sailed  it  round, 
And  loud  and  loud  cried  she, 

"Now  break,  now  break  your  fairy  charms, 
And  set  my  true-love  free." 

She's  ta'en  her  young  son  in  her  arms, 

And  to  the  door  she's  gane, 
And  long  she  knocked,  and  sair  she  ca'd, 

But  answer  got  she  nane. 

"O  open,  open,  Gregory! 

O  open!  if  ye  be  within; 
For  here's  the  lass  of  Lochroyan, 

Come  far  frae  kith  and  kin. 

"O  open  the  door,  Lord  Gregory! 

O  open  and  let  me  in ! 
The  wind  blows  loud  and  cauld,  Gregory, 

The  rain  drops  frae  my  chin. 

"The  shoe  is  frozen  to  my  foot. 

The  glove  unto- my  hand, 
The  wet  drops  frae  my  yellow  hair, 

Na  langer  dow  I  stand." 

O  up  then  spak  his  ill  mither, 

— An  ill  death  may  she  dee! 
"Ye're  no  the  lass  of  Lochroyan, 

She's  far  out-owre  the  sea. 


The    Lass  of  Lochroyan  266 

"Awa',  awa',  ye  ill  woman, 

Ye're  no  come  here  for  gudc ; 
Ye're  but  some  witch  or  wil'  warlock, 

Or  mermaid  o'  the  flood." 

"I  am  neither  witch  nor  wil'  warlock, 

Nor  mermaid  o'  the  sea, 
But  I  am  Annie  of  Lochroyan, 

()  open  the  door  to  me!" 

"Gin  ye  be  Annie  of  Lochroyan, 

As  I  trow  thou  binna  she. 
Now  tell  me  of  some  love-tokens 

That  passed  'tween  thee  and  me." 

"O  dinna  ye  mind,  love  Gregory, 

As  we  sat  at  the  wine, 
We  changed  the  rings  frae  our  fingers? 

And  I  can  shew  thee  thine. 

"iv/i:&".0  yours  was  gude,  and  gude  enough, 
But  ay  the  best  was  mine, 
For  yours  was  o'  the  gude  red  gowd, 
But  mine  o'  the  diamond  fine. 

"Yours  was  o'  the  gude  red  gowd, 

Mine  o'  the  diamond  fine; 
Mine  was  o'  the  purest  troth. 

But  thine  was  false  within." 

"If  ye  be  the  lass  of  Lochroyan, 

As  I  kenna  thou  be. 
Tell  me  some  mair  o'  the  love-tokens 

Passed  between  thee  and  me." 

"And  dinna  ye  mind,  love  Gregory! 

As  w^e  sat  on  the  hill. 
Thou  twined  me  o'  my  maidenheid, 

Right  sair  against  my  will? 


J 


2664  Ballads   Old  and  New 

"Now  open  the  door,  love  Gregory! 
Open  the  door!  I  pray; 
For  thy  young  son  is  in  my  arms, 
And  will  be  dead  ere  day." 

"Ye  lee,  ye  lee,  ye  ill  woman, 

So  loud  I  hear  ye  lee; 
For  Annie  of  the  Lochroyan 

Is  far  out-owre  the  sea." 

Fair  Annie  turned  her  round  about: 

"Weel,  syne  that  it  be  sae, 
May  ne'er  woman  that  has  borne  a  son 

Hae  a  heart  sae  fu'  0'  wae!  ,    : 

"Tak  down,  tak  down  that  mast  o'  gowd, 

Set  up  a  mast  o'  tree; 
It  disna  become  a  forsaken  lady 

To  sail  sae  royallie." 

When  the  cock  had  crawn,  and  the  day  did  dawn 

And  the  sun  began  to  peep, 
Up  then  raise  Lord  Gregory,] 

And  sair,  sair  did  he  weep. 

"0  1  hae  dreamed  a  dream,  mither, 

I  wish  it  may  bring  good ! 
That  the  bonny  lass  of  Lochroyan 

At  my  bower  window  stood. 

"0  1  hae  dreamed  a  dream,  mither, 

The  thought  o't  gars  me  greet! 
That  fair  Annie  of  Lochroyan 

Lay  dead  at  my  bed-feet." 

"Gin  it  be  for  Annie  of  Lochroyan 

That  ye  mak  a'  this  mane. 
She  stood  last  night  at  your  bower-door,,,  ( 

But  I  hae  sent  her  hame."        wi  Mbu^ 


The   Lass  of  Lochroyan  2665 

"O  wae  betide  ye,  ill  woman, 

An  ill  death  may  ye  dee! 
That  wadna  open  the  door  yourscU 

Nor  yet  wad  v/aken  me." 

O  he's  gane  down  to  yon  shore-side, 

As  fast  as  he  could  dree, 
And  there  he  saw  fair  Annie's  bark 

A  rowing  owre  the  sea. 

"O  Annie,  Annie,"  loud  he  cried, 

"O  Annie,  O  Annie,  bide!" 
But  ay  the  mair  he  cried  "Annie," 

The  braider  grew  the  tide. 

"0  Annie,  Annie,  dear  Annie, 

Dear  Annie,  speak  to  me!" 
But  ay  the  louder  he  gan  call, 

The  louder  roared  the  sea. 

The  wind  blew  loud,  the  waves  rose  hie 

And  dashed  the  boat  on  shore; 
Fair  Annie's  corse  was  in  the  faem, 

The  babe  rose  never  more. 

Lord  Gregory  tore  his  gowden  locks 

And  made  a  wafu'  mane; 
Fair  Annie's  corpse  lay  at  his  feet, 

His  bonny  son  was  gane. 

"0  cherry,  cherry  was  her  cheek, 

And  gowden  was  her  hair, 
And  coral,  coral  was  her  lips, 

Nane  might  with  her  compare." 

Then  first  he  kissed  her  pale,  pale  cheek, 
And  syne  he  kissed  her  chin,  1  i 

And  syne  he  kissed  her  wane,  wane  lips,    ' 
There  was  na  breath  within. 


2666  Ballads  Old  and  New 

"O  wae  betide  my  ill  mither, 
An  ill  death  may  she  dee!  .p 

She  turned  my  true-love  frae  my  door, 
Wha  cam  so  far  to  me. 

"O  wae  betide  my  ill  mither, 

An  ill  death  may  she  dee! 
She  has  no  been  the  deid  o'  ane, 

But  she's  been  the  deid  o'  three." 

Then  he's  ta'en  out  a  little  dart, 

Hung  low  down  by  his  gore, 
He  thrust  it  through  and  through  his  heart, 

And  word  spak  never  more. 

Unknovm 


YOUNG  BEICHAN  AND   SUSIE  PYE 

In  London  was  young  Beichan  born,        i.'i 
He  longed  strange  countries  for  to  see; 

But  he  was  ta'en  by  a  savage  Moor, 
Who  handled  him  right  cruellie; 

For  he  viewed  the  fashions  of  that  land: 
Their  way  of  worship  viewed  he; 

But  to  Mahound,  or  Termagant, 
Would  Beichan  never  bend  a  knee. 

So  in  every  shoulder  they've  putten  a  bore, 
In  every  bore  they've  putten  a  tree, 

And  they  have  made  him  trail  the  wine 
And  spices  on  his  fair  bodie. 

They've  casten  him  in  a  dungeon  deep,    ' 
Where  he  could  neither  hear  nor  see; 

And  fed  him  on  naught  but  bread  and  water, 
Till  he  for  hunger's  like  to  dee. 

This  Moor  he  had  but  ae  daughter,Trt  rrarfT 
Her  name  was  called  Susie  Pye;  \ 

And  every  day  as  she  took  the  air, 
Near  Beichan's  prison  she  passed  by. 


Young   Beichan   and  Susie   Pye     2667 

And  so  it  fell  upon  a  day, 

About  the  middle  time  of  Spring, 
As  she  was  passing  by  that  way, 

She  heard  young  Beichan  sadly  sing: 

"My  hounds  they  all  run  masterless,  ^" 

My  hawks  they  fly  frae  tree  to  tree; 
My  youngest  brother  will  heir  my  lands; 

Fair  England  again  I'll  never  see. 

"Oh  were  I  free  as  I  hae  been, 

And  my  ship  swimming  once  more  on  sea, 
I'd  turn  my  face  to  fair  England,  -"iS 

And  sail  no  more  to  a  strange  countrie!'* 

All  night  long  no  rest  she  got. 

Young  Beichan's  song  for  thinlcing  on; 

She's  stown  the  keys  from  her  father's  head, 
And  to  the  prison  Strang  is  gone. 

And  she  has  opened  the  prison  doors, 

I  wot  she  opened  two  or  three. 
Ere  she  could  come  young  Beichan  at, 

He  was  locked  up  so  curiousHe. 

But  when  she  cam'  young  Beichan  till. 

Sore  wondered  he  that  may  to  see; 
He  took  her  for  some  fair  captive: 

"Fair  lady,  I  pray,  of  what  countrie?" 


"O  have  ye  any  lands,"  she  said, 
"Or  castles  in  your  ain  countrie, 

That  ye  could  give  a  lady  fair. 

From  prison  Strang  to  set  you  free?" 


"Near  London  town  I  have  a  hall, 
And  other  castles  two  or  threfe-'i'^i  oJ  iiiT 

I'll  give  them  all  to  the  lady  fair  "■'  fi  aiorfW 
That  out  of  prison  will  set  me  he&M^'-^'-^i 


2668  Ballads  Old  and  New 

"Give  me  the  truth  of  your  right  hand, 
The  truth  of  it  give  unto  me,    jdj  juod/^     ' 

That  for  seven  years  ye'll  no  lady  wed, 
Unless  it  be  alang  wi'  me." 

"I'll  give  thee  the  truth  of  my  right  hand, 

The  truth  of  it  I'll  freely  gie, 
That  for  seven  years  I'll  stay  unwed, 

For  the  kindness  thou  dost  show  to  me." 

And  she  has  bribed  the  proud  warder 
Wi'  mickle  gold  and  white  monie; 

She's  gotten  the  keys  of  the  prison  Strang, 
And  she  has  set  young  Beichan  free. 

She's  gi'en  him  to  eat  the  good  spice-cake; 
She's  gi'en  him  to  drink  the  blude-red  wine; 
■  She's  bidden  him  sometimes  think  on  her 
That  sae  kindly  freed  him  out  o'  pine. 

And  she  has  broken  her  finger  ring, 
And  to  Beichan  half  of  it  gave  she; 

"Keep  it  to  mind  you  of  that  love 
The  lady  bore  that  set  you  free,,,  ^.i,*/  uLl 

"And  set  your  foot  on  good  ship-board,         ,  • 
And  haste  ye  back  to  your  ain  countrie; 

And  before  that  seven  years  have  an  end. 
Come  back  again,  love,  and  marry  me." 

But  lang  ere  seven  years  had  an  end, 
She  longed  full  sore  her  love  to  see;     i(j  • 

So  she's  set  her  foot  on  good  ship-board.  ; ,  f y 
And  turned  her  back  to  her  ain  countries 

She  sailed  east,  she  sailed  west, 
Till  to  fair  England's  shore  she  came; 

Where  a  bonny  shepherd  she  espied. 
Feeding  his  sheep  upon  the  plain. 


Young   Beichan   and   Susie   Pye     2669 

"What  news,  what  news,  thou  bonny  shepherd? 

What  news  has  thou  to  tell  to  me?" 
"Such  news  I  hear,  ladie,"  he  says, 

"The  like  was  never  in  this  countrie. 

"There  is  a  wedding  in  yonder  hall, 

And  ever  the  bells  ring  merrilie; 
It  is  Lord  Beichan 's  wedding-day 

Wi'  a  lady  fair  o'  high  degree." 

She's  putten  her  hand  in  her  pocket, 

Gi'en  him  the  gold  and  white  monie; 
"Here,  take  ye  that,  my  bonny  boy, 

All  for  the  news  thou  tell'st  to  me." 

When  she  came  to  young  Beichan's  gate, 

She  tirled  softly  at  the  pin: 
So  ready  was  the  proud  porter 

To  open  and  let  this  lady  in. 

"Is  this  young  Beichan's  hall,"  she  said, 

"Or  is  that  noble  lord  within?" 
"Yea,  he's  in  the  hall  among  them  all. 

And  this  is  the  day  o'  his  weddin'." 

"And  has  he  wed  anither  love? 

And  has  he  clean  forgotten  me?" 
And,  sighin',  said  that  ladie  gay, 

"I  wish  I  were  in  my  ain  countrie." 

And  she  has  ta'en  her  gay  gold  ring. 
That  with  her  love  she  brake  sae  free; 

Says,  "Gie  him  that,  ye  proud  porter, 
And  bid  the  bridegroom  speak  wi'  me.'' 

When  the  porter  came  his  lord  before. 

He  kneeled  low  upon  his  knee — 
"What  aileth  thee,  my  proud  porter, 

Thou  art  so  full  of  courtesie?" 


2670  Ballads  Old  and   New 

■  ,;,j;  "I've  been  porter  at  your  gates, 

It's  now  for  thirty  years  and  three; 
But  there  stands  a  lady  at  them  nom'i  hjo" 
The  like  o'  her  did  I  never  see;      liT" 

"For  on  every  finger  she  has  a  ring, 
And  on  her  mid-finger  she  has  three; 

And  meikle  gold  aboon  her  brow.  \l 

Sae  fair  a  may  did  I  never  see." 

It's  out  then  spak  the  bride's  mother. 
Aye  and  an  angry  woman  was  she: 

"Ye  might  have  excepted  our  bonny  bride, 
And  twa  or  three  of  our  companie." 

"O  haud  your  tongue,  thou  bride's  mother, 

Of  all  your  folly  let  me  be ; 
She's  ten  times  fairer  nor  the  bride. 

And  all  that's  in  your  companie. 

"And  this  golden  ring  that's  broken  in  twa, 
This  half  o'  a  golden  ring  sends  she: 

'Ye'U  carry  that  to  Lord  Beichan,'  she  says, 
'And  bid  him  come  an'  spak  wi'  me.' 

"She  begs  one  sheave  of  your  white  bread, 
But  and  a  cup  of  your  red  wine; 

And  to  remember  the  lady's  love. 
That  last  relieved  you  out  of  pine." 

"O  well-a-day!"  said  Beichan  then, 
"That  I  so  soon  have  married  me!jf;riT 

P'or  it  can  be  none  but  Susie  Pye,  ■  -  'b? 
That  for  my  love  has  sailed  the  sea." 

And  quickly  hied  he  down  the  stair; 

Of  fifteen  steps  he  made  but  three; 
He's  ta'en  his  bonny  love  in  his  arms,;  !  </ 

And  kist,  and  kist  her  tenderlie.   :  uorfT 


The  Gay   Gos-Hawk  2671 

"O  hac  ye  ta'en  anilhcr  bride? 

And  hae  ye  quite  forgotten  me? 
And  hae  ye  quite  forgotten  her, 

That  gave  you  life  and  hbertie?" 

She  lookit  o'er  her  left  shoulder, 

To  hide  the  tears  stood  in  her  e'c; 
"Now  fare  thee  well,  young  Beichan,"  she  says, 

"I'll  try  to  think  no  more  on  thee." 

"O  never,  never,  Susie  Pye, 

For  surely  this  can  never  be; 
Nor  ever  shall  I  wed  but  her 

That's  done  and  dreed  so  much  for  me." 

Then  out  and  spak  the  forenoon  bride: 
"My  lord,  your  love  it  changeth  soon; 

This  morning  I  was  made  your  bride, 
And  another's  chose  ere  it  be  noon." 

"O  hand  thy  tongue,  thou  forenoon  bride; 

Ye're  ne'er  a  whit  the  worse  for  me; 
And  whan  ye  return  to  jour  own  land, 

A  double  dower  I'll  send  wi'  thee." 

He's  ta'en  Susie  Pye  by  the  white  hand. 

And  gently  led  her  up  and  down; 
And  ay,  as  he  kist  her  red  rosy  lips, 

"Ye're  welcome,  jewel,  to  your  own." 

He's  ta'en  her  by  her  milk-white  hand, 

And  led  her  to  yon  fountain  stane; 
He's  changed  her  name  from  Susie  Pye, 

And  called  her  his  bonny  love.  Lady  Jane. 

Unknown 

THE   GAY   GOS-HAWK 

"O  WELL  is  me,  my  gay  gos-hawk, 

That  you  can  speak  and  flee; 
For  you  can  carry  a  love-letter 

To  my  true  love  frae  me." 


2672  Ballads   Old  and  New 

"O  how  can  I  carry  a  letter  to  her, 
Or  how  should  I  her  know? 

I  bear  a  tongue  ne'er  wi'  her  spak', 
And  eyes  that  ne'er  her  saw." 

"The  white  o'  my  love's  skin  is  white 
As  down  o'  dove  or  maw; 

The  red  o'  my  love's  cheek  is  red 
As  blood  that's  spilt  on  snaw. 

"When  ye  come  to  the  castle, 

Light  on  the  tree  of  ash. 

And  sit  ye  there  and  sing  our  loves 

As  she  comes  frae  the  mass. 
;-i)hn'i  noofioio.l  'hU 

"  Four  and  twenty  fair  ladies 

Will  to  the  mass  repair; 
And  weel  may  ye  my  lady  ken, 
.,;  The  fairest  lady  there." 

When  the  gos-hawk  flew  to  that  castle, 

He  lighted  on  the  ash; 
And  there  he  sat  and  sang  their  loves 

As  she  came  frae  the  mass. 

"Stay  where  ye  be,  my  maidens  a', 

And  sip  red  wine  anon, 
Till  I  go  to  my  west  window 

And  hear  a  birdie's  moan." 

She's  gane  unto  her  west  window, 
5^.  ,  The  bolt  she  fainly  drew; 

And  unto  that  lady's  white,  white  neck 
The  bird  a  letter  threw. 

"Ye're  bidden  to  send  your  love  a  send, 

For  he  has  sent  you  twa; 
And  tell  him  where  he  may  see  you  soon, 

Or  he  cannot  live  ava." 


The  Gay  Gos-Hawk  2673 

"I  send  him  the  ring  from  my  finger, 

The  gariand  off  my  hair, 
I  send  him  the  heart  that's  in  my  breast; 

What  would  my  love  have  mair? 
And  at  the  fourth  kirk  in  fair  Scotland, 

Ye'll  bid  him  wait  for  me  there." 

She  hied  her  to  her  father  dear 

As  fast  as  gang  could  she: 
"I'm  sick  at  the  heart,  my  father  dear; 

An  asking  grant  you  me!" 
"Ask  ye  na  for  that  Scottish  lord. 

For  him  ye'll  never  see!" 

"An  asking,  an  asking,  dear  father!"  she  says, 

"An  asking  grant  you  me; 
That  if  I  die  in  fair  England, 

In  Scotland  ye'll  bury  me. 

"At  the  first  kirk  o'  fair  Scotland, 

Ye  cause  the  bells  be  rung; 
At  the  second  kirk  o'  fair  Scotland, 

Ye  cause  the  mass  be  sung; 

"At  the  third  kirk  o'  fair  Scotland, 

Ye  deal  gold  for  my  sake; 
At  the  fourth  kirk  o'  fair  Scotland, 

0  there  ye'll  bury  me  at! 

"This  is  all  my  asking,  father, 

1  pray  ye  grant  it  me!" 

"Your  asking  is  but  small,"  he  said; 

"Weel  granted  it  shall  be. 
But  why  do  ye  talk  o'  suchlike  things? 

For  ye  arena  going  to  dee." 

The  lady's  gane  to  her  chamber. 

And  a  moanfu'  woman  was  she. 
As  gin  she  had  ta'en  a  sudden  brash. 

And  were  about  to  dee.  :  1 


[6yA  Ballads  Old  and   New 

The  lady's  gane  to  her  chamber 

As  fast  as  she  could  fare; 
And  she  has  drunk  a  sleepy  draught, 

She  mixed  wi'  mickle  care. 

She's  fallen  into  a  heavy  trance, 
And  pale  and  cold  was  she; 

She  seemed  to  be  as  surely  dead 
As  any  corpse  could  be. 

Out  and  spak'  an  auld  witch-wife, 

At  the  fireside  sat  she: 
"  Gin  she  has  killed  herself  for  love, 

I  wot  it  weel  may  be: 

"But  drap  the  het  lead  on  her  cheek, 

And  drap  it  on  her  chin, 
And  drap  it  on  her  bosom  white, 

And  she'll  maybe  speak  again. 
'Tis  much  that  a  young  lady  will  do 

To  her  true  love  to  win." 

They  drapped  the  het  lead  on  her  cheek, 
They  drapped  it  on  her  chin, 

They  drapped  it  on  her  bosom  white. 
But  she  spake  none  again. 

Her  brothers  they  went  to  a  room. 

To  make  to  her  a  bier; 
The  boards  were  a'  o'  the  cedar  wood. 

The  edges  o'  silver  clear. 

Her  sisters  they  went  to  a  room, 

To  make  to  her  a  sark; 
The  cloth  was  a'  o'  the  satin  fine,     «  tuQ. 

And  the  stitching  silken-wark.       -r/I 

"Now  well  is  me,  my  gay  gos-hawk, 
That  ye  can  speak  and  flee ! 

Come  show  me  any  love-tokens 
That  ye  have  brought  to  me." 


The  Gay  Gos-Hawk  2675 

"She  sends  ye  her  ring  frae  her  finger  wliite, 

The  garland  frae  her  hair; 
She  sends  ye  the  heart  within  her  breast;... 

And  what  would  ye  have  mair? 
And  at  the  fourth  kirk  o'  fair  Scotland, 

She  bids  ye  wait  for  her  there." 

"Come  hither,  all  my  merry  young  men!''' 

And  drink  the  good  red  wine; 
For  we  must  on  towards  fair  England 

To  free  my  love  frae  pine." 

The  funeral  came  into  fair  Scotland, 

And  they  gart  the  bells  be  rung; 
And  when  it  came  to  the  second  kirk, 

They  gart  the  mass  be  sung. 

And  when  it  came  to  the  third  kirk, 

They  dealt  gold  for  her  sake ; 
And  when  it  came  to  the  fourth  kirk, 

Her  love  was  waiting  thereat. 

At  the  fourth  kirk  in  fair  Scotland 

Stood  spearmen  in  a  row; 
And  up  and  started  her  ain  true  love, 

The  chieftain  over  them  a'. 

"Set  down,  set  down  the  bier,"  he  says, 

"Till  I  look  upon  the  dead; 
The  last  time  that  I  saw  her  face. 

Its  color  was  warm  and  red." 

He  stripped  the  sheet  from  off  her  face 

A  little  below  the  chin; 
The  lady  then  she  opened  her  eyes. 

And  looked  full  on  him. 

"O  give  me  a  shive  o'  your  bread,  love, 

O  give  me  a  cup  o'  your  wine! 
Long  have  I  fasted  for  your  sake, 

And  now  I  fain  would  dine. 


2676  Ballads   Old  and   New 

"Gae  hame,  gae  hame,  my  seven  brpthe^rs, 
Gae  hame  and  blow  the  horn!  f-ff:t>  ^rlT 

And  ye  may  say  that  ye  sought  my  skaith, . 
And  that  I  hae  gi'en  ye  the  scorn. 

"I  cam'  na  here  to  bonny  Scotland      ^       ■ 
To  lie  down  in  the  clay;  -"'  ' 

But  I  cam'  here  to  bonny  Scotland, 
To  wear  the  silks  sac  gay! 

"I  cam'  na  here  to  bonny  Scotland,  ^ 

Amang  the  dead  to  rest; 
But  I  cam'  here  to  bonny  Scotland 

To  the  man  that  I  lo'e  best!" 


Unknoimi 


SWEET  WILLIAM   AND   MAY  MARG'RET 

There  came  a  ghost  to  Marg'ret's  door, 

With  many  a  grievous  groan, 
And  aye  he  tirled  at  the  pin, 

But  answer  made  she  none. 

"Is  that  my  father  Philip, 

Or  is't  my  brother  John? 
Or  is't  my  true-love  Willie, 

From  Scotland  new  come  home?  " 

'"Tis  not  thy  father  Philip, 

Nor  yet  thy  brother  John 
But  'tis  thy  true-love  Willie, 

From  Scotland  new  come  home. 

"O  sweet  Marg'ret,  O  dear  Marg'i;et,.     . . 

I  r^ray  thee  speak  to  me:  ^IWil  A 

Give  me  my  faith  and  troth,  Marg'ret,  '^ 

As  I  gave  it  to  thee." 

"Thy  faith  and  troth  thou'It  never  get. 

Of  me  shalt  never  win. 
Till  that  thou  come  within  my  bower,,,,,  j^ 

And  kiss  me  cheek  and  chin.",,Yi  ]jf,/^ 


Sweet  William   and   May    Marg'ret     2677 

"If  I  should  come  within  thy  bower, 

I  am  no  earthly  man: 
And  should  I  kiss  thy  rosy  lips 

Thy  days  would  not  be  king. 

"O  sweet  Marg'ret,  0  dear  Mar'gret, 

I  pray  thee  speak  to  me: 
Give  me  my  faith  and  troth,  Marg'ret, 

As  I  gave  it  to  thee." 

"Thy  faith  and  troth  tiiou'lt  never  get,  ""' 

Of  me  shalt  never  win, 
Till  you  take  me  to  yon  kirk-yard. 

And  wed  me  with  a  ring." 

"My  bones  are  buried  in  yon  kirk-yard 

Afar  beyond  the  sea, 
And  it  is  but  my  spirit,  Marg'ret, 

That's  now  speaking  to  thee." 

She  stretched  out  her  lily-white  hand. 

And  for  to  do  her  best : 
"Ha'e  there  your  faith  and  troth,  Willie, 

God  send  your  soul  good  rest." 

Now  she  has  kilted  her  robe  o'  green 

A  piece  below  her  knee. 
And  a'  the  live-lang  winter  night 

The  dead  corp  followed  she. 

"Is  there  any  room  at  your  head,  Willie, 

Or  any  rooni  at  your  feet? 
Or  any  room  at  your  side,  Willie, 

Wherein  that  I  may  creep?" 

"There's  nae  room  at  my  head,  Marg'ret, 

There's  nae  room  at  my  feet; 
There's  nae  room  at  my  side,  Marg'ret, 

My  coffin's  made  so  meet." 


2678  Ballads  Old  and   New 

Then  up  and  crew  the  red,  red  cock, 

And  up  and  crew  the  gray; 
'"Tis  tune,  'tis  thiie,  my  dear  Marg'ret, 

That  you  were  gane  awa'." 

Unknown 

WILLY  REILLY 

"Oh!  rise  up,  Willy  Reilly,  and  come  along  with  me, 
I  mean  for  to  go  with  you  and  leave  this  counterie. 
To  leave  my  father's  dwelhng,  his  houses  and  free  land;" 
And  away  goes  Willy  Reilly  and  his  dear  Coolen  Ban. 

They  go  by  hills  and  mountains,  and  by  yon  lonesome  plain, 
Through  shady  groves  and  valleys,  all  dangers  to  refrain; 
But  her  father  followed  after  with  a  well-armed  band. 
And  taken  was  poor  Reilly  and  his  dear  Coolen  Ban. 

It's  home  then  she  was  taken,  and  in  her  closet  bound; 
Poor  Reilly  all  in  Shgo  jail  lay  on  the  stony  ground. 
Till  at  the  bar  of  justice,  before  the  Judge  he'd  stand, 
For  nothing  but  the  stealing  of  his  dear  Coolen  Ban. 

"Now  in  the  cold,  cold  iron  my  hands  and  feet  are  bound, 
I'm  handcuffed  Uke  a  murderer,  and  tied  unto  the  ground. 
But  all  the  toil  and  slavery  I'm  willing  for  to  stand. 
Still  hoping  to  be  succoured  by  my  dear  Coolen  Ban." 

The  jailer's  son  to  Reilly  goes,  and  thus  to  him  did  say: 
"Oh!  get  up,  Willy  Reilly,  you  must  appear  this  day. 
For  great  Squire  Foillard's  anger  you  never  can  withstand: 
I'm  afeered  you'll  suffer  sorely  for  your  dear  Coolen  Ban. 

"This  is  the  news,  young  Reilly,  last  night  that  I  did  hear: 
The  lady's  oath  will  hang  you  or  else  will  set  you  clear." 
"If  that  be  so,"  says  Reilly,  "her  pleasure  I  will  stand, 
Still  hoping  to  be  succoured  by  my  dear  Coolen  Ban." 

Now  Willy's  dressed  from  top  to  toe  all  in  a  suit  of  green. 
His  hair  hangs  o'er  his  shoulders  most  glorious  to  be  seen; 
He's  tall  and  straight,  and  comely  as  any  could  be  found; 
He's  fit  for  Foillard's  daughter,  was  she  heiress  to  a  crown. 


Willy   Reilly  2679 

The  Judge  he  said:  "This  lady  being  in  her  tender  youth, 
If  Reilly  has  deluded  her  she  will  declare  the  truth." 
Then,  like  a  moving  beauty  bright,  before  him  she  did  stand, 
"You're  welcome  there,  my  heart's  delight  and  dear  Coolen 
Ban." 

"Oh,  gentlemen,"  Squire  Foillard  said,  "with  pity  look  on 

me. 
This  villain  came  amongst  us«to  disgrace  our  family, 
And  by  his  base  contrivances  this  villainy  was  planned; 
If  I  don't  get  satisfaction  I'll  quit  this  Irish  land." 

i  '»i;/,i  ■jfl.i 

The  lady  with  a  tear  began,  and  thus  replied  she: 
"The  fault  is  none  of  Reilly's,  the  blame  lies  all  on  me, 
I  forced  him  for  to  leave  this  place  and  come  along  with  me; 
I  loved  him  out  of  measure,  which  wrought  our  destiny." 

Out  bespoke  the  noble  Fox,  at  the  table  he  stood  by: 

"Oh,  gentlemen,  consider  on  this  extremity; 

To  hang  a  man  for  love  is  a  murder,  you  may  see: 

So  spare  the  life  of  Reilly,  let  him  leave  this  counterie." 

"Good  my  lord,  he  stole  from  her  her  diamonds  and  her 

rings, 
Gold  watch  and  silver  buckles,  and  many  precious  things, 
Which  cost  mc  in  bright  guineas  more  than  five  hundred 

pounds, 
I'll  have  the  life  of  Reilly  should  I  lose  ten  thousand  pounds." 

"  Good  my  lord,  I  gave  them  him  as  tokens  of  true  love. 
And  when  we  are  a-parting  I  will  them  all  remove ; 
If  you  have  got  them,  Reilly,  pray  send  them  home  to  me." 
"I  will,  my  loving  lady,  with  many  thanks  to  thee." 

"There  is  a  ring  among  them  I  allow  yourself  to  wear. 
With  thirty  locket  diamonds  well  set  in  silver  fair. 
And  as  a  true-love  token  wear  it  on  your  right  hand. 
That  you'll  think  on  my  poor  broken  heart  when  you're  in 
foreign  land." 


268o  Ballads  Old  and   New 

Then  out  spoke  noble  Fox:  "You  may  let  the  prisoner  go; 

The  lady's  oath  has  cleared  him,  as  the  Jury  aU  may  know. 

She  has  released  her  own  true  love,  she  has  renewed  his  name; 

May  her  honor  bright  gain  high  estate,  and  her  offspring 

rise  to  fame!" 

Unknown 
no  jfool  \i' 

THE  TWA   CORBIES 

* 

As  I  was  walking  all  alane 
I  heard  twa  corbies  making  a  mane; 
The  tane  unto  the  t'other  did  say, 
"Where  sail  we  gang  and  dine  to-day? " 

" — In  behint  yon  auld  fail  dyke 
I  wot  there  lies  a  new-slain  Knight; 
And  naebody  kens  that  he  lies  there, 
But  his  hawk,  his  hound,  and  lady  fair. 

"His  hound  is  to  the  hunting  gane, 
His  hawk  to  fetch  the  wild-fowl  hame, 
His  lady's  ta'en  another  mate. 
So  we  may  mak  our  dinner  sweet. 

"Ye'U  set  on  his  white  hause-banc, 

And  I'll  pick  out  his  bonnie  blue  een: 

Wi' ae  lock  o' his  gowden  hair  ,^ 

We'U  theek  our  nest  when  it  grows  bare. 

"  Mony  a  one  for  him  make  mane. 
But  nane  sail  ken  whar  he  is  gane; 
O'er  his  white  banes,  when  they  are  bare, 
The  wind  sail  blaw  for  evermair."  rfv/  baA 

Unkfio'ibri ' 

THE  THREE  RAVENS   • 

There  were  three  ravens  sat  on  a  tree, 
They  were  as  black  as  they  might  be. 

The  one  of  them  said  to  his  mate, 
"Where  shall  we  our  breakfast  take?" 


Lord   Randal  2681 

'  Down  in  yonder  greene  field 

There  lies  a  knight  slain  under  his  shield; 

"His  hounds  they  lie  down  at  his  feet, 
So  well  do  they  their  master  keep; 

"His  hawks  they  fly  so  eagerly, 
There's  no  fowl  dare  come  him  nigh. 

"Down  there  comes  a  fallow  doe 

As  great  with  young  as  she  might  goe. 

"She  lifted  up  his  bloudy  head 

And  kist  his  wounds  that  were  so  red. 

"She  gat  him  up  upon  her  back 
And  carried  him  to  earthen  lake. 

"She  buried  him  before  the  prime, 
She  was  dead  herself  ere  evensong  time. 

"  God  send  every  gentleman 

Such  hounds,  such  hawks,  and  such  a  leman." 

Unknowti 

LORD   RANDAL 

"0  WHERE  hae  ye  been,  Lord  Randal,  my  son? 

O  where  hae  ye  been,  my  handsome  young  man?".. 

"I  hae  been  to  the  wild  wood;  mother,  make  my  bed  soon; 

For  I'm  weary  wi'  hunting,  and  fain  wald  lie  doun." 

"Where  gat  ye  your  dinner,  Lord  Randal,  my  son? 
Where  gat  ye  your  dinner,  mj-  handsome  young  man?" 
"I  dined  wi'  my  true-love;  mother,  make  my  bed  soon; 
For  I'm  weary  wi'  hunting,  and  fain  wald  he  doun." 

"What  gat  ye  to  your  dinner.  Lord  Randal,  my  son? 
What  gat  ye  to  your  dinner,  my  handsome  young  man?" 
"I  gat  eels  boiled  in  broo;  mother,  make  my  bed  soon; 
For  I'm  weary  wi'  hunting,  and  fain  wald  lie  doun." 


2682  Ballads   Old  and  New 

"What  became  of  your  bloodhounds,  Lord  Randal,  my  son? 
What  became  of  your  bloodhounds,  my  handsome  young 

man?" 
"O  they  swelled  and  they  died;  mother,  make  my  bed  soon; 
For  I'm  weary  wi'  hunting,  and  fain  wald  lie  doun." 

"01  fear  ye  are  poisoned.  Lord  Randal,  my  son! 
O  I  fear  ye  are  poisoned,  my  handsome  young  man!" 
"O  yes!  I  am  poisoned;  mother,  make  my  bed  soon; 
For  I'm  sick  at  the  heart,  and  I  fain  wald  lie  doun." 

Unknown 

EDWARD,   EDWARD 

"Why  does  your  brand  sae  drop  wi'  blude, 

Edward,  Edward? 
Why  does  your  brand  sae  drop  wi'  blude, 

And  why  sae  sad  gang  ye,  O?" 
"0  1  hae  killed  my  hawk  sae  gude, 

Mither,  mither; 
O  I  hae  killed  my  hawk  sae  gude, 
And  I  had  nae  mair  but  he,  O." 

"Your  hawk's  blude  was 'never  sae  red, 

Edward,  Edward; 
Your  hawk's  blude  was  never  sae  red, ,  •  : 

My  dear  son,  I  tell  thee,  O."       '  ''^  --siKv/  O 
"0  1  hae  killed  my  red-roan  steed, 

Mither,  mither; 
O  I  hae  killed  my  red-roan  steed, 

That  erst  was  sae  fair  and  free,  O." 

'  "Your  steed  was  auld,  and  ye  hae  got  mair, 
',         ,    •.,    Edward,  Edward;  '^',t 

Your  steed  was  auld,  and  ye  hae  got  mair; 
-         Some  other  dule  ye  dree,  O." 
"0  1  hae  killed  my  father  dear, 

Mither,  mither; 
O  I  hae  killed  my  father  dear,  Z     • , 

Alas,  and  wae  is  me,  O! 


Riddles  Wisely   Expounded         2683 

"And  whatten  penance  will  ye  dree  for  that, 

Edward,  Edward? 
Whatten  penance  will  ye  dree  for  that? 

My  dear  son,  now  tell  me,  O." 
"I'll  set  my  feet  in  yonder  beat, 

Mither,  mither; 
I'll  set  my  feet  in  yonder  boat, 
And  I'll  fare  over  the  sea,  O." 

"And  what  will  ye  do  wi'  your  towers  and  your  ha', 

Edward,  Edward? 
And  what  will  ye  do  wi'  your  towers  and  your  ha', 

That  were  sae  fair  to  see,  O?" 
"I'll  let  them  stand  till  they  doun  fa', 

Mither,  mither; 
I'll  let  them  stand  till  they  doun  fa', 
For  here  never  mair  maun  I  be,  0." 

"And  what  will  ye  leave  to  your  bairns  and  your  wife, 

Edward,  Edward? 
And  what  will  ye  leave  to  your  bairns  and  your  wife, 

When  ye  gang  owre  the  sea,  O?" 
"The  warld's  room:  let  them  beg  through  Hfe, 

jMither,  mither; 
The  warld's  room:  let  them  beg  through  Ufa; 
For  them  never  mair  will  I  see,  O." 

"And  what  will  ye  leave  to  your  ain  mither  dear, 

Edward,  Edward? 
And  what  will  ye  leave  to  your  ain  mither  dear. 

My  dear  son,  now  tell  me,  0?" 
"The  curse  of  hell  frae  me  sail  ye  bear, 

Mither,  mither; 
The  curse  of  hell  frae  me  sail  ye  bear: 
Sic  counsels  ye  gave  to  me,  O!" 

Unknoum 

RIDDLES   WISELY   EXPOUNDED 

There  was  a  knicht  riding  frae  the  east, 

Jennifer  gentle  an'  josemaree. 
Who  had  been  wooing  at  monie  a  place. 

As  the  doo  Jlies  oivre  the  mulberry  tree. 


:684  Ballads  Old  and  New 

He  cam'  unto  a  widow's  door, 

And  speird  wharc  her  three  dochters  were. 

'  The  auldest  ane's  to  a  washing  gane, 
The  second's  to  a  baking  gane. 

"The  youngest  ane's  to  a  wedding  gane, 
And  it  will  be  nicht  or  she  be  hame." 

He  sat  him  doun  upon  a  stane, 

Till  thir  three  lasses  cam'  tripping  hame. 

The  auldest  ane  she  let  him  in, 
And  pinned  the  door  wi'  a  siller  pin. 

The  second  ane  she  made  his  bed, 
And  laid  saft  pillows  unto  his  head. 

The  youngest  ane  was  bauld  and  bricht. 

And  she  tarried  for  words  wi'  this  unco  knicht, 

"  Gin  ye  will  answer  me  questions  ten. 
The  morn  ye  sail  be  made  my  ain. 

"O  what  is  higher  nor  the  tree? 
And  what  is  deeper  nor  the  sea? 

"Or  what  is  heavier  nor  the  lead? 
And  what  is  better  nor  the  breid? 

"Or  what  is  whiter  nor  the  milk? 
Or  what  is  safter  nor  the  silk? 

"Or  what  is  sharper  nor  a  thorn? 
Or  what  is  louder  nor  a  horn? 

"Or  what  is  greener  nor  the  grass? 
Or  what  is  waur  nor  a  woman  was?" 

•   "O  heaven  is  higher  nor  the  tree, 
And  hell  is  deeper  nor  the  sea. 


Sir  Patrick  Spens  2685 

"O  sin  is  heavier  nor  the  lead. 
The  blessing's  better  nor  the  breid. 

.lir 

"The  snaw  is  whiter  nor  the  milk,  ,, 

And  the  down  is  safter  nor  the  silk. 

"Hunger  is  sharper  nor  a  thorn, 
And  shame  is  louder  nor  a  horn. 

"The  pics  are  greener  nor  the  grass, 
And  Clootie's  waur  nor  a  woman  was." 

As  sune  as  she  the  fiend  did  name, 

Jennifer  gentle  an'  roscmarcc, 
He  flew  awa  in  a  blazing  flame, 

As  the  doo  flies  owre  the  mulberry  tree. 

Unknown 

SIR  PATRICK  SPENS 

I. — THE   SAILING 

The  King  sits  in  Dunfermline  toun. 

Drinking  the  blude-red  wine: 
"O  whaur  will  I  get  a  skeely  skipper 

To  sail  this  gude  ship  of  mine?" 

Then  up  an'  spak  an  eldern  knight, 

Sat  at  the  King's  right  knee: 
"Sir  Patrick  Spens  is  the  best  sailor 

That  ever  sailed  the  sea." 

The  King  has  written  a  braid  letter, 

And  sealed  it  wi'  his  hand, 
And  sent  it  to  Sir  Patrick  Spens 

Was  walking  on  the  strand. 

"To  Noroway,  to  Noroway, 

To  Noroway  o'er  the  faem; 
The  King's  daughter  to  Noroway, 

'Tis  thou  maun  tak'  her  hame!" 


2686  Ballads   Old  and  New 

The  first  line  that  Sir  Patrick  read, 

A  loud  laugh  laughed  he; 
The  neist  line  that  Sir  Patrick  read, 

The  tear  blindit  his  e'e. 

"O  wha  is  this  hae  dune  this  deed, 

And  tauld  the  King  o'  me, 
To  send  us  out,  at  this  time  o'  year. 

To  sail  upon  the  sea? 

"Be  it  wind  or  weet,  be  it  hail  or  sleet, 

Our  ship  maun  sail  the  faem; 
The  King's  daughter  to  Noroway, 

'Tis  we  maun  tak'  her  hame." 

They  hoysed  their  sails  on  Monday  morn 

Wi'  a'  the  speed  they  may; 
And  they  hae  landed  in  Noroway 

Upon  the  Wodensday. 

II. — THE   RETURN 

"Mak  ready, .mak  ready,  my  merry  men  a'! 

Our  gude  ship  sails  the  mern." 
"Now,  ever  alack!  my  master  dear, 

I  fear  a  deadly  storm! 

"I  saw  the  new  moon  late  yestreen, 

Wi'  the  auld  moon  in  her  arm; 
And  I  fear,  I  fear,  my  master  dear. 

That  we  sail  come  to  harm!" 

They  hadna  sailed  a  league,  a  league, 

A  league  but  barely  three. 
When  the  lift  grew  dark,  and  the  wind  blew  loud, 

And  gurly  grew  the  sea. 

The  ropes  they  brak,  and  the  topmast  lap. 

It  was  sic  a  deadly  storm; 
And  the  waves  cam  owre  the  broken  ship 

Till  a'  her  sides  were  torn. 


sir  Patrick  Spens  2687 

"O  whaur  will  I  get  a  gude  sailor 

"To  tak'  the  helm  in  hand, 
Until  I  win  to  the  tall  topmast 
And  see  if  I  spy  the  land?" 

.nUObwdA  O)  3I7/0-l|f;  1  ! 

"It's  here  am  I,  a  sailor  gude, 

To  tak'  the  helm  in  hand. 
Till  ye  win  up  to  the  tall  topmast, 

But  I  fear  ye'U  ne'er  spy  land." 

He  hadna  gane  a  step,  a  step, 

A  step  but  barely  ane, 
When  a  bolt  flew  out  of  the  gude  ship's  side, 

And  the  saut  sea  it  cam'  in. 

"Gae  fetch  a  web  0'  the  silken  claith, 

Anither  o'  the  twine. 
And  wap  them  into  the  gude  ship's  side 

And  let  na  the  sea  come  in." 

They  fetched  a  web  o'  the  silken  claith, 

Anither  o'  the  twine, 
And  they  wapped  them  into  that  gude  ship's  side, 

But  aye  the  sea  cam'  in. 

O  laith,  laith  were  our  gude  Scots  lords 

To  weet  their  cock-heeled  shoon! 
But  lang  ere  a'  the  play  was  played, 

They  wat  their  hats  aboon. 

And  mony  was  the  feather-bed 

That  floated  on  the  faem; 
And  mony  was  the  gude  lord's  son 

That  never  mair  cam  hame. 

O  lang,  lang,  may  the  ladies  sit, 

Wi'  their  fans  into  their  hand, 
Or  ever  they  see  Sir  Patrick  Spens 

Come  saihng  to  the  strand! 


2  688  Ballads  Old  and  New 

And  lang,  lang  may  the  maidens  sit, 
Wi'  their  gowd  kaims  in  their  hair, ", "!, 

A- waiting  for  their  ain  dear  loves, 
For  them  they'll  see  nae  mair. 

Half-owre,  half-owre  to  Aberdour, 

'Tis  fifty  fathoms  deep, 
And  there  lies  gude  Sir  Patrick  Spans 

Wi'  the  Scots  lords  at  his  feet.  r 


Unknown 


EDOM  O'   GORDON  erf  sH 

It  fell  about  the  Martinmas, 

When  the  wind  blew  shrill  and  cauld, 
Said  Edom  o'  Gordon  to  his  men, 

"We  maun  draw  to  a  hauld. 

"And  what  a  hauld  sail  we  draw  to. 

My  merry  men  and  me? 
We  will  gae  to  the  house  o'  the  Rodes, 

To  see  that  fair  ladye." 

The  lady  stood  on  her  castle  wa', 
0    Beheld  baith  dale  and  down; 
There  she  was  ware  of  a  host  of  men 
Cam  riding  towards  the  town. 

"O  see  ye  not,  my  merry  men  a', 

0  see  ye  not  what  I  see? 
Methinks  I  see  a  host  of  men; 

1  marvel  wha  they  be." 

She  weened  it  had  been  her  lovely  lord, 

As  he  cam  riding  hame; 
It  was  fhe  traitor,  Edom  o'  Gordon, 

Wha  recked  nae  sin  nor  shame. 

She  had  nae  sooner  buskit  hersell, 

And  putten  on  her  gown, 
But  Edom  o'  Gordon  an'  his  men 

Were  round  about  the  town. 


Edom  o'   Gordon 

They  had  nae  sooner  supper  set, 

Nae  sooner  said  the  grace, 
But  Edom  o'  Gordon  an'  his  men 

Were  lighted  about  the  place. 

The  lady  ran  up  to  her  tower-head,     ''  ' 

Sae  fast  as  she  could  hie, 
To  see  if  by  her  fair  speeches 

She  could  wi'  him  agree. 

"Come  doun  to  me,  ye  lady  gay, 
Come  doun,  come  doun  to  me; 

This  night  sail  ye  lig  within  myne  arms, 
To-morrow  my  bride  sail  be." 

"I  winna  come  doun,  ye  fals  Gordon, 

I  winna  come  doun  to  thee; 
I  winna  forsake  my  ain  dear  lord. 

That  is  sae  far  frae  me," 

"  Gie  owre  your  house,  ye  lady  fair,     '  ^^ 

Gie  owre  your  house  to  me; 
Or  I  sail  brenn  yoursell  therein. 

But  and  your  babies  three." 

"I  winna  gie  owre,  ye  fals  Gordon, 

To  nae  sic  traitor  as  ye; 
And  if  ye  brenn  my  ain  dear  babes. 

My  lord  sail  mak  ye  dree. 

"Now  reach  my  pistol,  Glaud,  my  man, 

And  charge  ye  wcel  my  gun; 
For,  but  an  I  pierce  that  bluidy  butcher, 

My  babes,  we  been  undone!" 

She  stood  upon  her  castle  wa',  ' 

And  let  twa  bullets  flee: 
She  missed  that  bluidy  butcher's  heart,' 

And  only  razed  his  knee. 


2689 


2690  Ballads   Old  and  New 

"Set  fire  to  the  house!"  quo'  fals  Gordon,- 

AU  wud  wi'  dule  and  ire: 
"  Fals  lady,  ye  sail  rue  this  deid 

As  ye  brenn  in  the  fire!" 

"Wae  worth,  wae  worth  ye,  Jock,  my  man! 

I  paid  ye  weel  your  fee ; 
Why  pu'  ye  out  the  grund-wa'  stane, 

Lets  in  the  reek  to  me? 

"And  e'en  wae  worth  ye,  Jock,  my  man! 

I  paid  ye  weel  your  hire; 
Why  pu'  ye  out  the  grund-wa'  stane, 

To  me  lets  in  the  fire?" 

"Ye  paid  me  weel  my  hire,  ladye, 

Ye  paid  me  weel  my  fee: 
But  now  I'm  Edom  o'  Gordon's  man—  , 

Maun  either  do  or  dee." 

O  then  bespake  her  little  son. 

Sat  on  the  nurse's  knee: 
Says,  "Mither  dear,  gie  owre  this  house, 

For  the  reek  it  smithers  me." 

"I  wad  gie  a'  my  gowd,  my  bairn,        j^., 

Sae  wad  I  a'  my  fee. 
For  ae  blast  o'  the  western  wind. 

To  blaw  the  reek  frae  thee." 

O  then  bespake  her  dochter  dear — 
She  was  baith  jimp  and  sma' : 

"0  row  me  in  a  pair  o'  sheets, 
And  tow  me  owre  the  wa' ! " 

They  rowed  her  in  a  pair  o'  sheets, 

And  towed  her  owre  the  wa'; 
But  on  the  point  o'  Gordon's  spear 

She  gat  a  deadly  fa'. 


Edom  o'   Gordon  2691 

0  bonnie,  bonnie  was  her  mouth, 
And  cherry  were  her  cheiks, 

And  clear,  clear  was  her  yellow  hair, 
Whereon  the  red  blood  dreips. 

Then  wi'  his  spear  he  turned  her  ow're; 

0  gin  her  face  was  wane! 

He  said,  "Ye  are  the  first  that  e'er 

1  wished  alive  again." 

jfiioa  ri'jri  r 
He  turned  her  owre  and  owrc  again; 

0  gin  her  skin  was  white! 

"I  might  hac  spared  that  bonnie  face 
To  hae  been  some  man's  delight. 

"Busk  and  boun,  my  merry  men  a', 
For  ill  dooms  I  do  guess; 

1  canna  look  in  that  bonnie  face 
As  it  lies,  on  the  grass." 

'JJ'/Wha  looks  to  freits,  my  master  dear, 
It's  freits  will  follow  them; 
Let  it  ne'er  be  said  that  Edom  o'  Gordon 
Was  daunted  by  a  dame." 

But  when  the  lady  saw  the  fire 

Come  flaming  owre  her  head, 
She  wept,  and  kissed  her  children  twain, 

Says,  "Bairns,  we  been  but  dead." 

The  Gordon  then  his  bugle  blew. 

And  said,  "Awa',  awa'! 
This  house  o'  the  Rodcs  is  a'  in  a  flame; 

1  hauld  it  time  to  ga'." 

And  this  way  lookit  her  ain  dear  lord, 

As  he  cam  owre  the  lea; 
He  saw  his  castle  a'  in  a  lowe. 

As  far  as  he  could  see. 


2692  Ballads  Old  and   New 

Then  sair,  O  sair,  his  mind  misgave, 

And  all  his  heart  was  wae: 
"Put  on,  put  on,  my  wighty  men, 

Sae  fast  as  ye  can  gae. 

"Put  on,  put  on,  my  wighty  men, 

Sae  fast  as  ye  can  drie! 
For  he  that's  hindmost  0'  the  thrang 

Sail  ne'er  get  good  o'  me." 

Then  some  they  rade,  and  some  they  ran, 
Out-owre  the  grass  and  bent ;  ' ' 

'  But  ere  the  foremost  could  win  up, 

Baith  lady  and  babes  were  brent. 

And  after  the  Gordon  he  is  gane, 

Sae  fast  as  he  might  drie; 
And  soon  i'  the  Gordon's  foul  heart's  blude 

He's  wroken  his  dear  ladye. 

Unknown 


ROBIN  HOOD   AND   ALLEN-A-DALE* 

Come  listen  to  me,  you  gallants  so  free, 
All  you  that  love  mirth  for  to  hear. 

And  I  will  tell  you  of  a  bold  outlaw. 
That  lived  in  Nottinghamshire,. 

As  Robin  Hood  in  the  forest  stood,    ' 

All  under  the  greenwood  tree. 
There  was  he  aware  of  a  brave  young  man, 

As  fine  as  fine  might  be. 

The  youngster  was  clad  in  scarlet  ,r^d.. 
In  scarlet  fine  and  gay;       ,>rjrvrf  ?\dT 

And  he  did  frisk  it  over  the  plain,  ^f  j 
And  chanted  a  roundelay. 

As  Robin  Hood  next  morning  stood 

Amongst  the  leaves  so  gay, 
There  did  he  espy  the  same  young  man 

Come  drooping  along  the  way. 


Robin   Hood  and  Allen-a-Dale     2693 

The  scarlet  he  wore  the  day  before 

It  was  clean  cast  away; 
And  at  every  step  he  fetched  a  sigh, 

"Alas!  and  well-a-dayi" 

Then  stepped  forth  brave  Little  John, 

And  Midge,  the  miller's  son; 
Which  made  the  young  man  bend  his  bow 

When  as  he  see  them  come. 

"Stand  ofT!  stand  off!"  the  young  man  said, 

"What  is  your  will  with  me?" 
"You  must  come  before  our  master  straight, 

Under  yon  greenwood  tree." 

And  when  he  came  bold  Robin  before, 

Robin  asked  him  courteously, 
"O,  hast  thou  any  money  to  spare. 

For  my  merry  men  and  me?" 

"I  have  no  money,"  the  young  man  said, 

"But  five  shillings  and  a  ring; 
And  that  I  have  kept  these  seven  long  years, 

To  have  at  my  wedding. 

"Yesterday  I  should  have  married  a  maid. 

But  she  was  from  me  ta'en. 
And  chosen  to  be  an  old  knight's  delight, 

Whereby  my  poor  heart  is  slain." 

"What  is  thy  name?"  then  said  Robin  Hood, 

"Come  tell  me,  without  any  fail." 
"By  the  faith  of  my  body,"  then  said  the  young  man, 

"My  name  it  is  Allen-a-Dale." 

"What  wilt  thou  give  me,"  said  Robin  Hood, 

"In  ready  gold  or  fee, 
To  help  thee  to  thy  true-love  again. 

And  deliver  her  unto  thee?" 


2694  Ballads  Old  and  New  -^ 'M 

"I  have  no  money,"  then  quoth  the  young  man, 

"No  ready  gold  nor  fee, 
But  I  will  swear  upon  a  book  ■  1  j  jji  Iau  . 

Thy  true  servant  for  to  be."  •  'ftalA" 

"  How  many  miles  is  it  to  thy  true-love? 

Come  tell  me  without  guile." 
"By  the  faith  of  my  body,"  then  said  the  young  man, 

"It  is  but  five  httle  mile." 

Then  Robin  he  hasted  over  the  plain; 

He  did  neither  stint  nor  lin, 
Until  he  came  unto  the  church 

Where  Allen  should  keep  his  weddin'. 

"What  dost  thou  here? "  the  bishop  then  said; 

"I  prithee  now  tell  unto  me." 
"I  am  a  bold  harper,"  quoth  Robin  Hood, 

"And  the  best  in  the  north  country."     nn  lu'l 

"Oh  welcome,  oh  welcome,"  the  bishop  he  said;  f  1  ' 
"That  music  best  pleaseth  me."  " 

"You  shall  have  no  music,"  quoth  Robin  Hood,'ffi/. 
"Till  the  bride  and  the  bridegroom  I  see."  T 

With  that  came  in  a  wealthy  knight, 

Which  was  both  grave  and  old;  lii.  Jijil 

And  after  him  a  finikin  lass,  -'^orb  briA 

Did  shine  like  ghstering  gold.  fSi^riW 

"This  is  no  fit  match,"  quoth  Robin  Hood,     '//" 

"That  you  do  seem  to  make  here ; 
Fot  since  we  are  come  into  the  church. 

The  bride  shall  chuse  her  own  dear." 

Then  Robin  Hood  put  his  horn  to  his  mouth j  //" 

And  blew  blasts  two  or  three; 
When  four-and-twenty  yeomen  bold  '    •  i 

Came  leaping  over  the  lea. 


Chevy-Chase         ■  2695 


And  when  they  came  into  the  church-yard, 

Marching  all  in  a  row, 
The  first  man  was  Allen-a-Dale, 

To  give  bold  Robin  his  bow. 

"This  is  thy  true  love,"  Robin  he  said. 

"Young  Allen,  as  I  hear  say: 
And  you  shall  be  married  at  this  same  time. 

Before  we  depart  away." 

"That  shall  not  be,"  the  bishop  he  cried, 

"For  thy  word  it  shall  not  stand; 
They  shall  be  three  times  asked  in  the  church, 

As  the  law  is  of  our  land." 

Robin  Hood  pulled  ofT  the  bishop's  coat, 

And  put  it  upon  Little  John; 
"By  the  faith  of  my  body,"  then  Robin  said, 

"This  cloth  doth  make  thee  a  man." 

When  Little  John  went  into  the  quire, 

The  people  began  to  laugh; 
He  asked  them  seven  times  into  church, 

Lest  three  times  should  not  be  enough. 

"Who  gives  me  this  maid?"  then  said  Little  John, 

Quoth  Robin  Hood,  "That  do  I; 
And  he  that  takes  her  from  Allen-a-Dale, 

Full  dearly  he  shall  her  buy." 

And  then  having  ended  this  merry  wedding, 
The  bride  looked  as  fresh  as  a  queen ; 

And  so  they  returned  to  the  merry  greenwood. 
Amongst  the  leaves  so  green. 


Unknown 


I  I 
CHEVY  CHASE 

God  prosper  long  our  noble  king, 
Our  lives  and  safeties  all ; 

A  woful  hunting  once  there  did  , 
In  Chevy-Chase  befaU- 


2696  Ballads   Old  and   New 

To  drive  the  deer  with  hound  and  horn 

Earl  Percy  took  his  way ; 
The  child  may  rue  that  is  unborn 

The  hunting  of  that  day.       ,  ..,, ,  ,  ^^ 

The  stout  Earl  of  Northumberland 

A  vow  to  God  did  make, 
His  pleasure  in  the  Scottish  woods 

Three  summer  days  to  take; 

The  chiefest  harts  in  Chevy-Chase 

To  kill  and  bear  away. 
These  tidings  to  Earl  Douglas  came, 

In  Scotland  where  he  lay; 

Who  sent  Earl  Percy  present  word 
He  would  prevent  his  sport. 

The  English  earl,  not  fearing  that, 
Did  to  the  woods  resort. 

With  fifteen  hundred  bowmen  bold, 

All  chosen  men  of  might, 
Who  knew  full  well  in  time  of  need 
.firiol.  3l       To  aim  their  shafts  aright. 

The  gallant  greyhounds  swiftly  ran 
To  chase  the  fallow  deer; 

On  Monday  they  began  to  hunt. 
When  daylight  did  appear; 

And  long  before  high  noon  they  had 
,,.  ,  A  hundred  fat  bucks  slain; 

Then,  having  dined,  the  drovers  went 
To  rouse  the  deer  again. 

The  bowmen  mustered  on  the  hills, 

Well  able  to  endure; 
And  all  their  rear,  w-ith  special  care, 

That  day  was  guarded  sure. 


Chevy-Chase  2697 

The  hounds  ran  swiftly  through  the  woods 

The  nimble  deer  to  take, 
That  with  their  cries  the  hills  and  dales 

An  echo  shrill  did  make. 

Lord  Percy  to  the  quarry  went,  ' 

To  view  the  slaughtered  deer; 
Quoth  he,  "Earl  Douglas  promised  ' 

This  day  to  meet  me  here; 

"But  if  I  thought  he  would  not  come, 

No  longer  would  I  stay;" 
With  that,  a  brave  young  gentleman 

Thus  to  the  earl  did  say: — 

"Lo,  yonder  doth  Earl  Douglas  come, — 

His  men  in  armor  bright; 
Full  twenty  hundred  Scottish  spears 

All  marching  in  our  sight; 

"All  men  of  pleasant  Teviotdale, 

Fast  by  the  river  Tweed;" 
"Then  cease  your  sports,"  Earl  Percy  said, 

"And  take  your  bows  with  speed; 

"And  now  with  me,  my  countrymen. 

Your  courage  forth  advance; 
For  never  was  there  champion  yet, 

In  Scotland  or  in  France, 

"That  ever  did  on  horseback  come, 

But  if  my  hap  it  were, 
I  durst  encounter  man  for  man. 

With  him  to  break  a  spear." 

Earl  Douglas  on  his  milk-white  steed, 

Most  like  a  baron  bold, 
Rode  foremost  of  his  company, 

Whose  armor  shone  like  gold. 


2698  Ballads  Old  and  New 

'  "Show  me,"  said  he,  "whose  men  you  bCj 
That  hunt  so  boldly  here^ldmiit  'j' 
That,  without  my  consent,  do  chase 
And  kill  my  fallow-deer." 

The  first  man  that  did  answer  make,  m. J 
Was  noble  Percy,  he —  '■' 

Who  said,  "We  Hst  not  to  declare, 
Nor  show  whose  men  we  be: 

"Yet  will  we  spend  our  dearest  blood 
Thy  chief  est  harts  to  slay." 

Then  Douglas  swore  a  solemn  oath, 
And  thus  in  rage  did  say: — 

"Ere  thus  I  will  out-braved  be, 

One  of  us  two  shall  die; 
I  know  thee  well,  an  earl  thou  art,— 

Lord  Percy,  so  am  I. 

"But  trust  me,  Percy,  pity  it  were, 

And  great  oljfense,  to  kill 
Any  of  these  our  guiltless  men, 

For  they  have  done  no  ill. 

"Let  you  and  I  the  battle  try, 

And  set  our  men  aside." 
"Accursed  be  he,"  Earl  Percy  said, 

"By  v/hom  this  is  denied." 

Then  stepped  a  gallant  squire  forth, 
Wltherington  was  his  name, 

Who  said,  "I  would  not  have  it  told 
To  Henry,  our  king,  for  shame, 

"That  e'er  my  captain  fought  on  foot, 
And  I  stood  looking  on.  \/\. 

You  two  be  earls,"  said  Witheringtoni  ■  > >T 
"And  I  a  squire  alone; 


•}!        Chevy-Chase  2699 

"I'll  do  the  best  that  do  I  may, 

While  I  have  power  to  stand; 
While  I  have  power  to  wield  my  sword, 

I'll  fight  with  heart  and  hand." 

Our  English  archers  bent  their  bows, — 

Their  hearts  were  good  and  true; 
At  the  first  flight  of  arrows  sent>  i*  m-.  J 

Fidl  fourscore  Scots  they  slew.'  ' '' 

Yet  stays  Earl  Douglas  on  the  bent, 

As  chieftain  stout  and  good; 
As  vahant  captain,  all  unmoved, 

The  shock  he  firmly  stood. 

His  host  he  parted  had  in  three, 

As  leader  ware  and  tried; 
And  soon  his  spearmen  on  their  foes 

Bore  down  on  eveiy  side. 

Throughout  the  English  archery 

They  dealt  full  many  a  wound; 
But  still  our  valiant  Englishmen 

All  firmly  kept  their  ground. 

And  throwing  straight  their  bows  away. 
They  grasped  their  swords  so  bright; 

And  now  sharp  blows,  a  heavy  shower, 
On  shields  and  helmets  light. 

They  closed  full  fast  on  every  side,      '' 

No  slackness  there  was  found; 
And  many  a  gallant  gentleman 

Lay  gasping  on  the  ground. 

In  truth,  it  was  a  grief  to  see  T 

How  each  one  chose  his  spear. 
And  how  the  blood  out  of  their  breasts 

Did  gush  like  water  clear. 


2700  Ballads   Old  and   New 

At  last  these  two  stout  earls  did  meet; 

Like  captains  of  great  might, 
Like  lions  wode,  they  laid  on  lode, 

And  made  a  cruel  fight. 

They  fought  until  they  both  did  sweat, 
With  swords  of  tempered  steel, 

Until  the  blood,  like  drops  of  rain, 
They  trickling  down  did  feel. 

"Yield  thee,  Lord  Percy,"  Douglas  said, 

"In  faith  I  will  thee  bring 
Where  thou  shalt  high  advanced  be 

By  James,  our  Scottish  king. 

"Thy  ransom  I  will  freely  give. 

And  this  report  of  thee, — 
Thou  art  the  most  courageous  knight 

That  ever  I  did  see." 

"No,  Douglas,"  saith  Earl  Percy  then, 

"Thy  proffer  I  do  scorn; 
I  will  not  yield  to  any  Scot 

That  ever  yet  was  born." 

With  that  there  came  an  arrow  keen 

Out  of  an  English  bow, 
Which  struck  Earl  Douglas  to  the  heart,- 

A  deep  and  deadly  blow;ol9ifia  nO 

Who  never  spake  more  words  than  these: 
"Fight  on,  my  merry  men  all; 

For  why,  my  life  is  at  an  end ; 
Lord  Percy  sees  my  fall." 

Then  leaving  life,  Earl  Percy  took 
The  dead  man  by  the  hand; 

And  said,  "Earl  Douglas,  for  thy  Hfe 
Would  I  had  lost  my  hand. 


Chevy-Chase  2701 


"In  truth,  my  very  heart  doth  bleed 

With  sorrow  for  thy  sake; 
For  sure  a  more  redoubted  knight 

Mischance  did  never  take." 

A  knight  amongst  the  Scots  there  was 

Who  saw  Hirl  Douglas  die, 
Who  straight  in  wrath  did  vow  revenge 

Upon  the  Earl  Percy. 

Sir  Hugh  Mountgomery  was  he  called, 
Who,  with  a  spear  full  bright, 

Well-mounted  on  a  gallant  steed. 
Ran  fiercely  through  the  fight; 

And  past  the  English  archers  all. 

Without  a  dread  or  fear; 
And  through  Earl  Percy's  body  then 

He  thrust  his  hateful  spear. 

With  such  vehement  force  and  might 

He  did  his  body  gore, 
The  staff  ran  through  the  other  side 

A  large  cloth-yard  and  more. 

So  thus  did  both  these  nobles  die. 
Whose  courage  none  could  stain. 

An  English  archer  then  perceived 
The  noble  earl  was  slain ;  ' 

He  had  a  bow  bent  in  his  hand, 

Made  of  a  trusty  tree; 
An  arrow  of  a  cloth-yard  long 

To  the  hard  head  drew  he. 

Against  Sir  Hugh  Mountgomery 

So  right  the  shaft  he  set. 
The  gray  goose-wing  that  was  thereon 

In  his  heart's  blood  was  wet. 


2702  Ballads  Old  and  New 

This  fight  did  last  from  break  of  day- 
Till  setting  of  the  sun; 

For  when  they  rung  the  evening-bell 
The  battle  scarce  was  done. 

With  stout  Earl  Percy  there  were  slain 

Sir  John  of  Egerton, 
Sir  Robert  Ratcliff ,  and  Sir  John,  :  // 

Sir  James,  that  bold  baron. 

And  with  Sir  George  and  stout  Sir  James, 
Both  Knights  of  good  account, 

Good  Sir  Ralph  Raby  there  was  slain, 
Whose  prowess  did  surmount. 

For  Witherington  my  heart  is  woe 
That  ever  he  slain  should  be. 

For  when  his  legs  were  hewn  in  two, 
He  knelt  and  fought  on  his  knee. 

And  with  Earl  Douglas  there  were  slain 

Sir  Hugh  Mountgomery, 
Sir  Charles  Murray,  that  from  the  field 

One  foot  would  never  flee; 

Sir  Charles  Murray  of  Ratcliff,  too, — 

His  sister's  son  was  he; 
Sir  David  Lamb,  so  well  esteemed. 

But  saved  he  could  not  be. 

And  the  Lord  Maxwell  in  like  case 
Did  with  Earl  Douglas  die: 

Of  twenty  hundred  Scottish  spears,  . 
Scarce  fifty-five  did  fly. 

Of  fifteen  hundred  Englishmen, 
Went  home  but  fifty-three; 

The  rest  in  Chevy-Chase  were  slain, 
Under  the  greenwood  tree. 


Chevy-Chase  2703 

Next  day  did  many  widows  come, 

Their  husbands  to  bewail; 
They  washed  their  wounds  in  brinish  tears, 

But  all  would  not  prevail. 

Their  bodies,  bathed  in  purple  blood, 

They  bore  with  them  away; 
They  kissed  them  dead  a  thousand  times, 

Ere  they  were  clad  in  clay. 

The  news  was  brought  to  Edinburgh, 

Where  Scotland's  king  did  reign. 
That  brave  Earl  Douglas  suddenly 

Was  with  an  arrow  slain: 

"O  heavy  news,"  King  James  did  say;, 

"Scotland  can  witness  be 
I  have  not  any  captain  more 

Of  such  account  as  he." 

Like  tidings  to  King  Henry  came 

Within  as  short  a  space, 
That  Percy  of  Northumberland 

Was  slain  in  Chevy-Chase: 

"Now  God  be  with  him,"  said  our  King, 

"Since  'twill  no  better  be; 
I  trust  I  have  within  my  realm 

Five  hundred  as  good  as  he. 

"Yet  shall  not  Scots  or  Scotland  say 

But  I  will  vengeance  take; 
I'll  be  revenged  on  them  all 

For  brave  Earl  Percy's  sake." 

This  vow  full  well  the  king  performed  ^  ■" 

After  at  Humbledown ; 
In  one  day  fifty  knights  were  slain 
-'"With  lords  of  high  renown; 


2704  Ballads  Old  and  New 

And  of  the  rest,  of  small  account, 

Did  many  hundreds  die: 
Thus  endeth  the  hunting  of  Chevy-Chase, 

Made  by  the  Earl  Percy. 

God  save  the  king,  and  bless  this  land. 

With  plenty,  joy,  and  peace; 
And  grant,  henceforth,  that  foul  debate 

'Twixt  noblemen  may  cease. 

Unknown 


BARBARA  ALLEN'S  CRUELTY 

In  Scarlet  town,  where  I  was  born, 
There  was  a  fair  maid  dwellin'. 

Made  every  youth  cry  W ell-a-way  ! 
Her  name  was  Barbara  Allen. 

All  in  the  merry  month  of  May, 
When  green  buds  they  were  swellin', 

Young  Jemmy  Gro^e  on  his  death-bed  lay, 
For  love  of  Barbara  Allen. 

He  sent  his  man  in  to  her  then, 

To  the  town  where  she  was  dwellin', 

"O  haste  and  come  to  my  master  dear. 
If  your  name  be  Barbara  Allen." 

So  slowly,  slowly  rase  she  up. 
And  slowly  she  came  nigh  him, 

And  when  she  drew  the  curtain  by — 
"Young  man,  I  think  you're  dyin'." 

"0  it's  I  am  sick  and  very  very  sick, 
And  it's  all  for  Barbara  Allen." 

"O  the  better  for  me  ye'se  never  be, 
Though  your  heart's  blood  were  a-spillin'! 


The   Bailiff's   Daughter  of  Islington     2705 

"O  dinna  ye  mind,  young  man,"  says  she, 
"When  the  red  wine  ye  were  fillin'. 

That  ye  made  the  healths  go  round  and  round, 
And  slighted  Barbara  Allen?" 

He  turned  his  face  unto  the  wall. 

And  death  was  with  him  dealin': 
"Adieu,  adieu,  my  dear  friends  all, 

And  be  kind  to  Barbara  Allen!" 

As  she  was  walking  o'er  the  fields. 

She  heard  the  dead-bell  knellin'; 
And  every  jow  the  dead-bell  gave 

Cried  "Woe  to  Barbara  Allen." 

"O  mother,  mother,  make  my  bed, 

O  make  it  saft  and  narrow: 
My  love  has  died  for  me  to-day, 

I'll  die  for  him  to-morrow. 

"Farewell,"  she  said,  "ye  virgins  all. 

And  shun  the  fault  I  fell  in : 
Henceforth  take  warning  by  the  fall 

Of  cruel  Barbara  Allen." 

Unknown 


THE  BAILIFF'S   DAUGHTER   OF  ISLINGTON 

Theee  was  a  youth,  a  well-beloved  youth. 

And  he  was  a  squire's  son, 
He  loved  the  bailiff's  daughter  dear, 

That  lived  in  Islington. 

Yet  she  was  coy  and  would  not  believe 

That  he  did  love  her  so. 
No,  nor  at  any  time  would  she 

Any  countenance  to  him  show. 


2706  Ballads   Old  and   New 

But  when  his  friends  did  understand 

His  fond  and  foolish  mind, 
They  sent  him  up  to  fair  London 

An  apprentice  for  to  bind. 

And  when  he  had  been  seven  long  years, 

And  never  his  love  could  see: 
Many  a  tear  have  I  shed  for  her  sake, 

When  she  little  thought  of  me. 

Then  all  the  maids  of  Islington 

Went  forth  to  sport  and  play, 
All  but  the  bailiff's  daughter  dear; 

She  secretly  stole  away. 

She  pulled  off  her  gown  of  green, 

And  put  on  ragged  attire. 
And  to  fair  London  she  would  go 

Her  true-love  to  enquire. 

As  she  went  along  the  high  road, 
The  weather  being  hot  and  dry. 

She  sat  her  down  upon  a  green  bank, 
And  her  true-love  came  riding  by. 

She  started  up,  with  a  color  so  red, 
Catching  hold  of  his  bridle-rein; 

One  penny,  one  penny,  kind  sir,  she  said, 
Will  ease  me  of  much  pain.  I  A3   SHI 


Before  I  give  you  one  penny,  sweet-heart, 
Pray  tell  me  where  you  were  born. 

At  Islington,  kind  sir,  said  she. 
Where  I  have  had  many  a  scorn. 

I  prithee,  sweet-heart,  then  tell  to  me,    -^ 
O  tell  me,  whether  you  know. 

The  bailiff's  daughter  of  Islington. 
She  is  dead,  sir,  long  ago. 


King  John  and  the  Abbot         2707 

If  she  be  dead,  then  take  my  horse, 

My  saddle  and  bridle  also; 
For  I  will  unto  some  far  country, 

Where  no  man  shall  me  know. 

O  stay,  O  stay,  thou  goodly  youth, 

She  standeth  by  thy  side; 
She  is  here,  ahve,  she  is  not  deaa, 

And  ready  to  be  thy  bride. 

O  farewell  grief,  and  welcome  joy, 

Ten  thousand  times  therefor; 
For  now  I  have  found  mine  own  true-love. 

Whom  I  thought  I  should  never  see  more. 

Unknown 


KING  JOHN  AND  THE  ABBOT  OF 
CANTERBURY 

An  ancient  story  I'll  tell  you  anon 
Of  a  notable  prince  that  was  called  King  John ; 
And  he  ruled  England  with  main  and  with  might. 
For  he  did  great  wrong,  and  maintained  httle  right. 

And  I'll  tell  you  a  story,  a  story  so  merry, 
Concerning  the  Abbot  of  Canterbury;        * 
How  for  his  house-keeping  and  high  renown. 
They  rode  post  for  him  to  fair  London  town. 

An  hundred  men  the  king  did  hear  say, 
The  abbot  kept  in  his  house  every  day; 
And  fifty  gold  chains  without  any  doubt, 
In  velvet  coats  waited  the  abbot  about. 

"How  now,  father  abbot.  1  hear  it  of  thee,      .i  irfT 

Thou  keepest  a  far  better  house  than  me; 

And  for  thy  house-keeping  and  high  renown, 

I  fear  thou  work'st  treason  against  my  own  crown." 


2708  Ballads  Old  and  New 

"My  liege,"  quo'  the  abbot,  "I  would  it  were  known 
I  never  spend  nothing,  but  what  is  my  own ; 
And  I  trust  your  grace  will  do  me  no  deere. 
For  spending  of  my  own  true-gotten  gear." 

"Yes,  yes,  father  abbot,  thy  fault  it  is  high. 
And  now  for  the  same  thou  needest  must  die; 
For  except  thou  canst  answer  me  questions  three, 
Thy  head  shall  be  smitten  from  thy  bodie. 

"And  first,"  quo'  the  king,  "when  I'm  in  this  stead. 
With  my  crown  of  gold  so  fair  on  my  head, 
Among  all  my  liege-men  so  noble  of  birth. 
Thou  must  tell  me  to  one  penny  what  I  am  worth. 

"Secondly,  tell  me,  without  any  doubt. 
How  soon  I  may  ride  the  whole  world  about; 
And  at  the  third  question  thou  must  not  shrink, 
But  tell  me  here  truly  what  I  do  think." 

"O  these  are  hard  questions  for  my  shallow  wit, 
Nor  I  cannot  answer  your  grace  as  yet : 
But  if  you  will  give  me  but  three  weeks'  space, 
I'll  do  my  endeavor  to  answer  your  grace." 

"Now  three  weeks'  space  to  thee  will  I  give. 
And  that  is  the  longest  time  thou  hast  to  live; 
For  if  thou  dost  not  answer  my  questions  three, 
Thy  lands  and  thy  livings  are  forfeit  to  me." 

Away  rode  the  abbot  all  sad  at  that  word,[)fitirf  nA 
And  he  rode  to  Cambridge,  and  Oxenford; 
But  never  a  doctor  there  was  so  wise. 
That  could  with  his  learning  an  answer  devise. 

Then  home  rode  the  abbot  of  comfort  so  cold,    ■  ^  ^  ^ 
And  he  met  his  shepherd  a-going  to  fold: 
"How  now,  my  lord  abbot,  you  are  welcome  home; ' 
What  news  do  you  bring  us  from  good  King  John?" 


King  John  and  the  Abbot         2709 

"Sad  news,  sad  news,  shepherd,  I  must  give, 
That  I  have  but  three  days  more  to  live; 
For  if  I  do  not  answer  him  questions  three, 
My  head  will  be  smitten  from  mj'  bodie. 

"The  first  is  to  tell  him,  there  in  that  stead, 
With  his  crown  of  gold  so  fair  on  his  head, 
Among  all  his  liegc-men  so  noble  of  birth, 
To  within  one  penny  of  what  be  is  worth. 

"The  second,  to  tell  him  without  any  doubt. 
How  soon  he  may  ride  this  whole  world  about; 
And  at  the  third  question  I  must  not  shrink. 
But  tell  him  there  truly  what  he  does  think." 

"Now  cheer  up,  sire  abbot,  did  you  never  hear  yet, 
That  a  fool  he  may  learn  a  wise  man  wit? 
Lend  me  horse,  and  serving-men,  and  your  apparel. 
And  I'll  ride  to  London  to  answer  your  quarrel. 

"Nay,  frown  not,  if  it  hath  been  told  unto  me, 

I  am  like  your  lordship,  as  ever  may  be; 

And  if  you  will  but  lend  me  your  gown, 

There  is  none  shall  know  us  at  fair  London  town." 

"Now  horses  and  serving-men  thou  shalt  have, 
With  sumptuous  array  most  gallant  and  brave, 
With  crozier,  and  mitre,  and  rochet,  and  cope, 
Fit  to  appear  'fore  our  Father  the  Pope." 

lKi({)   [V 

"Now  welcome,  sire  abbot."  the  king  he  did  say, 
"'Tis  well  thou'rt  come  back  to  keep  thy  day: 
For  and  if  thou  canst  answer  my  questions  three. 
Thy  life  and  thy  living  both  saved  shall  be. 

"And  first,  when  thou  seest  me  here  in  this  stead, 
With  my  crown  of  gold  so  fair  on  my  head. 
Among  all  my  liege-men  so  noble  of  birth, 
Tell  me  to  one  penny  what  I  am  worth." 


2710  BalJads   Old  and  New 

"For  thirty  pence  our  Saviour  was  sold 
Among  the  false  Jews,  as  I  have  been  told, 
And  twenty-nine  is  the  worth  of  thee, 
For  I  think  thou  art  one  penny  worser  than  he." 

The  king  he  laughed,  and  swore  by  St.  Bittel, 

"I  did  not  think  I  had  been  worth  so  httle!    ^"^^ /"-^  ['" 

— Now  secondly  tell  me,  without  any  doubt, 

How  soon  I  may  ride  this  whole  world  about." 

"You  must  rise  with  the  sun,  and  ride  with  the  same 
Until  the  next  morning  he  riseth  again ; 
And  then  your  grace  need  not  make  any  doubt  L 

But  in  twenty-four  hours  you'll  ride  it  about." 

,1 
The  king  he  laughed,  and  swore  by  St.  Jonc, 

"I  did  not  think  it  could  be  done  so  soon! 

— Now  from  the  third  question  thou  must  not  shrink, 

But  tell  me  here  truly  what  I  do  think." 

i 

"Yea,  that  shall  I  do,  and  make  your  grace  merry [  briA 
You  think  I'm  the  Abbot  of  Canterbury; 
But  I'm  his  poor  shepherd,  as  plain  you  may  see, 
That  am  come  to  beg  pardon  for  him  and  for  me." 

The  king  he  laughed,  and  swore  by  the  Mass, 
"I'll  make  thee  lord  abbot  this  day  in  bis  place!" 
"Now  nay,  my  liege,  be  not  in  such  speed, 
For  alack  I  can  neither  write  nor  read." 

"Four  nobles  a  week,  then,  I  will  give  thee. 
For  this  merry  jest  thou  hast  shown  unto  me; 
And  tell  the  old  abbot  when  thou  comest  home, 
Thou  hast  brought  him  a  pardon  from  good  King  John." 

Unknown 


THE   FRIAR   OF   ORDERS    GRAY 

It  was  a  friar  of  orders  gray 
Walked  forth  to  tell  his  beads; 

And  he  met  with  a  lady  fair 
Clad  in  a  pilgrim's  weeds. 


The   Friar  of  Orders  Gray         271 1 

''Now  Christ  thee  save,  thou  reverend  friar; 

I  pray  thee  teli  to  me, 
If  ever  at  yon  holy  shrine 

My  true-love  thou  didst  see." 

"And  how  should  I  know  your  true-love 

From  many  another  one?  " 
"O,  by  his  cockle  hat,  and  staff, 

And  by  his  sandal  shoon. 

"But  chiefly  by  his  face  and  mien, 

That  were  so  fair  to  view; 
His  flaxen  locks  that  sweetly  curled, 

And  eyes  of  lovely  blue."  77 

"O  lady,  he  is  dead  and  gone! 

Lady,  he's  dead  and  gone! 
And  at  his  head  a  green  grass  turf, 

And  at  his  heels  a  stone. 

"Within  these  holy  cloisters  long 

He  languished,  and  he  died, 

Lamenting  of  a  lady's  love,  -^  ,  j^ 

And  'plaining  of  her  pride.  :f ' 

"Here  bore  him  barefaced  on  hisbiqr, 
Six  proper  youths  and  tall,  ;  .,r[  u\  fj 

And  many  a  tear  bedewed  his  grave 
Within  yon  kirkyard  wall." 

"And  art  thou  dead,  thou  gentle  youth? 

And  art  thou  dead  and  gone? 
And  didst  thou  die  for  love  of  me? 

Break,  cruel  heart  of  stone!" 

"O,  weep  not,  lady,  weep  not  so; 

Some  ghostly  comfort  seek; 
Let  not  vain  sorrow  rive  thy  heart. 

Nor  tears  bedew  thy  cheek."  ,  ,     - 


712  Ballads  Old  and  New 

"O,  do  not,  do  not,  holy  friar, 

My  sorrow  now  reprove; 
For  I  have  lost  the  sweetest  youth 

That  e'er  won  lady's  love. 

"And  now,  alas!  for  thy  sad  loss 
I'll  evermore  weep  and  sigh; 

For  thee  I  only  wished  to  live, 
For  thee  I  wish  to  die." 

"Weep  no  more,  lady,  weep  no  more, 

Thy  sorrow  is  in  vain; 
For  violets  plucked,  the  sweetest  showers 

Will  ne'er  make  grow  again. 

"Our  joys  as  winged  dreams  do  fly; 

Why  then  should  sorrow  last? 
Since  grief  but  aggravates  thy  loss, 

Grieve  not  for  what  is  past." 

"O,  say  not  so,  thou  holy  friar; 

I  pray  thee,  say  not  so; 
For  since  my  true-love  died  for  me, 

'Tis  meet  my  tears  should  flow. 

"And  will  he  never  come  again? 

Will  he  ne'er  come  again? 
Ah,  no!  he  is  dead,  and  laid  in  his  grave, 

Forever  to  remain. 

"His  cheek  was  redder  than  the  rose; 

The  comeliest  youth  was  he! 
But  he  is  dead  and  laid  in  his  grave: 

Alas,  and  woe  is  me!" 

"Sigh  no  more,  lady,  sigh  no  more, 

Men  were  deceivers  ever: 
One  foot  on  sea  and  one  on  shore. 

To  one  thing  constant  never. 


The  Friar  of  Orders  Gray         2713 

"Hadst  thou  been  fond,  he  had  been  false, 

And  left  thee  sad  and  heavy; 
For  young  men  ever  were  fickle  found, 

Since  summer  trees  were  leafy." 

"Now  say  not  so,  thou  holy  friar, 

I  pray  thee  say  not  so; 
My  love  he  had  the  truest  heart, 

O,  he  was  ever  true! 

"And  art  thou  dead,  thou  much-loved  youth. 

And  didst  thou  die  for  me? 
Then  farewell  home;  for  evermore 

A  pilgrim  1  will  be. 

"But  first  upon  my  true-love's  grave 

My  weary  limbs  I'll  lay. 
And  thrice  I'll  kiss  the  green-grass  turf 

That  wraps  his  breathless  clay." 

"Yet  stay,  fair  lady;  rest  awhile 

Beneath  this  cloister  wall; 
The  cold  wind  through  the  hawthorn  blows, 

And  drizzly  rain  doth  fall." 

"0,  stay  me  not,  thou  holy  friar, 

O,  stay  me  not,  I  pray; 
No  drizzly  rain  that  falls  on  me 

Can  wash  my  fault  away." 

"Yet  stay,  fair  lady,  turn  again. 

And  dry  those  pearly  tears; 
For  see,  beneath  this  gown  of  gray 

Thy  own  true-love  appears. 

"Here  forced  by  grief  and  hojieless  love, 

These  holy  weeds  I  sought; 
And  here,  amid  these  lonely  walls. 

To  end  my  days  I  thought. 


2714  Ballads  Old  and  New 

"But  haply,  for  my  year  of  grace 

Is  not  yet  passed  away, 
Might  I  still  hope  to  win  thy  love, 

No  longer  would  I  stay." 

"Now  farewell  grief,  and  welcome  joy 

Once  more  unto  my  heart; 
For  since  I  have  found  thee,  lovely  youth. 

We  nevermore  will  part." 
Adapted  from  old  ballads  by  Thomas  Percy  [i 729-181 1] 


BONNIE   GEORGE  CAMPBELL 

Hie  upon  Hielands, 

And  low  upon  Tay, 
Bonnie  George  Campbell 

Rade  out  on  a  day. 
Saddled  and  bridled 

And  gallant  rade  he; 
Hame  cam  his  gude  horse, 

But  never  cam  he! 

Out  cam  his  auld  mither 

Greeting  fu'  sair. 
And  out  cam  his  bonnie  bride 

Rivin'  her  hair. 
Saddled  and  bridled 

And  booted  rade  he; 
Toom  hame  cam  the  saddle 

But  never  cam  he! 

"My  meadow  Hes  green. 

And  my  corn  is  unshorn, 
My  barn  is  to  bigg. 

And  my  babie's  unborn." 
Saddled  and  bridled 

And  booted  rade  he; 
Toom  hame  cam  the  saddle, 

But  never  cam  he! 

Unhiwwn 


Rosabelle  2715 


ROSABELLE 

From  "  The  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel" 

O  LISTEN,  listen,  ladies  gay! 

No  haughty  feat  of  arms  I  tell; 
Soft  is  the  note,  and  sad  the  lay, 

That  mourns  the  lovely  Rosabelle. 

"Moor,  moor  the  barge,  ye  gallant  crew! 

And,  gentle  Lady,  deign  to  stay! 
Rest  thee  in  Castle  Ravensheuch, 

Nor  tempt  the  stormy  firth  to-day._ 

"The  blackening  wave  is  edged  with  white; 

To  inch  and  rock  the  sea-mews  fly: 
The  fishers  have  heard  the  Water-Sprite, 

Whose  screams  forebode  that  wreck  is  nigh. 

"Last  night  the  gifted  Seer  did  view 
A  wet  shroud  swathed  round  lady  gay; 

Then  stay  thee,  Fair,  in  Ravensheuch; 
Why  cross  the  gloomy  firth  to-day?" 

"  'Tis  not  because  Lord  Lindesay's  heir 
To-night  at  Roslin  leads  the  ball, 

But  that  my  lady-mother  there 
Sits  lonely  in  her  castle-hall. 

"  'Tis  not  because  the  ring  they  ride, 
And  Lindesay  at  the  ring  rides  well, 

But  that  my  sire  the  wine  will  chide 
If  'tis  not  filled  by  Rosabelle." 

O'er  Roslin  all  that  dreary  night 

A  wondrous  blaze  was  seen  to  gleam; 

'Twas  broader  than  the  watch-fire's  light. 
And  redder  than  the  bright  moonbeam.' 

It  glared  on  Roslin's  castled  rock. 
It  ruddied  all  the  copse-wood  glen; 

'Twas  seen  from  Dryden's  groves  of  oak. 
And  seen  from  cavQrned  Hawthornden. 


2716  Ballads  Old  and  New 

Seemed  all  on  fire  that  chapel  proud 
Where  Roslin's  chiefs  uncoffined  lie, 

Each  Baron,  for  a  sable  shroud. 
Sheathed  in  his  iron  panoply. 

Seemed  all  on  fire  within,  around, 

Deep  sacristy  and  altar's  pale; 
Shone  every  pillar  foliage-bound, 

And  glimmered  all  the  dead  men's  mail. 

Blazed  battlement  and  pinnet  high. 

Blazed  every  rose-carved  buttress  fair, — 

So  stiU  they  blaze,  when  fate  is  nigh 
The  lordly  line  of  high  Saint  Clair. 

There  are  twenty  of  Roslin's  barons  bold 
Lie  buried  within  that  proud  chapelle; 

Each  one  the  holy  vault  doth  hold, — 
But  the  sea  holds  lovely  Rosabelle! 

And  each  Saint  Clair  was  buried  there 
With  candle,  with  book,  and  with  knell; 

But  the  sea-caves  rung,  and  the  wild  winds  sung 
The  dirge  of  lovely  Rosabelle ! 

Walter  Scott  [1771-1832] 


ALICE  BRAND 

From  "  The  Lady  of  the  Lake  " 
I 

Merry  it  is  in  the  good  greenwood. 
When  the  mavis  and  merle  are  singing, 

When  the  deer  sweeps  by,  and  the  hounds  are  in  cry, 
And  the  hunter's  horn  is  ringing. 

"O  Alice  Brand,  my  native  land 

Is  lost  for  love  of  you; 
And  we  must  hold  by  wood  and  wold, 

As  outlaws  wont  to  dp. 


'     '    Alice  Brand 

"O  Alice,  'twas  all  for  thy  locks  so  bright, 
And  'twas  all  for  thine  eyes  so  blue, 

That  on  the  night  of  our  luckless  flight, 
Thy  brother  bold  I  slew. 

"Now  must  I  teach  to  hew  the  beech 
The  hand  that  held  the  glaive, 

For  leaves  to  spread  our  lowly  bed. 
And  stakes  to  fence  our  cave. 


"And  for  vest  of  pall,  thy  fingers  small. 

That  wont  on  harp  to  stray, 
A  cloak  must  shear  from  the  slaughtered  deer, 

To  keep  the  cold  away." 

"O  Richard!  if  my  brother  died, 

'Twas  but  a  fatal  chance; 
For  darkling  was  the  battle  tried, 

And  fortune  sped  the  lance. 

"If  pall  and  vair  no  more  I  wear. 

Nor  thou  the  crimson  sheen, 
As  warm,  we'll  say,  is  the  russet  gray, 

As  gay  the  forest  green. 

"And,  Richard,  if  our  lot  be  hard, 

And  lost  thy  native  land, 
Still  Alice  has  her  own  Richard, 

And  he  his  Alice  Brand." 


'Tis  merry,  'tis  merry,  in  good  greenwood, 
So  blithe  Lady  Alice  is  singing; 

On  the  beech's  pride,  and  oak's  brown  side, 
Lord  Richard's  ax  is  ringing. 

Up  spoke  the  moody  Elfin  King, 

Who  woned  within  the  hill, — 
Like  wind  in  the  porch  of  a  ruined  church, 

His  voice  was  ghostly  shrill. 


2717 


2718  Ballads  Old  and  New 

"Why  sounds  yon  stroke  on  beech  and  oak, 
Our  moonlight  circle's  screen?        1/. 

Or  who  comes  here  to  chase  the  deer^;fl T 
Beloved  of  our  Elfin  Queen?  :  r 

Or  who  may  dare  on  wold  to  wear 
The  fairies'  fatal  green? 

"Up,  Urgan,  up!  to  yon  mortal  hie, 
For  thou  wert  christened  man; 

For  cross  or  sign  thou  wilt  not  fly, 
For  muttered  word  or  ban. 

"Lay  on  him  the  curse  of  the  withered  heart, 
The  curse  of  the  sleepless  eye; 

Till  he  wish  and  pray  that  his  life  would  part, 
Nor  yet  find  leave  to  die!" 

lu 

'Tis  merry,  'tis  merry,  in  good  greenwood, 
Though  the  birds  have  stilled  their  singing; 

The  evening  blaze  doth  AUce  raise, 
And  Richard  is  fagots  bringing. 

Up  Urgan  starts,  that  hideous  dwarf. 

Before  Lord  Richard  stands, 
And,  as  he  crossed  and  blessed  himself, 
"I  fear  not  sign,"  quoth  the  grisly  elf, 

"That  is  made  with  bloody  hands." 

But  out  then  spoke  she,  Alice  Brand, 

That  woman  void  of  fear, — 
"And  if  there's  blood  upon  his  hand, 

'Tis  but  the  blood  of  deer." 

"Now  loud  thou  licst,  thou  bold  of  mood! 

It  cleaves  unto  his  hand, 
The  stain  of  thine  own  kindly  blood,     ; 

The  blood  of  Ethert  Brand." 


Alice   iBrand  -1^9 

Then  forward  stepped  she,  Alice  Brand, 

And  made  the  holy  sign,— 
"And  if  there's  blood  on  Richard's  hand, 

A  spotless  hand  is  mine. 

"And  I  conjure  thee,  Demon  elf, 

By  Him  whom  Demons  fear, 
To  show  us  whence  thou  art  thyself. 

And  what  thine  errand  here? '' 

IV 

"'Tis  merry,  'tis  merry,  in  Fairy-land, 

When  fairy  birds  are  singing, 
When  the  court  doth  ride  by  the  monarch's  side, 

With  bit  and  bridle  ringing. 

"And  gaily  shines  the  Fairy-land — 

But  all  is  glistening  show, 
Like  the  idle  gleam  that  December's  beam 

Can  dart  on  ice  and  snow. 

"And  fading,  like  that  varied  gleam, 

Is  our  inconstant  shape,- 
Who  now  like  knight  and  lady  seem, 

And  now  like  dwarf  and  ape. 

"It  was  between  the  night  and  day. 

When  the  Fairy  King  has  power. 
That  I  sunk  down  in  a  sinful  fray, 
And,  'twixt  life  and  death,  was  snatched  away 

To  the  joyless  Elfin  bower. 

"But  wist  I  of  a  woman  bold, 

WQio  thrice  my  brow  durst  sign, 
I  might  regain  my  mortal  mold. 

As  fair  a  form  as  thine." 

She  crossed  him  once — she  crossed  him  twice — ■ 

That  lady  was  so  brave; 
The  fouler  grew  his  goblin  hue. 

The  darker  grew  i\t  cave. 


2720  Ballads   Old  and  New 

She  crossed  him  thrice,  that  lady  bold; 

He  rose  beneath  her  hand 
The  fairest  knight  on  Scottish  mold, 

Her  brother,  Ethert  Brand! 

Merry  it  is  in  good  greenwood, 

When  the  mavis  and  merle  are  singing, 

But  merrier  were  they  in  Dunfermhne  gray, 
When  all  the  bells  were  ringing. 

Walter  Scotl  [1771-1832] 


SONG 

From  "  Rokeby  " 

O  Brignall  banks  are  wild  and  fair, 

And  Greta  woods  are  green, 
And  you  may  gather  garlands  there 
w   Would  grace  a  summer-queen. 
And  as  I  rode  by  Dalton-Hall 

Beneath  the  turrets  high, 
A  Maiden  on  the  castle-wall 

W^as  singing  merrily: 
"O  Brignall  banks  are  fresh  and  fair, 

And  Greta  woods  are  green; 
I'd  rather  rove  with  Edmund  there 

Than  reign  our  English  queen." 
I 
"O  Maiden,  wouldst  thou  wend  with  me, 

To  leave  both  tower  and  town, 
Thou  first  must  guess  what  life  lead  we 

That  dwell  by  dale  and  down. 
And  if  thou  canst  that  riddle  read, 

As  read  full  well  you  may. 
Then  to  the  greenwood  shalt  thou  speed, 

As  bhthe  as  Queen  of  May." 
Yet  sung  she,  "Brignall  banks  are  fair, 

And  Greta  woods  are  green; 
I'd  rather  rove  with  Edmund  there 

Than  reign  our  English  queen. 


Song  2721 

"I  read  you,  by  your  bugle-horn 

And  by  your  palfrey  good, 
I  read  you  for  a  Ranger  sworn 

To  keep  the  king's  greenwood." 
"A  Ranger,  lady,  winds  his  horn, 

And  'tis  at  peep  of  light; 
His  blast  is  heard  at  merry  morn. 

And  mine  at  dead  of  night." 
Yet  sung  she,  "Brignall  banks  are  fair, 

And  Greta  woods  are  gay; 
I  would  I  were  with  Edmund  there 

To  reign  his  Queen  of  May! 

"With  burnished  brand  and  musketoon 

So  gallantly  you  come, 
I  read  you  for  a  bold  Dragoon 

That  lists  the  tuck  of  drum." 
"I  list  no  more  the  tuck  of  drum. 

No  more  the  trumpet  hear; 
But  when  the  beetle  sounds  his  hum 

My  comrades  take  the  spear. 
And  0!  though  Brignall  banks  be  fair 

And  Greta  woods  be  gay, 
Yet  mickle  must  the  maiden  dare 

Would  reign  my  Queen  of  May! 

"Maiden!  a  nameless  life  I  lead, 

A  nameless  death  I'll  die; 
The  fiend,  whose  lantern  lights  the  mead, 

Were  better  mate  than  I! 
And  when  I'm  with  my  comrades  met 

Beneath  the  greenwood  bough, — 
WTiat  once  we  were  we  all  forget. 

Nor  think  what  we  are  now. 
Yet  Brignall  banks  are  fresh  and  fair. 

And  Greta  woods  are  green  ^ 
And  you  may  gather  garlands  there 

Would  grace  a  summer  queen." 

Walter  ScoH  [i 771-183 2] 


2722  Ballads  Old  and   New 


GLENARA 

Oh,  heard  ye  yon  pibroch  sound  sad  in  the  gale, 
Where  a  band  cometh  slowly  with  weeping  and  wail? 
'Tis  the  Chief  of  Glenara  laments  for  his  dear, 
And  her  sire,  and  her  people,  are  called  to  her  bier. 

Glenara  came  first  with  the  mourners  and  shroud; 

His  kinsmen  they  followed,  but  mourned  not  aloud: 

Their  plaids  all  their  bosoms  were  folded  around; 

They  marched  all  in  silence, — they  looked  on  the  ground. 

In  silence  they  went,  over  mountain  and  moor. 
To  a  heath,  where  the  oak-tree  grew  lonely  and  hoar; 
"Now  here  let  us  place  the  gray  stone  of  her  cairn: 
Why  speak  ye  no  word?  "  said  Glenara  the  stern. 

"And  tell  me,  I  charge  you,  ye  clan  of  my  spouse. 
Why  fold  ye  your  mantles,  why  cloud  ye  your  brows?  " 
So  spake  the  rude  chieftain: — no  answer  is  made. 
But  each  mantle  unfolding,  a  dagger  displayed. 

"I  dreamt  of  my  lady,  I  dreamt  of  her  shroud," 
Cried  a  voice  from  the  kinsmen,  all  wrathful  and  loud: 
"And  empty  that  shroud  and  that  coffin  did  seem; 
Glenara!  Glenara!  now  read  me  my  dream!" 

Oh,  pale  grew  the  cheek  of  that  chieftain,  I  ween, 
When  the  shroud  was  unclosed  and  no  lady  was  seen; 
When  a  voice  from  the  kinsmen  spoke  louder  in  scorn, — 
'Twas  the  youth  who  had  loved  the  fair  Ellen  of  Lorn, — 

"I  dreamt  of  my  lady,  I  dreamt  of  her  grief; 
I  dreamt  that  her  lord  was  a  barbarous  chiefs 
On  a  rock  of  the  ocean  fair  Ellen  did  seemio  \iid7I 
Glenara!  Glenara!  now  read  me  my  dream!" 

In  dust,  low  the  traitor  has  knelt  to  the  ground, 
And  the  desert  revealed  where  his  lady  was  found; 
From  a  rock  of  the  ocean  that  beauty  is  borne,— 
Now  joy  to  the  house  of  fair  Ellen  of  Lorn ! 

Thomas  Campbell  [1777-1844] 


Lord    Ullin's   Daughter  2723 


LORD   ULLIN'S  DAUGHTER 

A  CHIEFTAIN,  to  the  Highlands  bound, 
Cries,  ''Boatman,  do  not  tarry! 

And  I'll  give  thee  a  silver  pound, 
To  row  us  o'er  the  ferry." 

"Now  who  be  ye,  would  cross  Lochgyle, 
This  dark  and  stormy  water?" 

"O,  I'm  the  chief  of  Ulva's  Isle, 
And  this  Lord  UTlin's  daughter. 

"And  fast  before  her  father's  men 
Three  days  we've  fled  together. 

For  should  he  find  us  in  the  glen. 
My  blood  would  stain  the  heather. 

"His  horsemen  hard  behind  us  ride; 

Should  they  our  steps  discover, 
Then  who  will  cheer  my  bonny  bride 

When  they  have  slain  her  lover?" 

Outspoke  the  hardy  Highland  wight, 
"I'll  go,  my  chief, — I'm  ready: — 

It  is  not  for  j'our  silver  bright ; 
But  for  your  winsome  lady: 

"And  by  my  word!  the  bonny  bird 

In  danger  shall  not  tarry: 
So,  though  the  waves  are  raging  white, 

I'll  row  3'ou  o'er  the  ferry."  ■ 

By  this  the  storm  grew  loud  apace, 
The  water-wraith  was  shrieking; 

And  in  the  scowl  of  heaven  each  face 
Grew  dark  as  they  were  speaking. 

But  still  as  wilder  blew  the  wind. 
And  as  the  night  grew  drearer, 

Adown  the  glen  rode  armed  men, — 
Their  trampling  sounded  nearer. 


2724  Ballads   Old  and   New 

"O,  haste  thee,  haste!"  the  lady  cries, 
"Though  tempests  round  us  gather; 

I'll  meet  the  raging  of  the  skies. 
But  not  an  angry  father." 

The  boat  has  left  a  stormy  land, 

A  stormy  sea  before  her, — 
When,  O,  too  strong  for  human  hand, 

The  tempest  gathered  o'er  her. 

And  still  they  rowed  amidst  the  roar 

Of  waters  fast  prevailing: 
Lord  Ullin  reached  that  fatal  shore, — 

His  wrath  was  changed  to  wailing. 

For  sore  dismayed,  through  storm  and  shade, 

His  child  he  did  discover: 
One  lovely  hand  she  stretched  for  aid, 

And  one  was  round  her  lover. 

"Come  back!  come  back!"  he  cried  in  grief, 

"Across  this  stormy  water: 
And  I'll  forgive  your  Highland  chief, 

My  daughter! — 0  my  daughter!" 

'Twas  vain; — the  loud  waves  lashed  the  shore, 

Return  or  aid  preventing; — 
The  waters  wild  went  o'er  his  child. 

And  he  was  left  lamenting. 

Thomas  Campbell  [i 777-1 844] 


SIR   GALAHAD 

My  good  blade  carves  the  casques  of  men, 
My  tough  lance  thrusteth  sure, 

My  strength  is  as  the  strength  of  ten, 
Because  my  heart  is  pure. 


Sir  Galahad  2725 

The  shattering  trumpet  shrilleth  high, 

The  hard  brands  shiver  on  the  steel, 
The  sphntered  spear-shafts  crack  and  fly, 

The  horse  and  rider  reel : 
They  reel,  they  roll  in  clanging  lists, 

And  when  the  tide  of  combat  stands, 
Perfume  and  flowers  fall  in  showers, 

That  lightly  rain  from  ladies'  hands. 

How  sweet  are  looks  that  ladies  bend 

On  whom  their  favors  fall! 
For  them  I  battle  till  the  end. 

To  save  from  shame  and  thrall: 
But  all  my  heart  is  drawn  above. 

My  knees  are  bowed  in  crypt  and  shrine: 
I  never  felt  the  kiss  of  love, 

Nor  maiden's  hand  in  mine. 
More  bounteous  aspects  on  me  beam. 

Me  mightier  transports  move  and  thrill; 
So  keep  I  fair  through  faith  and  prayer 

A  virgin  heart  in  work  and  will. 

When  down  the  stormy  crescent  goes, 

A  light  before  me  swims. 
Between  dark  stems  the  forest  glows, 

I  hear  a  noise  of  hymns: 
Then  by  some  secret  shrine  I  ride; 

I  hear  a  voice,  but  none  are  there; 
The  stalls  are  void,  the  doors  are  wide, 

The  tapers  burning  fair. 
Fair  gleams  the  snowy  altar-cloth, 

The  silver  vessels  sparkle  clean,  • 
The  shrill  bell  rings,  the  censer  swings. 

And  solemn  chaunts  resound  between. 

Sometimes  on  lonely  mountain-meres 

I  find  a  magic  bark ; 
I  leap  on  board;  no  helmsman  steers: 

I  float  till  all  is  dark. 


2726  Ballads  Old  and  New 

A  gentle  sound,  an  awful  light! 

Three  angels  bear  the  Holy  Grail: 
With  folded  feet,  in  stoles  of  white, 

On  sleeping  wings  they  sail.       ■  .       ■ 
Ah,  blessed  vision!  blood  of  God! 

My  spirit  beats  her  mortal  bars, 
As  down  dark  tidies  the  glory  slides, 

And  star-like  mingles  with  the  stars. 

When  on  my  goodly  charger  borne        , , : ' 

Through  dreaming  towns  I  go, 
The  cock  crows  ere  the  Christmas  morn,  . 

The  streets  are  dumb  with  snow.    :  | 
The  tempest  crackles  on  the  leads. 

And,  ringing,  springs  from  brand  and  mail; 
But  o'er  the  dark  a  glory  spreads. 

And  gilds  the  driving  hail. 
I  leave  the  plain,  I  climb  the  height; 

No  branchy  thicket  shelter  yields;. 
But  blessed  forms  in  whistling  storms  I  o?. 

Fly  o'er  waste  fens  and  windy  fields. 

A  maiden  knight— to  me  is  given 

Such  hope,  I  know  not  fear; 
I  yearn  to  breathe  the  airs  of  heaven 

That  often  meet  me  here.  i 

I  muse  on  joy  that  will  not  cease,  ' '' 

Pure  spaces  clothed  in  living  beams, 
Pure  lilies  of  eternal  peace,  -ji[{ 

Whose  odors  haunt  my  dreams;       i" 
And,  stricken  by  an  angel's  hand,      ,;,;^ 

This  mortal  armor  that  I  wear, 
This  weight  and  size,  this  heart  and  e3^es, 

Are  touched,  arc  turned  to  finest  air. 


The  clouds  are  broken  in  the  skyytftomo?!  I 

And  through  the  mountain-walls 
A  rolling  organ-harmony 

Swells  up,  and  shakes  and  falls.  I 


Lady  Clare  2727 

Then  move  the  trees,  the  copses  nod, 

Wings  flutter,  voices  hover  clear:  I 

"O  just  and  faithful  knight  of  God! 

Ride  on!  the  prize  is  near." 
So  pass  I  hostel,  hall,  and  grange; 

By  bridge  and  ford,  by  park  and  pale, 
AU-armed  I  ride,  whate'er  betide. 

Until  I  find  the  Holy  Grail. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809- 189 2] 


LADY  CLARE 

It  was  the  time  when  lilies  blow,  i/, 

And  clouds  are  highest  up  in  air. 

Lord  Ronald  brought  a  lily-white  doe 
To  give  his  cousin.  Lady  Clare. 

I  trow  they  did  not  part  in  scorn: 
Lovers  long-betrothed  were  they: 

They  two  will  wed  the  morrow  morn, — 
God's  blessing  on  the  day! 

"He  does  not  love  me  for  my  birth,      mjw 
Nor  for  my  lands  so  broad  and  fair;' if ns  -uP. 

He  loves  me  for  my  own  true  worth, 
And  that  is  well,"  said  Lady  Clare. 

In  there  came  old  Alice  the  nurse, 

Said,  "Who  was  this  that  went  from  thee?" 
"It  was  my  cousin,"  said  Lady  Clare, 

"To-morrow  he  weds  with  me." 

"0  God  be  thanked!"  said  Alice  the  nurse, 
"That  all  comes  round  so  just  and  fair: 

Lord  Ronald  is  heir  of  all  your  lands. 
And  you  are  not  the  Lady  Clare." 

"  Are  ye  out  of  your  mind,  my  nurse,  my  nurse," 
Said  Lady  Clare,  "that  ye  speak  so  wild?" 

"As  God's  above,"  said  Alice  the  nurse, 
"I  speak  the  truth:  you  are  my  child. 


2728  Ballads  Old  and  New 

"The  old  earl's  daughter  died  at  my  breast; 

I  speak  the  truth,  as  I  live  by  bread! 
I  buried  her  like  my  own  sweet  child, 

And  put  my  child  in  her  stead." 

"Falsely,  falsely  have  ye  done, 
O  mother,"  she  said,  "if  this  be  true, 

To  keep  the  best  man  under  the  sun 
So  many  years  from  his  due." 

"Nay  now,  my  child,"  said  AKce  the  nurse, 
"But  keep  the  secret  for  your  life. 

And  all  you  have  will  be  Lord  Ronald's,     "  ': 
When  you  are  man  and  wife." 

"If  I'm  a  beggar  born,"  she  said, 
"I  will  speak  out,  for  I  dare  not  lie. 

Pull  off,  pull  off,  the  brooch  of  gold. 
And  fling  the  diamond  necklace  by." 

"Nay  now,  my  child,"  said  Alice  the  nurse, 
"But  keep  the  secret  all  you  can." 

She  said,  "Not  so:  but  I  will  know 
If  there  be  any  faith  in  man." 

"Nay  now,  what  faith?"  said  AHce  the  nurse, 
"The  man  will  cleave  unto  his  right." 

"And  he  shall  have  it,"  the  lady  replied, 
"Though  I  should  die  to-night." 


"Yet  give  one  kiss  to  your  mother  dear 
Alas,  my  child,  I  sinned  for  thee." 

"O  mother,  mother,  mother,"  she  said, 
"  So  strange  it  seems  to  me. 


!oJ 


"Yet  here's  a  kiss  for  my  mother  dear, 
Aly  mother  dear,  if  this  be  so. 

And  lay  your  hand  upon  my  head. 
And  bless  me,  mother,  ere  I  go," 


Lady   Clare  2729 


She  clad  herself  in  a  russet  gown, 

She  was  no  longer  Lady  Clare: 
She  went  by  dale,  and  she  went  by  down, 

With  a  single  rose  in  her  hair. 

The  hly-white  doe  Lord  Ronald  had  brought 

Leaped  up  from  where  she  lay, 
Dropped  her  head  in  the  maiden's  hand, 

And  followed  her  all  the  way. 

Down  stepped  Lord  Ronald  from  his  tower: 
"0  Lady  Clare,  you  shame  your  worth! 

Why  come  you  dressed  like  a  village  maid. 
That  are  the  flower  of  the  earth?" 

"If  I  come  dressed  hke  a  village  maid, 

I  am  but  as  my  fortunes  are: 
I  am  a  beggar  born,"  she  said, 

"And  not  the  Lady  Clare." 

"Play  me  no  tricks,"  said  Lord  Ronald, 
"For  I  am  yours  in  word  and  in  deed. 

Play  me  no  tricks,"  said  Lord  Ronald, 
"Your  riddle  is  hard  to  read." 

O,  and  proudly  stood  she  up ! 

Her  heart  within  her  did  not  fail; 
She  looked  into  Lord  Ronald's  eyes. 

And  told  him  all  her  nurse's  tale. 

He  laughed  a  laugh  of  merry  scorn: 

He  turned  and  kissed  her  where  she  stood: 

"If  you  are  not  the  heiress  born, 

And  I,"  said  he,  "the  next  in  blood — 

"If  you  are  not  the  heiress  born. 

And  I,"  said  he,  "the  lawful  heir, 
We  two  will  wed  to-morrow  morn, 

And  you  shall  still  be  Lady  Clare." 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1802] 


7/ 


2730  Ballads  Old  and  New 


GLENKINDIE 

About  Glenkindic  and  his  man, 
A  false  ballant  hath  long  been  writ; 
Some  bootless  loon  had  written  it, 
Upon  a  bootless  plan:  '  '•'''    '"  ^ 

But  I  have  found  the  true  at  last,.  "^^^^^^ 
And  here  it  is,  so  hold  it  fast !         '  baqqciQ 
'Twas  made  by  a  kind  damosel 
Who  loved  him  and  his  man  right  well: 

Glenkindie,  best  of  harpers,  came 

Unbidden  to  our  town; 
And  he  was  sad,  and  sad  to  see, 

For  love  had  worn  him  down. 

It  was  love,  as  all  men  know. 
The  love  that  brought  him  down, 

The  hopeless  love  for  the  King's  daughter, 
The  dove  that  heired  a  crown. 

Now  he  wore  not  that  collar  of  gold, 
,  His  dress  was  forest  green, 
His  wondrous  fair  and  rich  mantle 
Had  lost  its  silvery  sheen. 

But  still  by  his  side  walked  Rafe,  his  boy. 

In  goodly  cramoisie: 
Of  all  the  boys  that  ever  I  saw, 

The  goodhest  boy  was  he. 

O  Rafe  the  page!  O  Rafe  the  page! 

Ye  stole  the  heart  frae  me: 
O  Rafe  the  page!  O  Rafe  the  page! 

I  wonder  where  ye  be; 
We  ne'er  may  see  Glenkindie  more, 

But  may  we  never  see  thee? 

Glenkindie  came  within  the  hall, 

We  set  him  on  the  dais, 
And  gave  him  bread,  and  gave  him  wine, 

The  best  in  all  the  place. 


Glenkindie  ^.73^ 

We  set  for  him  the  guest's  high  chair, 

And  spread  the  naperie: 
Our  Dame  herself  would  serve  for  him, 

And  I  for  Rafe,  perdie! 

But  down  he  sat  on  a  low,  low  stool, 

And  thrust  his  long  legs  out. 
And  leaned  his  back  to  the  high  chair, 

And  turned  his  harp  about. 

He  turned  it  round,  he  stroked  the  strings, 

He  touched  each  tirling-pin. 
He  put  his  mouth  to  the  sounding-board 

And  breathed  his  breath  therein. 

And  Rafe  sat  over  against  his  face, 

And  looked  at  him  wistfullie: 
I  almost  grat  ere  he  began. 

They  were  so  sad  to  see. 

The  very  first  stroke  he  strack  that  day, 

We  all  came  crowding  near; 
And  the  second  stroke  he  strack  that  day. 

We  all  were  smit  with  fear. 

The  third  stroke  that  he  strack  that  day, 

Full  fain  we  were  to  cry; 
The  fourth  stroke  that  he  strack  that  day, 

We  thought  that  we  would  die. 

No  tongue  can  tell  how  sweet  it  was, 

How  far,  and  yet  how  near, 
We  saw  the  saints  in  Paradise, 

And  bairnies  on  their  bier. 

And  our  sweet  Dame  sav/  her  good  lord — 

She  told  me  privihe — 
She  saw  him  as  she  saw  him  last, 

On  his  ship  upon  the  sea. 


2732  Ballads  Old  and  New 

Anon  he  laid  his  little  harp  by, 

He  shut  his  wondrous  eyes; 
We  stood  a  long  time  like  dumb  things, 

Stood  in  a  dumb  surprise. 

Then  all  at  once  we  left  that  trance, 

And  shouted  where  we  stood; 
We  clasped  each  other's  hands  and  vowed 

We  would  be  wise  and  good. 

Soon  he  rose  up  and  Rafe  rose  too, 

He  drank  wine  and  broke  bread; 
He  clasped  his  hands  with  our  trembhng  Dame, 

But  never  a  word  he  said. 
They  went, — Alack  and  lack-a-day! 

They  went  the  way  they  came. 

I  followed  them  all  down  the  floor. 

And  oh  but  I  had  drouth 
To  touch  his  cheek,  to  touch  his  hand, 

To  kiss  Rafe's  velvet  mouth! 

But  I  knew  such  was  not  for  me. 

They  went  straight  from  the  door; 
We  saw  them  fade  within  the  mist. 

And  never  saw  them  more. 

William  Bell  ScoU  [  1 8 1 1  - 1 890] 


"HOW  THEY  BROUGHT  THE  GOOD  NEWS  FROM 
GHENT   TO   AIX" 

[16-] 

I  SPRANG  to  the  stirrup,  and  Joris,  and  he; 

I  galloped,  Dirck  galloped,  we  galloped  all  three; 

"Good  speed!"  cried  the  watch,  as  the  gate-bolts  undrew; 

"Speed!"  echoed  the  wall  to  us  galloping  through; 

Behind  shut  the  postern,  the  lights  sank  to  rest,. 

And  into  the  midnight  we  galloped  abreast.         ; 


"  How  They  Brought  the  Good  News  "    2733 

Not  a  word  to  each  other;  we  kept  the  great  pace    "  ' 
Neck  by  neck,  stride  by  stride,  never  changing  our  place; 
I  turned  in  my  saddle  and  made  its  girths  tight, 
Then  shortened  each  stirrup,  and  set  the  pique  right, 
Rebuckled  the  cheek-strap,  chained  slacker  the  bit,  ' 

Nor  galloped  less  steadily  Roland  a  whit. 

'Twas  moonset  at  starting;  but  while  we  drew  near 

Lokeren,  the  cocks  crew  and  twilight  dawned  clear; 

At  Boom,  a  great  yellow  star  came  out  to  see; 

At  Dliffeld,  'twas  morning  as  plain  as  could  be; 

And  from  Mecheln  church-steeple  we  heard  the  half-chime. 

So  Joris  broke  silence  with,  "Yet  there  is  time!" 

At  Aershot,  up  leaped  of  a  sudden  the  sun, 
And  against  him  the  cattle  stood  black  every  one, 
To  stare  through  the  mist  at  us  galloping  past, 
And  I  saw  my  stout  galloper  Roland  at  last, 
With  resolute  shoulders,  each  butting  away 
The  haze,  as  some  bluff  river  headland  its  spray: 

And  his  low  head  and  crest,  just  one  sharp  ear  bent  back 
For  my  voice,  and  the  other  pricked  out  on  his  track; 
And  one  eye's  black  intelligence, — ever  that  glance 
O'er  its  white  edge  at  me,  his  own  master,  askance! 
And  the  thick  heavy  spume-flakes  which  aye  and  anon 
His  fierce  lips  shook  upwards  in  galloping  on. 

By  Hasselt,  Dirck  groaned;  and  cried  Joris  "Stay  spur! 
Your  Roos  galloped  bravely,  the  fault's  not  in  her, 
We'll  remember  at  Aix" — for  one  heard  the  quick  wheeze 
Of  her  chest,  saw  the  stretched  neck  and  staggering  knees, 
And  sunk  tail,  and  horrible  heave  of  the  flank, 
As  down  on  her  haunches  she  shuddered  and  sank. 

So,  we  were  left  galloping,  Joris  and  I, 

Past  Looz  and  past  Tongres,  no  cloud  in  the  sky; 

The  broad  sun  above  laughed  a  pitiless  laugh, 

'Neath  our  feet  broke  the  brittle  bright  stubble  like  chaff; 

Till  over  by  Dalhem  a  dome-spire  sprang  white. 

And  "Gallop,"  gasped  Joris,  "for  Aix  is  in  sight! 


2734  Ballads  Old  and   New   HT  woH '' 

"How  they'll  greet  us!" — and  all  in  a  moment  his  roan 

RoUedneck  and  croup  over,  lay  dead  as  a  stone; 

And  there  was  my  Roland  to  bear  the  whole  weight 

Of  the  news  which  alcne  could  save  Aix  from  her  fate, 

With  his  nostrils  like  pits  full  of  blood  to  the  brim. 

And  with  circles  of  red  for  his  e3'e-so€kets'  rim.  .u  ..y  iu  > 

Then  I  cast  loose  my  buffcoat,  each  holster  let  fall,  ,,-•: 

Shook  off  both  my  jack-boots,  let  go  belt  and  all, 

Stood  up  in  the  stirrup,  leaned,  patted  his  car, 

Called  my  Roland  his  pet-name,  my  horse  without  peer; 

Clapped  my  hands,  laughed  and  sang,  any  noise,  bad  or 

good. 
Till  at  length  into  Aix  Roland  galloped  and  stood. 

And  all  I  remember  is, — friends  flocking  round 
As  I  sat  with  his  head  'tAvixt  my  knees  on  the  ground; 
And  no  voice  but  was  praising  this  Roland  of  mine. 
As  I  poured  down  his  throat  our  last  measure  of  wine,    ' '/, 
Which  (the  burgesses  voted  by  common  consent)      ' 
Was  no  more  than  his  due  who  brought  good  news  from 
Ghent. 

Robert  Broivniiig  [1812-1S89] 


THE  OLD   SCOTTISH   CAVALIER 

Come  listen  to  another  song. 

Should  make  your  heart  beat  high, 
Bring  crimson  to  your  forehead, 

And  the  luster  to  your  eye ; — 
It  is  the  song  of  the  olden  time. 

Of  days  long  since  gone  by, 
And  of  a  Baron  stout  and  bold 

As  e'er  wore  sword  on  thigh! 

Like  a  brave  old  Scottish  cavalier. 
All  of  the  olden  time! 

He  kept  his  castle  in  the  north. 

Hard  by  the  thundering  Spey; 
And  a  thousand  vassals  dwelt  around,    ■  ■>■  -■■'  ■ 

All  of  his  kindred  they,  ifiO  "  bn/ 


The  Old  Scottish  Cavalier         ^73 5 

And  not  a  man  of  all  that  clan 

Had  ever  ceased  to  pray 
For  the  Royal  race  they  loved  so  well, 
Though  exiled  far  away 

From  the  steadfast  Scottish  cavaliers, 
All  of  the  olden  time! 


His  father  drew  the  righteous  sword 

For  Scotland  and  her  claims, 
Among  the  loyal  gentlemen 

And  chiefs  of  ancient  names. 
Who  swore  to  fight  or  fall  beneath 

The  standard  of  King  James, 
And  died  at  Killiecrankie  Pass 

With  the  glory  of  the  Graemes; 
Like  a  true  old  Scottish  cavaUer 
All  of  the  olden  time! 

He  never  owned  the  foreign  rule, 

No  master  he  obeyed, 
But  kept  his  clan  in  peace  at  home, 

From  foray  and  from  raid; 
And  when  they  asked  him  for  his  oath, 

He  touched  his  glittering  blade, 
And  pointed  to  his  bonnet  blue, 

That  bore  the  white  cockade: 
Like  a  leal  old  Scottish  cavalier, 
All  of  the  olden  time ! 

At  length  the  news  ran  through  the  land- 

The  Princk  had  come  again! 
That  night  the  fiery  cross  was  sped 

O'er  mountain  and  through  glen; 
And  our  old  Baron  rose  in  might. 

Like  a  lion  from  his  den, 
And  rode  away  across  the  hills 

To  Charlie  and  his  men,  . 

With  the  valiant  Scottish  cavaliers, 
All  of  the  olden  time! 


2736  Ballads   Old  and   New 

He  was  the  first  that  bent  the  knee 

When  the  Standard  waved  abroad, 
He  was  the  first  that  charged  the  foe 

On  Preston's  bloody  sod; 
And  ever,  in  the  van  of  fight, 

The  foremost  still  he  trod, 
Until  on  bleak  Culloden's  heath, 

He  gave  his  soul  to  God, 

Like  a  good  old  Scottish  cavaUer, 
All  of  the  olden  time! 

Oh,  never  shall  we  know  again 
A  heart  so  stout  and  true — 
The  olden  times  have  passed  away, 

And  weary  are  the  new : 
The  fair  White  Rose  has  faded 

From  the  garden  where  it  grew. 
And  no  fond  tears,  save  those  of  heaven, 
The  glorious  bed  bedew 

Of  the  last  old  Scottish  cavalier 
All  of  the  olden  time! 

William  Edmondstoune  Aytoun  [1813-1865] 


THE  BALLAD  OF  KEITH  OF  RAVELSTON 

From  "  A  Nuptial  Eve  " 

The  murmur  of  the  mourning  ghost 
That  keeps  the  shadowy  kine, 

"O  Keith  of  Ravelston, 
The  sorrows  of  thy  line!" 

Ravelston,  Ravelston, 

The  merry  path  that  leads 
Down  the  golden  morning  hill. 

And  through  the  silver  meads; 

Ravelston,  Ravelston, 

The  stile,  beneath  the  tree, 
The  maid  that  kept  her  mother's  kine, 

The  song  that  sang  she! 


The  Ballad  of  Keith  of  Ravelston     2737 

She  sang  her  song,  she  kept  her  kine, 

She  sat  beneath  the  thorn, 
When  Andrew  Keith  of  Ravelston 

Rode  through  the  Monday  morn. 

His  henchmen  sing,  his  hawk-bells  ring, 

His  belted  jewels  shine; 
0  Keith  of  Ravelston, 

The  sorrows  of  thy  line! 

Year  after  year,  where  Andrew  came, 

Comes  evening  down  the  glade, 
And  still  there  sits  a  moonshine  ghost 

Where  sat  the  sunshine  maid. 

Her  misty  hair  is  faint  and  fair, 
She  keeps  the  shadowy  kine; 

0  Keith  of  Ravelston, 
The  sorrows  of  thy  line! 

1  lay  my  hand  upon  the  stile, 
The  stile  is  lone  and  cold. 

The  burnie  that  goes  babbling  by 
Says  naught  that  can  be  told. 

Yet,  stranger!  here,  from  year  to  year, 

She  keeps  her  shadowy  kine; 
O  Keith  of  Ravelston, 

The  sorrows  of  thy  line! 

Step  out  three  steps,  where  Andrew  stood — 

Why  blanch  thy  cheeks  for  fear? 
The  ancient  stile  is  not  alone, 

'Tis  not  the  burn  I  hear! 

She  makes  her  immemorial  moan. 

She  keeps  her  shadowy  kine; 
O  Keith  of  Ravelston. 

The  sorrows  of  thy  line! 

■Syihicy  Dohcll  [i 824-1 87 4I 


2738  Ballads   Old  and   NeW-^H   ^HT 

THE  MISTLETOE   BOUGH 

The  mistletoe  hung  in  the  castle  hall, 
The  hoUy  branch  shone  on  the  old  oak  wall; 
And  the  baron's  retainers  were  blithe  and  gay. 
And  keeping  their  Christmas  holiday. 
The  baron  beheld  with  a  father's  pride 
His  beautiful  child,  young  Lov ell's  bride; 
While  she  with  her  bright  eyes  seemed  to  be 
The  star  of  the  goodly  company. 

"I'm  weary  of  dancing  now,"  she  cried; 

"Here  tarry  a  moment, — I'U  hide,  I'll  hide! 

And,  Lovell,  be  sure  thou'rt  first  to  trace 

The  clew  to  my  secret  lurking-place." 

Away  she  ran, — and  her  friends  began 

Each  tower  to  search,  and  each  nook  to  scan; 

And  young  Lovell  cried,  "O,  where  dost  thou  hide? 

I'm  lonesome  without  thee,  ray  own  dear  bride." 

They  sought  her  that  night,  and  they  sought  her  next  day, 

And  they  sought  her  in  vain  while  a  week  passed  away; 

In  the  highest,  the  lowest,  the  loneliest  spot, 

Young  Lovell  sought  wildly, — but  found  her^nQt,.^ 

And  years  flew  by,  and  their  grief  at  last  ,-;  .,f\p 

Was  told  as  a  sorrowful  tale  long  past; 

And  when  Lovell  appeared,  the  children  cried, 

"See!  the  old  man  weeps  for  his  fairy  bride." 

At  length  an  oak  chest,  that  had  long  lain  hid. 
Was  found  in  the  castle, — they  raised  the  lid, 
And  a  skeleton  form  lay  moldering  there 
In  the  bridal  wreath  of  that  lady  fair! 
O,  sad  was  her  fate! — in  sportive  jest 
She  hid  from  her  lord  in  the  old  oak  chest. 
It  closed  with  a  spring! — and,  dreadful  doom, 
The  bride  lay  clasped  in  her  living  tomb! 

Thomas  Haynes  Bayly  [1797-1839] 


The  Abbot  of  Inisfalen  2739 


THE   ABBOT  OF  INISFALEN 


The  Abbot  of  Inisfalen 

Awoke  ere  dawn  of  day; 
Under  the  dewy  green  leaves 

Went  he  forth  to  pray. 

The  lake  around  his  island 

Lay  smooth  and  dark  and  deep, 

And,  wrapped  in  a  misty  stillness, 
The  mountains  were  all  asleep. 

Lov.'  kneeled  the  Abbot  Cormac, 
When  the  dawn  was  dim  and  gray; 

The  prayers  of  his  holy  office  ' 

He  faithfully  'gan  say. 

Low  kneeled  the  Abbot  Cormac, 
When  the  dawn  was  waxing  red. 

And  for  his  sins'  forgiveness 
A  solemn  prayer  he  said. 

Low  kneeled  that  holy  Abbot 

When  the  dawn  was  waxing  clear; 

And  he  prayed  with  loving-kindness 
For  his  convent  brethren  dear. 

Low  kneeled  that  blessed  Abbot, 
When  the  dawn  was  waxing  bright; 

He  prayed  a  great  prayer  for  Ireland, 
He  prayed  with  all  his  might. 

Low  kneeled  that  good  old  father, 
While  the  sun  began  to  dart; 

He  prayed  a  prayer  for  all  mankind;. 
He  prayed  it  from  his  heart. 


2740  Ballads  Old  and  New 

II 

The  Abbot  of  Inisfalen 

Arose  upon  his  feet ; 
He  heard  a  small  bird  singing, 

And,  oh,  but  it  sung  sweet! 

He  heard  a  white  bird  singing  well 

Within  a  holly-tree; 
A  song  so  sweet  and  happy 

Never  before  heard  he. 

It  sung  upon  a  hazel,  ■  ' 

It  sung  upon  a  thorn; 
He  had  never  heard  such  music 

Since  the  hour  that  he  was  born. 

It  sung  upon  a  sycamore, 

It  sung  upon  a  briar; 
To  follow  the  song  and  hearken 

This  Abbot  could  never  tire. 

Till  at  last  he  well  bethought  him 

He  might  no  longer  sta)^; 
So  he  blessed  the  little  white  singing-bird, 

And  gladly  went  his  way. 

Ill 

But  when  he  came  to  his  Abbey  walls, 
He  found  a  wondrous  change; 

He  saw  no  friendly  faces  there, 
For  every  face  was  strange. 

The  stranger  spoke  unto  him; 

And  he  heard  from  all  and  each 
The  foreign  tone  of  the  Sassenach, 

Not  wholesome  Irish  speech. 

Then  the  oldest  monk  came  forward, 

In  Irish  tongue  spake  he: 
"Thou  wearest  the  holy  Augustine's  dress, 

And  who  hath  given  it  thee?" 


The  Abbot  of  Inisfalen  274 

"I  wear  the  holy  kugiistine's  drfess',     '    ' 

And  Cormac  is  my  name, 
The  Abbot  of  this  good  Al)bey 

By  grace  of  God  I  am. 

"I  went  forth  to  pray,  at  the  dawn  of  day; 

And  when  my  prayers  were  said, 
I  hearkened  awhile  to  a  httle  bird 

That  sung  above  my  head." 

The  monks  to  him  made  answer, 
"Two  hundred  years  have  gone  o'er, 

Since  our  Abbot  Cormac  went  through  the  gate, 
And  never  was  heard  of  more. 

"Matthias  now  is  our  Abbot, 

And  twenty  have  passed  away. 
The  stranger  is  lord  of  Ireland; 

We  live  in  an  evil  day." 

IV 

"Now  give  me  absolution; 

For  my  time  is  come,"  said  he. 
And  they  gave  him  absolution 

As  speedily  as  might  be. 

Then,  close  outside  the  window. 

The  sweetest  song  they  heard 
That  ever  yet  since  the  world  began 

Was  uttered  by  any  bird. 

The  monks  looked  out  and  saw  the  bird, 

Its  feathers  all  white  and  clean ; 
And  there  in  a  moment,  beside  it. 

Another  white  bird  was  seen. 

Those  two  they  sang  together,  ,  "' 

Waved  their  white  wings,  and  fled; 
Flew  aloft,  and  vanished; 

But  the  good  old  man  was  dead.  1 


2742  Ballads  Old  and  New 

They  buried  his  blessed  body 

Where  lake  and  greensward  meet;  / 

A  carven  cross  above  his  head,  ,^-y 
A  holly-bush  at  his  feet;  [ 

Where  spreads  the  beautiful  water 

To  gay  or  cloudy  skies, 
And  the  purple  peaks  of  Killamey 

From  ancient  woods  arise. 

William  Allingham  [1824-] 

iUKDv  b'jibnufl  owT" 
,-,  THE  CAVALIER'S  ESCA^^^^j^iig 

Trample!  trample!  went  the  roan,  ^'i  ^"A 

Trap!  trap!  went  the  gray; 
But  pad!  pad!  pad!  like  a  thing  that  was  madj 

My  chestnut  broke  away. 
It  was  just  five  miles  from  Sahsbury  town, 

And  but  one  hour  to  day. 

Thud!  thud!  came  on  the  heavy  roan. 

Rap!  rap!  the  mettled  gray; 
But  my  chestnut  mare  was  of  blood  so  rare, 

That  she  showed  them  all  the  way. 
Spur  on !  spur  on ! — I  doffed  my  hat, 

And  wished  them  all  good-day. 

They  splashed  through  miry  rut  and  pool, — 
SpUntered  through  fence  and  rail; 

But  chestnut  Kate  s\vitched  over  the  gate,— 
I  saw  them  droop  and  trail. 

To  Sahsbury  town — but  a  mile  of  down,      1 1' 
Once  over  this  brook  and  rail. 

Trap!  trap!  I  heard  their  echoing  hoofs 

Past  the  walls  of  mossy  stone; 
The  roan  flew  on  at  a  staggering  pace,"  osorlT 

But  blood  is  better  than  bone. 
I  patted  old  Kate,  and  gave  her  the  spur,    ,i  { 

For  I  knew  it  was  all  my  own.  ; 


,;  Xh<2  Three  Troopers  -743 

But  trample!  trample!  came  their  steeds, 

And  I  saw  their  wolf's  eyes  burn; 
I  felt  like  a  royal  hart  at  bay, 

And  made  me  ready  to  turn. 
I  looked  where  highest  grew  the  may. 

And  deepest  arched  the  fern. 

I  flew  at  the  first  knave's  sallow  throat; 

One  blow,  and  he  was  down. 
The  second  rogue  fired  twice,  and  missed; 

I  shced  the  villain's  crown, — 
Clove  through  the  rest,  and  flogged  brave  Kate, 

Fast,  fast  to  Salisbury  town  ! 

Pad!  pad!  they  came  on  the  level  sward. 

Thud!  thud!  upon  the  sand, — 
With  a  gleam  of  swords  and  a  burning  match, 

And  a  shaking  of  flag  and  hand; 
But  one  long  bound,  and  I  passed  the  gate, 

Safe  from  the  canting  band. 

Walter  Thornbury  [1828-1876] 


THE  THREE  TROOPERS 

DURING   THE   PROTECTORATE 

Into  the  Devil  tavern 

Three  booted  troopers  strode, 
From  spur  to  feather  spotted  and  splashed 

With  the  mud  of  a  winter  road. 
In  each  of  their  cups  they  dropped  a  crust. 

And  stared  at  the  guests  with  a  frown; 
And  drew  their  swords,  and  roared  for  a  toast, 

"God  send  this  Crum-wcU-down!" 


A  blue  smoke  rose  from  their  pistol  locks, 

Their  sword  blades  were  still  wet; 
There  were  long  red  smears  on  their  jerkins  of  buff, 

As  the  table  they  overset. 


2  744  Ballads  Old  and  New 

Then  into  their  cups  they  stirred  the  crusts,'*  ^'~'" 

And  cursed  old  London  town ; 
Then  waved  their  swords,  and  drank  with  a  stamp, 

"God  send  this  Crum-well-down!" 

The  'prentice  dropped  his  can  of  beer, 

The  host  turned  pale  as  a  clout; 
The  ruby  nose  of  the  toping  squire 

Grew  white  at  the  wild  men's  shout. 
Then  into  their  cups  they  flung  the  crusts. 

And  showed  their  teeth  with  a  frown; 
They  flashed  their  swords  as  they  gave  the  toast, 

"God  send  this  Crum-well-down!" 

The  gambler  dropped  his  dog's-eared  cards. 

The  waiting-women  screamed. 
As  the  Hght  of  the  fire,  like  stains  of  blood. 

On  the  wild  men's  sabers  gleamed. 
Then  into  their  cups  they  splashed  the  crusts, 

And  cursed  the  fool  of  a  town, 
And  leaped  on  the  table,  and  roared  a  toast, 

"God  send  this  Crum-well-down!" 

Till  on  a  sudden  fire-bells  rang, 

And  the  troopers  sprang  to  horse; 
The  eldest  muttered  between  his  teeth. 

Hot  curses — deep  and  coarse. 
In  their  stirrup  cups  they  flung  the  crusts, 

And  cried  as  they  spurred  through  the  town. 
With  their  keen  swords  drawn  and  their  pistols  cocked, 

"God  send  this  Crum-well-down!" 

Away  they  dashed  through  Temple  Bar, 

Their  red  cloaks  flowing  free, 
Their  scabbards  clashed,  each  back-piece  shone — 

None  liked  to  touch  the  three. 
The  silver  cups  that  held  the  crusts 

They  flung  to  the  startled  town, 
Shouting  again,  with  a  blaze  of  swords, 

"God  send  this  Crum-well-down!" 

Walter  TJwrnhiiry  [1S28-1S76] 


The  Sally  from   Coventry  2745 


THE   SALLY  FROM   COVENTRY 

"Passion  o'  me! "  cried  Sir  Richard  Tyrone, 
Spurning  the  sparks  from  the  broad  paving-stone, 
"Better  turn  nurse  and  rock  children  to  sleep, 
Than  yield  to  a  rebel  old  Coventry  Keep. 
No,  by  my  hahdom,  no  one  shall  say, 
Sir  Richard  Tyrone  gave  a  city  away!" 

Passion  o'  me!  how  he  pulled  at  his  beard! 
Fretting  and  chafing  if  any  one  sneered, 
Clapping  his  breastplate  and  shaking  his  fist, 
Giving  his  grizzly  moustachios  a  twist, 
Running  the  protocol  through  with  his  steel. 
Grinding  the  letter  to  mud  with  his  heel. 

Then  he  roared  out  for  a  pottle  of  sack, 

Clapped  the  old  trumpeter  twice  on  the  back. 

Leaped  on  his  bay  with  a  dash  and  a  swing. 

Bade  all  the  bells  in  the  city  to  ring, 

And  when  the  red  flag  from  the  steeple  went  down, 

Open  they  flung  every  gate  in  the  town. 

To  boot!  and  to  horse!  and  away  like  a  flood, 

A  fire  in  their  eyes,  and  a  sting  in  their  blood; 

Hurrying  out  with  a  flash  and  a  flare, 

A  roar  of  hot  guns,  a  loud  trumpeter's  blare. 

And  first,  sitting  proud  as  a  king  on  his  throne, 

At  the  head  of  them  all  dashed  Sir  Richard  Tyrone. 

Crimson,  and  yellow,  and  purple,  and  dun. 
Fluttering  scarf,  flowing  bright  in  the  sun, 
Steel  like  a  mirror  on  brow  and  on  breast. 
Scarlet  and  white  on  their  feather  and  crest. 
Banner  that  blew  in  a  torrent  of  red, 
Borne  by  Sir  Richard,  who  rode  at  their  head. 

The  "trumpet"  went  down — with  a  gash  on  his  poll. 
Struck  by  the  parters  of  body  and  soul. 
Forty  saddles  were  empty;  the  horses  ran  red 
With  foul  Puritan  blood  from  the  slashes  that  bled. 


2746  Ballads  Old  and  New 

Curses  and  cries  and  a  gnashing  of  teeth, ,   ^ . 

A  grapple  and  stab  on  the  slippery  heath, 

And  Sir  Richard  leaped  up  on  the  fool  that  went  down, 

Proud  as  a  conqueror  donning  his  crown. ,, 

They  broke  them  away  through  a  flooding' of  firfej 
Trampling  the  best  blood  of  London  to  mire, 
When  suddenly  rising  a  smoke  and  a  blaze. 
Made  all  "the  dragon's  sons"  stare  in  amaze: 
"O  ho! "  quoth  Sir  Richard,  "my  city  grows  hot:- 
I've  left  it  rent-paid  to  the  villainous  Scot!" 

Walter  Thombury  [182S-1876] 

SHAMEFUL  DEATH 

There  were  four  of  us  about  that  bed;   '"•-' 
The  mass-priest  knelt  at  the  side, 

I  and  his  mother  stood  at  the  head, 
Over  his  feet  lay  the  bride; 

We  were  quite  sure  that  he  was  dead.       .    ^ 
Though  his  eyes  were  open  wide.         ,     ^ 

He  did  not  die  in  the  night, 

He  did  not  die  in  the  day,  .  1  jq^j  Q-p 

But  in  the  morning  twilight 

His  spirit  passed  away; 
When  neither  sun  nor  moon  was  bright, 

And  the  trees  were  merely  gray. 

He  was  not  slain  with  the  sword, 
Knight's  axe,  or  the  knightly  spear, 

Yet  spoke  he  never  a  word 
After  he  came  in  here; 

I  cut  away  the  cord  ;ii;'j?' 

From  the  neck  of  my  brother  dear.-  " 

He  did  not  strike  one  blow, 

For  the  recreants  came  behind,  '   ' 

In  a  place  where  the  hornbeams  grow,  'i J'"' 

A  path  right  hard  to  find,  ^'>i 

For  the  hornbeam  boughs  swing  so  •  '•■' 

That  the  twilight  makes  it  blind. 


The   Rime  ot  the  Ancient   Mariner     oy^y 

They  lighted  a  great  torch  then, 

When  his  arms  were  pinioned  fast; 
Sir  John,  the  Knight  of  the  Fen, 

Sir  Guy,  of  the  Dolorous  Blast, 
With  knights  threescore  and  ten, 

Hung  brave  Sir  Hugh  at  last. 

I  am  threescore  and  ten. 

And  my  hair  is  all  turned  gray, 
But  I  met  Sir  John  of  the  Fen 

Long  ago  on  a  summer  day,  -uiri/,?  j.n 

And  am  glad  to  think  of  the  moment  when 

I  took  his  Hfe  away. 

I  am  threescore  and  ten, 

And  my  strength  is  mostly  passed, 

But  long  ago  I  and  my  men, 
When  the  sky  was  overcast. 

And  the  smoke  rolled  over  the  reeds  of  the  fen, 
Slew  Guy  of  the  Dolorous  Blast. 

And  now.  Knights,  all  of  you, 
I  pray  you,  pray  for  Sir  Hugh, 
A  good  knight  and  a  true, 
And  for  Alice,  his  wife,  pray  too. 

WilUatn  Morris  [1834-1896] 


THE  RIME  OF  THE  ANCIENT  MARINER 

ARGUMENT 

How  a  Ship,  having  passed  the  Line,  was  driven  by  storms  to  the  cold  Coun- 
try towards  the  South  Pole;  and  how  from  thence  she  made  hercourse  to  the 
tropical  Latitude  of  the  Great  Pacific  Ocean;  and  of  the  strange  things  that  be- 
fell; and  in  what  manner  the  Ancyent  Marinere  came  back  to  his  own  Country. 

PART  I 

An  ancient 

It  is  an  ancient  IMariner,  Manner 

'  meeteth  three 

And  he  stoppeth  one  of  three.  gallants 

.  .  bidden  to  a 

"By  thy  long  gray  beard  and  gliltermg  eye,      wedding-feast,' 
Now  wherefore  stopp'st  thou  me?  one. 


2748 


Ballads   Old  and   Nevv-^jjf^-  ^^^'p 


The  Wedding- 
Guest  is  spell- 
bound by  the 
eye  of  the  old 
seafaring 
man,  and  con- 
strained to 
hear  his  tale. 


"The  Bridegroom's  doors  are  opened  wide, 
And  I  am  next  of  kin; 
The  guests  are  met,  the  feast  is  set: 
May'st  hear  the  merry  din." 

He  holds  him  with  his  skinny  hand, 
"There  was  a  ship,"  quoth  he. 
"Hold  off!  unhand  me,  gray-beard  loon!" 
Eftsoons  his  hand  dropped  he. 

He  holds  him  with  his  glittering  eye — 
The  Wedding-Guest  stood  still, 
And  listens  hke  a  three  years'  child : 
The  Mariner  hath  his  will. 

The  Wedding-Guest  sat  on  a  stone: 
He  cannot  choose  but  hear; 
And  thus  spake  on  that  ancient  man, 
The  bright-eyed  Mariner. 

"The  ship  was  cheered,  the  harbor  cleared. 

Merrily  did  we  drop 

Below  the  kirk,  below  the  hill. 

Below  the  lighthouse  top. 


The  Mariner 
tells  how  the 
ship  sailed 
southward 
with  a  good 
wind  and  fair 
weather,  till  it 
reached  the 
Line. 


"The  Sun  came  up  upon  the  left. 
Out  of  the  sea  came  he! 
And  he  shone  bright,  and  on  the  right 
Went  down  into  the  sea. 

"Higher  and  higher  every  day. 

Till  over  the  mast  at  noon " 

The  Wedding-Guest  here  beat  his  breast. 
For  he  heard  the  loud  bassoon. 


The  Wedding- 
Guest  heareth 
the  bridal 
music;  but  the 
Mariner  con- 
tinueth  his  tale. 


The  bride  hath  paced  into  the  hall, 
Red  as  a  rose  is  she; 
Nodding  their  heads  before  her  goes 
The  merry  minstrelsy. 


The   Rime  of  the  Ancient   Mariner 


2749 


The  Wedding-Guest  he  beat  his  breast, 
Yet  he  cannot  choose  but  hear; 
And  thus  spake  on  that  ancient  man, 
The  bright-eyed  Mariner. 

"And  now  the  Storm-blast  came,  and  he 
Was  tyrannous  and  strong: 
He  struck  with  his  o'ertaking  wings, 
And  chased  us  south  along. 

"With  sloping  masts  and  dipping  prow. 

As  who  pursued  with  yell  and  blow 

Still  treads  the  shadow  of  his  foe. 

And  forward  bends  his  head. 

The  ship  drove  fast,  loud  roared  the  blast, 

And  southward  aye  we  fled. 

"And  now  there  came  both  mist  and  snow, 
And  it  grew  wondrous  cold: 
And  ice,  mast-high,  came  floating  by. 
As  green  as  emerald. 

"And  through  the  drifts  the  snowy  clifts 
Did  send  a  dismal  sheen: 
Nor  shapes  of  men,  nor  beasts  we  ken — 
The  ice  was  all  between. 


The  ship  driven 
by  a  storm  to- 
ward the  South 
Pole. 


The  land  of  ice, 
and  of  fearful 
sounds,   where 
no  living  thing 
was  to  be  seen. 


"The  ice  was  here,  the  ice  was  there. 

The  ice  was  aU  around: 

It  cracked  and  growled,  and  roared  and  howled, 

Like  noises  in  a  swound ! 


"At  length  did  cross  an  Albatross, 
Thorough  the  fog  it  came; 
As  if  it  had  been  a  Christian  soul, 
We  hailed  it  in  God's  name. 

"It  ate  the  food  it  ne'er  had  eat, 
And  round  and  round  it  flew. 
The  ice  did  split  with  a  thunder-fit; 
The  helmsman  steered  us  through! 


Till  a  great 
sea-bird,  called 
the  .\lbatross, 
came  through 
the  snow-fog, 
and  was  re- 
ceived with 
great  joy  and 
hospitality. 


2750 


Ballads  Old  and  New 


And  lo!  the 
Albatross 
proveth  a  bird 
of  good  omen, 
and  foUoweth 
the  ship  as  it 
returned  north- 
ward through  foj 
and  floating  ice. 


The  ancient 
Mariner  in- 
hospitably 
killeth  the  pious 
bird  of  good 
omen. 


''And  a  good  south  wind  sprung  up  behindf^^T 
The  Albatross  did  follow,  *  - '' 

And  every  day,  for  food  or  play,  ' -'^  bnA 

Came  to  the  mariners'  hoUo!  ^M'"itl  ariT 

,_  ^  t-,  „  fc  s  ■ 
"In  mist  or  cloud,  on  mast  or  shroud,  '' 

It  perched  for  vespers  nine; 

Whiles  all  the  night,  through  fog-smoke  white, 

Glimmered  the  white  moonshine." 


"  God  save  thee,  ancient  Mariner, 
From  the  fiends,  that  plague  thee  thus!—  , 
Why  look'st  thou  so?"  "With  my  crossbow 
I  shot  the  Albatross. 


//• 


PART  II 

"The  Sun  now  rose  upon  the  right: 
Out  of  the  sea  came  he. 
Still  hid  in  mist,  and  on  the  left 
Went  down  into  the  sea. 

"And  the  good  south  wind  still  blew  behind, 
But  no  sweet  bird  did  follow, 
Nor  any  day  for  food  or  play 
Came  to  the  mariners'  hollo! 


His  shipmates    "And  I  had  done  a  heUish  thing, 

cry  out  agamst 

And  it  would  work  'em  woe: 


the  ancient 
Mariner  for 
killing  the  bird 
of  good  luck. 


For  all  averred  I  had  killed  the  bird 

That  made  the  breeze  to  blow. 

Ah  wretch!  said  they,  the  bird  to  slayV'^''-  ^•^-" 

That  made  the  breeze  to  blow! 


'Nor  dim  nor  red,  like  God's  own  head, 


But  when  the 

fog  cleared  off,  i      ■  o 

they  justify  the  The  glonous  Sun  uprist: 

make  them-  ""  Then  all  averred  I  had  killed  the  bird 

selves  accom-  /-m      .1  Li^ir  i        "i. 

plices  in  the  That  brought  the  fog  and  mist. 

crime.  'Twas  right,  said  they,  such  birds  to  slay 


That  bring  the  fog  and  mist. 


J 


The   Rime  of  the  Ancient   Mariner     2751 


"The  fair  breeze  blew,  the  white  foam  flew, 

The  furrow  followed  free ; 

We  were  the  first  that  ever  burst 

Into  that  silent  sea. 

"Down  dropped  the  breeze,  the  sails  dropped 

down, 
'Twas  sad  as  sad  could  be; 
And  we  did  speak  only  to  break 
The  silence  of  the  sea! 


The  fair  breeze 
continues;  the 
ship  enters  the 
Pacific  Ocean, 
and  sails  north- 
ward, even  till 
it  reaches  the 
Line. 

The  ship  hath 
been  suddenly 
becalmed. 


"All  in  a  hot  and  copper  sky. 
The  bloody  Sun,  at  noon. 
Right  up  above  the  mast  did  stand, 
No  bigger  than  the  Moon. 

"Day  after  day,  day  after  day, 
We  stuck,  nor  breath  nor  motion; 
As  idle  as  a  painted  ship 
Upon  a  painted  ocean. 

"Water,  water,  everywhere. 
And  all  the  boards  did  shrink; 
Water,  water,  everywhere, 
Nor  any  drop  to  drink. 

"The  very  deep  did  rot:  O  Christ! 
That  ever  this  should  be! 
Yea,  slimy  things  did  crawl  with  legs 
Upon  the  slimy  sea. 

"About,  about,  in  reel  and  rout 
The  death-fires  danced  at  night; 
The  water,  like  a  witch's  oils, 
Burnt  green,  and  blue,  and  white. 


"And  some  in  dreams  assured  were 
Of  the  Spirit  that  plagued  us  so; 
Nine  fathom  deep  he  had  followed  us 
From  the  land  of  mist  and  snow. 


And  the  Alba- 
tross begins  to 
be  avenged. 


A  Spirit  had 
followed  them; 
one  of  the  in- 
visible inhabit- 
ants of  this 
planet,  neither 
departed  souls 
nor  angels;  con- 
cerning whom  the  learned  Jew,  Josephus,  and  the  Platonic  Constantinopolitan 
Michael  Pscllus,  may  be  consulted.    They  are  very  numerous,  and  there  is  no 
climate  or  -lejneat  without  one  or  more. 


2752 


Ballads  Old  and   New 


:r5T  -.cVr 


"And  every  tongue,  through  utter  drought, 
Was  withered  at  the  root;   •         rr  -. 
We  could  not  speak,  no  more  than  if 
We  had  been  cholced  with  soot. 


The  shipmates     //  .  ,   ,         n         ,       ,      ,  -i  i      i 

in  their  sore         Ah!  well-a-day!  what  evil  looks 

distress,  would     tt    j  t  r  i  i  i  i 

fain  throw  the    Had  I  from  old  and  young! 

whole  guilt  on 
the  ancient 
Mariner:  in 
sign  whereof 
they  hang  the 
dead  sea-bird 
round  his  neck. 


Instead  of  the  cross,  the  Albatross 
About  my  neck  was  hung; 


jnalia  ari' 


PART  in 


The  ancient 
Mariner  be- 
holdeth  a  sign 
in  the  element 
afar  oS. 


"There  passed  a  weary  time.    Each  throat 

Was  parched,  and  glazed  each  eye. 

A  weary  time!  a  weary  time! 

How  glazed  each  weary  eye! 

When  looking  westward,  I  beheld 

A  something  in  the  sky. 

"At  first  it  seemed  a  little  speck, 
And  then  it  seemed  a  mist; 
It  moved  and  moved,  and  took  at  last 
A  certain  shape,  I  wist. 


At  its  nearer 
approach,  it 
seemeth    him 
to  be  a  ship; 
and  at  a  dear 
ransom  he 
freeth  his 
speech  from 
the  bonds  of 
thirst. 


A  flash  of  joy; 


"A  speck,  a  mist,  a  shape,  I  wist! 
And  still  it  neared  and  neared: 
As  if  it  dodged  a  water-sprite, 
It  plunged,  and  tacked,  and  veered. 

"With  throats  unslaked,  with  black  lips  baked, 

We  could  nor  laugh  nor  wail; 

Through  utter  drought  all  dumb  we  stood!   , 

I  bit  my  arm,  I  sucked  the  blood, 

And  cried,  A  sail!  a  sail! 

"With  throats  unslaked,  with  black  lips  baked, 
Agape  they  heard  me  call: 
Gramcrcy!  they  for  joy  did  grin. 
And  all  at  once  their  breath  drew  in, 
As  they  were  drinking  all. 


The  Rime  of  the  Ancient  Mariner 


753 


"Sec!  see!  (I  cried)  she  tacks  no  more 
Hither  to  work  us  weal — 
Without  a  breeze,  without  a  tide, 
She  steadies  with  upright  keel! 


And  horror  fol- 
lows.   For  can 
it  be  a  ship 
that  comes  on- 
ward without 
wind  or  tide? 


"The  western  wave  was  all  aflame, 

The  day  was  wellnigh  done! 

Almost  upon  the  western  wave 

Rested  the  broad,  bright  Sun; 

When  that  strange  shape  drove  suddenly 

Betwixt  us  and  the  Sun. 


"And  straight  the  Sun  was  flecked  with  bars 
(Heaven's  Mother  send  us  grace!), 
As  if  through  a  dungeon-grate  he  peered 
With  broad  and  burning  face. 


It  seemeth  him 
but  the  skele- 
ton of  a  ship. 


"Alas!  (thought  I,  and  my  heart  beat  loud) 
How  fast  she  nears  and  nears! 
Are  those  her  sails  that  glance  in  the  Sun, 
Like  restless  gossameres? 


"Are  those  her  ribs  tPirough  which  the  Sun 
Did  peer,  as  through  a  grate? 
And  is  that  Woman  all  her  crew? 
Is  that  a  Death?  and  are  there  two? 
Is  Death  that  Woman's  mate? 

"Her  lips  were  red,  her  looks  were  free, 
Her  locks  were  yellow  as  gold : 
Her  skin  was  as  white  as  leprosy, 
The  Nightmare  Lifc-in-Death  was  she, 
Who  thicks  man's  blood  with  cold. 


And  its  rihs  are 
seen  ar.  bars  on 
the  face  of  the    ■ 
setting  Sun. 
The  Specter- 
Woman  and 
her  Death- 
mate,  and  no 
other,  on  board 
the  skeleton 
ship.     Like 
vessel,  like  crew! 


"The  naked  hulk  alongside  came, 
.And  the  twain  were  casting  dice; 
'The  game  is  done!  I've  won!  I've  won!' 
Quoth  she,  and  whistles  thrice. 


Death  and 
I.ife-in-Death 
have  .diced  for 
the  ship's  crew, 
and  she  (the 
latter)   winneth 
the  ancient 
Mariner. 


^754 


Ballads  Old  and  NewrnfH   ^HT 


No  twilight 
within  the 
courts  of  the 
Sun. 

--.isiiiivj 


"The  Sun's  rim  dips;  the  stars  rush  out 
At  one  stride  comes  the  dark; 
With  far-heard  whisper,  o'er  the  sea, 
Off  shot  the  specter-bark. 


At  the  rising  of 
the  Moon, 


"We  hstened  and  looked  sidev/ays  up! 

Fear  at  my  heart,  as  at  a  cup. 

My  hfe-blood  seemed  to  sip! 

The  stars  were  dim,  and  thick  the  night, 

The  steersman's  face  by  his  lamp  gleamed  white; 

From  the  sails  the  dew  did  drip — 

Till  clomb  above  the  eastern  bar        ""  ^^^^''■^'-' 

The  horned  Moon,  with  one  bright  star 

Within  the  nether  tip. 


One  after  an 
other, 


"One  after  one,  by  the  star-dogged  Moon, 
Too  quick  for  groan  or  sigh, 
Each  turned  his  face  with  a  ghastly  pang, 
And  cursed  me  with  his  eye. 


His  shipmates    "Four  times  fifty  living  men 

drop  down  ^  a 

dead.  (And  I  heard  nor  sigh  nor  groan), 


With  heavy  thump,  a  lifeless  lump. 
They  dropped  down  one  by  one. 


Death 'begbs      "The  souls  did  from  their  bodies  fly- 
thl  Indent"       ^hey  fled  to  bliss  or  woe! 
Mariner.  And  every  soul,  it  passed  me  by 


Like  the  whizz  of  my  crossbow!' 


PART   IV 

The  Wedding-    "J  fgar  thee,  ancient  Mariner! 

Guest  feareth  ' 

that  a  spirit  is    I  fear  thy  skinny  hand ! 

And  thou  art  long,  and  lank,  and  brown. 
As  is  the  ribbed  sea-sand. 


talking  to  him. 


But  the  ancient 

Mariner  as-       "I  fear  thee  and  thy  glittering  eye, 

sureth  him  of       ^       ,     ,  ,  .  ,  ,  ,  ,, 

his  bodily  life,    And  thy  skinny  hand  so  brown.  — 

eth  to  rekte  his  "Fear  not,  fear  not,  thou  Wedding-Guest! 

ance.  ^  ^'^°       This  body  dropped  not  dowiv. 


The   Rime  ot  the  Ancient   Mariner 


^755 


"Alone,  alone,  all,  all  alone. 

Alone  on  a  wide,  wide  sea!  .,  i;  j 

And  never  a  saint  took  pity  on 

My  soul  in  agony. 

"The  many  men,  so  beautiful! 
And  they  all  dead  did  lie: 
And  a  thousand  thousand  slimy  things 
Lived  on;  and  so  did  I. 

"I  looked  upon  the  rotting  sea, 
And  drew  my  eyes  away; 
I  looked  upon  the  rotting  deck, 
And  there  the  dead  men  lay. 

"I  looked  to  heaven,  and  tried  to  pray; 
But  or  ever  a  prayer  had  gushed, 
A  wicked  whisper  came,  and  made 
]My  heart  as  dry  as  dust. 

"I  closed  my  lids,  and  kept  them  close, 

And  the  balls  like  pulses  beat; 

For  the  sky  and  the  sea,  and  the  sea  and  the  sky, 

Lay  like  a  load  on  my  weary  eye. 

And  the  dead  were  at  my  feet. 

"The  cold  sweat  melted  from  their  limbs, 
Nor  rot  nor  reek  did  they: 
The  look  with  which  they  looked  on  me 
Had  never  passed  away.  "'^'^^  ''" 

"An  orphan's  curse  would  drag  to  hell 

A  spirit  from  on  high; 

But  oh !  more  horrible  than  that 

Is  a  curse  in  a  dead  man's  eye! 

Seven  days,  seven  nights,  I  saw  that  curse, 

And  yet  I  could  not  die. 

"The  moving  Moon  went  up  the  sky, 
And  nowhere  did  abide; 
Softly  she  was  going  up, 
And  a  star  or  two  beside — 


He  despiseth 
the  creatures  of 
the  calm. 


And  envieth 
that  they 
should  live, 
and  so  many 
be  dead. 


But  the  curse 
livcth  for  him  ,„ 
in  the  eyes  of      _ 
the  dead  men. 

In  his  loneli- 
ness and  fixed- 
ness he  yearn- 
eth  towards 
the  journeying 
Moon,  and  the 
stars  that  still 
sojourn,  yet  still 
move  onward; 
and  everywhere 
the  blue  sky  be- 
longs to  them, 
and  is  their  ap- 
pointed rest  and 
their  native 
country  and  their 
own  natural 
homes,  which 
they  enter  unan- 
nounced, as  lords 
that  are  certainly 
expected,  and  yet 
there  is  u  silent 
icy  at  theiT     ,  .  ' 
arrival. '"«'""" 


756 


Ballads  Old  and  New  ^i-^  ^ri! 


By  the  light  of 
the  Moon  he 
heholdeth  God'i 
creatures  of 
the  great  calm. 


"Her  beams  bemocked  the  sultry  main, 

Like  April  hoar-frost  spread ; 

But  where  the  ship's  huge  shadow  lay,  ■■ 

The  charmed  water  burnt  alway  ■!'' 

A  still  and  awful  red. 

.tm  g.dT' 

"Beyond  the  shadow  of  the  ship, 

I  watched  the  water-snakes: 

They  moved  in  tracks  of  shining  white,'' 

And  when  they  reared,  the  elfish  light 

Fell  off  in  hoary  flakes. 


Their  beauty 
and  their 
happiness. 


He  blesseth 
them  in  his 
heart. 


"Within  the  shadow  of  the  ship 

I  watched  their  rich  attire: 

Blue,  glossy  green,  and  velvet  black. 

They  coiled  and  swam;  and  every  track 

Was  a  flash  of  golden  fire. 

"O  happy  living  things!  no  tongue 

Their  beauty  might  declare: 

A  spring  of  love  gushed  from  my  heart, 

And  I  blessed  them  unaware: 

Sure  my  kind  saint  took  pity  on  me. 

And  I  blessed  them  unaware. 


The  speli  begins 
to  break. 


"The  selfsame  moment  I  could  pray; 
And  from  my  neck  so  free 
The  Albatross  fell  off,  and  sank 
Like  lead  into  the  sea. 


"O  sleep!  it  is  a  gentle  thing, 
Beloved  from  pole  to  pole! 
To  Mary  Queen  the  praise  be  given! 
She  sent  the  gentle  sleep  from  Heaven, 
That  slid  into  my  soul. 


By  grace  of  the 
Holy  Mother, 
the  ancient 
Mariner  is 
refreshed 
with  rain. 


"The  silly  buckets  on  the  deck, 
That  had  so  long  remained,  '    ' 

I  dreamt  that  they  were  filled  with  dew;  ' 
And  when  I  awoke,  it  rained.  '■' 


The   Rime  of  the  Ancient   Mariner 


■^757 


"My  lips  were  wet,  my  throat  was  cold, 
My  garments  all  were  dank ; 
Sure  I  had  drunken  in  my  dreams. 
And  still  my  body  drank. 

"I  moved,  and  could  not  feel  my  limbs: 
I  was  so  light — almost 
I  thought  that  I  had  died  in  sleep. 
And  was  a  blessed  ghost. 

"And  soon  I  heard  a  roaring  wind: 
It  did  not  come  anear; 
But  with  its  sound  it  shook  the  sails, 
That  were  so  thin  and  sere. 


He  heareth 
sounds  and 
seetli  strange 
sights  and 
commotions  in 
the  sky  and 
the  element. 


"The  upper  air  burst  into  life; 
And  a  hundred  fire-flags  sheen; 
To  and  fro  they  were  hurried  about; 
And  to  and  fro,  and  in  and  out. 
The  wan  stars  danced  between. 


"And  the  coming  wind  did  roar  more  loud, 
And  the  sails  did  sigh  like  sedge; 
And  the  rain  poured  down  from  one  black  cloud; 
The  Moon  was  at  its  edge. 

"The  thick  black  cloud  was  cleft,  and  still 

The  Moon  was  at  its  side; 

Like  waters  shot  from  some  high  crag, 

The  lightning  fell  with  never  a  jag. 

A  river  steep  and  wide. 

"The  loud  wind  never  reached  the  ship. 
Yet  now  the  ship  moved  on! 
Beneath  the  lightning  and  the  Moon 
The  dead  men  gave  a  groan. 

"They  groaned,  they  stirred,  they  all  uprose, 
Nor  spake,  nor  moved  their  eyes; 
It  had  been  strange,  even  in  a  dream, 
To  have  seen  those  dead  men  rise. 


The  bodies  of 
the  ship's  crew 
are  inspired, 
and  the  ship 
moves  on; 


2758 


Ballads  Old  and  New' 


TfH.sfJT 


"The  helmsman  steered',  the  ship  moved  on; 

Yet  never  a  breeze  up-blew; 

The  mariners  all  'gan  work  the  ropes, 

Where  they  were  wont  to  do; 

They  raised  their  limbs  like  lifeless  tools — 

We  were  a  ghastly  crew. 

"The  body  of  my  brother's  son 
Stood  by  me,  knee  to  knee : 
The  body  and  I  pulled  at  one  rope, 
But  he  said  naught  to  me." 


But  not  by  the 

souls  of  the 
men,  nor  by 
demons  of 
earth  or  middle 
air,  but  by  a 
blessed  troop 
of  angelic 
spirits,  sent 
down  by  the 
invocation  of 
the  guardian 
saint. 


"I  fear  thee,  ancient  Mariner!" 
"Be  calm,  thou  Wedding-Guest: 
'Twas  not  those  souls  that  fled  in  pain. 
Which  to  their  corses  came  again, 
But  a  troop  of  spirits  blest: 

"For  when  it  dawned — they  dropped  their 

arms, 
And  clustered  round  the  mast; 
Sweet  sounds  rose  slowly  through  their  mouths, 
And  from  their  bodies  passed. 


"Around,  around,  flew  each  sweet  sound, 
Then  darted  to  the  Sun; 
Slowly  the  sounds  came  back  again. 
Now  mixed,  now  one  by  one. 

"  Sometimes  a-diopping  from  the  sky 
I  heard  the  skylark  sing; 
Sometimes  all  little  birds  that  are. 
How  they  seemed  to  fill  the  sea  and  air 
With  their  sweet  jargoning! 


"And  now  'twas  like  all  instruments. 
Now  like  a  lonely  flute; 
And  now  it  is  an  angel's  song. 
That  makes  the  Heavens  be  mute. 


The   Rime  of  the  Ancient  Mariner 


^759 


"It  ceased:  yet  still  the  sails  made  on 

A  pleasant  noise  till  noon, 

A  noise  like  of  a  hidden  brook 

In  the  leafy  month  of  June, 

That  to  the  sleeping  woods  all  night 

Singeth  a  quiet  tune. 

"Till  noon  we  quietly  sailed  on, 
Yet  never  a  breeze  did  breathe: 
Slowly  and  smoothly  went  the  ship, 
Moved  onward  from  beneath. 


"Under  the  keel  nine  fathom  deep, 
From  the  land  of  mist  and  snow, 
The  Spirit  slid:  and  it  was  he 
That  made  the  ship  to^o. 
The  sails  at  noon  left  off  their  tune, 
And  the  ship  stood  still  also. 

"The  Sun,  right  up  above  the  mast, 
Had  fixed  her  to  the  ocean: 
But  in  a  minute  she  'gan  stir. 
With  a  short  uneasy  motion — 
Backwards  and  forwards  half  her  length 
With  a  short  uneasy  motion. 

"Then  like  a  pawing  horse  let  go, 
She  made  a  sudden  bound: 
It  flung  the  blood  into  my  head, 
And  I  fell  down  in  a  swound. 

"How  long  in  that  same  fit  I  lay, 
I  have  not  to  declare; 
But  ere  my  living  life  returned, 
I  heard,  and  in  my  soul  discerned 
Two  voices  in  the  air. 

"'Is  it  he?'  quoth  one,  'is  this  the  man? 
By  Him  who  died  on  cross, 
With  his  cruel  bow  he  laid  full  low 
The  harmless  Albatross. 


The  lonesome 
Spirit  from  the 
South  Pole 
carries  on  the 
ship  as  far  as 
the  Line,  in 
obedience  to 
the  angelic 
troop,  but  still 
requireth 
vengeance. 


The  Polar 
Spirit's  fellow- 
demons,  the 
invisible  in- 
habitants of 
the  element, 
take  part  in  his 
wrong;  and 
two  of  them 
relate,  one  to 
the  other,  that 
penance  long 
and  heavy  for 
the  ancient 
Mariner  hath 
been  accorded 
to  the  Polar 
Spirit,  who  re- 
turneth  south- 
ward. 


2760 


Ballads  Old  and   New 


"'The  Spirit  who  bideth  by  himself 
In  the  land  of  niist  and  snow, 
He  loved  the  bird  that  loved  the  man 
Who  shot  him  with  his  bow.' 

"The  other  was  a  softer  voice, 

As  soft  as  honey-dew : 

Quoth  he,  'The  man  hath  penance  done, 

And  penance  more  will  do.' 

PART  VI 

First  Voice: 
"'But  tell  me,  tell  me!  speak  again, 
Thy  soft  response  renewing — 
What  makes  that  ship  drive  on  so  fast? 
What  is  the  Ocean  doing? ' 

Second  Voice: 
"  'StiU  as  a  slave  before  his  lord, 
The  Ocean  hath  no  blast; 
His  great  bright  eye  most  silently 
Up  to  the  Moon  is  cast — 

"  'If  he  may  know  which  way  to  go; 
For  she  guides  him  smooth  or  grim. 
See,  brother,  see!  how  graciously 
She  looketh  down  on  him.' 


The  Mariner 
hath  been  cast 
into  a  trance; 
for  the  angelic 
power  causeth 
the  vessel  to 
drive  northward 
faster  than 
human  life 
could  endure. 


First  Voice: 
"  'But  why  drives  on  that  ship  so  fast, 
Without  or  wave  or  wind?' 

Second  Voice: 
"  'The  air  is  cut  away  before. 
And  closes  from  behind. 


"  'Fly,  brother,  fly!  more  high,  more  high! 
Or  we  shall  be  belated : 
For  slow  and  slow  that  ship  will  go. 
When  the  Mariner's  trance  is  abated." 


The  Rime  of  the  Ancient   Mariner     2761 

"  I  woke,  and  we  were  sailing  on  ra^'urafm^tion 

As  in  a  gentle  weather:  11  "■'^'^^Z'^?^' 

°  the  Mariner 

■'Twas  night,  calm  night,  the  Moon  was  high;    awakes,  and 

his  penance 

The  dead  men  stood  together.  begins  anew. 

"All  stood  together  on  the  deck, 
For  a  charnel-dungeon  fitter: 
All  fixed  on  me  their  stony  eyes, 
That  in  the  Moon  did  glitter. 

"The  pang,  the  curse,  with  which  they  died, 
Had  never  passed  away: 
I  could  not  draw  my  eyes  from  theirs, 
Nor  turn  them  up  to  pray. 

"And  now  this  spell  was  snapped:  once  more     The  curse  is 

.  ,     ,  finally  expiated. 

I  Viewed  the  ocean  green, 

And  looked  far  forth,  yet  little  saw 

Of  what  had  else  been  seen — 

"Like  one  that  on  a  lonesome  road 

Doth  walk  in  fear  and  dread, 

And  having  once  turned  round,  walks  on. 

And  turns  no  more  his  head; 

Because  he  knows  a  frightful  fiend 

Doth  close  behind  him  tread. 

"But  soon  there  breathed  a  wind  on  me, 
Nor  sound  nor  motion  made: 
Its  path  was  not  upon  the  sea, 
In  ripple  or  in  shade. 

"It  raised  my  hair,  it  fanned  my  cheek 
Like  a  meadow-gale  of  spring — 
It  mingled  strangely  with  my  fears. 
Yet  it  felt  like  a  welcoming. 

"Swiftly,  swiftly  flew  the  ship. 
Yet  she  sailed  softly  too: 
Sweetly,  sweetly  blew  the  breeze — 
On  me  alone  it  blew. 


2762 


And  the  ancient 
Mariner  be- 
holdeth  his 
native  country. 


Ballads  Old  and  New,-q     ,,11 

"O  dream  of  joy!  is  this  indeed 
The  lighthouse  top  I  see? 
Is  this  the  hill?  is  this  the  kirk? 
Is  this  mine  own  countree? 


"We  drifted  o'er  the  harbor-bar, 
And  I  with  sobs  did  pray — 
O  let  me  be  awake,  my  God! 
Or  let  me  sleep  alway. 

"The  harbor-bay  was  clear  as  glass, 
So  smoothly  it  was  strewn! 
And  on  the  bay  the  moonlight  lay, 
And  the  shadow  of  the  Moon. 

"The  rock  shone  bright,  the  kirk  no  less, 
That  stands  above  the  rock: 
The  moonlight  steeped  in  silentness 
The  steady  weathercock. 


The  angelic 
spirits  leave  the 
dead  bodies. 


"And  the  bay  was  white  with  silent  light 
Till  rising  from  the  same, 
Full  many  shapes,  that  shadows  were, 
In  crimson  colors  came. 


And  appear  in 
their  own  forms 
of  light. 


"A  little  distance  from  the  prow 
Those  crimson  shadows  were; 
I  turned  my  eyes  upon  the  deck — 
O  Christ!  what  saw  I  there! 


"Each  corse  lay  flat,  Hfeless  and  flat, 
And,  by  the  holy  rood! 
A  man  all  light,  a  seraph-man, 
On  every  corse  there  stood. 


"This  seraph-band,  each  waved  his  hand: 
It  was  a  heavenly  sight! 
They  stood  as  signals  to  the  land. 
Each  one  a  lovely  light; 


The   Rime  of  the  Ancient   Mariner      2763 

"This  seraph-band,  each  waved  his  hand, 
No  voice  did  they  impart — 
No  voice;  but  O,  the  silence  sank 
Like  music  on  my  heart. 

"But  soon  I  heard  the  dash  of  oars, 
I  heard  the  Pilot's  cheer; 
My  head  was  turned  perforce  away, 
And  I  saw  a  boat  appear. 

"The  Pilot  and  the  Pilot's  boy, 

I  heard  them  coming  fast: 

Dear  Lord  in  Heaven!  it  was  a  joy 

The  dead  men  could  not  blast. 

r> 

"I  saw  a  third — I  heard  his  voice: 

It  is  the  Hermit  good! 

He  singeth  loud  his  godly  hymns 

That  he  makes  in  the  wood. 

He'll  shrieve  my  soul,  he'll  wash  away 

The  Albatross's  blood. 

PART   VII 
iin^i  .  The  Hermit 

This  Hermit  good  lives  in  that  wood        of  the  Wood 
Which  slopes  down  to  the  sea. 
How  loudly  his  sweet  voice  he  rears! 
He  loves  to  talk  with  marineres 
That  come  from  a  far  countree. 

"He  kneels  at  morn,  and  noon,  and  eve— - 

He  hath  a  cushion  plump: 

It  is  the  moss  that  wholly  hides 

The  rotted  old  oak-stump. 

"The  skifT-boat  neared:  I  heard  them  talk, 
'Why,  this  is  strange,  I  trow! 
Where  are  those  lights  so  many  and  fair,. 
That  signal  made  but  now? '  ;; 


76. 


Approacheth 
the  ship  with 
wonder. 


Ballads   Old  and  New  '^^   ^H'' 

"  'Strange,  by  my  faith!'  the  Hermit  said — 

'And  they  answered  not  our  cheer! 

The  planks  look  warped!  and  see  those  sails, 

How  thin  they  are  and  sere! 

I  never  saw  aught  like  to  them. 

Unless  perchance  it  were 


"  'Brown  skeletons  of  leaves  that  lag 
My  forest-brook  along; 
When  the  ivy-tod  is  heavy  with  snow, 
And  the  owlet  whoops  to  the  wolf  below, 
That  eats  the  she-wolf's  young.' 

"  'Dear  Lord!  it  hath  a  fiendish  look — 
(The  Pilot  made  reply) 
I  am  a-f eared. ' — 'Push  on,  push  on!' 
Said  the  Hermit  cheerily. 


The  ship  sud- 
denly sinketh. 


"The  boat  came  closer  to  the  ship, 
But  I  nor  spake  nor  stirred; 
The  boat  came  close  beneath  the  ship, 
And  straight  a  sound  was  heard. 

"Under  the  water  it  rumbled  on, 
Still  louder  and  more  dread: 
It  reached  the  ship,  it  split  the  bay; 
The  ship  went  down  like  lead. 


The  ancient 
Mariner  is 
saved  in  the 
Pilot  s  boat. 


"Stunned  by  that  loud  and  dreadful  sound, 

Which  sky  and  ocean  smote. 

Like  one  that  hath  been  seven  days  drowned 

My  body  lay  afloat ; 

But  swift  as  dreams,  myself  I  found 

Within  the  Pilot's  boat. 


"  Upon  the  whirl,  where  sank  the  ship, 
The  boat  spun  round  and  round; 
And  all  was  still,  save  that  the  hill 
Was  telling  of  the  sound. 


The   Rime  of  the  Ancient   Mariner 


2765 


"I  moved  my  lips — the  Pilot  shrieked, I  '.nA 

And  fell  down  in  a  fit; 

The  holy  Hermit  raised  his  eyes, 

And  prayed  where  he  did  sit. 

"I  took  the  oars:  the  Pilot's  boy, 

Who  now  doth  crazy  go, 

Laughed  loud  and  long,  and  all  the  while 

His  eyes  went  to  and  fro. 

'Ha!  ha!'  quoth  he,  'full  plain  I  see 

The  Devil  knows  how  to  row.' 

"And  now,  all  in  my  own  countree, 
I  stood  on  the  firm  land! 
The  Hermit  stepped  forth  from  the  boat. 
And  scarcely  he  could  stand. 

"  'O  shrieve  me,  shrieve  mc,  holy  man!' 
The  Hermit  crossed  his  brow. 
'Say  quick,'  quoth  he,  'I  bid  thee  say — 
What  manner  of  man  art  thou? ' 

"Forthwith  this  frame  of  mine  was  wrenched 

With  a  woful  agony. 

Which  forced  me  to  begin  my  tale; 

And  then  it  left  me  free. 

"Since  then,  at  an  uncertain  hour, 
That  agony  returns: 
And  till  my  ghastly  tale  is  told. 
This- heart  within  me  burns. 

"I  pass,  Hke  night,  from  land  to  land; 
I  have  strange  power  of  speech; 
That  moment  that  his  face  I  see, 
I  know  the  man  that  must  hear  me: 
To  him  my  tale  I  teach. 

"What  loud  uproar  bursts  from  that  door! 
The  wedding-guests  are  there: 
But  in  the  garden-bower  the  bride 
And  bride-maids  singing  are: 


The  ancient 
Mariner 
earnestly  en- 
treat eth  the 
Hermit  to 
shrieve  him; 
and  the  pen- 
ance of  life 
falls  on  him. 


And  ever 
and  anon 
throughout 
his  future  life 
an  agony 
constraineth 
him  to  travel 
from  land  to 
land; 


2766 


Ballads   Old  and   New 


And  hark,  the  httle  vesper  bell, 
Which  biddeth  me  to  prayer! 


"O  Wedding-Guest!  this  soul  hath  been 
Alone  on  a  wide,  wide  sea: 
So  lonely  'twas,  that  God  Himself 
Scarce  seemed  there  to  be. 


■^rf »  :fnn+  f 


And  to  teach, 
by  his  own 
example,  love 
and  reverence 
to  all  things 
that  God  made 
and  loveth. 


"O  sweeter  than  the  marriage-feast, 
'Tis  sweeter  far  to  me. 
To  walk  together  to  the  kirk 
With  a  goodly  company! — 

"To  walk  together  to  the  kirk. 

And  all  together  pray, 

While  each  to  his  great  Father  bends. 

Old  men,  and  babes,  and  loving  friends. 

And  youths  and  maidens  gay! 

"Farewell,  farewell!  but  this  I  tell 
To  thee,  thou  Wedding-Guest! 
He  prayeth  well,  who  loveth  well 
Both  man  and  bird  and  beast. 

<  nsdi  bn . 
"He  prayeth  best,  who  loveth  best 

AU  things  both  great  and  small;      )di  3om8 

For  the  dear  God,  who  loveth  us,  ~  '■  ' 

He  made  and  loveth  aU." 


The  Mariner,  whose  eye  is  bright, 
Whose  beard  with  age  is  hoar. 
Is  gone:  and  now  the  Wedding-Guest 
Turned  from  the  bridegroom's  door. 

■'rn  rnirf  o 
He  went  like  one  that  hath  been  stunned, 

And  is  of  sense  forlorn: 

A  sadder  and  a  wiser  man  ao-iw  od' 

He  rose  the  morrow  morn.  r'l  n'i  in 

Samuel  Taylor  Cokridge  [1772-1834] 


The   Dream  of  Eugene  Aram       2767 


THE   DREAM   OF  EUGENE  ARAM 

'TwAS  in  the  prime  of  summer  time, 

An  evening  calm  and  cool, 
And  four-and-twenty  happy  boys 

Came  bounding  out  of  school: 
There  were  some  that  ran  and  some  that  leaped, 

Like  troutlcts  in  a  pool. 

Away  they  sped  with  gamesome  minds, 

And  souls  untouched  by  sin; 
To  a  level  mead  they  came,  and  there 

They  drave  the  wickets  in : 
Pleasantly  shone  the  setting  sun 

Over  the  town  of  Lynn. 

Like  sportive  deer  they  coursed  about, 

And  shouted  as  they  ran, 
Turning  to  mirth  all  things  of  earth. 

As  only  boyhood  can; 
But  the  Usher  sat  remote  from  all, 

A  melancholy  man! 

His  hat  was  off,  his  vest  apart, 

To  catch  heaven's  blessed  breeze; 
For  a  burning  thought  was  in  his  brow, 

And  his  bosom  ill  at  ease: 
So  he  leaned  his  head  on  his  hands,  and  read 

The  book  between  his  knees. 

Leaf  after  leaf,  he  turned  it  o'er,  ;n 

Nor  ever  glanced  aside. 
For  the  peace  of  his  soul  he  read  that  book 

In  the  golden  eventide  v,,,,,  .,^„  ,„„^  ^nA 
Much  study  had  made  him  very  lean, 

And  pale,  and  leaden-eyed.  ,  ^ 

At  last  he  shut  the  ponderous  tome, 
With  a  fast  and  fervent  grasp 


2768  Ballads  Old  and  New 

He  strained  the  dusky  covers  close, 
And  fixed  the  brazen  hasp: 

"Oh,  God!  could  I  so  close  my  mind, 
And  clasp  it  with  a  clasp!" 

Then  leaping  on  his  feet  upright, 
f.  ,,~      Some  moody  turns  he  took, — 

Now  up  the  mead,  then  down  the  mead, 

And  past  a  shady  nook, — 
And,  lo!  he  saw  a  little  boy 
That  pored  upon  a  book. 

"My  gentle  lad,  what  is't  you  read — 

Romance  or  fairy  fable? 
Or  is  it  some  historic  page, 

Of  kings  and  crowns  unstable?" 
The  young  boy  gave  an  upward  glance, — ■ 

"It  is  'The  Death  of  Abel.'" 

The  Usher  took  six  hasty  strides. 

As  smit  with  sudden  pain, 
Six  hasty  strides  beyond  the  place, 

Then  slowly  back  again; 
And  down  he  sat  beside  the  lad. 

And  talked  with  him  of  Cain; 

And,  long  since  then,  of  bioody  men, 
Whose  deeds  tradition  saves; 

Of  lonely  folk  cut  off  unseen, 
And  hid  in  sudden  graves; 

Of  horrid  stabs,  in  groves  forlorn, 
And  murders  done  in  caves; 

And  how  the  sprites  of  injured  men 
Shriek  upward  from  the  sod; 

Aye,  how  the  ghostly  hand  will  point 
To  show  the  burial  clod; 

And  unknown  facts  of  guilty  acts 
Are  seen  in  dreams  from  God! 


The  Dream  of  Eugene  Aram       2769 

He  told  how  murderers  walk  the  earth  ; 

Beneath  the  curse  of  Cain, 
With  crimson  clouds  before  their  eyes, 

And  flames  about  their  brain: 
For  blood  has  left  upon  their  souls 

Its  everlasting  stain. 

"And  well,"  quoth  he,  "I  know  for  truth, 

Their  pangs  must  be  extreme, — 
Woe,  woe,  unutterable  woe, — 

Who  spill  life's  sacred  stream.! 
For  why?  Mcthought,  last  night,  I  wrought 

A  murder,  in  a  dream! 

"One  that  had  never  done  me  wrong, 

A  feeble  man  and  old : 
I  led  him  to  a  lonely  field ; 

The  moon  shone  clear  and  cold: 
Now  here,  said  I,  this  man  shall  die. 

And  I  will  have  his  gold! 

"Two  sudden  blows  with  a  ragged  stick. 

And  one  with  a  heavy  stone. 
One  hurried  gash  with  a  hasty  knife, — 

And  then  the  deed  was  done; 
There  was  nothing  lying  at  my  foot,,,     : 

But  lifeless  flesh  and  bone!  ,„  .  1' 


"Nothing  but  lifeless  flesh  and  bone. 

That  could  not  do  me  ill; 
And  yet  I  feared  him  all  the  more. 

For  lying  there  so  still: 
There  was  a  manhood  in  his  look. 

That  murder  could  not  kiU. 

"And,  lo!  the  universal  air 
Seemed  lit  with  ghastly  flame; 

Ten  thousand  tliousand  dreadful  eyes 
Were  looking  down  in  blame: 

I  took  the  dead  man  by  his  hand 
And  called  upon  his  name ! 


2770  Ballads   Old  and  New 

"Oh,  God!  it  made  me  quake  to  see 

Such  sense  within  the  slain! 
But  when  I  touched  the  hfeless  clay, 

The  blood  gushed  out  amain ! 
For  every  clot,  a  burning  spot 

Was  scorching  in  my  brain! 

"My  head  was  like  an  ardent  coal, 

My  heart  as  solid  ice; 
My  wretched,  wretched  soul,  I  knew, 

Was  at  the  Devil's  price; 
A  dozen  times  I  groaned:  the  dead 

Had  never  groaned  but  twice! 

"And  now,  from  forth  the  frowning  sky 
From  the  Heaven's  topmost  height, 

I  heard  a  voice — that  awful  voice 
Of  the  blood-avenging  sprite: 

'Thou  guilty  man!  take  up  thy  dead 
And  hide  it  from  my  sight!' 

"I  took  the  dreary  body  up, 

And  cast  it  in  a  stream, 
A  sluggish  water,  black  as  ink. 

The  depth  was  so  extreme: — 
My  gentle  Boy,  remember  this 

Is  nothing  but  a  dream! 

"Down  went  the  corse  with  a  hollow  plunge 

And  vanished  in  the  pool ; 
Anon  I  cleansed  my  bloody  hands. 

And  washed  my  forehead  cool. 
And  sat  among  the  urchins  young, 

That  evening  in  the  school. 

"Oh,  Heaven!  to  think  of  their  white  souls 

And  mine  so  black  and  grim ! 
I  could  not  share  in  childish  prayer 

Nor  join  in  Evening  Hymn : 
Like  a  Devil  of  the  Pit  I  seemed, 

'Mid  holy  Cherubim ! 


The  Dream  of  Eugene  Aram       2771 

"And  peace  went  with  them,  one  and  all, 

And  each  calm  pillow  spread: 
But  Guilt  was  my  grim  Chamberlain 

That  hghted  me  to  bed, 
And  drew  my  midnight  curtains  round,  j 

With  fingers  bloody  red! 

"All  night  I  lay  in  agony, 

In  anguish  dark  and  deep, 
My  fevered  eyes  I  dared  not  close, 

But  stared  aghast  at  Sleep: 
For  Sin  had  rendered  unto  her 

The  keys  of  hell  to  keep. 

"All  night  I  lay  in  agony. 

From  weary  chime  to  chime, 
With  one  besetting  horrid  hint. 

That  racked  me  all  the  time; 
A  mighty  yearning,  like  the  first 

Fierce  impulse  unto  crime; 

"One  stern  tyrannic  thought,  that  made 

All  other  thoughts  its  slave: 
Stronger  and  stronger  every  pulse 

Did  that  temptation  crave, 
Still  urging  me  to  go  and  see 

The  Dead  Man  in  his  grave! 

"Heavily  I  rose  up,  as  soon 

As  light  was  in  the  sky. 
And  sought  the  black  accursed  pool        ; 

With  a  wild  misgiving  eye: 
And  I  saw  the  Dead  in  the  river  bed,     , 

For  the  faithless  stream  was  dry! 

"Merrily  rose  the  lark,  and  shook 

The  dew-drop  from  its  wing; 
But  I  never  marked  its  morning  flight,  v 

I  never  heard  it  sing. 
For  I  was  stooping  once  again 

Under  the  horrid  thing. 


2772  Ballads  Old  and  New 

"With  breathless  speed,  like  a  soul  in  chase, 

I  took  him  up  and  ran; 
There  was  no  time  to  dig  a  grave 

Before  the  day  began: 
In  a  lonesome  wood,  with  heaps  of  leaves, 

I  hid  the  murdered  man. 

"And  all  that  day  I  read  in  school, 
But  my  thought  was  otherwhere; 

As  soon  as  the  mid-day  task  was  done. 
In  secret  I  was  there; 

And  a  mighty  wind  had  swept  the  leaves, 
And  still  the  corse  was  bare! 

"Then  down  I  cast  me  on  my  face, 

And  first  began  to  weep, 
For  I  knew  my  secret  then  was  one 

That  earth  refused  to  keep: 
Or  land  or  sea,  though  it  should  be 

Ten  thousand  fathoms  deep. 

"So  wiUs  the  fierce  avenging  Sprite, 

Till  blood  for  blood  atones! 
Aye,  though  he's  buried  in  a  cave. 

And  trodden  down  with  stones. 
And  years  have  rotted  off  his  flesh, — 

The  world  shall  see  his  bones ! 

"Oh,  God!  that  horrid,  horrid  dream 

Besets  me  now  awake! 
Again- — again,  with  dizzy  brain. 

The  human  life  I  take; 
And  my  red  right  hand  grows  raging  hot, 

Like  Cranmer's  at  the  stake. 

"And  still  no  peace  for  the  restless  clay 

Will  wave  or  mold  allow; 
The  horrid  thing  pursues  my  soul, —     ■  1 

It  stands  before  me  now!" 
The  fearful  Boy  looked  up,  and  saw 

Huge  drops  upon  his  brow. 


The   Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol       2773 

That  very  night,  while  gentle  sleep 

The  urchin  eyelids  kissed, 
Two  stern-faced  men  set  out  from  I.ynn, 

Through  the  cold  and  heavy  mist; 
And  Eugene  Aram  walked  between, 

With  gyves  upon  his  wrist. 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 


THE  BALLAD  OF  READING  GAOL 
I 

He  did  not  wear  his  scarlet  coat, 

For  blood  and  wine  are  red. 
And  blood  and  wine  were  on  his  hands 

When  they  found  him  with  the  dead, 
The  poor  dead  woman  whom  he  loved, 

And  murdered  in  her  bed. 

He  walked  amongst  the  Trial  Men 

In  a  suit  of  shabby  gray; 
A  cricket  cap  was  on  his  head, 

And  his  step  seemed  light  and  gay; 
But  I  never  saw  a  man  who  looked 

So  wistfully  at  the  day. 

I  never  saw  a  man  who  looked 

With  such  a  wistful  eye 
Upon  that  little  tent  ef  blue 

Wliich  prisoners  call  the  sky. 
And  at  every  drifting  cloud  that  went 

With  sails  of  silver  by. 

I  walked,  with  other  souls  in  pain, 

Within  another  ring. 
And  was  wondering  if  the  man  had  done 

A  great  or  little  thing. 
When  a  voice  behind  me  whispered  low, 

"That  fellow's  got  to  swing." 


2  774  Ballads   Old  and  New 

Dear  Christ!  the  very  prison  walls 

Suddenly  seemed  to  reel, 
And  the  sky  above  my  head  became 

Like  a  casque  of  scorching  steel; 
And,  though  I  was  a  soul  in  pain, 

My  pain  I  could  not  feel. 

I  only  knew  what  hunted  thought 
Quickened  his  step,  and  why 

He  looked  upon  the  garish  day 
With  such  a  wistful  eye; 

The  man  had  killed  the  thing  he  loved, 
And  so  he  had  to  die. 

Yet  each  man  kills  the  thing  he  loves, 

By  each  let  this  be  heard. 
Some  do  it  with  a  bitter  look. 

Some  with  a  flattering  word. 
The  coward  does  it  with  a  kiss, 

The  brave  man  with  a  sword! 

Some  kill  their  love  when  they  are  young, 
And  some  when  they  are  old; 

Some  strangle  with  the  hands  of  Lust, 
Some  with  the  hands  of  Gold: 

The  kindest  use  a  knife,  because 
The  dead  so  soon  grow  cold. 

Some  love  too  little,  some  too  long, 

Some  sell,  and  others  buy; 
Some  do  the  deed  with  many  tears, 

And  some  without  a  sigh : 
For  each  man  kills  the  thing  he  loves, 

Yet  each  man  does  not  die. 

He  does  not  die  a  death  of  shame 

On  a  day  of  dark  disgrace. 
Nor  have  a  noose  about  his  neck. 

Nor  a  cloth  upon  his  face. 
Nor  drop  feet  foremost  through  the  floor 

Into  an  empty  space. 


The   Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol       ^775 

He  does  not  sit  with  silent  men 

Who  watch  him  night  and  day; 
Who  watch  him  when  he  tries  to  weep, 

And  when  he  tries  to  pray; 
Who  watch  him  lest  himself  should  rob 

The  prison  of  its  prey.  , 

He  does  not  wake  at  dawn  to  see 

Dread  figures  throng  his  room, 
The  shivering  Chaplain  robed  in  white, 

The  Sheriff  stern  with  gloom. 
And  the  Governor  all  in  shiny  black, 

With  the  yellow  face  of  Doom. 

He  does  not  rise  in  piteous  haste 

To  put  on  convict-clothes, 
While  some  coarse-mouthed  Doctor  gloats,  and  notes 

Each  new  and  nerve-twitched  pose, 
Fingering  a  watch  whose  little  ticks 

Are  like  horrible  hammer-blows. 

He  does  not  know  that  sickening  thirst 

That  sands  one's  throat,  before 
The  hangman  with  his  gardener's  gloves 

Slips  through  the  padded  door, 
And  binds  one  with  three  leathern  thongs, 

That  the  throat  may  thirst  no  more. 

He  does  not  bend  his  head  to  hear 

The  Burial  Office  read, 
Nor,  while  the  terror  of  his  soul 

Tells  him  he  is  not  dead. 
Cross  his  own  cofhn,  as  he  moves 

Into  the  hideous  shed. 

He  does  not  stare  upon  the  air 

Through  a  little  roof  of  glass: 
He  does  not  pray  with  Ups  of  clay 

For  his'agony  to  pass; 
Nor  feel  upon  his  shuddering  cheek 

That  kiss  of  Caiaphas. 


2776  Ballads   Old  and  New 


Six  weeks  our  guardsman  walked  the  yard, 

In  the  suit  of  shabby  gray: 
His  cricket  cap  was  on  his  head, 

And  his  step  seemed  hght  and  gay, 
But  I  never  saw  a  man  who  looked    ' '  '  i  '' 

So  wistfully  at  the  day. 

I  never  saw  a  man  who  looked 

With  such  a  wistful  eye 
Upon  that  little  tent  of  blue 

Which  prisoners  call  the  sky, 
And  at  every  wandering  cloud  that  trailed 

Its  raveled  fleeces  by. 

He  did  not  v/ring  his  hands,  as  do 

Those  witless  men  who  dare 
To  try  to  rear  the  changehng  Hope 

In  the  cave  of  black  Despair: 
He  only  looked  upon  the  sun. 

And  drank  the  morning  air. 

He  did  not  wring  his  hands  nor  weep. 

Nor  did  he  peek  or  pine, 
But  he  drank  the  air  as  though  it  held 

Some  healthful  anodyne; 
With  open  mouth  he  drank  the  sun 

As  though  it  had  been  wine! 

And  I  and  all  the  souls  in  pain. 

Who  tramped  the  other  ring. 
Forgot  if  we  ourselves  had  done 

A  great  or  little  thing. 
And  watched  with  gaze  of  dull  amaze 

The  man  who  had  to  swing. 

And  strange  it  was  to  see  him  pass 

With  a  step  so  light  and  gay, 
And  strange  it  was  to  see  him  look 

So  wistfully  at  the  day. 
And  strange  it  was  to  think  that  he 

Had  such  a  debt  to  pay. 


The   Ballad   of  Reading  Gaol       2777 

For  oak  and  elm  have  pleasant  leaves 

That  in  the  spring-time  shoot: 
But  grim  to  see  is  the  gallows-tree, 

With  its  adder-bitten  root, 
And,  green  or  dry,  a  man  must  die 

Before  it  bears  its  fruit! 

The  loftiest  place  is  that  seat  of  grace 

For  which  all  wordlings  try: 
But  who  would  stand  in  hempen  band 

Upon  a  scaffold  high. 
And  through  a  murderer's  collar  take 

His  last  look  at  the  sky? 

It  is  sweet  to  dance  to  violins 

When  Love  and  Life  are  fair: 
To  dance  to  flutes,  to  dance  to  lutes 

Is  delicate  and  rare: 
But  it  is  not  sweet  with  nimble  feet 

To  dance  upon  the  air! 

So  with  curious  eyes  and  sick  surmise 

We  watched  him  day  by  day, 
And  wondered  if  each  one  of  us 

Would  end  the  self-same  way. 
For  none  can  tell  to  what  red  Hell 

His  sightless  soul  may  stray. 

At  last  the  dead  men  walked  no  more 

Amongst  the  Trial  Men, 
And  I  knew  that  he  was  standing  up 

In  the  black  dock's  dreadful  pen, 
And  that  never  would  I  see  his  face 

In  God's  sweet  world  again. 

Like  two  doomed  ships  that  pass  in  storm. 

We  had  crossed  each  other's  way: 
But  we  made  no  sign,  we  said  no  word. 

We  had  no  word  to  say; 
For  we  did  not  meet  in  the  holy  night, 

But  in  the  shameful  day. 


2778  Ballads  Old  and  New 

A  prison  wall  was  round  us  both, 
Two  outcast  men  we  were: 

The  world  had  thrust  us  from  its  heart, 
And  God  from  out  his  care: 

And  the  iron  gin  that  waits  for  Sin 
Had  caught  us  in  its  snare. 

Ill 

In  Debtor's  Yard  the  stones  are  hard, 
And  the  dripping  wall  is  high. 

So  it  was  there  he  took  the  air 
Beneath  the  leaden  sky. 

And  by  each  side  a  Warder  walked. 
For  fear  the  man  might  die. 

Or  else  he  sat  with  those  v/ho  watched 
His  anguish  night  and  day; 

Who  watched  him  when  he  rose  to  weep. 
And  when  he  crouched  to  pray; 

Who  watched  him  lest  himself  should  rob 
Their  scaffold  of  its  prey. 

The  Governor  was  strong  upon 

The  Regulations  Act: 
The  Doctor  said  that  Death  was  but 

A  scientific  fact : 
And  twice  a  day  the  Chaplain  called. 

And  left  a  little  tract. 

And  twice  a  day  he  smoked  his  pipe, 
And  drank  his  quart  of  beer: 

His  soul  was  resolute,  and  held 
No  hiding-place  for  fear; 

He  often  said  that  he  was  glad 
The  hangman's  hands  were  near. 

But  why  he  said  so  strange  a  thing 

No  Warder  dared  to  ask : 
For  he  to  whom  a  watcher's  doom 

Is  given  as  his  task, 
Must  set  a  lock  upon  his  lips. 

And  make  his  face  a  mask. 


The  Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol       2779 

Or  else  he  might  be  moved,  and  try 

To  comfort  or  console: 
And  what  should  Human  Pity  do 

Pent  up  in  Murderers'  Hole? 
What  word  of  grace  in  such  a  place 

Could  help  a  brother's  soul? 

With  slouch  and  swing  around  the  ring 

We  trod  the  Fools'  Parade! 
We  did  not  care:  we  knew  we  were 

The  Devil's  Own  Brigade: 
And  shaven  head  and  feet  of  lead 

Make  a  merry  masquerade. 

We  tore  the  tarry  rope  to  shreds 

With  blunt  and  bleeding  nails; 
We  rubbed  the  doors,  and  scrubbed  the  floors, 

And  cleaned  the  shining  rails: 
And,  rank  by  rank,  we  soaped  the  plank, 

And  clattered  with  the  pails. 

We  sewed  the  sacks,  we  broke  the  stones. 

We  turned  the  dusty  drill: 
We  banged  the  tins,  and  bawled  the  hymns, 

And  sweated  on  the  mill: 
But  in  the  heart  of  every  man 

Terror  was  lying  still. 

So  still  it  lay  that  every  day 

Crawled  like  a  weed-clogged  wave: 
And  we  forgot  the  bitter  lot 

That  waits  for  fool  and  knave, 
Till  once,  as  we  tramped  in  from  work, 

We  passed  an  open  grave. 

With  yawning  mouth  the  yellow  hole 

Gaped  for  a  living  thing; 
The  very  mud  cried  out  for  blood 

To  the  thirsty  asphalt  ring: 
And  we  knew  that  ere  one  dawn  grew  fair, 

Some  prisoner  had  to  swing. 


2700 


Ballads  Old  and  New 

Right  in  we  went,  with  soul  intent 
On  Death  and  Dread  and  Doom: 

The  hangman,  with  his  Kttle  bag, 
Went  shuffling  through  the  gloom: 

And  each  man  trembled  as  he  crept 
Into  his  numbered  tomb. 

That  night  the  empty  corridors 

Were  full  of  forms  of  Fear, 
And  up  and  down  the  iron  town 

Stole  feet  we  could  not  hear, 
And  through  the  bars  that  hide  the  stars 

White  faces  seemed  to  peer. 

He  lay  as  one  who  lies  and  dreams 

In  a  pleasant  meadow-land, 
The  watchers  watched  him  as  he  slept, 

And  could  not  understand 
How  one  could  sleep  so  sweet  a  sleep 

With  a  hangman  close  at  hand. 

But  there  is  no  sleep  when  men  must  weep 

Who  never  yet  have  wept : 
So  we — the  fool,  the  fraud,  the  knave — 

That  endless  vigil  kept, 
And  through  each  brain  on  hands  of  pain 

Another's  terror  crept. 

Alas!  it  is  a  fearful  thing 

To  feel  another's  guilt! 
For,  right  within,  the  sword  of  Sin 

Pierced  to  its  poisoned  hilt, 
And  as  molten  lead  were  the  tears  we  shed 

For  the  blood  we  had  not  spilt. 

The  Warders  with  their  shoes  of  felt 
Crept  by  each  padlocked  door. 

And  peeped  and  saw,  with  eyes  of  awe, 
Gray  figures  on  the  floor. 

And  wondered  why  men  knelt  to  pray 
Who  never  prayed  before. 


The   Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol       2781 

All  through  the  night  we  knelt  and  prayed, 

Mad  mourners  of  a  corse ! 
The  troubled  plumes  of  mkUiight  were 

The  plumes  upon  a  hearse: 
And  bitter  wine  upon  a  sponge 

Was  the  savor  of  Remorse. 

The  gray  cock  crew,  the  red  cock  crew, 

But  never  came  the  day; 
And  crooked  shapes  of  terror  crouched 

In  the  corners  where  we  lay: 
And  each  evil  sprite  that  walks  by  night 

Before  us  seemed  to  play. 

They  glided  past,  they  glided  fast, 

Like  travelers  through  a  mist: 
They  mocked  the  moon  in  a  rigadoon 

Of  delicate  turn  and  twist. 
And  with  formal  pace  and  loathsome  grace 

The  phantoms  kept  their  tryst. 

With  mop  and  mow,  we  saw  them  go, 

Slim  shadows  hand  and  hand: 
About,  about,  in  ghostly  rout 

They  trod  a  saraband: 
And  the  damned  grotesques  made  arabesques, 

Like  the  wind  upon  the  sand ! 

With  the  pirouettes  of  marionettes 

They  tripped  on  pointed  tread: 
But  with  flutes  of  Fear  they  filled  the  ear. 

As  their  grisly  masque  they  led. 
And  loud  they  sang,  and  long  they  sang, 

For  they  sang  to  wake  the  dead. 

"Oho!"  they  cried,  "The  world  is  wide, 

Bui  fettered  limbs  go  lame! 
And  once,  or  twice,  to  throw  the  dice 

Is  a  gentlemanly  game. 
But  he  does  not  win  who  plays  with  Sin 

In  the  Secret  House  of  Shame.'" 


2782  Ballads  Old  and  New 

No  things  of  air  these  antics  were, 

That  frolicked  with  such  glee: 
To  men  whose  lives  were  held  in  gyves, 

And  whose  feet  might  not  go  free, 
Ah!  wounds  of  Christ!  they  were  living  things, 

Most  terrible  to  see. 

Around,  around,  they  waltzed  and  wound; 

Some  wheeled  in  smirking  pairs; 
With  the  mincing  step  of- a  demirep 

Some  sidled  up  the  stairs: 
And  with  subtle  sneer,  and  fawning  leer, 

Each  helped  us  at  our  prayers. 

The  morning  wind  began  to  moan, 

But  still  the  night  went  on; 
Through  its  giant  loom  the  web  of  gloom 

Crept  till  each  thread  was  spun: 
And,  as  we  prayed,  we  grew  afraid 

Of  the  Justice  of  the  Sun.  jri  J 

The  moaning  wind  went  wandering  round 

The  weeping  prison-wall: 
Till  like  a  wheel  of  turning  steel 

We  felt  the  minutes  crawl: 
O  moaning  wind!  what  had  we  done 

To  have  such  a  seneschal? 

At  last  I  saw  the  shadowed  bars. 

Like  a  lattice  wrought  in  lead. 
Move  right  across  the  whitewashed  wall 

That  faced  my  three-planked  bed. 
And  I  knew  that  somewhere  in  the  world 

God's  dreadful  dawn  was  red. 

At  six  o'clock  we  cleaned  our  cells, 

At  seven  all  was  still, 
But  the  sough  and  swing  of  a  mighty  wing 

The  prison  seemed  to  fill, 
For  the  Lord  of  Death  with  icy  breath. 

Had  entered  in  to  kill. 


The   Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol       2783 

He  did  not  pass  in  purple  pomp, 

Nor  ride  a  moon-white  steed. 
Three  yards  of  cord  and  a  sHding  board 

Are  all  the  gallows'  need: 
So  with  rope  of  shame  the  Herald  came 

To  do  the  secret  deed. 

We  were  as  men  who  through  a  fen 

Of  filthy  darkness  grope: 
We  did  not  dare  to  breathe  a  prayer, 

Or  to  give  our  anguish  scope: 
Something  was  dead  in  each  of  us, 

And  what  was  dead  was  Hope. 

For  Man's  grim  Justice  goes  its  way. 

And  will  not  swerve  aside: 
It  slays  the  weak,  it  slays  the  strong, 

It  has  a  deadly  stride: 
With  iron  heel  it  slays  the  strong. 

The  monstrous  parricide! 

We  waited  for  the  stroke  of  eight: 

Each  tongue  was  thick  with  thirst: 
For  the  stroke  of  eight  is  the  stroke  of  Fate 

That  makes  a  man  accursed, 
And  Fate  will  use  a  running  noose 

For  the  best  man  and  the  worst. 

We  had  no  other  thing  to  do. 

Save  to  wait  for  the  sign  to  come: 
So,  like  things  of  stone  in  a  valley  lone, 

Quiet  we  sat  and  dumb: 
But  each  man's  heart  beat  thick  and  quick, 

Like  a  madman  on  a  drum! 

With  sudden  shock,  the  prison-clock 

Smote  on  the  shivering  air, 
And  from  all  the  jail  rose  up  a  wail 

Of  impotent  despair, 
Like  the  sound  that  frightened  marshes  hear 

From  some  leper  in  his  lair. 


2784 


Ballads  Old  and  New 

And  as  one  sees  most  dreadful  things 

In  the  crystal  of  a  dream. 
We  savv'  the  greasy  hempen  rope 

Hooked  to  the  blackened  beam, 
And  heard  the  prayer  the  hangman's  snare 

Strangled  into  a  scream. 

And  all  the  woe  that  moved  him  so 

That  he  gave  that  bitter  cry, 
And  the  wild  regrets,  and  the  bloody  sweats, 

None  knew  so  well  as  I: 
For  he  who  lives  more  lives  than  one 

More  deaths  than  one  must  die. 

IV 

There  is  no  chapel  on  the  day 

On  which  they  hang  a  man: 
The  Chaplain's  heart  is  far  too  sick, 

Or  his  face  is  far  too  wan. 
Or  there  is  that  written  in  his  eyes 

Which  none  should  look  upon. 

So  they  kept  us  close  till  nigh  on  noon, 

And  then  they  rang  the  bell. 
And  the  Warders  with  their  jingling  keys 

Opened  each  listening  cell, 
And  down  the  iron  stair  we  tramped, 

Each  from  his  separate  Hell. 

Out  into  God's  sweet  air  we  went. 

But  not  in  wonted  way, 
For  this  man's  face  was  white  with  fear, 

And  that  man's  face  was  gray. 
And  I  never  saw  sad  men  who  looked 

So  wistfully  at  the  day. 

I  never  saw  sad  men  who  looked 

With  such  a  v/istful  eye 
Upon  that  little  tent  of  blue 

We  prisoners  call  the  sky, 
And  at  every  careless  cloud  that  passed 

In  happy  freedom  by. 


The   Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol       278c 

But  there  were  those  amongst  us  all 

Who  walked  with  downcast  head, 
And  knew  that,  had  each  got  his  due, 

They  should  have  died  instead: 
He  had  but  killed  a  thing  that  lived, 

Whilst  they  had  killed  the  dead.  ' 

For  he  who  sins  a  second  time 

Wakes  a  dead  soul  to  pain, 
And  draws  it  from  its  spotted  shroud, 

And  makes  it  bleed  again, 
And  makes  it  bleed  great  gouts  of  blood, 

And  makes  it  bleed  in  vain! 

Like  ape  or  clown,  in  monstrous  garb 

With  crooked  arrows  starred, 
Silently  we  went  round  and  round 

The  slippery  asphalt  yard; 
Silently  we  went  round  and  round, 

And  no  man  spoke  a  word. 

Silently  we  went  round  and  round. 

And  through  each  hollow  mind 
The  Memory  of  dreadful  things 

Rushed  like  a  dreadful  wind. 
And  Honor  stalked  before  each  man, 

And  Terror  crept  behind. 

The  Warders  strutted  up  and  down, 

And  kept  their  herd  of  brutes, 
Their  uniforms  were  spick  and  span. 

They  wore  their  Sunday  suits. 
But  we  knew  the  work  they  had  been  at, 

By  the  quickhme  on  their  boots. 

For  where  a  grave  had  opened  wide. 

There  was  no  grave  at  all: 
Only  a  stretch  of  mud  and  sand 

By  the  hideous  prison-wall, 
And  a  little  heap  of  burning  lime, 

That  the  man  should  have  his  pall. 


2786  Ballads  Old  and  New     ' 

For  he  has  a  pall,  this  wretched  man, 

Such  as  few  men  can  claim: 
Deep  down  below  a  prison-yard, 

Naked  for  greater  shame, 
He  lies,  with  fetters  on  each  foot, 

Wrapped  in  a  sheet  of  flame! 

And  all  the  while  the  burning  lirne 

Eats  flesh  and  bone  away, 
It  eats  the  brittle  bone  by  night, 

And  the  soft  flesh  by  day, 
It  eats  the  flesh  and  bone  by  turns. 

But  it  eats  the  heart  alway. 

For  three  long  years  they  wiU  not  sow;i,i 

Or  root  or  seedling  there: 
For  three  long  years  the  unblessed  spot 

Will  sterile  be  and  bare, 
And  look  upon  the  wondering  sky 

With  unreproachful  stare. 

They  think  a  murderer's  heart  would  taint 

Each  simple  seed  they  sow. 
It  is  not  true!     God's  kindly  earth 

Is  kindlier  than  men  know, 
And  the  red  rose  would  but  blow  more  red, 

The  white  rose  whiter  blow. 

Out  of  his  mouth  a  red,  red  rose! 

Out  of  his  heart  a  white! 
For  who  can  say  by  what  strange  way 

Christ  brings  his  will  to  light. 
Since  the  barren  staff  the  pilgrim  bore 

Bloomed  in  the  great  Pope's  sight? 

But  neither  milk-white  rose  nor  red 

May  bloom  in  prison  air; 
The  shard,  the  pebble,  and  the  flint, 

Are  what  they  give  us  there: 
For  flowers  have  been  known  to  heal 

A  common  man's  despair. 


The   Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol       2787 

So  never  will  wine-red  rose  or  white 

Petal  by  petal,  fall 
On  that  stretch  of  mud  and  sand  that  lies 

By  that  hideous  prison-wall, 
To  tell  the  men  who  tramp  the  yard 

That  God's  Son  died  for  all. 

Yet  though  the  hideous  prison-wall 

Still  hems  him  round  and  round, 
And  a  spirit  may  not  walk  by  night 

That  is  with  fetters  bound, 
And  a  spirit  may  but  weep  that  lies 

In  such  unholy  ground. 

He  is  at  peace — this  wretched  man — • 

At  peace,  or  will  be  soon : 
There  is  no  thing  to  make  him  mad. 

Nor  does  Terror  walk  at  noon, 
For  the  lamplcss  Earth  in  which  he  lies 

Has  neither  Sun  nor  Moon. 

They  hanged  him  as  a  beast  is  hanged: 

They  did  not  even  toll 
A  recjuiem  that  might  have  brought 

Rest  to  his  startled  soul, 
But  hurriedly  they  took  him  out, 

And  hid  him  in  a  hole. 

They  stripped  him  of  his  canvas  clothes, 

And  gave  him  to  the  flics: 
They  mocked  the  swollen  purple  throat. 

And  the  stark  and  staring  eyes: 
And-with  laughter  loud  they  heaped  the  shroud 

In  which  their  convict  lies. 

The  Chaplain  would  not  kneel  to  pray 

By  his  dishonored  grave: 
Nor  mark  it  with  that  blessed  Cross  ' 

That  Christ  for  sinners  gave. 
Because  the  man  was  one  of  those 

Whom  Christ  came  down  to  save. 


2788  Ballads   Old  and  New 

Yet  all  is  well;  he  has  but  passed 
To  Life's  appointed  bourne: 

And  alien  tears  will  iill  for  him 
Pity's  long-broken  urn, 

For  his  mourners  will  be  outcast  men, 
And  outcasts  always  mourn. 


I  know  not  whether  Laws  be  right, 

Or  whether  Laws  be  wrong; 
All  that  we  know  who  lie  in  jail 

Is  that  the  wall  is  strong; 
And  that  each  clay  is  like  a  year, 

A  year  whose  days  are  long. 

But  this  I  know,  that  every  Law 
That  men  have  made  for  Man, 

Since  first  Man  took  his  brother's  life. 
And  this  sad  world  began, 

But  straws  the  wheat  and  saves  the  chaff 
With  a  most  evil  fan. 

This  too  I  know — and  wise  it  were 
If  each  could  know  the  same — 

That  every  prison  that  men  build 

■    Is  built  with  bricks  of  shame. 

And  bound  with  bars  lest  Christ  should  see 
How  men  their  brothers  maim. 

With  bars  they  blur  the  gracious  moon, 

And  blind  the  goodly  sun: 
And  they  do  well  to  hide  their  Hell, 

For  in  it  things  are  done 
That  Son  of  God  nor  son  of  Man 

Ever  should  look  upon! 

The  vilest  deeds  like  poison  weeds 

Bloom  well  in  prison-air: 
It  is  only  what  is  good  in  Man 

That  wastes  and  withers  there: 
Pale  Anguish  keeps  the  heavy  gate,  . 

And  the  Warder  is  Despair. 


I'he   Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol       2789 

For  they  starve  the  little  frightened  child, 

Till  it  weeps  both  night  and  day: 
And  they  scourge  the  weak,  and  flog  the  fool, 

And  gibe  the  old  and  gray, 
And  some  grow  mad,  and  all  grow  bad,    .;U 

And  none  a  word  may  say. 

Each  narrow  cell  in  which  we  dwell 

Is  a  foul  and  dark  latrine, 
And  the  fetid  breath  of  living  Death 

Chokes  up  each  grated  screen. 
And  all,  but  Lust,  is  turned  to  dust  lA 

In  Humanity's  machine. 

The  brackish  water  that  we  drink 

Creeps  with  a  loathsome  slime. 
And  the  bitter  bread  they  weigh  in  scales  i ! 

Is  full  of  chalk  and  lime. 
And  Sleep  will  not  lie  down,  but  walks 

Wild-eyed,  and  cries  to  Time. 

But  though  lean  Hunger  and  green  Thirst 

Like  asp  with  adder  fight, 
We  have  little  care  of  prison  fare. 

For  what  chills  and  kills  outright 
Is  that  every  stone  one  hfts  by  day 

Becomes  one's  heart  by  night. 

With  midnight  always  in  one's  heart, 

And  twiUght  in  one's  cell. 
We  turn  the  crank,  or  tear  the  rope. 

Each  in  his  separate  Hell, 
And  the  silence  is  more  awful  far 

Than  the  sound  of  a  brazen  bell. 

And  never  a  human  voice  comes  near 

To  speak  a  gentle  word : 
And  the  eye  that  watches  through  the  door 

Is  pitiless  and  hard: 
And  by  all  forgot,  we  rot  and  rot. 

With  soul  and  body  marred. 


2790  Ballads  Old  and  New   !  f 

And  thus  we  rust  Life's  iron  chain, 

Degraded  and  alone: 
And  some  men  curse,  and  some  men  weep,  . 

And  some  men  make  no  moan: 
But  God's  eternal  Laws  are  kind  .A 

And  break  the  heart  of  stone,  nua  uii/. 

And  every  human  heart  that  breaks, 

In  prison-cell  or  yard. 
Is  as  that  broken  box  that  gave 

Its  treasure  to  the  Lord, 
And  filled  the  unclean  leper's  house 

With  the  scent  of  costhest  nard.       ;  ,.i 

Ah!  happy  they  whose  hearts  can  break 

And  peace  of  pardon  win! 
How  else  may  man  make  straight  his  plan  •', 

And  cleanse  his  soul  from  Sin? 
How  else  but  through  a  broken  heart 

May  Lord  Christ  enter  in?  :  1  // 

And  he  of  the  swollen  purple  throat,  I 

And  the  stark  and  staring  eyes. 

Waits  for  the  holy  hands  that  took 
The  Thief  to  Paradise; 

And  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart 
The  Lord  will  not  despise. 

The  man  in  red  who  reads  the  Law 

Gave  him  three  weeks  of  life, 
Three  little  weeks  in  which  to  heal 

His  soul  of  his  soul's  strife. 
And  cleanse  from  every  blot  of  blood 

The  hand  that  held  the  knife. 

And  with  tears  of  blood  he  cleansed  the  hand, 

The  hand  that  held  the  steel: 
For  only  blood  can  wipe  out  blood, 

And  only  tears  can  heal:   ,n£  gealiJiq  si 
And  the  crimson  stain  that  was  oi  Cain' 

Became  Christ's  snow-white  seal. 


The   Ballad  of  Judas   Iscariot       2791 

VI 

In  Reading  gaol  by  Reading  town 

There  is  a  pit  of  shame. 
And  in  it  hes  a  wretched  man 

Eaten  by  teeth  of  flame, 
In  a  burning  winding-sheet  he  lies, 

And  his  grave  has  got  no  name. 

And  there,  till  Christ  call  forth  the  dead, 

In  silence  let  him  lie: 
No  need  to  waste  the  foolish  tear. 

Or  heave  the  windy  sigh: 
The  man  had  killed  the  thing  he  loved, 

And  so  he  had  to  die. 

And  all  men  kill  the  thing  they  love, 

By  all  let  this  be  heard, 
Some  do  it  with  a  bitter  look. 

Some  with  a  flattering  word, 
The  coward  does  it  with  a  kiss. 

The  brave  man  with  a  sword! 

Oscar  Wilde  [1856-1900] 


THE   BALLAD   OF  JUDAS   ISCARIOT 

'TwAS  the  body  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Lay  in  the  Field  of  Blood; 
'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Beside  the  body  stood. 

Black  was  the  earth  by  night, 

And  black  was  the  sky; 
Black,  black  were  the  broken  clouds, 

Though  the  red  Moon  went  by. 

'Twas  the  body  of  Judas  Iscariot 
Strangled  and  dead  lay  there; 

'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 
Looked  on  it  in  despair. 


279^  Ballads   Old  and  New 

The  breath  of  the  World  came  and  went 

Like  a  sick  man's  in  rest; 
Drop  by  drop  on  the  World's  eyes 

The  dews  fell  cool  and  blest. 

Then  the  soul  of  Judas  Is.cariot 

Did  make  a  gentle  moan — 
"I  will  bury  underneath  the  ground 

My  flesh  and  blood  and  bone. 

"I  will  bury  deep  beneath  the  soil, 

Lest  mortals  look  thereon, 
And  when  the  wolf  and  raven  come 

The  body  will  be  gone! 

"The  stones  of  the  field  are  sharp  as  steel, 
And  hard  and  bold,  God  wot; 

And  I  must  bear  my  body  hence 
Until  I  find  a  spot!" 


'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 
So  grim,  and  gaunt,  and  gray, 

Raised  the  body  of  Judas  Iscariot, 
And  carried  it  away. 


And  as  he  bare  it  from  the  field 

Its  touch  was  cold  as  ice, 
And  the  ivory  teeth  within  the  jaw 

Rattled  aloud,  like  dice. 

As  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Carried  its  load  with  pain. 
The  Eye  of  Heaven,  like  a  lantern's  eye. 

Opened  and  shut  again. 

Half  he  walked,  and  half  he  seemed 

Lifted  on  the  cold  wind; 
He  did  not  turn,  for  chilly  hands 

Were  pushing  from  behind. 


The   Ballad  of  Judas   Iscariot       2793 

The  first  place  that  he  came  unto 

It  was  the  open  wold, 
And  underneath  were  prickly  whins, 

And  a  wind  that  blew  so  cold. 


The  next  place  that  he  came  unto 

It  was  a  stagnant  pool, 
And  when  he  threw  the  body  in 

It  floated  light  as  wool. 

He  drew  the  body  on  his  back, 

And  it  was  dripping  chill, 
And  the  next  place  that  he  came  unto 

Was  a  Cross  upon  a  hill. 

A  Cross  upon  the  windy  hill. 

And  a  Cross  on  either  side. 
Three  skeletons  that  swing  thereon, 

Who  had  been  crucified. 

And  on  the  middle  cross-bar  sat 

A  white  Dove  slumbering; 
Dim  it  sat  in  the  dim  light, 

With  its  head  beneath  its  wing. 

And  underneath  the  middle  Cross 
A  grave  yawned  wide  and  vast. 

But  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 
Shivered,  and  glided  past. 

The  fourth  place  that  he  came  unto 

It  was  the  Brig  of  Dread, 
And  the  great  torrents  rushing  down 

Were  deep,  and  swift,  and  red. 

He  dared  not  fling  the  body  in 

For  fear  of  faces  dim, 
And  arms  were  waved  in  the  wild  water 

To  thrust  it  back  to  him. 


2794  Ballads   Old  and  NewiT 

'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Turned  from  the  Brig  of  Dread, 
And  the  dreadful  foam  of  the  wild  water 

Had  splashed  the  body  red. 

For  days  and  nights  he  wandered  on 

Upon  an  open  plain, 
And  the  days  went  by  hke  blinding  mist, 

And  the  nights  like  rushing  rain. 

For  days  and  nights  he  wandered  on, 

All  through  the  Wood  of  Woe; 
And  the  nights  went  by  like  moaning  wind, 

And  the  days  Hke  drifting  snow. 

'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Came  with  a  weary  face — 
Alone,  alone,  and  all  alone. 

Alone  in  a  lonely  place! 

He  wandered  east,  he  wandered  west,.,iA 

And  heard  no  human  sound; 
For  months  and  years,  in  grief  and  tears, 

He  wandered  round  and  round. 

For  months  and  years,  in  grief  and  tears. 

He  walked  the  silent  night; 
Then  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Perceived  a  far-off  Ught. 

A  far-off  light  across  the  waste. 

As  dim  as  dim  might  be. 
That  came  and  went  Uke  a  lighthouse  gleam 

On  a  black  night  at  sea. 

'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot  ••■'tpI>  -^H 

Crawled  to  the  distant  gleam; 
And  the  rain  came  down,  and  the  rain, was  blown 

Against  him  with  a  scream.     ,[U  oT 


The   Ballad  of  Judas  Iscariot       2795 

For  days  and  nights  he  wandered  on, 

Pushed  on  by  hands  behind ; 
And  the  days  went  by  like  black,  black  rain, 

And  the  nights  hke  rushing  wind. 

'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot,  '' 

Strange,  and  sad,  and  tall, 
Stood  all  alone  at  dead  of  night 

Before  a  Ughted  hall. 

And  the  wold  was  white  with  snow. 
And  his  foot-marks  black  and  damp, 

And  the  ghost  of  the  silver  Moon  arose, 
Holding  her  yellow  lamp. 

And  the  icicles  were  on  the  eaves, 
And  the  walls  were  deep  with  white, 

And  the  shadows  of  the  guests  within 
Passed  on  the  window  light. 

The  shadows  of  the  wedding  guests 

Did  strangers  come  and  go. 
And  the  body  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Lay  stretched  along  the  snow. 

The  body  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Lay  stretched  along  the  snow; 
'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Ran  swiftly  to  and  fro. 

To  and  fro,  and  up  and  down. 

He  ran  so  swiftly  there. 
As  round  and  round  the  frozen  Pole  . .  .=    1 

Glideth  the  lean  white  bear.  OTjrfT 

'Twas  the  Bridegroom  sat  at  the  table-head, 
And  the  lights  burned  bright  and  clear — 

"Oh,  who  is  that?"  the  Bridegroom  said, 
"Whose  weary  feet  I  hear?" 


2796  Ballads  Old  and  New 

'Twas  one  looked  from  the  lighted  hall, 

And  answered  soft  and  slow, 
"It  is  a  wolf  runs  up  and  down 

With  a  black  track  in  the  snow." 

The  Bridegroom  in  his  robe  of  white 

Sat  at  the  table-head — 
"Oh,  who  is  that  who  moans  without?" 

The  blessed  Bridegroom  said. 

'Twas  one  looked  from  the  lighted  hall, 

And  answered  fierce  and  low, 
"  'Tis  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 

GHding  to  and  fro." 

'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Did  hush  itself  and  stand. 
And  saw  the  Bridegroom  at  the  door 

With  a  light  in  his  hand. 

The  Bridegroom  stood  in  the  open  door, 

And  he  was  clad  in  white. 
And  far  within  the  Lord's  Supper 

Was  spread  so  long  and  bright. 

The  Bridegroom  shaded  his  eyes  and  looked, 
And  his  face  was  bright  to  see — 

"What  dost  thou  here  at  the  Lord's  Supper 
With  thy  body's  sins?"  said  he. 

'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot     f1  hnR  oT 
Stood  black,  and  sad,  and  bare — 

"I  have  wandered  many  nights  and  days; 
There  is  no  light  elsewhere."  i.) 

'Twas  the  wedding  guests  cried  out  within, 
And  their  eyes  were  fierce  and  bright — 

"  Scourge  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot 
Away  into  the  night!" 


He   Fell  Among  Thieves  2797 

The  Bridegroom  stood  in  the  open  door,        ''^■•' ■   -TT 

And  he  waved  hands  still  and  slow, 
And  the  third  time  that  he  waved  his  hands 

The  air  was  thick  with  snow. 

And  of  every  flake  of  falling  snow. 

Before  it  touched  the  ground, 
There  came  a  dove,  and  a  thousand  doves  •  ii/'. 

Made  sweet  sound.  • 

'Twas  the  body  of  Judas  Iscariot 

Floated  away  full  fleet, 
And  the  wings  of  the  doves  that  bare  it  off 

Were  like  its  winding-sheet. 

'Twas  the  Bridegroom  stood  at  the  open  door,  ■ 

And  beckoned,  smUing  sweet;  ' 

'Twas  the  soul  of  Judas  Iscariot  ■  '^' ' 

Stole  in,  and  fell  at  his  feet.  'I'f'  undU.'J 

"The  Holy  Supper  is  spread  within. 

And  the  many  candles  shine, 
And  I  have  waited  long  for  thee 

Before  I  poured  the  wine!" 

The  supper  wine  is  poured  at  last,  '  "^^^-^  ^"• 

The  lights  burn  bright  and  fair,  ' 

Iscariot  washes  the  Bridegroom's  feet, 
'     And  dries  them  with  his  hair. 

Robert  Biichauaii  [1841-igoi] 

r 

HE   FELL   AMONG  THIEVES 

'Ye  have  robbed,"  said  he,  "ye  have  slaughtered  and  made 
an  end,  

Take  your  ill-got  plunder,  and  bury  the  dead:     .['ji  -jH 
Vhat  will  ye  more  of  your  guest  and  sometime  friend?  " 

"Blood  for  our  blood,"  they  said. 


2798  Ballads  Old  and  New 

He  laughed:  "If  one  may  settle  the  score  for  five, '  ' 
I  am  ready;  but  let  the  reckoning  stand  till  day: 

I  have  loved  the  sunhght  as  dearly  as  any  alive. " 
"You  shall  die  at  dawn,"  said  they. 

He  flung  his  empty  revolver  down  the  slope. 

He  climbed  alone  to  the  Eastward  edge  of  the  trees; 

AU  night  long  in  a  dream  untroubled  of  hope)  arjai 
He  brooded,  clasping  his  knees.  !  ■  l^ 

He  did  not  hear  the  monotonous  roar  that  fills 
The  ravine  where  the  Yassin  river  sullenly  flows; 

He  did  not  see  the  starlight  on  the  Laspur  hills, ;  n/ 
Or  the  far  Afghan  snows. 

He  saw  the  April  noon  on  his  books  aglow. 
The  wistaria  trailing  in  at  the  window  wide ; 

He  heard  his  father's  voice  from  the  terrace  below 
Calling  him  down  to  ride. 

He  saw  the  gray  little  church  across  the  park,  ,  p)> 
The  mounds  that  hid  the  loved  and  honored  dead; 

The  Norman  arch,  the  chancel  softly  dark, 

The  brasses  black  and  red.  jj 

He  saw  the  School  Close,  sunny  and  green,  .''- 

The  runner  beside  him,  the  stand  by  the  parapet  wall. 

The  distant  tape,  and  the  crowd  roaring  betw.^pn, ,  ^ , 
His  own  name  over  all.  r,  [^P,yi     - 

He  saw  the  dark  wainscot  and  timbered  roof, 
The  long  tables,  and  the  faces  merry  and  keen; 

The  College  Eight  and  their  trainer  dining  aloof. 
The  Dons  on  the  daifs  serene. 

He  watched  the  hner's  stem  plowing  the  foam,      "^3  nn 
He  felt  her  trembliivg  speed  and  the  thrash  of  her  screw; 

He  heard  the  passengers'  voices  talking  of  home,  •■■<■''  juh  . 
He  saw  the  flag  she  flew.  boofS" 


./:•  The   Last  Hunt  2799 

And  now  it  was  dawn.     He  rose  strong  on  his  feet, 
And  strode  to  his  ruined  camp  below  the  wood; 

He  drank  the  breath  of  the  morning  cool  and  sweet; 
His  murderers  round  him  stood. 

Light  on  the  Laspur  hills  was  broadening  fast, 

The  blood-red  snow-peaks  chilled  to  a  dazzling  white; 

He  turned,  and  saw  the  golden  circle  at  last, 
Cut  by  the  Eastern  height. 

"O  glorious  Life,  Who  dwellest  in  earth  and  sun, 
I  have  lived,  I  praise  and  adore  Thee." 

A  sword  swept. 
Over  the  pass  the  voices  one  by  one 
Faded,  and  the  hill  slept. 

Henry  Newbolt  [1862- 


THE  LAST  HUNT 

Oh,  it's  twenty  gallant  gentlemen 

Rode  out  to  hunt  the  deer, 
With  mirth  upon  the  silver  horn 

And  gleam  upon  the  spear; 
They  galloped  through  the  meadow-grass, 

They  sought  the  forest's  gloom. 
And  loudest  rang  Sir  Morven's  laugh. 
And  lightest  tossed  his  plume. 

There's  no  delight  by  day  or  night 

Like  hunting  in  the  morn; 

So  busk  ye,  gallant  gentlemen. 

And  sound  the  silver  horn! 

They  rode  into  the  dark  greenwood 

By  ferny  dell  and  glade, —  1^ 

And  now  and  then  upon  their  cloak&ir.;^ 

The  yellow  sunshine  played; 
They  heard  the  timid  forest-birds 

Break  off  amid  their  glee, 
They  saw  the  startled  leveret, 

But  not  a  stag  did  see. 


28oo  Ballads   Old  and  New 

Wind,  wind  the  horn,  on  summer  mornj, 
Though  ne'er  a  buck  appear,  bnA 

There's  health  for  horse  and  gentleman  ; 
A-hunting  of  the  deer! 

Ihey  panted  up  Ben  l^omond  s  side 

Where  thick  the  leafage  grew. 
And  when  they  bent  the  branches  back 

The  sunbeams  darted  through; 
Sir  Morven  in  his  saddle  turned, 

And  to  his  comrades  spake, 

"Now  quiet!  we  shall  find  a  stag 

Beside  the  Brownies'  Lake." 

Then  sound  not  on  the  bugle-horn, 

Bend  bush  and  do  not  break. 
Lest  ye  should  start  the  timid  hart 
A-drinking  at  the  lake. 

Now  they  have  reached  the  Brownies'  Lake,^ 

A  blue  eye  in  the  wood, — 
And  on  its  brink  a  moment's  space 

All  motionless  they  stood: 
When,  suddenly,  the  silence  broke 

With  fifty  bowstrings'  twang. 
And  hurtling  through  the  drowsy  air 
Full  fifty  arrows  sang. 
Ah,  better  for  those  gentlemen, 
Than  horn  and  slender  spear, 
Were  morion  and  buckler  true, 
A-hunting  of  the  deer. 

Not  one  of  that  brave  company 

Shall  hunt  the  deer  again; 
Some  fell  beside  the  Brownies'  Poolyju/. 

Some  dropped  in  dell  or  glen; 
An  arrow  pierced  Sir  Morven's  breast, 

His  horse  plunged  in  the  lake, 
And  swimming  to  the  farther  bank 

He  left  a  bloody  wake. 


Andre's   Ride  2801 

Ah,  what  avails  the  silver  horn, 

And  what  the  slender  spear? 
There's  other  quarry  in  the  wood 

Beside  the  fallow  deer! 

O'er  ridge  and  hollow  sped  the  horse 

Besprent  with  blood  and  foam, 
Nor  slackened  pace  until  at  eve 
He  brought  his  master  home. 
How  tenderly  the  Lady  Ruth 

The  cruel  dart  withdrew! 
"False  Tirrell  shot  the  bolt,"  she  said, 
"That  my  Sir  Morven  slew!" 
Deep  in  the  forest  lurks  the  foe, 
While  gayly  shines  the  morn: 
Hang  up  the  broken  spear,  and  blow 
A  dirge  upon  the  horn. 

William  Roscoe  Thayer  [1859-- 


ANDRfi'S  RIDE 

When  Andre  rode  to  Pont-du-lac, 
With  all  his  raiders  at  his  back, 
Mon  Dieu!  the  tumult  in  the  town! 
Scarce  clanged  the  great  portcullis  down 
Ere  in  the  sunshine  gleamed  his  spears, 
And  up  marched  all  his  musketeers, 
And  far  and  fast  in  haste's  array 
Sped  men  to  fight  and  priests  to  pray: 
In  every  street  a  barricade 
Of  aught  that  lay  to  hand  was  made; 
From  every  house  a  man  was  told. 
Nor  quittance  given  to  young  or  old: 
Should  youth  be  spared  or  age  be  slack 
When  Andr6  rode  to  Pont-du-lac? 

When  Andre  rode  to  Pont-du-lac, 
With  all  his  ravening  reiver-pack, 
The  mid  lake  was  a  frozen  road 
Unbending  to  the  cannon's  load; 


2  8o2  Ballads   Old  and  New 

No  warmth  the  sun  had  as  it  shone; 

The  kine  were  stalled,  the  birds  were  gone; 

Like  wild  things  seemed  the  shapes  of  fur 

With  which  was  every  street  astir, 

And  over  all  the  huddling  crowd 

The  thick  breath  hung — a  sohd  cloud, — 

Roof,  road,  and  river,  all  were  white; 

Men  moved  benumbed  by  day — rby  night 

The  boldest  durst  not  bivouac. 

When  Andre  rode  to  Pont-du-lac. 

When  Andre  rode  to  Pont-du-lac, 
We  scarce  could  stem  his  swift  attack,; 
A  halt,  a  cheer,  a  bugle-call, — 
Like  wild-cats  they  were  up  the  wall: 
But  still  as  each  man  won  the  town, 
We  tossed  him  from  the  ramparts  down; 
And  when  at  last  the  stormers  quailed. 
And  back  the  assailants  shrank  assailed. 
Like  wounded  wasps  that  still  could  sting, 
Or  tigers  that  had  missed  their  spring. 
They  would  not  fly,  but  turned  at  bay 
And  fought  out  all  the  dying  day;—  ■:;>h/7 
Sweet  saints!  it  was  a  curious  track    ''  "^'^^  '^ 
That  Andre  left  by  Pont-du-lac.  ■  '"- 

When  Andre  rode  to  Pont-du-lac, 

Said  he,  "A  troop  of  girls  could  sack    .    ,  . , 

This  huckster  town,  that  hugs  its  hoar.^  ^r,/ 

But  wists  not  how  to  wield  a  sword." 

It  makes  my  blood  warm  now  to  know 

How  soon  Sir  Cockerel  ceased  to  croASfy^  jq 

And  how  'twas  my  sure  dagger-point  t- 

In  Andre's  harness  found  a  joint: 

For  I,  who  now  am  old,  was  young, 

And  strong  the  thews  were,  now  unstrung, 

And  deadly  though  our  danger  then, 

I  would  that  day  were  back  again; 

Ay,  would  to  God  that  day  were  back      ; 

When  Andre  rode  to  Pont-du-lac! 

A.  H.  Beesly  [i8    - 


The   Ballad  of  Father  GilHgan      2803 

THE  BALLAD   OF   FATHER   GILLIGAN 

The  old  priest  Peter  GiUigan 
Was  weary  night  and  day: 
For  half  his  flock  were  in  their  beds, 
Or  under  green  sods  lay. 

Once,  while  he  nodded  on  a  chair, 
At  the  moth-hour  of  eve, 
Another  poor  man  sent  for  him, 
And  he  began  to  grieve. 

"I  have  no  rest,  nor  joy,  nor  peace, 
For  people  die  and  die"; 
And  after  cried  he,  "God  forgive! 
My  body  spake,  not  I!" 

He  knelt,  and  leaning  on  the  chair 
He  prayed  and  fell  asleep; 
And  the  moth-hour  went  from  the  fields, 
And  stars  began  to  peep. 

They  slowly  into  millions  grew, 
And  leaves  shook  in  the  wind; 
And  God  covered  the  world  with  shade, 
And  whispered  to  mankind. 

Upon  the  time  of  sparrow  chirp 
When  the  moths  came  once  more, 
The  old  priest  Peter  GiUigan 
Stood  upright  on  the  floor. 

"Mavrone,  mavrone!  the  man  has  died, 
While  I  slept  on  the  chair"; 
He  roused  his  horse  out'of  his  sleep. 
And  rode  with  httle  care. 

He  rode  now  as  he  never  rode, 
By  rocky  lane  and  fen; 
The  sick  man's  wife  opened  the  door: 
"Father!  you  come  again!" 


2804  Ballads  Old  and  New 

"And  is  the  poor  man  dead?"  he  cried. 
M /'He  died  an  hour  ago."  1JA8  S\ii' 

The  old  priest  Peter  Gilhgan 
In  grief  swayed  to  and  fro. 

"When  you  were  gone,  he  turned  and  died 

As  merry  as  a  bird." 

The  old  priest  Peter  Gilligan 

He  knelt  him  at  the  word. 

"He  who  hath  made  the  night  of  stars 
For  souls,  who  tire  and  bleed. 
Sent  one  of  His  great  angels  down 
To  help  me  in  my  need. 

"He  who  is  wrapped  in  purple  robes, 
With  planets  in  His  care, 
Had  pity  on  the  least  of  things 
Asleep  upon  a  chair." 

William  Butler  Yeats  [1865- 


HERVfi  RIEL 


On  the  sea  and  at  the  Hogue,  sixteen  hundred  ninety-two, 
Did  the  English  fight  the  French, — woe  to  France! 

And,  the  thirty-first  of  May,  helter-skelter  through  the  blue, 

Like  a  crowd  of  frightened  porpoises  a  shoal  of  sharks  pur- 
sue. 
Came  crowding  ship  on  ship  to  Saint  Malo  on  the  Ranee, 

With  the  English  fleet  in  view. 


'Twas  the  squadron  that  escaped,  with  the  victor  in  full 
chase ; 
First  and  foremost  of  the  drove,  in  his  great  ship,  Dam- 
freville; 

Close  on  him  fled,  great  and  small, 
Twenty-two  good  ships  in  all; 


Herve   Riel  2805 

And  Lhey  signalled  to  the  place 
"Help  the  winners  of  a  race! 

Get  us  guidance,  give  us  harbor,  take  us  quick — or,  quicker 
still, 

Here's  the  English  can  and  will!" 

in 

Then  the  pilots  of  the  place  put  out  brisk  and  leapt  on 

board; 
"  Why,  what  hope  or  chance  have  ships  like  these  to  pass?  " 
laughed  they: 
"Rocks  to  starboard,  rocks  to  port,  all  the  passage  scarred 

and  scored. 
Shall  the  Formidable  here,  with  her  twelve-and-eighty  guns, 
Think  to  make  the  river-mouth  by  the  single  narrow  way, 
Trust  to  enter  where  'tis  ticklish  for  a  craft  of  twenty  tons, 
And  with  flow  at  full  beside? 
Now,  'tis  slackest  ebb  of  tide. 
Reach  the  mooring?    Rather  say, 
While  rock  stands  or  water  runs. 
Not  a  ship  will  leave  the  bay!" 

IV 

Then  was  called  a  council  straight. 

Brief  and  bitter  the  debate: 

"Here's  the  English  at  our  heels;  would  you  have  them  take 

in  tow 
All  that's  left  us  of  the  fleet,  linked  together  stern  and  bow. 
For  a  prize  to  Plymouth  Sound? 
Better  run  the  ships  aground!" 

(Ended  Damfreyille  his  speech). 
"Not  a  minute  more  to  wait! 

Let  the  Captains  all  and  each 

Shove  ashore,  then  blow  up,  burn  the  vessels  on  the  beach! 
France  must  undergo  her  fate. 

V 

"Give  the  word!"    But  no  such  word 
Was  ever  spoke  or  heard; 

For  up  stood,  for  out  stepped,  for  in  struck  amid  all  these 


2  8o6  Ballads  Old  and  New 

— A  Captain?  A  Lieutenant?  A  Mate — first,  second,  third? 

No  such  man  of  mark,  and  meet 

With  his  betters  to  compete ! 

But  a  simple  Breton  sailor  pressed  by  Tourville  for  the 
fleet, 
A  poor  coasting-pilot  he,  Herve  Riel  the  Croisickese. 

VI 

And  "What  mockery  or  malice  have  we  here?"  cries  Herve 

Riel: 
"Are  you  mad,  you  Malouins?    Are  you  cowards,  fools,  or 

rogues? 
Talk  to  me  of  rocks  and  shoals,  me  who  took  the  soundings, 

tell 
On  my  fingers  every  bank,  every  shallow,  every  swell 

'Twixt  the  offing  here  and  Greve  where  the  river  disem- 
bogues? 
Are  you  bought  by  EngHsh  gold?    Is  it  love  the  lying's  for? 
Morn  and  eve,  night  and  day,  I 

Have  I  piloted  your  bay,  ,: 

Entered  free  and  anchored  fast  at  the  foot  of  Solidor. 

Burn  the  fleet  and  ruin  France?     That  were  worse  than 
fifty  Hogues! 
Sirs,  they  know  I  speak  the  truth!     Sirs,  believe  rpe 
there's  a  way!  ;    i 

Only  let  me  lead  the  line, 

Have  the  biggest  ship  to  steer. 
Get  this  Formidable  clear. 
Make  the  others  follow  mine, 

And  I  lead  them,  most  and  least,  by  a  passage  I  know  well, 
Right  to  Solidor  past  Greve, 

And  there  lay  them  safe  and  sound; 
And  if  one  ship  misbehave, — 

— Keel  so  much  as  grate  the  ground. 
Why,  I've  nothing  but  my  Hfe,— here's  my  head!"  cries 
Herve  Riel. 

VII 

Not  a  minute  more  to  wait. 
"Steer  us  in,  then,  small  and  great! 
Take  the  helm,  lead  the  line,  save  the  squadron!"  cried 
its  chief. 


\ 


Herve   Riel        i  2807 

Captains,  give  the  sailor  place! 

He  is  Admiral,  in  brief. 
Still  the  north-wind,  by  God's  grace! 
See  the  noble  fellow's  face 
As  the  big  ship,  with  a  bound, 
Clears  the  entry  like  a  hound. 

Keeps  the  passage,  as  its  inch  of  way  were  the  wide  seas 
profound  I 

See,  safe  through  shoal  and  rock, 

How  they  follow  in  a  flock,  ' 

Not  a  ship  that  misbehaves,  not  a  keel  that  grates  the 
ground, 

Not  a  spar  that  comes  to  grief! 
The  peril,  see,  is  past. 
All  are  harbored  to  the  last. 

And  just  as  Herve  Riel  hollas  "Anchor!" — sure  as  fate,       ^ 
Up  the  English  come, — too  late! 


vm 

So,  the  storm  subsides  to  calm: 

They  see  the  green  trees  wave 

On  the  heights  o'erlooking  Greve. 
Hearts  that  bled  are  stanched  with  balm. 
"Just  our  rapture  to  enhance, 

Let  the  English  rake  the  bay, 
Gnash  their  teeth  and  glare  askance 

As  they  cannonade  away! 
'Neath  rampired  Sohdor  pleasant  riding  on  the  Ranee!" 
How  hope  succeeds  despair  on  each  Captain's  countenance! 
Out  burst  all  with  one  accord, 

"This  is  Paradise  for  Hell! 
Let  France,  let  France's  King 
Thank  the  man  that  did  the  thing!" 
What  a  shout,  and  all  one  word, 

"Herve  Riel!" 
As  he  stepped  in  front  once  more, 

Not  a  symptom  of  surprise 

In  the  frank  blue  Breton  eyes, 
Just  the  same  man  as  before. 


28o8  Ballads   Old  and  New 


IX 

Then  said  Damfreville,  "My  friend, 
I  must  speak  out  at  the  end, 

Though  I  find  the  speaking  hard. 
Praise  is  deeper  than  the  hps: 
You  have  saved  the  King  his  ships, 

You  must  name  your  own  reward. 
'Faith,  our  sun  was  near  ecKpse! 
Demand  whate'er  you  will, 
France  remains  your  debtor  still. 

Ask  to  heart's  content  and  have!  or  my  name's  not  Dam- 
freville." 

X 

Then  a  beam  of  fun  outbroke 
On  the  bearded  mouth  that  spoke, 
As  the  honest  heart  laughed  through 
Those  frank  eyes  of  Breton  blue: 
"  Since  I  needs  must  say  my  say, 

Since  on  board  the  duty's  done, 

And  from  Malo  Roads  to  Croisic  Point,  what  is  it  but  a 
run? — 
Since  'tis  ask  and  have,  I  may — 

Since  the  others  go  ashore — 
Come!     A  good  whole  holiday! 

Leave  to  go  and  see  my  wife,  whom   I  call  the  Belle 
Aurore!  " 

That  he  asked  and  that  he  got, — nothing  more. 

XI 

Name  and  deed  alike  are  lost: 
Not  a  pillar  or  a  post 

In  his  Croisic  keeps  alive  the  feat  as  it  befell; 
Not  a  head  in  white  and  black 
On  a  single  fishing-smack, 
In  memory  of  the  man  but  for  whom  had  gone  to  wrack 

AU  that  France  saved  from  the  fight  whence  England  bore 
the  bell: 


The  Highwayman  2809 

Go  to  Paris :  rank  on  rank 

Search  the  heroes  flung  pell-mell 
On  the  Louvre,  face  and  flank! 

You  shall  look  long  enough  ere  you  come  to  Herve  Riel. 
So,  for  better  and  for  worse, 
Herv6  Riel,  accept  my  verse! 
In  my  verse,  Herv6  Riel,  do  thou  once  more 
Save  the  squadron,  honor  France,  Icve  thy  wife  the  Belle 
Aurore! 

Robert  Browning  [  1 8 1 2- 1 88g] 


THE  HIGHWAYMAN 

PART   I 

The  wind  was  a  torrent  of  darkness  among  the  gusty  trees. 
The  moon  was  a  ghostly  galleon  tossed  upon  cloudy  seas, 
The  road  was  a  ribbon  of  moonlight  over  the  purple  moor, 
And  the  highwayman  came  riding — 

Riding — riding — 
The  highwayman  came  riding,  up  to  the  old  inn-door. 

He'd  a  French  cocked-hat  on  his  forehead,  a  bunch  of  lace 

at  his  chin, 
A  coat  of  the  claret  velvet,  and  breeches  of  brown  doe-skin; 
They  fitted  with  never  a  wrinkle:  his  boots  were  up  to  the 

thigh! 
And  he  rode  with  a  jeweled  twinkle, 
His  pistol  butts  a-twinkle, 
His  rapier  hilt  a-twinkle,  under  the  jeweled  sky. 

Over  the  cobbles  he  clattered  and  clashed  in  the  dark  inn- 
yard, 

And  he  tapped  with  his  whip  on  the  shutters,  but  all  was 
locked  and  barred; 

He  whistled  a  tune  to  the  window,  and  who  should  be  wait- 
ing there 

But  the  landlord's  black-eyed  daughter, 
Bess,  the  landlord's  daughter, 

Plaiting  a  dark  red  love-knot  into  her  long  black  hair. 


28 lo  Ballads  Old  and   New 

And  dark  in  the  dark  old  inn-yard  a  stable-wicket  creaked 
Where  Tim  the  ostler  listened;  his  face  was  white  and  peaked; 
His  eyes  were  hollows  of  madness,  his  hair  Hke  moldy  hay,'  ' 
But  he  loved  the  landlord's  daughter, 

The  landlord's  red-lipped  daughter, 
Dumb  as  a  dog  he  listened,  and  he  heard  the  robber  say — 

"One  kiss,  my  bonny  sweetheart,  I'm  after  a  prize  to-night. 
But  I  shall  be  back  with  the  yellow  gold  before  the  morning 

light; 
Yet,  if  they  press  me  sharply,  and  harry  me  through  the 

day. 
Then  look  for  me  by  moonlight. 

Watch  for  me  by  moonlight, 
I'll  come  to  thee  by  moonlight,  though  hell  should  bar  the 

way." 

He  rose  upright  in  the  stirrups;  he  scarce  could  reach  her 

hand. 
But  she  loosened  her  hair  i'  the  casement!     His  face  burnt 

like  a  brand 
As  the  black  cascade  of  perfume  came  tumbling  over  his 

breast; 
And  he  kissed  its  waves  in  the  moonlight, 

(Oh,  sweet  black  waves  in  the  moonlight!) 
Then  he  tugged  at  his  rein  in  the  moonlight,  and  galloped 

away  to  the  West. 

PART  n 

He  did  not  come  in  the  dawning;  he  did  not  come  at  noon; 
And  out  o'  the  tawny  sunset,  before  the  rise  o'  the  moon, 
When  the  road  was  a  gipsy's  ribbon,  looping    the  purple 

moor, 
A  red-coat  troop  came  marching — 

Marching — marching — 
King  George's  men  came  marching,  up  to  the  old  inn-door. 

They  said  no  word  to  the  landlord,  they  drank  his  ale  instead. 
But  they  gagged  his  daughter  and  bound  her  to  the  foot  of 
her  narrow  bed; 


The   Highwayman  28 ii 


Two  of  them  knelt  at  her  casement,  with  muskets  at  their 

side! 
There  was  death  at  every  window; 

And  hell  at  one  dark  window;  '^ 

For  Bess  could  see,  through  her  casement,  the  road  that  he 

would  ride. 

They  had  tied  her  up  to  attention,  with  many  a  sniggering 
jest ; 

They  had  bound  a  musket  beside  her,  with  the  barrel  be- 
neath her  breast! 

"Now  keep  good  watch!"  and  they  kissed  her.  She  heard 
the  dead  man  say — 

Look  for  me  by  moonlight; 

Watch  for  me  by  moonlight; 

I'll  come  to  thee  by  moonlight,  though  hell  should  bar  the  way  1 

She  twisted  her  hands  behind  her;  but  all  the  knots  held 

good! 
She  writhed  her  hands  till  her  fingers  were  wet  with  sweat 

or  blood ! 
They  stretched  and  strained  in  the  darkness,  and  the  hours 

crawled  by  like  years, 
Till,  now,  on  the  stroke  of  midnight. 

Cold,  on  the  stroke  of  midnight, 
The  tip  of  one  finger  touched  it!    The  trigger  at  least  was 

The  tip  of  one  finger  touched  it;  she  strove  no  more  for  the 

rest! 
Up,  she  stood  up  to  attention,  with  the  barrel  beneath  her 

breast, 
She  would  not  risk  their  hearing:  she  would  not  strive  again; 
For  the  road  lay  bare  in  the  moonlight ; 

Blank  And  bare  in  the  moonlight; 
And  the  blood  of  her  veins  in  the  moonlight  throbbed  to  her 

love's  refrain. 

Tlot-tlot;  tlot-tlot!  Had  they  heard  it?  The  horse-hoofs 
ringing  clear;  '(Vw  u  Ao  WsAi-.  \^\\  k 

Tlot-tlot,  tlot-tlot,  in  the  distance?  Were  they  deaf  that  they 
did  not  hear? 


28l2 


Ballads  Old  and  New 


Down  the  ribbon  of  moonlight,  over  the  brow  of  the  hill, 
The  highwayman  came  riding, 

Riding,  riding! 
The   red-coats   looked   to   their  priming!     She   stood   up, 
straight  and  still! 

Tlot-tlot,   in   the   frosty  silence!     Tlot-tlot,   in   the   echoing 

night ! 
Nearer  he  came  and  nearer!     Her  face  was  like  a  light! 
Her  eyes  grew  wide  for  a  moment;  she  drew  one  last  deep 

breath. 
Then  her  finger  moved  in  the  moonlight. 

Her  musket  shattered  the  moonHght, 
Shattered  her  breast  in  the  moonlight  and  warned  him — with 

her  death. 

He  turned;  he  spurred  to  the  Westward;  he  did  not  know 

who  stood 
Bowed,  with  her  head  o'er  the  musket,  drenched  with  her 

own  red  blood! 
Not  till  the  dawn  he  heard  it,  his  face  grew  gray  to  hear 
How  Bess,  the  landlord's  daughter. 

The  landlord's  black-eyed  daughter. 
Had  watched  for  her  love  in  the  moonlight,  and  died  in  the 

darkness  there. 

Back,  he  spurred  like  a  madman,  shrieking  a  curse  to  the 

sky. 
With  the  white  road  smoking  behind  him,  and  his  rapier 

brandished  high! 
Blood-red  were  his  spurs  in  the  golden  noon;  wine-red  was 

his  velvet  coat, 
When  they  shot  him  down  on  the  highway, 

Down  like  a  dog  on  the  highway ,> 
And  he  lay  in  his  blood  on  the  highway,  with  the  bunch  of 

lace  at  his  throat. 


And  still  of  a  winter's  night,  they  say,  when  the  wind  is  in  the 

trees, 
When  the  moon  ^s  a  ghostly  galleon  tossed  upon  cloudy  seas. 


Lancelot  and  Guinevere  -813 

When  the  road  is  a  ribbon  of  moonlight  over  the  purple  moor, 
A  highwayman  comes  riding — 

Riding — riding — 
^1  highwayman  comes  riding,  up  to  the  old  inn-door. 

Over  the  cobbles  he  clatters  and  clangs  in  the  dark  inn-yard; 
And  he  taps  with  his  whip  on  the  shutters,  hut  all  is  locked  and 

barred; 
He  whistles  a  tune  to  the  window,  and  who  should  be  waiting 

there 
But  the  landlord's  black-eyed  daughter, 
Bess,  the  landlord's  daughter. 
Plaiting  a  dark  red  love-knot  into  her  lon§  black  hair. 

Alfred  Noyes  [1880- 


LANCELOT  AND   GUINEVERE 

Sir  Lancelot  beside  the  mere 

Rode  at  the  golden  close  of  day, 
And  the  sad  eyes  of  Guinevere 

Went  with  him,  with  him,  all  the  way. 

The  golden  light  to  silver  turned, 
The  mist  came  up  out  of  the  mere. 

And  steadily  before  him  burned 
The  sombre  gaze  of  Guinevere. 

A  dreadful  chill  about  him  crept. 
The  pleasant  air  to  winter  turned; 

Like  the  wan  eyes  of  one  that  wept 

Far  through  the  mist  the  faint  stars  burned. 

All  that  had- sinned  in  days  gone  by 

Like  pale  companions  round  him  crept — 

All  that  beneath  the  morning  sky 

Had  called  the  night  to  mind  and  wept. 

But  strangest  showed  his  own  offence 

Of  all  the  shadows  creeping  by; 
The  star  of  his  magnificence 

Fell  from  its  station  in  the  sky. 


2814  Ballads   Old  and   New 

The  lean  wind  robbed  him  of  his  pride; 

Keen  grew  the  sting  of  his  offence; 
And  Hke  a  lamp  within  him  died 

The  flame  of  his  magnificence. 

The  drifting  phantoms  of  the  mere 
Were  death  to  pleasure  and  to  pride; 

The  joy  he  had  of  Guinevere 
Faded  into  the  dark  and  died. 

Oh  loss  of  hope  with  loss  of  day 
In  mist  and  shadow  of  the  mere! — 

Where  with  him,  with  him,  all  the  way, 
Went  the  sad  eyes  of  Guinevere. 

Gerald  Gould  [18    -igi6] 

BALLAD  OF  THE  GOODLY  FERE 

SIMON    ZELOTES    SPEAKETH    IT    SOMEWHILE    AFTER    THE 
CRUCIFIXION 

Ha'  we  lost  the  goodliest  fere  o'  all 
For  the  priests  and  the  gallows  tree? 
Aye  lover  he  was  of  brawny  men, 
O'  ships  and  the  open  sea. 

When  they  came  wi'  a  host  to  take  Our  Man 
His  smile  was  good  to  see, 
"First  let  these  go!"  quo'  our  Goodly  Fere, 
"Or  I'll  see  ye  damned,"  says  he. 

Aye  he  sent  us  out  through  the  crossed  high  spears 
And  the  scorn  of  his  laugh  rang  free, 
"Why  took  ye  not  me  when  I  walked  about 
Alone  in  the  town?"  says  he. 

Oh  we  drank  his  "Hale"  in  the  good  red  wine 
When  we  last  made  company. 
No  capon  priest  was  the  Goodly  Fere,      ^    ^   ,_^ 
But  a  man  o'  men  was  he. 

I  ha'  seen  him  drive  a  hundred  men 
Wi'  a  bundle  o'  cords  swung  free. 


Ballad  of  the  Goodly   Fere         2815- 

That  they  took  the  high  and  holy  house 
For  their  pawn  and  treasury. 

They'll  no'  get  him  a'  in  a  book,  I  think, 
Though  they  write  it  cunningly; 
No  mouse  of  the  scrolls  was  the  Goodly  Fere 
But  aye  loved  the  open  sea. 

If  they  think  they  ha'  snared  our  Goodly  Fere 
They  are  fools  to  the  last  degree. 
"I'll  go  the  feast,"  quo'  our  Goodly  Fere, 
"Though  I  go  the  gallows  tree. 

"Ye  ha'  seen  me  heal  the  lame  and  blind, 
And  wake  the  dead,"  says  he. 
"Ye  shall  see  one  thing  to  master  all: 
'Tis  how  a  brave  man  dies  -on  the  tree." 

A  son  of  God  was  the  Goodly  Fere 
That  bade  his  brothers  be. 
I  ha'  seen  him  cow  a  thousand  men. 
I  have  seen  him  upon  the  tree. 

He  cried  no  cry  when  they  drave  the  nails 
And  the  blood  gushed  hot  and  free. 
The  hounds  of  the  crimson  sky  gave  tongue, 
But  never  a  cry  cried  he. 

I  ha'  seen  him  cow  a  thousand  men 

On  the  hills  o'  Galilee. 

They  whined  as  he  walked  out  calm  between, 

Wi'  his  eyes  like  the  gray  o'  the  sea. 

Like  the  sea  that  brooks  no  voyaging, 

With  the  winds  unleashed  and  free. 

Like  the  sea  that  he  cowed  at  Genseret 

Wi'  twey  words  spoke  suddently. 

I 
A  master  of  men  was  the  Goodly  Fere, 

A  mate  of  the  wind  and  sea. 

If  they  think  they  ha'  slain  our  Goodly  Fere 

They  are  fools  eternally. 

I  ha'  seen  him  eat  o'  the  honey-comb 
Sin'  they  nailed  him  to  the  tree. 

Ezra  Pound  [1885- 


28 16  Ballads   Old  and   New     > 


EVE 


Eve,  with  her  basket,  was 
Deep  in  the  bells  and  grass. 
Wading  in  bells  and  grass 
Up  to  her  knees, 
Picking  a  dish  of  sweet 
Berries  and  plums  to  eat, 
Down  in  the  bells  and  grass 
Under  the  trees. 

Mute  as  a  mouse  in  a 
Corner  the  cobra  lay, 
Curled  round  a  bough  of  the 
Cinnamon  tall.  .  .  . 
Now  to  get  even  and 
Humble  proud  heaven  and 
Now  was  the  moment  or 
Never  at  all. 

"Eva!"    Each  syllable 
Light  as  a  flower  fell, 
"Eva!"  he  whispered  the 
Wondering  maid, 
Soft  as  a  bubble  sung 
Out  of  a  linnet's  lung. 
Soft  and  most  silverly 
"Eva!"  he  said. 

Picture  that  orchard  sprite. 
Eve,  with  her  body  white. 
Supple  and  smooth  to  her 
Slim  finger  tips, 
Wondering,  listening. 
Listening,  wondering. 
Eve  with  a  berry 
Half-way  to  her  lips 

Oh,  had  our  simple  Eve 
Seen  through  the  make-believe! 
Had  she  but  known  the 
Pretender  he  was! 


Time,   You   Old   Gipsy    Man"      2817 

Out  of  the  boughs  he  came, 
Whispering  still  her  name, 
Tumbling  in  twenty  rings 
Into  the  grass. 

Here  was  the  strangest  pair 
In  the  world  anywhere, 
Eve  in  the  bells  and  grass 
Kneeling,  and  he 
Telling  his  story  low.  .  .  . 
Singing  birds  saw  them  go 
Down  the  dark  path  to 
The  Blasphemous  Tree. 

Oh,  what  a  clatter  when 
Titmouse  and  Jenny  Wren 
Saw  him  successful  and 
Taking  his  leave! 
How  the  birds  rated  him. 
How  they  all  hated  him! 
How  they  all  pitied 
Poor  motherless  Eve! 

Picture  her  crying 

Outside  in  the  lane. 

Eve,  with  no  dish  of  sweet 

Berries  and  plums  to  eat, 

Haunting  the  gate  of  the 

Orchard  in  vain.  .  .  . 

Picture  the  lewd  delight 

Under  the  hill  to-night — 

"Eva!"  the  toast  goes  round, 

"Eva!"  again.        Ralph  Hodgson  [18 

"TIME,  YOU  OLD  GIPSY  MAN" 

Time,  you  old  gipsy  man, 
Will  you  not  stay, 
Put  up  your  caravan 
Just  for  one  day? 

All  things  I'll  give  you 
Will  you  be  my  guest, 


28 1 8  Ballads   Old  and   New 

Bells  for  your  jennet 
Of  silver  the  best, 
Goldsmiths  shall  beat  you 
A  great  golden  ring, 
Peacocks  shall  bow  to  you, 
Little  boys  sing, 
Oh,  and  sweet  girls  will 
Festoon  you  with  may. 
Time,  you  old  gipsy, 
Why  hasten  away? 

Last  week  in  Babylon, 

Last  night  in  Rome, 

Morning,  and  in  the  crush 

Under  Paul's  dome; 

Under  Paul's  dial 

You  tighten  your  rein — 

Only  a  moment, 

And  off  once  again; 

Off  to  some  city  . ; 

Now  blind  in  the  womb, 

Off  to  another 

Ere  that's  in  the  tomb. 

Time,  you  old  gipsy  man,    , 
Will  you  not  stay, 
Put  up  your  caravan 
Just  for  one  day? 

Ralph  Hodgson  [i8 

CHANSON  OF  THE  BELLS  OF  OSENEY 

(thirteenth  century) 

The  bells  of  Oseney 
{Hautclcre,  Doiicement,  Aiistyn) 
Chant  sweetly  every  day. 
And  sadly,  for  our  sin. 
The  bells  of  Oseney 
{John,  Gabriel,  Marie) 
Chant  lowly, 

Chant  slowly. 


The  Waste  Places  2819 

Chant  wistfully  and  holy 
Of  Christ,  our  Paladin. 

Hautclere  chants  to  the  East 
(His  tongue  is  silvery  high), 
And  Austyn  like  a  priest 
Sends  West  a  weighty  cry; 
But  Doucement  set  between 
(Like  an  appeasive  nun) 
Chants  cheerly, 

Chants  clearly, 
As  if  Christ  heard  her  nearly, 
A  plea  to  every  sky. 

;-t;:  A  plea  that  John  takes  up 
(He  is  the  evangelist) 
Till  Gabriel's  angel  cup 
Pours  sound  to  sun  or  mist. 
And  last  of  all  Marie 
(The-  virgin- voice  of  God) 
Peals  purely, 

Demurely, 
And  with  a  tone  so  surely 
Divine  that  all  must  hear. 

The  bells  of  Oseney 
{Doucement,  Austyn,  Hautclere) 
Pour  ever  day  by  day 
Their  peals  on  the  rapt  air; 
And  with  their  mellow  mates 
{John,  Gabriel,  Mark) 
Tell  slowly. 

Tell  lowly. 
Of  Christ  the  High  and  Holy, 
Who  makes  the  whole  world  fair. 

Calc  Young  Rice  [1872- 

THE  WASTE  PLACES 

I 

As  a  naked  man  I  go 

Through  the  desert  sore  afraid, 


2  820  Ballads  Old  and   New 

Holding  up  my  head  although 
I'm  as  frightened  as  a  maid. 

The  couching  lion  there  I  saw 
From  barren  rocks  lift  up  his  eye; 

He  parts  the  cactus  with  his  paw, 
He  stares  at  me  as  I  go  by. 

He  would  follow  on  my  trace 

If  he  knew  I  was  afraid, 
If  he  knew  my  hardy  face 

Hides  the  terrors  of  a  maid. 

In  the  night  he  rises  and 

He  stretches  forth,  he  snuffs  the  air; 
He  roars  and  leaps  along  the  sand, 

He  creeps  and  watches  everywhere. 

His  burning  eyes,  his  eyes  of  bale, 
Through  the  darkness  I  can  see; 

He  lashes  fiercely  with  his  tail. 
He  would  love  to  spring  at  me. 

I  am  the  lion  in  his  lair; 

I  am  the  fear  that  frightens  me; 
I  am  the  desert  of  despair 

And  the  nights  of  agony. 

Night  or  day,  whate'er  befall, 
I  must  walk  that  desert  land, 

Until  I  can  dare  to  call 
The  lion  out  to  lick  my  hand. 

II 

As  a  naked  man  I  tread 

The  gloomy  forests,  ring  on  ring, 

Where  the  sun  that's  overhead 
Cannot  see  what's  happening. 

There  I  go:  the  deepest  shade, 
The  deepest  silence  pressing  me; 

And  my  heart  is  more  afraid 
Than  a  maiden's  heart  would  be. 


The   Warrior   Maid  2821 

Every  day  I  have  to  run  t 

Undernealh  the  demon  tree, 
Where  the  ancient  wrong  is  done 

While  I  shrink  in  agony. 

There  the  demon  held  a  maid 

In  his  arms,  and  as  she,  daft , 
Screamed  again  in  fear,  he  laid 

His  lips  upon  her  lips  and  laughed. 

And  she  beckoned  me  to  run, 

And  she  called  for  help  to  me, 
And  the  ancient  wrong  was  done 

Which  is  done  eternally. 

I  am  the  maiden  and  the  fear; 

I  am  the  sunless  shade,  the  strife; 
I  the  demon  lips,  the  sneer 

Showing  under  every  life. 

I  must  tread  that  gloomy  way 

Until  I  shall  dare  to  run 
And  bedr  the  demon  with  his  prey 

From  the  forest  to  the  sun. 

James  Stephens  fi8 

THE  WARRIOR  MAID 

They  bade  me  to  my  spinning 
Because  I  was  a  maid, 
But  down  into  the  battle 
I  marshalled  unafraid. 

Brightly  against  the  sunbeams 
I  shook  the  flaming  lance. 
Then  out  I  swept  to  gather 
With  the  red  and  royal  dance. 

The  war  was  stately  in  me, 
And  in  my  heart  was  pride—,     ] 
Fierce  moods  like  neighing  horses 
Most  terribly  did  ride. 


2822  Ballads   Old  and   New 

Deep  as  a  sea  of  scarlet  '  ': 

I  saw  the  banners  roll—  ; 

And  then  the  great  war  terropioii// 
Laid  hold  upon  my  soul.        I   1/7 

I  laughed  aloud  to  feel  it 

And  royally  did  cheer: 

I  strode  amid  my  tremblings n./.i.,'. 

And  did  not  fear  to  fear.     mJ  /iM 

A  warrior  rode  against  me.  ;  [/i^ 

I  laid  him  to  his  rest. 

I  could  not  stop  to  gather 

The  bright  sword  from  his  breast. 

But  on  I  drove  in  splendor, 
I— that  was  but  a  maid — 
With  piercing  calls  of  triumph 
And  I  was  not  afraid. 

But  once,  beneath  my  charging, 
A  face  shone  up  below. 
Dead  in  the  bloody  furrow, 
A  stranger  white  as  snow! 

The  foe  rode  close  behind  me! 
I  lost  the  day  for  this — ■ 
I  sprang  from  off  my  stallion 
And  left  on  him  a  kiss. 

The  sword  that  pierced  his  bosom 
With  jewelled  splendor  shone. 
I  snatched  it  from  his  bleeding, 
And  lo,  it  was  my  own. 

The  spears  blazed  thick  around  me 
When  I  leaped  forth  again. 
But  jubilant  they  found  me 
To  face  a  thousand  men. 

Bright- voiced  was  my  laughter, 
I — that  was  a  maid ! 
And  when  the  sharp  gyve  bound  me, 
Then  was  I  not  afraid. 


The   Songs   of  Guthrum  and  Alfred      2823 

Ah,  hadst  thou  hved,  my  warrior, 
Among  the  glorious  ones, 
I  had  borne  thee  savage  daughters 
And  beautiful  fierce  sons. 

Anna  Hempstead  Branch  [18 


THE  SONGS  OF  GUTHRUM  AND  ALFRED 

From  "  The  Ballad  of  the  White  Horse  " 

He  took  the  great  harp  wearily, 

Even  Guthrum  of  the  Danes, 
With  wide  eyes  bright  as  the  one  long  day 

On  the  long  polar  plains. 

For  he  sang  of  a  wheel  returning, 
And  the  mire  trod  back  to  mire,       ,( 

And  how  red  hells  and  golden  heavens. -y/ 
Are  castles  in  the  fire.  ,,^ 

"It  is  good  to  sit  where  the  good  tales  go, 

To  sit  as  our  fathers  sat; 
But  the  hour  shall  come  after  his  youth. 
When  a  man  shall  know  not  tales  but  truth. 

And  his  heart  fail  thereat.  ^  ,j    ,    ., 

"When  he  shall  read  what  is  written 
So  plain  in  clouds  and  clods,      ,-i,yr!\if'^ 

When  he  shall  hunger  without  hope 
Even  for  evil  gods. 

''For  this  is  a  heavy  matter. 

And  the  truth  is  cold  to  tell; 
Do  we  not  know,  have  we  not  heard. 
The  soul  is  like  a  lost  bird,  .^^ 

The  body  a  broken  shell? 

"And  a  man  hopes,  being  ignorant^  ,,.  ,, 

Till  in  white  woods  apart, 
He  finds  at  last  the  lost  bird  dead: 
And  a  man  may  still  lift  up  his  head,    '  i 

But  never  more  his  heart. 


2824  Ballads   Old  and   New     108  a/ll 

'There  comes  no  noise  but  weeping 

Out  of  the  ancient  sky, 
And  a  tear  is  in  the  tiniest  flower, 
Because  the  gods  must  die. 

"The  Uttle  brooks  are  very  sweet 

Like  a  girl's  ribbons  curled, 
But  the  great  sea  is  bitter  OP,  3HT 

That  washes  all  the  world. 

"Strong  are  the  Roman  roses  '  ■ ' 

Or  the  free  flowers  of  the  heath,        1 

But  every  flower,  like  a  flower  of  the  sea, 
Smelleth  with  the  salt  of  death. 

"And  the  heart  of  the  locked  battle  "•'T 
Is  the  happiest  place  for  men;  ■'- 

When  shrieking  souls  as  shafts  go  by      ^ 

And  many  have  died  and  all  may  die; 

Though  this  word  be  a  mystery, 
Death  is  most  distant  then. 

"Death  blazes  bright  above  the  cup, 
'"'"  '  Arid  clear  above  the  crown;     >  £  mrlW 
But  in  that  dream  of  battle  '  '  "■^ 

We  seem  to  tread  it  down. 

"Wherefore  I  am  a  great  King 

And  waste  the  world  in  vain, 
Because  man  hath  not  other  power, 
Save  that  in  dealing  death  for  dower, 
He  may  forget  it  for  an  hour 

To  remember  it  again." 

And  slowly  his  hands  and  thoughtfully 

Fell  from  the  lifted  lyre. 
And  the  owls  moaned  from  the  mighty  trees 
Till  Alfred  caught  it  to  his  knees 

And  smote  it  as  in  ire. 

.11 
He  heaved  the  head  of  the  harp  on  high, 
And  swept  the  frame-work  barred. 


The   Songs  of  Guthruin   and   Alfred      2825 

And  his  stroke  had  all  the  rattle  and  spark 
Of  horses  flying  hard. 

"When  God  put  man  in  a  garden 

He  girt  him  with  a  sword, 
And  sent  him  forth  a  free  knight, 

That  might  betray  his  lord; 

"He  brake  Him  and  betrayed  Him 

And  fast  and  far  he  fell 
Till  you  and  I  may  stretch  our  necks 

And  burn  our  beards  in  hell. 

"But  though  I  lie  on  the  floor  of  the  world 

With  the  seven  sins  for  rods, 
I  would  rather  fall  with  Adam 

Than  rise  with  all  your  gods. 

"What  have  the  strong  gods  given? 

Where  have  the  glad  gods  led? 
When  Guthrum  sits  on  a  hero's  throne 

And  asks  if  he  is  dead? 

"Sirs,  I  am  but  a  nameless  man, 

A  rhymester  without  home, 
Yet  since  I  come  to  the  Wessex  clay 

And  carry  the  cross  of  Rome, 

"I  will  even  answer  the  mighty  earl 

That  asked  of  Wessex  men 
Why  they  be  meek  and  monkish  folk, 
And  bow  to  the  White  Lord's  broken  yoke; 
What  sign  have  we  save  blood  and  smoke? 

Here  is  my  answer  then. 

"T'hat  on  you  is  fallen  the  shadow, 

And  not  upon  the  Name; 
That  though  we  scatter  and  though  we  fly 
And  you  hang  over  us  like  the  sky 
You  are  more  tired  of  victory, 

Than  we  are  tired  of  shame. 


2826  Ballads   Old  and  New  ^^^  ^^^'^^ 

■  "That  though  you  hunt  the  Christian  man 
Like  a  hare  in  the  hill-side 
The  hare  has  still  more  heart  to  run 
Than  you  have  heart  to  ride. 

"That  though  all  lances  split  on  you, 

All  swords  be  heaved  in  vain, 
We  have  more  lust  again  to  lose 

Than  you  to  win  again.  ■'Asnd  ali" 

"Your  lord  sits  high  in  the  saddle, 

A  broken-hearted  king. 
But  our  King  Alfred,  lost  from  fame, 
1),  Fallen  among  foes  or  bonds  of  shame, 
In  I  know  not  what  mean  trade  or  name, 

Has  still  some  song  to  sing; 

"Our  monks  go  robed  in  rain  and  snow 
But  the  heart  of  flame  therein, 

But  you  go  clothed  in  feasts  and  flames 
When  all  is  ice  withm; 

"Nor  shall  all  iron  dooms  make  dumb 
Men  wondering  ceaselessly,  ,-j^^  j  2ii8" 

If  it  be  not  better  to  fast  iox.jo^y^-^  j\^ 
Than  feast  for  misery.  r„n-^  ]  '^-.nie  joY 

"Nor  monkish  order  only 

Slides  down,  as  field  to  fen, 
All  things  achieved  and  chosen  pass 
As  the  White  Horse  fades  in  the  grass. 

No  work  of  Christian  men.  i     .  j,j  ■  ;i/ 

"Ere  the  sad  gods  that  made  ybtlr  goas 

Saw  their  sad  sunrise  pass, 
The  White  Horse  of  the  White  Horse  Vale> 
That  you  have  left  to  darken  and  fail, 

Was  cut  out  of  the  grass. 

"Therefore  your  end  is  on  you,        '•  ^^ 

Is  on  you  and  your  kings,  r:  uo  i 

Not  for  a  fire  in  Ely  fen,  '''  ■ 


The    Pageant  of  Seamen  2827 

Not  that  your  gods  are  nine  or  ten,     '''  ''-'^    ''''' 
But  because  it  is  only  Christian  men 
Guard  even  heathen  things, 

"For  our  God  hath  blessed  creation, 

Calling  it  good.    I  know — ■ 
What  spirit  with  whom  you  blindly  band 
Hath  blessed  destruction  with  this  hand; 
But  by  God's  death  the  stars  shall  stand 

And  the  small  apples  grow." 

And  the  King,  with  harp  on  shoulder. 

Stood  up  and  ceased  his  song; 
And  the  owls  moaned  from  the  mighty  trees, 

And  the  Danes  laughed  loud  and  long. 

Gilbert  Kcilh  Chcstcrloii  [1874- 

THE  PAGEANT  OF  SEAMEN  i 

The  song  of  the  sea-adventurers,  that  never  were  known  to 

fame. 
The  roving,  roistering  mariners  that  builded  our  England's 
name : 
Foolhardy,  reckless,  undaunted. 
Death  they  courted  and  taunted: 
In  the  jaws  of  hell  their  flag  they  flaunted,  answering  flame 
U'M     with  flame.  ,,,^;/f 

An  endless  pageant  of  power  and  pride,  they  steer  from  the 

long-ago 
From  quays  that  moulder  beneath  the  tide,  from  cities  whose 
walls  lie  low: 
Carrack  and  sloop  and  galley, 
Out  of  the  dark  they  rally. 
As  homing  birds  over  hill  and  valley,  back  to  the  land  they 
know. 

.The  crews  of  the  Bristol  Guinea-men,  that  traded  to  Old 
;•         Calabar, 
Fading  for  years  out  of  English  ken  in  sweltering  seas  afar; 
The  Danes  and  the  Dutch  they  raced  there. 


2828  Ballads   Old  and  New 

The  Brandenburgers  they  chased  there, 
They  bid  the  Portingale  cargoes  v/aste  there,  under  an  evil 
star. 

Their  ships  came  back  from  the  Cameroons,  ragged  and 

patched  and  old. 
With  decks  roof-thatched  from  the  Accra  noons — but  down 
in  their  sultry  hold. 
Battened  from  wind  and  weather. 
Were  coral  and  ostrich  feather, 
Jasper  and  ivory  heaped  together,  amber  and  dust  of  gold. 

The  Greenland  skippers  that  speared  the  whale  at  the  edge 

of  the  grinding  floe, 
Icicles  fringing  sheet  and  sail,  and  decks, in  a  smother  of 
snow: 
Men  of  Clyde  and  of  Humber, 
Cold  is  their  Arctic  slumber, 
But  their  deeds  of  daring  that  none  may  number  shall  live 
wliile  the  north  winds  blow. 

The  stately  captains  of  barque  and  brig,  in  the  days  of  the 

good  Queen  Anne; 
Under  each  powdered  periwig  was  the  brain  of  a  sea-bred 
man. 
Was  there  work  to  be  done?  they  did  it: 
Was  there  danger?  they  pressed  amid  it: 
Wounded  to  death,  with  a  smile  they  hid  it,  and  perished 
as  sailors  can. 

The  fihbusters  of  Tudor  years,  that  held  the  ocean  in  fee, 
The  buccaneers  and  the  privateers,  the  outlawed  sons  of 
the  sea: 
Terrible,  swift,  unsleeping. 
Like  bolts  from  the  azure  leaping. 
Like  birds  of  prey  on  their  quarry  sweeping,  foraging  far 
and  free. 

The  pigtailed  bo's'ns  of  Anson  and  Cook,  and  the  seafaring 

men  they  led— 
Who  has  counted  in  song  or  book  the  roll  of  those  glorious 

dead? 


The   Pageant  of  Seamen  2829 

On  the  desolate  isles  uncharted 
Their  valorous  souls  departed: 
They    fought — they    fell — ^and    in    death,    blithe-hearted, 
cheered  as  the  foeman  fled. 

The  men  that  talked  with  a  Devon  twang,  as  they  hoisted 

the  sails  of  Drake—  a'aoxu,m 

All  through  the  West  their  rumor  rang,  the  pride  of  the 
Dons  to  bteak, 
Fierce  to  seize  and  to  sunder 
The  golden  argosies'  plunder. 
The  New  World's  dread  and  the  Old  World's  wonder,  splen- 
did for  England's  sake. 

The  coasting-craft  and  the  fishing-craft,  lugger  and  ketch 

and  hoy, 
With  a  duck-gun  fore  and  a  blunderbuss  aft,  served  by  a 
man  and  a  boy; 
Their  tiny  armaments  flinging 
On  frigate  and  gun-boat — bringing 
Prizes  and  prisoners  home  with  singing,  fired  with  a  desper- 
ate joy. 

Ruffed  to  the  chin,  or  laced  to  the  knee,  or  stripped  to  the 

waist  for  light, 
Herding  the  alien  hordes  of  the  sea  to  fields  of  defeat  and. 

flight,  ; 

Or,  lit  by  the  lightning's  flashing, 
Close-hauled  through  the  hurricane  thrashing, 
With  decks  a-wash  and  with  spars  a-crashing,  they  swoop 
on  the  reeling  sight. 

The  sea-dogs  sturdy,  the  sea-hawks  bold,  that  were  never 

known  to  fame — 
The  grim  adventurers,  young  and  old,   that  builded  our 
England's  name — 
Over  the  waters  of  dreaming. 
Their  bows  are  rocking  and  gleaming. 
To  the  sun  unsetting  their  flag  is  streaming,   answering 
/^^''  flame  with  flame. 

May  Byron  [1861- 


2830  Ballads   Old  and   New 

THE  BALLAD  OF  EAST  AND  WEST 

Oh,  East  is  East,  and  West  is  West,  and  never  the  twain  shall 

Till  Earth  and  Sky  stand  presently  at  God^s  great  Jitdgment  Seat: 
But  there  is  neither  East  nor  West,  Border,  nor  Breed,  nor  Birth, 
When  two  strong  men  stand  face  to  face,  though  they  come  from 
the  ends  of  the  earth! 

Kamal  is  out  with  twenty  men  to  raise  the  Border-side, 
And  he  has  lifted  the  Colonel's  mare  that  is  the  Colonel's 

pride: 
He  has  lifted  her  out  of  the  stable-door  between  the  dawn 

and  the  day, 

And  turned  the  calkins  upon  her  feet,  and  ridden  her  far 
oy^^Y^  rn-gnirian  arii  bnc  sikv 

Then  up  and  spoke  the  Colonel's  son  that  led  a  troop  of  the 

Guides: 
"Is  there  never  a  man  of  all  my  men  can  say  where  Kamal 

hides?" 
Then  up  and  spoke  Mohammed  Khan,  the  son  of  the  Rcs- 

saldar: 
"If  ye  know  the  track  of  the  morning-mist,  ye  know  where 

his  pickets  are. 
At  dusk  he  harries  the  Abazai — at  dawn  he  is  into  Bonair, 
But  he  must  go  by  Fort  Bukloh  to  his  own  place  to  fare, 
So  if  ye  gallop  to  Fort  Bukloh  as  fast  as  a  bird  can  fly, 
By  the  favor  of  God  ye  may  cut  him  off  ere  he  win  to  the 

Tongue  of  Jagai.  "rf.  („,[  -■ 

But  if  he  be  past  the  Tongue  of  Jagai,  right  swiftly  turn 

ye  then. 
For  the  length  and  the  breadth  of  that  grisly  plain  is  sown 

with  Kamal's  men. 
There  is  rock  to  the  left,  and  rock  to  the  right,  and  low 

,,    lean  thorn  between, 
And  ye  may  hear  a  breech-bolt  snick  where  never  a  man 

is  seen." 
The  Colonel's  son  has  taken  a  J),prse, ,  g,i;^4  3,  ,^aw  r9U|;h  dun 

^^^  "^'  liarl}   :9f!ij.1o?.nti  nu?.  srfl   oT 

With  the  mouth  of  a  bell  and  the  heart  of  Hell  and  the  head, 

of  a  gaUows-tree. 


The   Ballad   of  East  and   West     2831 

The  Colonel's  son  to  the  f'ort  has  won,  they  bid  him  stay 

to  eat— 
Who  rides  at  the  tail  of  a  Border  thief,  he  sits  not  long  at 

his  meat. 
He's  up  and  away  from  Fort  Bukloh  as  fast  as  he  can  fly. 
Till  he  was  aware  of  his  father's  mare  in  the  gut  of  the 

Tongue  of  Jagai, 
Till  he  was  aware  of  his  father's  mare  with  Kamal  upon  her 

back, 
And  when  he  could  spy  the  white  of  her  eye,  he  made  the 

pistol  crack. 
He  has  fired  once,  he  has  fired  twice,  but  the  whistling  ball 

went  wide. 
"Ye  shoot  like  a  soldier,"  Kamal  said.     "Show  now  if  ye 

can  ride." 
It's  up  and  over  the  Tongue  of  Jagai,  as  blown  dust-devils  go. 
Thedun  hefled  like  a  stag  of  ten,  but  the  mare  like  a  barren  doe. 
The  dun  he  leaned  against  the  bit  and  slugged  his  head  above, 
But  the  red  mare  played  with  the  snaffle-bars,  as  a  maiden 

plays  with  a  glove. 
There  was  rock  to  the  left  and  rock  to  the  right,  and  low 

lean  thorn  between, 
And  thrice  he  heard  a  breech-bolt  snick  though  never  a  man 

was  seen. 
They  have  ridden  the  low  moon  out  of  the  sky,  their  hoofs 

drum  up  the  dawn. 
The  dun  he  went  like  a  wounded  bull,  but  the  mare  like  a 

new- roused  fawn. 
The  dun  he  fell"at  a  water-course — in  a  woeful  heap  fell  he, 
And  Kamal  has  turned  the  red  mare  back,  and  pulled  the 

rider  free. 
He  has  knocked  the  pistol  out  of  his  hand — small  room  was 

there  to  strive, 
"  'Twas  only  by  favor  of  mine,"  quoth  he,  "ye  rode  so  long 

alive: 
There  was  not   a   rock   for  twenty  mile,  there  was  not  a 

clump  of  tree, 
But  covered  a  man  of  my  own  men  with  his  ritle  cocked  on 

his  knee. 
If  I  had  raised  my  bridle-hand,  as  1  have  held  it  low. 
The  little  jackals  that  flee  so  fast  were  feasting  all  in  a  row: 


2832  Ballads  Old  and   New 

If  I  had  bowed  my  head  on  my  breast,  as  I  have  held  it  high, 
The  kite  that  whistles  above  us  now  were  gorged  till  she 

could  not  fly." 
Lightly  answered  the  Colonel's  son:  "Do  good  to  bird  and 

beast. 
But  count  who  come  for  the  broken  meats  before  thou 

makest  a  feast. 
If  there  should  follow  a  thousand  swords  to  carry  my  bones  - 

away, 
BeUke  the  price  of  a  jackal's  meal  were  more  than  a  thief 

could  pay. 
They  will  feed  their  horse  on  the  standing  crop,  their  men 

on  the  garnered  grain. 
The  thatch  of  the  byres  will  serve  their  lires  when  all  the 

cattle  are  slain. 
But  if  thou  thinkest  the  price  be  fair, — thy  brethren  wait 

to  sup, 
The  hound  is  kin  to  the  jackal-spawn, — howl,  dog,  and  call 

them  up! 
And  if  thou  thinkest  the  price  be  high,  in  steer  and  gear 

and  stack. 
Give  me  my  father's  mare  again,  and  I'll  fight  my  own 

way  back!" 
Kamal  has  gripped  him  by  the  hand  and  set  him  upon  his  feet. 
"No  talk  shall  be  of  dogs,"  said  he,  "when  wolf  and  gray 

wolf  meet. 
May  I  eat  dirt  if  thou  hast  hurt  of  me  in  deed  or  breath; 
What  dam  of  lances  brought  thee  forth  to  jest  at  the  dawn 

with  Death?"  , 

Lightly  answered  the  ColonePs  son:  "I  hold  by  the  blood 

of  my  clan: 
Take  up  the  mare  for  my  father's  gift — by  God,  she  has 

carried  a  man!" 
The  red  mare  ran  to  the  Colonel's  son,  and  nuzzled  against 

his  breast; 
"We  be  two  strong  men,"  said  Kamal  then,  "but  she  loveth 

the  younger  best. 
So  she  shall  go  with  a  lifter's  dower,  my  t  urquoise-st  udded  rein, 
My  broidered  saddle  and  saddle-cloth,  and  silver  stirrups 

twain." 


The   Ballad  of  East  and   West      2833 

The  Colonel's  son  a  pistol  drew,  and  held  it  muzzle-end, 
"Ye  have  taken  the  one  from  a  foe,"  said  he;  "will  ye  take 

the  mate  from  a  friend?"  : 

"A  gift  for  a  gift,"  said  Kamal  straight;  "a  limb  for  the  risk 

of  a  limb. 
Thy  father  has  sent  his  son  to  me,  I'll  send  my  son  to  him! " 
With  that  he  whistled  his  only  sou,  that  dropped  from  a 

mountain-crest— 
He  trod  the  ling  like  a  buck  in  spring,  and  he  looked  like  a. 

lance  in  rest. 
"Now  liere  is  thy  master,"  Kamal  said,  "who  leads  a  troop 

of  the  Guides, 
And  thou  must  ride  at  his  left  side  as  shield  on  shoulder 

rides. 
Till  Death  or  I  cut  loose  the  tie,  at  camp  and  board  and  bed, 
Thy  life  is  his — thy  fate  it  is  to  guard  him  with  thy  head. 
So  thou  must  eat  the  White  Queen's  meat,  and  all  her  foes 

are  thine. 
And  thou  must  harry  thy  father's  hold  for  the  peace  of  the 

Border-line, 
And  thou  must  make  a  trooper  tough  and  hack  thy  way  to 

power — 
Belike  they  will  raise  thee  to  Ressaldar  when  I  am  hanged 

in  Peshawur." 

i" 
They  have  looked  each  other  between  the  eyes,  and  there 

they  found  no  fault, 
They  have  taken  the  Oath   of  the  Brother-in-Blood   on 

leavened  bread  and  salt: 
They  have  taken  the  Oath  of  the  Brothcr-in-Blood  on  lire 

and  fresh-cut  sod, 
On  the  hilt  and  the  haft  of  the  Khyber  knife,  and  the  Won- 
drous Names  of  God. 
The  Colonel's  son  he  rides  the  mare  and  Kamal'sboy  thedun,' 
And  two  have  come  back  to  Fort  Bukloh  where  there  went 

forth  but  one. 
And  when  they  drew  to  the  Quarter-Guard,  full  twenty 

swords  flew  clear — 
There  was  not  a  man  but  carried  his  feud  with  the  blood 

of  the  mountaineer. 


2834  Ballads  Old  and   New 

"Ha'  done!  ha'  done!"  said  the  Colonel's  son.     "Put  up 

the  steel  at  your  sides! 
Last  night  ye  had  struck  at  a  Border  thief — to-night  'tis 

a  man  of  the  Guides!" 

Oh,  East  is  East,  and  West  is  West,  and  never  the  twain  shall 

meet, 
Till  Earth  and  Sky  stajid  presently  at  God's  great  Judgment  Seat; 
But  there  is  neither  East  nor  West,  Border,  nor  Breed,  nor  Birth, 
When  two  strong  men  stand  face  to  face,  though  they  come  from 

the  ends  of  the  earth!  Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 

THE  MAID 

Thunder  of  riotous  hoofs  over  the  quaking  sod; 
Clash  of  reeking  squadrons,  steel-capped,  iron-shod; 
The  White  Maid  and  white  horse,  and  the  flapping  banner 
of  God. 

Black  hearts  riding  for  money;  red  hearts  riding  for  fame; 
The  Maid  who  rides  for  France  and  the  King  who  rides  for 

shame — 
Gentlemen,  fools,  and  a  saint  riding  in  Christ's  high  name! 

"Dust  to  dust!"  it  is  written.     Wind-scattered  are  lance 

and  bow. 
Dust,  the  Cross  of  Saint  George;  dust,  the  banner  of  snow. 
The  bones  of  the  King  are  crumbled, -and  rotted  the  shafts 

of  the  foe. 

Forgotten,  the  young  knight's  valor;  forgotten,  the  captain's 
skill;  "'"   ^'"'  ' 

Forgotten,  the  fear  and  the  hate  and  the  mailed  hands 
raised  to  kill; 

Forgotten,  the  shields  that  clashed  and  the  arrows  that 
cried  so  shrill. 

Like  a  story  from  some  old  book,  that  battle  of  long  ago: 
Shadows,  the  poor  French  King  and  the  might  of  his  English 

foe; 
Shadows,   the  charging  nobles   and   the  archers  kneeling 

a- row  — 
But  a  flame  in  my  heart  and  my  eyes,  the  Maid  with  her 

banner  of  snow!  Theodore  Roberts  [1877- 


PART  VI 

POEMS  OF   SENTIMENT  AND 
REFLECTION 


THE  NOBLE  NATURE 

From  "  An  Ode  to  Sir  Lucius  Cary  and  Sir  H.  Morison" 

It  is  not  growing  like  a  tree 

In  bulk,  doth  make  man  better  be; 
Or  standing  long  an  oak,  three  hundred  year, 
To  fall  a  log  at  last,  dry,  bald,  and  sear: 
A  lily  of  a  day 
Is  fairer  far  in  May, 
Although  it  fall  and  die  that  night, — 
It  was  the  plant  and  flower  of  Light. 
In  small  proportions  we  just  beauties  see, 
And  in  short  measures  life  may  perfect  be. 

Ben  Jonson  [iS73?-i637] 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LIFE 

SWEET  AND   SOUR 

From  "  Amoretti  " 

Sweet  is  the  rose,  but  grows  upon  a  brier; 

Sweet  is  the  juniper,  but  sharp  his  bough; 

Sweet  is  the  eglantine,  but  pricketh  near; 

Sweet  is  the  fir-bloom,  but  his  branches  rough; 

Sweet  is  the  cypress,  but  his  rind  is  tough; 

Sweet  is  the  nut,  but  bitter  is  his  pill; 

Sweet  is  the  broom-flower,  but  yet  sour  enough; 

And  sweet  is  moly,  but  his  root  is  ill: 

So  every  sweet  with  sour  is  tempered  still. 

That  maketh  it  be  coveted  the  more; 

For  easy  things,  that  may  be  got  at  will, 

Most  sorts  of  men  do  set  but  little  store. 
Why  then  should  I  account  of  Httle  pain, 
That  endless  pleasure  shall  unto  me  gain? 

Edmund  Spenser  [i552?-iS9g] 

ON  THE  LIFE  OF  MAN 

Like  to  the  falling  of  a  star. 
Or  as  the  flights  of  eagles  are. 
Or  like  the  fresh  spring's  gaudy  hue, 
Or  silver  drops  of  morning  dew, 
Or  like  a  wind  that  chafes  the  flood, 
Or  bubbles  which  on  water  stood: 
Even  such  is  Man,  whose  borrowed  light 
Is  straight  called  in  and  paid  to  night. 
The  wind  blows  out,  the  bubble  dies, 
The  spring  entombed  in  autumn  lies; 
The  dew  dries  up,  the  star  is  shot, 
The  flight  is  past, — and  man  forgot. 

Henry  King  [1592-1699] 
2837 


2838    Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 


ALL  IS  VANITY 

Whether  men  do  laugh  or  weep, 
Whether  they  do  wake  or  sleep, 
Whether  they  die  young  or  old, 
Whether  they  feel  heat  or  cold; 
There  is  underneath  the  sun 
Nothing  in  tnae  earnest  done. 

All  our  pride  is  but  a  jest. 
None  are  worst  and  none  are  best, 
Grief  and  joy,  and  hope  and  fear 
Play  their  pageants  everywhere: 
Vain  Opinion  all  doth  sway. 
And  the  world  is  but  a  play. 

Powers  above  in  clouds  do  sit. 
Mocking  our  poor  apish  wit, 
That  so  lamely  with  such  state 
Their  high  glory  imitate. 
No  ill  can  be  felt  but  pain, 
And  that  happy  men  disdain. 

Philip  Rosseicr  [iS75?-i623] 


TIMES   GO  BY  TURNS 

The  lopped  tree  in  time  may  grow  again, 
Most  naked  plants  renew  both  fruit  and  flower; 
The  sorriest  wight  may  find  release  of  pain,      1 
The  driest  soil  suck  in  some  moistening  shower; 
Times  go  by  turns,  and  chances  change  by  course. 
From  foul  to  fair,  from  better  hap  to  worse. 

The  sea  of  Fortune  doth  not  ever  flow. 
She  draws  her  favors  to  the  lowest  ebb; 
Her  tides  have  equal  times  to  come  and  go. 
Her  loom  doth  weave  the  fine  and  coarsest  web; 
No  joy  so  great  but  runneth  to  an  end. 
No  hap  so  hard  but  may  in  fine  amend. 


"The  Struggle  Naught  Ayaileth "     2839 

Not  always  fall  of  leaf,  nor  ever  spring, 
No  endless  night,  yet  not  eternal  day; 
The  saddest  birds  a  season  find  to  sing, 
The  roughest  storm  a  cahn  may  soon  allay: 
Thus,  with  succeeding  turns,  God  tempercth  all. 
That  man  may  hope  to  rise,  yet  fear  to  fall. 

A  chance  may  win  that  by  mischance  was  lost ; 
That  net  that  holds  no  great,  takes  little  fish; 
In  some  things  all,  in  all  things  none  are  crossed; 
Few  all  they  need,  but  none  have  all  they  wish. 
Unmingled  joys  here  to  no  man  befall: 
Who  least,  hath  some;  who  most,  hath  never  all. 

Robert  Southwell  [is6i?-iS95] 


"SAY  NOT,  THE  STRUGGLE  NAUGHT  AVAILETH" 

Say  not,  the  struggle  naught  availeth, 
The  labor  and  the  wounds  are  vain, 

The  enemy  faints  not,  nor  faileth. 

And  as  things  have  been  they  remain. 

If  hopes  were  dupes,  fears  may  be  liars; 

It  may  be,  in  yon  smoke  concealed, 
Your  comrades  chase  e'en  now  the  fliers, 

And,  but  for  you,  possess  the  field. 

For  while  the  tired  waves,  vainly  breaking, 

Seem  here  no  painful  inch  to  gain, 
Far  back,  through  creeks  and  inlets  making. 

Comes  silent,  flooding  in,  the  main. 

And  not  by  eastern  windows  only, 

When  daylight  comes,  comes  in  the  light; 

In  front,  the  sun  climbs  slow^,  how  slowly, 
But  westward,  look,  the  land  is  bright. 

A  rth ur  Hugh  CI o ugh  [  1 8 1 9- 1 8 6 1  ] 


2840    Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 


KYRIELLE 

A  LARK  in  the  mesh  of  the  tangled  vine, 

A  bee  that  drowns  in  the  flower-cup's  wine, 

A  fly  in  the  sunshine, — such  is  man. 

All  things  must  end,  as  all  began. 

A  little  pain,  a  little  pleasure, 
A  little  heaping  up  of  treasure; 
Then  no  more  gazing  upon  the  sun. 
All  things  must  end  that  have  begun. 

Where  is  the  time  for  hope  or  doubt? 
A  puff  of  the  wind,  and  Hfe  is  out; 
A  turn  of  the  wheel,  and  rest  is  won. 
All  things  must  end  that  have  begun. 

Golden  morning  and  purple  night. 
Life  that  fails  with  the  failing  light; 
Death  is  the  only  deathless  one. 
All  things  must  end  that  have  begun. 

Ending  waits  on  the  brief  beginning; 
Is  the  prize  worth  the  stress  of  winning? 
E'en  in  the  dawning  the  day  is  done. 
.All  things  must  end  that  have  begun. 

Weary  waiting  and  weary  striving. 
Glad  outsetting  and  sad  arriving; 
What  is  it  worth  when  the  goal  is  won? 
All  things  must  end  that  have  begun. 

Speedily  fades  the  morning  glitter; 
Love  grows  irksome  and  wine  grows  bitter. 
Two  are  parted  from  what  was  one. 
All  things  must  end  that  have  begun. 

Toil  and  pain  and  the  evening  rest; 
Joy  is  weary  and  sleep  is  best ; 
Fair  and  softly  the  day  is  done. 
All  things  must  end  that  have  begun. 

John  Payne  [fl.  1770-ii 


Song  2841 


"LET   ME   ENJOY" 

Let  me  enjoy  the  earth  no  less 
Because  the  all-enacting  Might 
That  fashioned  forth  its  loveliness 
Had  other  aims  than  my  delight. 

About  my  path  there  flits  a  Fair, 

Who  throws  me  not  a  word  or  sign; 

I  will  find  charm  in  her  uncare, 

And  laud  those  lips  not  meant  for  mine. 

From  manuscripts  of  moving  song 
Inspired  by  scenes  and  souls  unknown, 
I'll  pour  out  raptures  that  belong 
To  others,  as  they  were  my  own. 

Perhaps  some  day,  toward  Paradise 
And  all  its  blest — if  such  should  be — 
I  shall  lift  glad,  afar-off  eyes. 
Though  it  contain  no  place  for  me. 

Thomas  Hardy  [1840- 


SONG 

Because  the  rose  must  fade. 
Shall  I  not  love  the  rose? 

Because  the  summer  shade 
Passes  when  winter  blows. 

Shall  I  not  rest  me  there 

In  the  cool  air? 

Because  the  sunset  sky 
Makes  music  in  my  soul, 

Only  to  fail  and  die. 

Shall  I  not  take  the  whole 

Of  beauty  that  it  gives 

While  yet  it  lives? 


2842    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Because  the  sweet  of  youth 

Doth  vanish  all  too  soon. 
Shall  I  forget,  forsooth, 

To  learn  its  lingering  tune; 
My  joy  to  memorize 
In  those  young  eyes? 

If,  like  the  summer  flower 

That  blooms — a  fragrant  death, 

Keen  music  hath  no  power 
To  live  beyond  its  breath, 

Then  of  this  flood  of  song 

Let  me  drink  long! 

Ah,  yes,  because  the  rose 

Fades  like  the  sunset  skies; 
Because  rude  winter  blows 

All  bare,  and  music  dies — 
Therefore,  now  is  to  me 
Eternity! 

Richard  Watson  Gilder  [1844-1909] 


"WHERE  RUNS  THE  RIVER" 

Where  runs  the  river?     Who  can  say 
Who  hath  not  followed  all  the  way 
By  alders  green  and  sedges  gray 
And  blossoms  blue? 

Where  runs  the  river?     Hill  and  wood 
Curve  round  to  hem  the  eager  flood; 
It  cannot  straightly  as  it  would 
Its  path  pursue. 

Yet  this  we  know:  O'er  whatso  plains 
Or  rocks  or  waterfalls  it  strains, 
At  last  the  Vast  the  stream  attains; 
And  I,  and  you. 

Francis  William  Bourdillon  [1852- 


Self- Dependence  2843 


SELF-DEPENDENCE 

Weary  of  myself,  and  sick  of  asking 
What  I  am,  and  what  I  ought  to  be, 
At  this  vessel's  prow  I  stand,  which  bears  me 
Forwards,  forwards,  o'er  the  starlit  sea. 

And  a  look  of  passionate  desire 

O'er  the  sea  and  to  the  stars  I  send: 

"  Ye  who  from  my  childhood  up  have  calmed  me, 

Calm  me,  ah,  compose  me  to  the  end! 

"Ah,  once  more,"  I  cried,  "ye  stars,  ye  waters, 
On  my  heart  your  mighty  charm  renew; 
Still,  still  let  me,  as  I  gaze  upon  you. 
Feel  my  soul  becoming  vast  like  you!" 

From  the  intense,  clear,  star-sown  vault  of  heaven, 
Over  the  lit  sea's  unquiet  way, 
In  the  rustling  night-air  came  the  answer: 
"Wouldst  thou  be  as  these  are?     Live  as  they. 

"  Unafifrighted  by  the  silence  round  them, 
Undistracted  by  the  sights  they  see. 
These  demand  not  that  the  things  without  them  ■ 
Yield  them  love,  amusement,  sympathy. 

"And  with  joy  the  stars  perform  their  shining, 
And  the  sea  its  long  moon-silvered  roll; 
For  self-poised  they  live,  nor  pine  with  noting 
All  the  fever  of  some  differing  soul. 

"Bounded  by  themselves,  and  unregardful 
In  what  state  God's  other  works  may  be, 
In  their  own  tasks  all  their  powers  pouring. 
These  attain  the  mighty  Hfe  you  see." 

O  air-born  voice!  long  since,  severely  clear, 
A  cry  like  thine  in  mine  own  heart  I  hear: 
"Resolve  to  be  thyself;  and  know,  that  he, 
Who  finds  himself,  loses  his  misery!" 

Maitheiv  Arnold  [1822-188 


;2  844    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


HOPE  AND   FEAR 

Beneath  the  shadow  of  dawn's  aerial  cope,  .,  r^ 

With  eyes  enkindled  as  the  sun's  own  sphere,  ;    . 

Hope  from  the  front  of  youth  in  godlike  cheer 

Looks  Godward,  past  the  shades  wheire  blind  men  grope 

Round  the  dark  door  that  prayers  nor  dreams  can  ope, 

And  makes  for  joy  the  very  darkness  dear 

That  gives  her  wide  wings  play;  nor  dreams  that  Fear 

At  noon  may  rise  and  pierce  the  heart  of  Hope. 

Then,  when  the  soul  leaves  off  to  dream  and  yearn, 

May  Truth  first  purge  her  eyesight  to  discern 

What  once  being  known  leaves  time  no  power  to  appall; 

Till  youth  at  last,  ere  yet  youth  be  not,  learn 

The  kind  wise  word  that  falls  from  years  that  fall — 

"Hope  not  thou  much,  and  fear  thou  not  at  all." 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-igog] 

ON  HIS  BLINDNESS 

When  I  consider  how  my  light  is  spent 

Ere  half  my  days  in  this  dark  world  and  wide, 

And  that  one  talent,  which  is  death  to  hide. 

Lodged  with  me  useless,  though  my  soul  more  bent 

To  serve  therewith  my  Maker,  and  present 

My  true  account,  lest  He  returning  chide; 

"Doth  God  exact  day-labor,  light  denied?" 

I  fondly  ask.     But  Patience,  to  prevent 

That  murmur,  soon  replies,  "God  doth  not  need 

Either  man's  work  or  his  own  gifts;  who  best 

Bear  his  mild  yoke,  they  serve  him  best;  his  state 

Is  kingly;  thousands  at  his  bidding  speed, 

And  post  o'er  land  and  ocean  without  rest; 

They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait." 

John  Milton  [1608-1674] 

"OZYMANDIAS  OF  EGYPT 

I  MET  a  traveler  from  an  antique  land 
[:',l;„    Who  said:  Two  vast  and  trunkless  legs  of  stone 


"Even  This   Shall    Pass  Awa}' "      2845 

Stand  in  the  desert.     Near  them,  on  the  sand, 
Half  sunk,  a  shattered  visage  Ues,  whose  frown 
And  wrinkled  hp  and  sneer  of  cold  command 
Tell  that  its  sculptor  well  those  passions  read 
Which  yet  survive,  stamped  on  these  lifeless  things, 
The  hand  that  mocked  them  and  the  heart  that  fed; 
And  on  the  pedestal  these  words  appear: 
"My  name  is  Ozymandias,  king  of  kings: 
Look  on  my  works,  ye  Mighty,  and  despair!" 
Nothing  beside  remains.     Round  the  decay 
Of  that  colossal  wreck,  boundless  and  bare, 
The  lone  and  level  sands  stretch  far  away. 

Percy  ByssJie  Shell ey  [1702-1822] 


A  TURKISH  LEGEND 

A  CERTAIN  Pasha,  dead  five  thousand  years, 
Once  from  his  harem  fled  in  sudden  tears. 

And  had  this  sentence  on  the  city's  gate 
Deeply  engraven,  "Only  God  is  great." 

So  these  four  words  above  the  city's  noise 
Hung  like  the  accents  of  an  angel's  voice. 

And  evermore,  from  the  high  barbican, 
Saluted  each  returning  caravan. 

Lost  is  that  city's  glory.     Every  gust 

Lifts,  with  dead  leaves,  the  unknown  Pasha's  dust, 

And  all  is  ruin, — save  one  wrinkled  gate 
Whereon  is  written,  "Only  God  is  great." 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [1837-1907] 


"EVEN  THIS   SHALL   PASS  AWAY" 

Once  in  Persia  reigned  a  King, 
Who  upon  his  signet  ring 
'Graved  a  maxim  true  and  wise. 
Which,  if  held  before  the  eyes, 


2846     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Gave  him  counsel  at  a  glance, 
Fit  for  every  change  and  chance. 
Solemn  words,  and  these  are  they: 
"Even  this  shall  pass  away." 

Trains  of  camels  through  the  sand 
Brought  him  gems  from  Samarcand; 
Fleets  of  galleys  through  the  seas 
Brought  him  pearls  to  match  with  these. 
But  he  counted  not  his  gain 
Treasures  of  the  mine  or  main; 
"What  is  wealth?"  the  King  would  say;        ; 
"Even  this  shall  pass  away." 

In  the  revels  of  his  court 
At  the  zenith  of  the  sport. 
When  the  palms  of  all  his  guests 
Burned  with  clapping  at  his  jests, 
He,  amid  his  figs  and  wine, 
Cried:  "Oh,  loving  friends  of  mine! 
Pleasure  comes,  but  not  to  stay; 
Even  this  shall  pass  away." 

Fighting  on  a  furious  field. 
Once  a  javeHn  pierced  his  shield; 
Soldiers  with  a  loud  lament 
Bore  him  bleeding  to  his  tent; 
Groaning  from  his  tortured  side, 
"Pain  is  hard  to  bear,"  he  cried, 
"But  with  patience,  day  by  day — 
Even  this  shall  pass  away." 

Towering  in  the  public  square. 
Twenty  cubits  in  the  air. 
Rose  his  statue,  carved  in  stone. 
Then  the  King,  disguised,  unknown, 
Stood  before  his  sculptured  name, 
Musing  meekly,  "What  is  fame? 
Fame  is  but  a  slow  decay — 
Even  this  shall  pass  away." 


Three  Sonnets  on   Oblivion        2847 

Struck  with  palsy,  sere  and  old, 
Waiting  at  the  gates  of  gold, 
Said  he,  with  his  dying  breath : 
"Life  is  done,  but  what  is  death?" 
Then,  in  answer  to  the  King, 
Fell  a  sunbeam  on  his  ring. 
Showing  by  a  heavenly  ray — 
"Even  this  shall  pass  away." 

Theodore  Til  ton  [1835-1007] 


SESOSTRIS 

Sole  Lord  of  Lords  and  very  King  of  Kings, 
He  sits  within  the  desert,  carved  in  stone; 
Inscrutable,  colossal,  and  alone. 
And  ancienter  than  memory  of  things. 
Graved  on  his  front  the  sacred  beetle  clings; 
Disdain  sits  on  his  lips;  and  in  a  frown 
Scorn  lives  upon  his  forehead  for  a  crown. 
The  affrighted  ostrich  dare  not  dust  her  wings 
Anear  this  Presence.     The  long  caravan's 
Dazed  camels  pause,  and  mute  the  Bedouins  stare. 
This  symbol  of  past  power  more  than  man's 
Presages  doom.     Kings  look — and  Kings  despair: 
Their  scepters  tremble  in  their  jeweled  hands 
And  dark  thrones  totter  in  the  baleful  air! 

Lloyd  Mifflin  [1S46- 


THREE   SONNETS  ON  OBLIVION 

OBLIVION 

Her  eyes  have  seen  the  monoliths  of  kings 
Upcast  like  foam  of  the  effacing  tide; 
She  hath  beheld  the  desert  stars  deride 
The  monuments  of  power's  imaginings: 
About  their  base  the  wind  Assyrian  flings 
The  dust  that  throned  the  satrap  in  his  pride; 
Cambyses  and  the  Memphian  pomps  abide 


2848     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

As  in  the  flame  the  moth's  presumptuous  wings. 
There  gleams  no  glory  that  her  hand  shall  spare, 
Nor  any  sun  whose  rays  shall  cross  her  night, 
Whose  realm  enfolds  man's  empire  and  its  end. 
No  armor  of  renown  her  sword  shall  dare, 
No  council  of  the  gods  withstand  her  might — 
Stricken  at  last  Time's  lonely  Titans  bend. 

THE   DUST   DETHRONED 

Sargon  is  dust,  Semiramis  a  clod. 

In  crypts  profaned  the  moon  at  midnight  peers; 

The  owl  upon  the  Sphinx  hoots  in  her  ears. 

And  scant  and  sere  the  desert  grasses  nod 

Where  once  the  armies  of  Assyria  trod, 

With  younger  sunlight  splendid  on  the  spears; 

The  lichens  cling  the  closer  with  the  years. 

And  seal  the  eyelids  of  the  weary  god. 

Where  high  the  tombs  of  royal  Egypt  heave, ; ;  ^ 

The  vulture  shadows  with  arrested  wings 

The  indecipherable  boasts  of  kings. 

Till  Arab  children  hear  their  mother's  cry 

And  leave  in  mockery  their  toy — they  leave 

The  skull  of  Pharaoh  staring  at  the  sky. 

THE   NIGHT   OF   GODS 

Their  mouths  have  drunken  the  eternal  wine — 
The  draught  that  Baal  in  oblivion  sips. 
Unseen  about  their  courts  the  adder  slips, 
Unheard  the  sucklings  of  the  leopard  whine; 
The  toad  has  found  a  resting-place  divine. 
And  bloats  in  stupor  between  Ammon's  lips. 

0  Carthage  and  the  unreturning  ships, 
The  fallen  pinnacle,  the  shifting  Sign! 

Lo!  when  I  hear  from  voiceless  court  and  fane 

Time's  adoration  of  eternity, — 

The  cry  of  kingdoms  past  and  gods  undone, — 

1  stand  as  one  whose  feet  at  noontide  gain 
A  lonely  shore;  who  feels  his  soul  set  free. 
And  hears  the  bhnd  sea  chanting  to  the  sun. 

George  Sieiilng  [i86g- 


Ebb  and   Flow  2849 


THE  MAGIC   MIRROR 

The  Magic  ISIirror  makes  not  nor  unmakes, 
Charms  none  to  sleep  nor  any  from  sleep  wakes; 
It  only  giveth  back  the  thing  it  takes. 

It  is  the  heart's  own  cheer  that  makes  it  glad, 
And  one's  own  bitterness  will  drive  him  m.ad; 
It  needeth  not  that  other  help  be  had. 

The  Mirror  maketh  none  to  rise  or  fall; 
To  him  that  hath  not  doth  no  portion  call; 
To  him  that  hath  is  freely  given  all. 

They  see  themselves  who  look  in  Fortune's  face; 
Unto  the  sad  is  sadness  Heaven's  grace, 
And  to  the  souls  that  love  is  love's  embrace. 

Hoiry  Mills  Alden  [1836- 


EBB   AND   FLOW 

I  WALKED  beside  the  evening  sea, 
And  dreamed  a  dream  that  could  not  be; 
The  waves  that  plunged  along  the  shore 
Said  only — "Dreamer,  dream  no  more!" 

But  still  the  legions  charged  the  beach; 
Loud  rang  their  battle-cry,  like  speech; 
But  changed  was  the  imperial  strain: 
It   murmured — "Dreamer,   dream   again!" 

I  homeward  turned  from  out  the  gloom, — 
That  sound  I  heard  not  in  my  room; 
But  suddenly  a  sound,  that  stirred 
Within  my  very  breast,  I  heard. 

It  was  my  heart,  that  like  a  sea 

Within  my  breast  beat  ceaselessly: 

But  like  the  waves  along  the  shore. 

It  said — "Dream  on!"  and  "Dream  no  more!" 

George  William  Curl  is  [1S24-1892] 


2850     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


THE  KING  OF  DREAMS 

SoAiE  must  delve  when  the  dawn  is  nigh; 

Some  must  toil  when  the  noonday  beams; 
But  when  night  comes,  and  the  soft  winds  sigh, 

Every  man  is  a  King  of  Dreams! 

One  must  plod  while  another  must  ply 
At  plow  or  loom  till  the  sunset  streams. 

But  when  night  comes,  and  the  moon  rides  high, 
Every  man  is  a  King  of  Dreams! 

One  is  slave  to  a  master's  cry. 

Another  serf  to  a  despot  seems, 
But  when  night  comes,  and  the  discords  die, 

Every  man  is  a  King  of  Dreams! 

This  you  may  sell  and  that  may  buy, 

And  this  you  may  barter  for  gold  that  gleams. 
But  there's  one  domain  that  is  fixed  for  aye, — 

Every  man  is  a  King  of  Dreams! 

Clinton  ScoUard  [1860- 


IF  ONLY  THE  DREAMS  ABIDE 

If  the  things  of  earth  must  pass 
Like  the  dews  upon  the  grass, 
Like  the  mists  that  break  and  run 
At  the  forward  sweep  of  the  sun, 
I  shall  be  satisfied 
If  only  the  dreams  abide. 

Nay,  I  would  not  be  shorn  | 

Of  gold  from  the  mines  of  morn!  ,, 

I  would  not  be  bereft 
Of  the  last  blue  flower  in  the  cleft,—.    , . 
Of  the  haze  that  haunts  the  hills,  ■■'nlufl 
Or  the  moon  that  the  midnight  fills!       T 
Still  would  I  know  the  grace 
Upon  love's  upUfted  face, 


New   Dreams   for  Old  2851 

And  the  slow,  sweet  joy-dawn  there 
Under  the  dusk  of  her  hair. 

I  pray  thee,  spare  me.  Fate, 
The  woeful,  wearying  weight 
Of  a  heart  that  feels  no  pain 
At  the  sob  of  the  autumn  rain, 
And  takes  no  breath  of  glee 
From  the  organ-surge  of  the  sea, — 
Of  a  mind  where  memory  broods 
Over  songless  solitudes! 
I  shall  be  satisfied 
If  only  the  dreams  abide. 

Clinloii  Scollard  [1860- 

NEW  DREAMS  FOR  OLD 

Is  there  no  voice  in  the  world  to  come  crying, 

"New  dreams  for  old! 

New  for  old!"? 
Many  have  long  in  my  heart  been  lying. 

Faded,  weary,  and  cold. 
All  of  them,  all,  would  I  give  for  a  new  one. 

(Is  there  no  seeker 

Of  dreams  that  were?) 
Nor  would  I  ask  if  the  new  were  a  true  one: 

Only  for  new  dreams! 

New  for  old! 

For  I  am  here,  halfway  of  my  journey, 

Here  with  the  old !  ,  ^ 

All  so  old! 
And  the  best  heart  with  death  is  at  tourney, 

If  naught  new  it  is  told. 
Will  there  no  voice,  then,  come — or  a  vision — 

Come  with  the  beauty 

That  ever  blows 
Out  of  the  lands  that  are  called  Elysian? 

I  must  have  new  dreams! 

New  for  old! 
-     :  ■  Cale  Vouiii;  Rice  [1872-  ,!\ 


2852      Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


"LORD  OF  MY  HEART'S  ELATION" 

Lord  of  my  heart's  elation, 
Spirit  of  things  unseen, 
Be  thou  my  aspiration 
Consuming  and  serene! 

Bear  up,  bear  out,  bear  onward, 
This  mortal  soul  alone, 
To  selfhood  or  oblivion. 
Incredibly  thine  own, — 

As  the  foamheads  are  loosened 
And  blown  along  the  sea. 
Or  sink  and  merge  forever 
In  that  which  bids  them  be. 

I,  too,  must  climb  in  wonder. 
Uplift  at  thy  command, — 
Be  one  with  my  frail  fellows 
Beneath  the  wind's  strong  hand, 

A  fleet  and  shadowy  column 
Of  dust  or  mountain  rain. 
To  walk  the  earth  a  moment 
And  be  dissolved  again. 

Be  thou  my  exaltation 

Or  fortitude  of  mien, 

Lord  of  the  world's  elation, 

Thou  breath  of  things  unseen! 

Bliss  Carman  [1S61- 
-p  ■■  fl 

THE  HIGHER  PANTHEISM    ' 

In  JirO 
The  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the  seas,  the  hills  and  the 

plains — 
Are  not  these,  O  Soul,  the  Vision  of  Him  who  reigns? 


The  White   Peace  2853 

Is  not  the  Vision  he?  though  He  be  not  that  which  He 

seems? 
Dreams  are  true  while  they  last,  and  do  we  not  live  in 

dreams? 

Earth,  these  sohd  stars,  this  weight  of  body  and  Hmb, 
Are  they  not  sign  and  symbol  of  thy  division  from  Him? 

Dark  is  the  world  to  thee:  thyself  art  the  reason  why; 

For  is  He  not  all  but  thou,  that  hast  power  to  feel  "I  am  I "? 

Glory  about  thee,  without  thee;  and  thou  fulfillest  thy  doom, 
Making  Him   broken   gleams,  and  a  stifled  splendor  and 
gloom. 

Speak  to  Him,  thou,  for  He  hears,  and  Spirit  with  Spirit  can 

meet — 
Closer  is  He  than  breathing,  and  nearer  than  hands  and  feet. 

God  is  law,  say  the  wise;  0  Soul,  and  let  us  rejoice, 
For  if  He  thunder  by  law  the  thunder  is  yet  His  voice. 

Law  is  God.  say  some:  no  God  at  all,  says  the  fool; 

For  all  we  have  power  to  see  is  a  straight  staff  bent  in  a  pool; 

And  the  ear  of  man  cannot  hear,  and  the  eye  of  man  cannot 

see; 
But  if  we  could  see  and  hear,  this  Vision — were  it  not  He? 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


THE  WHITE  PEACE 

It  lies  not  on  the  sunlit  hill 

Nor  on  the  sunlit  plain: 
Nor  ever  on  any  running  stream 

Nor  on  the  unclouded  main — 

But  sometimes,  through  the  Soul  of  Man, 

Slow  moving  o'er  his  pain, 
The  moonlight  of  a  perfect  peace 

Floods  heart  and  brain. 

William  Sharp  [1855-1905] 


2854     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

.H  ,bWw  in.  ^^^  MYSTIC'S  PRAYER  ''  '''"  ' 

Lay  me  to  sleep  in  sheltering  fJame, 

O  Master  of  the  Hidden  Fire! 
Wash  pure  my  heart,  and  cleanse  for  me 

My  soul's  desire.  '^^  <rf^^- 

•   ■'•  ■ .  -!ofi  yarfJ  31/ 

In  flame  of  sunrise  bathe  my  mind, 

O  Master  of  the  Hidden  Fire,  ''i^  af  >Ii£<^ 

^  That,  when  I  wake,  clear-eyed  may  be     ^W  ?t  lo 

My  soul's  desire. 

William  Sharp  [1855-1905]  " 
bn£  lo'oi.  )ijuji^    iiij.iuui    iiiiH  •  gni;iiiL 

THE  PLAY  '"°"'S 

■' ■•      The  endless  mime  goes  on;  new  faces  come,'  '^t  -J'r.'^ifi  : 

New  mummers  babble  in  each  other's  ears;     ■  ' 
'^-     And  some  wear  masks  of  woe,  of  lau  hter  some,  ' 

Nor  know  they  play  Life's  Comedy  of  Tears. 
James  B.  Kenyan  [1858- 

THE  WAYFARER 

;loO'     I  WILL  reach  far  down  in  the  pit  of  sorrow 
And  gather  song, 
With  the  bitter  past  I  will  deck  to-morrow. 

I  will  turn  no  cowardly  look  behind  me, 

But  still  fare  on 
Till  the  glow  of  ultimate  joy  shall  blind  me. 

For  I  ask  no  blessing  and  no  forgiving, 

The  gain  was  mine, 
Since  I  learn  from  all  things  the  truth  of  Hving. 
Helen  Huntington  [18    - 

BOOKRA 

rrr-T.''    V 

•''  '^■-  '■''    As  I  lay  asleep  in  Italy. — Shelley 

One  night  I  lay  asleep  in  Africa, 

In  a  closed  garden  by  the  city  gate; 

A  desert  horseman,  furious  and  late, 

Came  wildly  thundering  at  the  massive  bar, 


JOi 


Tears  '^^SS 

"Open  in  Allah's  name!  Wake,  Mustapha! 
Slain  is  the  Sultan, — treason,  war,  and  hate 
Rage  from  Fez  to  Tetuan!    Open  straight."    ;  . 
The  watchman  heard  as  thunder  from  afar:      ■  i 
"Go  to!     In  peace  this  city  lies  asleep; 
To  all-knowing  Allah  'tis  no  news  you  bring;" 
Then  turned  in  slumber  still  his  watch  to  keep. 
At  once  a  nightingale  began  to  sing, 
In  oriental  calm  the  garden  lay, — 
Panic  and  war  postponed  another  day. 

Charles  Dudley  \Var)ur  [i 829-1900] 


INTO  THE  TWILIGHT 

Out-worn  heart,  in  a  time  out-worn, 
Come  clear  of  the  nets  of  wrong  and  right; 
Laugh,  heart,  again  in  the  gray  twilight, 
Sigh,  heart,  again  in  the  dew  of  the  morn. 

Your  mother  Eire  is  always  young, 
Dew  ever  shining  and  twihght  gray; 
Though  hope  fall  from  you  and  love  decay. 
Burning  in  fires  of  a  slanderous  tongue. 

Come,  heart,  where  hill  is  heaped  upon  hill: 
For  there  the  mystical  brotherhood 
Of  sun  and  moon  and  hollow  and  wood 
And  river  and  stream  work  out  their  will; 

And  God  stands  winding  His  lonely  horn, 
And  time  and  the  world  are  ever  in  flight ; 
And  love  is  less  kind  than  the  gray  twilight. 
And  hope  is  less  dear  than  the  dew  of  the  mom. 
William  Butler  Yeats  [1865- 

TEARS 

When  I  consider  Life  and  its  few  years — 
A  wisp  of  fog  betwixt  us  and  the  sun ; 
A  call  to  battle,  and  the  battle  done 
Ere  the  last  echo  dies  within  our  cars; 


2856     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

A  rose  choked  in  the  grass;  an  hour  of  fears; 

The  gusts  that  past  a  darkening  shore  do  beat;;.! 

The  burst  of  music  down  an  unHstening  street — 

I  wonder  at  the  idleness  of  tears. 

Ye  old,  old  dead,  and  ye  of  yesternight, 

Chieftains,  and  bards,  and  keepers  of  the  sheep, 

By  every  cup  of  sorrow  that  you  had, 

Loose  me  from  tears,  and  make  me  see  aright 

How  each  hath  back  what  once  he  stayed  to  weep; 

Homer  his  sight,  David  his  little  lad! 

Lkclle  Woodworth  Reese  [1856- 


VERS  LA  VIE 

The  statue  by  Victor  Rosseau  in  the  Palais  des  Beaux  Arts,  Brussels 

Angel,  hast  thou  betrayed  me?     Long  ago 
In  the  Forgotten  Land  of  souls  that  wait, 
Thou  leddest  me  to  the  outward-folding  gate, 
Bidding  me  live.     I  leaned  into  the  flow  / 

Of  earthward-rushing  spirits,  fain  to  know 
What  are  humanity  and  human  fate 
Of  which  the  rumor  reached  to  where  we  sate 
In  our  cool,  hidden,  dreamless  ante-glow. 
But  I  learn  not,  and  am  bewildered  here 
To  know  why  thou  with  seeming-kindly  hands 
Didst  let  me  forth,  explorer  of  a  star 
Where  all  is  strange,  and  very  often  Fear 
Urges  retreat  to  that  Forgotten  Land's 
LTnthoughtful  shores  where  thou  and  Silence  are! 

Arthur  Upson  [18 7 7-1908] 

LEAVES 

One  by  one,  like  leaves  from  a  tree. 
All  my  faiths  have  forsaken  me; 
But  the  stars  above  my  head 
Burn  in  white  and  delicate  red, 
And  beneath  my  feet  the  earth 
Brings  the  sturdy  grass  to  birth. 


Pre-existcnce  ^^57 


I  who  was  content  to  be 

But  a  silken-singing  tree, 

But  a  rustle  of  delight 

In  the  wistful  heart  of  night — 

I  have  lost  the  leaves  that  knew 

Touch  of  rain  and  weight  of  dew. 

Blinded  by  a  leafy  crown, 

I  looked  neither  up  nor  down — 

But  the  little  leaves  that  die 

Have  left  me  room  to  see  the  sky; 

Now  for  the  first  time  I  know 

Stars  above  and  earth  below. 

Sara  Tcasdale 


PRE-EXISTENCE 

While  sauntering  through  the  crowded  street, 
Some  half-remembered  face  I  meet, 

Albeit  upon  no  mortal  shore 

That  face,  methinks,  has  smiled  before. 

Lost  in  a  gay  and  festal  throng, 
I  tremble  at  some  tender  song, 

Set  to  an  air  whose  golden  bars 
I  must  have  heard  in  other  stars. 

In  sacred  aisles  I  pause  to  share 
The  blessing  of  a  priestly  prayer, — 

When  the  whole  scene  which  greets  mine  eyes 
In  some  strange  mode  I  recognize, 

As  one  whose  every  mystic  part 
I  feel  prefigured  in  my  heart. 

At  sunset,  as  I  calmly  stand, 
A  stranger  on  an  alien  strand, 


2858     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Familiar  as  my  childhood's  home 

Seems  the  long  stretch  of  wave  and  foam. 

One  sails  toward  me  o'er  the  bay, 
And  what  he  comes  to  do  and  say 

I  can  foretell.     A  prescient  lore 
Springs  from  some  life  outlived  of  yore. 

O  swift,  instinctive,  startling  gleams 
Of  deep  soul-knowledge!  not  as  dreams 

For  aye  ye  vaguely  dawn  and  die, 
But  oft  with  lightning  certainty 

Pierce  through  the  dark,  oblivious  brain. 
To  make  old  thoughts  and  memories  plain — 

Thoughts  which  perchance  must  travel  back 
Across  the  wild,  bewildering  track 

Of  countless  a?ons;  memories  far, 
High-reaching  as  yon  paUid  star. 

Unknown,  scarce  seen,  whose  flickering  grace 
Faints  on  the  outmost  rings  of  space! 

Paul  Hamilton,  Haync  [i 830-1 886] 


ENVOY 

From  "  Songs  from  Vagabondia'' 


Have  little  care  that  Life  is  brief, 
And  less  that  Art  is  long. 
Success  is  in  the  silences        arij  nadW 
Though  Fame  is  in  the  song.       -;og  ril 


With  the  Orient  in  her  eyes. 
Life  my  mistress  lured  me  on. 
"Knowledge,"  said  that  look  of  hers, 
"Shall  be  yours  when  all  is  done." 


no?l-"-'R-.?M  The  Petrified  Fern  '^^S9 

Like  a  pomegranate  in  halves, 
"Drink  me,"  said  that  mouth  of  hers, 
And  I  drank  who  now  am  here 
Where  my  dust  with  dust  confers. 

Bliss  Carman  [1861- 


THE   PETRIFIED   FERN 

In  a  valley,  centuries  ago, 

Grew  a  little  fern-leaf,  green  and  slender, 
Veining  delicate  and  libers  tender; 

Waving  when  the  wind  crept  down  so  low. 

Rushes  tall,  and  moss,  and  grass  grew  round  it, 
Playful  sunbeams  darted  in  and  found  it. 
Drops  of  dew  stole  in  by  night,  and  crowned  it. 
But  no  foot  of  man  e'er  trod  that  way; 
Earth  was  young,  and  keeping  holiday. 

Monster  fishes  swam  the  silent  main,  ,^ 

Stately  forests  waved  their  giant  branches, 
IMountains  hurled  their  snowy  avalanches, 

Mammoth  creatures  stalked  across  the  plain; 
Nature  reveled  in  grand  mysteries, 
But  the  little  fern  was  not  of  these. 

Did  not  number  with  the  hills  and  trees; 

1 

Only  grew  and  waved  its  wild  sweet  way, — 
No  one  came  to  note  it  day  by  day. 

Earth,  one  time,  put  on  a  frolic  mood, 

Heaved  the  rocks  and  changed  the  mighty  motion 

Of  the  deep,  strong  currents  of  the  ocean; 
Moved  the  plain  and  shook  the  haughty  wood, 

Crushed  the  little  fern  in  soft  moist  clay, 

Covered  it,  and  hid  it  safe  away. 

Oh,  the  long,  long  centuries  since  that  day! 

Oh,  the  changes!    Oh,  life's  bitter  cost, 

Since  that  useless  little  fern  was  lost! 

Useless?    Lost?    There  came  a  thoughtful  man 
Searching  Nature's  secrets,  far  and  deep; 
From  a  fissure  in  a  rocky  steep  ;I 

He  withdrew  a  stone,  o'er  which  there  ran 


2  86o     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Fairy  pencilings,  a  quaint  design,      ■  ''  T 
Veinings,  leafage,  fibers  clear  and  fine. 
And  the  fern's  life  lay  in  every  line! 
So,  I  think,  God  hides  some  souls  away. 
Sweetly  to  surprise  us,  the  last  day. 

Mary  Bolles  Branch  [  1 840- 

THE  QUESTION  WHITHER         ,^  yj 

When  we  hiave  thrown  off  this  old  suit,      '" ' 

So  much  in  need  of  mending,  '  ^ 

To  sink  among  the  naked  mute,  ''  ■ '■  ^'' 

Is  that,  think  you,  our  ending? 
We  follow  many,  more  we  lead, 

And  you  who  sadly  turf  us. 
Believe  not  that  all  living  seed 

Must  flower  above  the  surface. 

Sensation  is  a  gracious  gift. 

But  were  it  cramped  to  station, 
The  prayer  to  have  it  cast  adrift. 

Would  spout  from  all  sensation. 
Enough  if  we  have  winked  to.  sun, 

Have  sped  the  plow  a  season; 
There  is  a  soul  for  labor  done, 

Endureth  fixed  as  reason. 

Then  let  our  trust  be  firm  in  Good, 

Though  we  be  of  the  fasting; 
Our  questions  are  a  mortal  brood, 

Our  work  is  everlasting. 
We  children  of  Beneficence 

Are  in  its  being  sharers; 
And  Whither  vainer  sounds  than  Whence, 

For  word  with  such  wayfarers. 

George  Meredith  [1828-1909] 


(O 


THE   GOOD   GREAT  MAN 

How  seldom,  friend,  a  good  great  man  inherits 
Honor  or  wealth,  with  all  his  worth  and  pains  1 


Human   Frailty  2861 

It  seems  a  story  from  the  land  of  spirits 
When  any  man  obtains  that  which  he  merits, 
Or  any  merit  that  which  he  obtains. 

REPLY   TO   THE   ABOVE 

For  shame,  dear  friend!  renounce  this  canting  strain! 

What  wouldst  thou  have  a  good  great  man  obtain? 

Wealth,  title,  dignity,  a  gilded  chain, 

Or  throne  of  corses  which  his  sword  hath  slain? 

Greatness  and  goodness  are  not  means,  but  ends. 

Hath  he  not  always  treasures,  always  friends, — 

The  good  great  man?     Three  treasures, — love,  and  light; 

And  calm  thoughts,  equable  as  infant's  breath; 
And  three  firm  friends,  more  sure  than  day  and  night, — 

Himself,  his  IMaker,  and  the  Angel  Death. 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [1772-1834] 


HUMAN  FRAILTY 

Weak  and  irresolute  is  man; 

The  purpose  of  to-day, 
Woven  with  pains  into  his  plan. 

To-morrow  rends  a\\'ay. 

The  bow  well  bent,  and  smart  the  spring. 

Vice  seems  already  slain; 
But  Passion  rudely  snaps  the  string, 

And  it  revives  again. 

Some  foe  to  his  upright  intent 

Finds  out  his  weaker  part; 
Virtue  engages  his  assent. 

But  Pleasure  wins  his  heart. 

'Tis  here  the  foUy  of  the  wise 

Through  all  his  art  we  view: 
And  while  his  tongue  the  charge  denies. 

His  conscience  owns  it  true. 


2862     Poems   of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

Bound  on  a  voyage  of  awful  length 

And  dangers  little  known, 
A  stranger  to  superior  strength, 

Man  vainly  trusts  his  own. 

But  oars  alone  can  ne'er  prevail 

To  reach  the  distant  coast; 
The  breath  of  Heaven  must  swell  the  sail, 

Or  all  the  toil  is  lost. 

William  Cowpcr  [1731-1800] 


STANZAS 

Where  forlorn  sunsets  flare  and  fade 

On  desolate  sea  and  lonely  sand, 
Out  of  the  silence  and  the  shade 

What  is  the  voice  of  strange  command 
Calling  you  still,  as  friend  calls  friend 

With  love  that  cannot  brook  delay, 
To  rise  and  follow  the  ways  that  wend 

Over  the  hills  and  far  away? 

Hark  to  the  city,  street  on  street 

A  roaring  reach  of  death  and  hfe, 
Of  vortices  that  clash  and  fleet 

And  ruin  in  appointed  strife; 
Hark  to  it  calling,  calling  clear. 

Calling  until  you  cannot  stay. 
From  dearer  things  than  your  own  most  dear 

Over  the  hills  and  far  away. 

Out  of  the  sound  of  the  ebb-and-flow. 

Out  of  the  sight  of  lamp  and  star. 
It  calls  you  where  the  good  winds  blow, 

And  the  unchanging  meadows  are; 
From  faded  hopes  and  hopes  agleam, 

It  calls  you,  calls  you  night  and  day 
Beyond  the  dark,  into  the  dream 

Over  the  hills  and  far  away. 

William  Ernest  Henley  [1849-1903] 


The   Beleaguered  City  2863 


THE   SEEKERS 

FRIE^^DS  and  loves  we  have  none,  nor  wealth,  nor  blest 

abode, 
But  the  hope,  the  burning  hope,  and  the  road,  the  lonely 

road. 

Not  for  us  are  content,  and  quiet,  and  peace  of  mind, 
For  we  go  seeking  a  city  that  we  shall  never  find. 

There  is  no  solace  on  earth  for  us — for  such  as  we — 
Who  search  for  a  hidden  city  that  we  shall  never  see. 

Only  the  road  and  the  dawn,  the  sun,  the  wind,  the  rain. 
And  the  watch-fire  under  stars,  and  sleep,  and  the  road 
again. 

We  seek  the  City  of  God,  and  the  haunt  where  beauty 

dwells, 
And  we  find  the  noisy  mart  and  the  sound  of  burial  bells. 

Never  the  golden  city,  where  radiant  people  meet. 
But  the  dolorous  town  where  mourners  are  going  about  the 
street. 

We  travel  the  dusty  road  till  the  hght  of  the  day  is  dim 
And  sunset  shows  us  spires  away  on  the  world's  rim. 

W'e  travel  from  dawn  till  dusk,  till  the  day  is  past  and  by, 
Seeking  the  Holy  City  beyond  the  rim  of  the  sky. 

Friends  and  loves  we  have  none,  nor  wealth,   nor  blest 

abode. 
But  the  hope,  the  burning  hope,  and  the  road,  the  lonely 

road. 

John  Mascfield  [1874- 

THE   BELEAGUERED   CITY 

I  HAVE  read,  in  some  old,  marvelous  tale, 

Some  legend  strange  and  vague. 
That  a  midnight  host  of  specters  pale 

Beleaguered  the  walls  of  Prague. 


2864     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Beside  the  Moldau's  rushing  stream, 

With  the  wan  moon  overhead. 
There  stood,  as  in  an  awful  dream, 

The  army  of  the  dead. 

White  as  the  sea-fog,  landward  bound, 

The  spectral  camp  was  seen, 
And,  with  a  sorrowful,  deep  sound, 

The  river  flowed  between. 

No  other  voice  nor  sound  was  there, 

No  drum,  nor  sentry's  pace; 
The  mist-like  banners  clasped  the  air, 

As  clouds  with  clouds  embrace. 

But  when  the  old  cathedral  bell 
Proclaimed  the  morning  prayer. 

The  white  pavilions  rose  and  fell 
On  the  alamied  air. 

Down  the  broad  valley  fast  and  far 

The  troubled  army  fled; 
Up  rose  the  glorious  morning  star, 

The  ghastly  host  was  dead. 

I  have  read,  in  the  marvelous  heart  of  man 
That  strange  and  mystic  scroll. 

That  an  army  of  Phantoms  vast  and  wan 
Beleaguer  the  human  soul. 

Encamped  beside  Life's  rushing  stream, 

In  Fancy's  misty  hght. 
Gigantic  shapes  and  shadows  gleam 
■ij..  Portentous  through  the  night. 

Upon  its  midnight  battle-ground 

The  spectral  camp  is  seen. 
And,  with  a  sorrowful,  deep  sound. 

Flows  the  River  of  Life  between. 

No  other  voice  nor  sound  is  there, 

In  the  army  of  the  grave; 
No  other  chaUenge  breaks  the  air, 

But  the  rushing  of  Life's  wave. 


A   Doubting   Heart  2865 

And  when  the  solemn  and  deep  church-bell 

Entreats  the  soul  to  pray, 
The  midnight  phantoms  feel  the  spell, 

The  shadows  sweep  away. 

Down  the  broad  Vale  of  Tears  afar 

The  spectral  camp  is  fled; 
Faith  shineth  as  a  morning  star, 

Our  ghastly  fears  are  dead. 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 


A  DOUBTING  HEART 

Where  are  the  swallows  fled? 

Frozen  and  dead 
Perchance  upon  some  bleak  and  stormy  shore. 
O  doubting  heart! 
Far  over  purple  seas 
They  wait,  in  sunny  ease, 
The  balmy  southern  breeze, 
To  bring  them  to  their  northern  homes  once  more. 

Why  must  the  flowers  die? 

Prisoned  they  He 
In  the  cold  tomb,  heedless  of  tears  or  rain. 
O  doubting  heart! 
They  only  sleep  below 
The  soft  white  ermine  snow 
While  winter  winds  shall  blow, 
To  breathe  and  smile  upon  you  soon  again. 

The  sun  has  hid  its  rays 

These  many  days; 
WiE  dreary  hours  never  leave  the  earth? 
O  doubting  heart ! 
The  stormy  clouds  on  high 
Veil  the  same  sunny  sky 
That  soon  (for  spring  is  nigh). 
Shall  wake  the  summer  into  golden  mirth. 


2  866     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Fair  hope  is  dead,  and  light 

Is  quenched  in  night. 
What  sound  can  break  the  silence  of  despair? 
0  doubting  heart! 
The  sky  is  overcast, 
Yet  stars  shall  rise  at  last, 
Brighter  for  darkness  past, 
And  angels'  silver  voices  stir  the  air. 

Adelaide  Anne  Procter  [1825-1864] 


VAIN  VIRTUES 

From  "  The  House  of  Life  " 

What  is  the  sorriest  thing  that  enters  Hell? 
None  of  the  sins, — but  this  and  that  fair  deed 
Which  a  soul's  sin  at  length  could  supersede. 

These  yet  are  virgins,  whom  death's  timely  knell 

Might  once  have  sainted;  whom  the  fiends  compel 
Together  now,  in  snake-bound  shuddering  sheaves 
Of  anguish,  while  the  pit's  pollution  leaves 

Their  refuse  maidenhood  abominable. 

Night  sucks  them  down,  the  tribute  of  the  pit. 
Whose  names,  half  entered  in  the  book  of  Life, 
Were  God's  desire  at  noon.     And  as  their  hair 

And  eyes  sink  last,  the  Torturer  deigns  no  whit 
To  gaze,  but,  yearning,  waits  his  destined  wife. 
The  Sin  still  blithe  on  earth  that  sent  them  there. 
Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti  [1828-1882] 


EVOLUTION 

Out  of  the  dusk  a  shadow, 

Then,  a  spark; 
Out  of  the  cloud  a  silence, 

Then,  a  lark; 
Out  of  the  heart  a  rapture, 

Then,- a  pain; 
Out  of  the  dead,  cold  ashes, 

Life  again. 

John  Banister  Tabh  [1845-1009] 


Each  in   His  Own  I'ongue        2867 


EACH  IN  HIS  OWN  TONGUE 

A  FIRE-MIST  and  a  planet, — 

A  crystal  and  a  cell, — 
A  jellyfish  and  a  saurian, 

And  caves  where  the  cave-men  dwell; 
Then  a  sense  of  law  and  beauty, 

And  a  face  turned  from  the  clod, — 
Some  call  it  Evolution, 

And  others  call  it  God. 

A  haze  on  the  far  horizon, 

The  infinite,  tender  sky. 
The  ripe,  rich  tint  of  the  cornfields. 

And  the  wild  geese  sailing  high, — 
And  all  over  upland  and  lowland 

The  charm  of  the  goldenrod, — 
Some  of  us  call  it  Autumn, 

And  others  call  it  God. 

Like  tides  on  a  crescent  sea-beach. 

When  the  moon  is  new  and  thin, 
Into  our  hearts  high  yearnings 

Come  welling  and  surging  in, — 
Come  from  the  mystic  ocean. 

Whose  rim  no  foot  has  trod, — 
Some  of  us  call  it  Longing, 

And  others  call  it  God. 

A  picket  frozen  on  duty,^ 

A  mother  starved  for  her  brood, — 
Socrates  drinking  the  hemlock. 

And  Jesus  on  the  rood; 
And  millions  who,  hymble  and  nameless, 

The  straight,  hard  pathway  plod, — 
Some  call  it  Consecration, 

And  others  call  it  God. 

Waiiam  Herbert  Carridh  [1859- 


2868      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


THE  NAME 

It  shifts  and  shifts  from  form  to  form, 

It  drifts  and  darkles,  glooms  and  glows, 
It  is  the  passion  of  the  storm, 

The  poignance  of  the  rose; 
Through  changing  shapes,  through  devious  ways, 

By  noon  or  night,  through  cloud  or  flame. 
My  heart  hath  followed  all  my  days 

Something  I  cannot  name. 

In  sunlight  on  some  woman's  hair, 

Or  starlight  in  some  woman's  eyne — 
Or  in  low  laughter  smothered  where 

Her  red  lips  wedded  mine — 
My  heart  has  known,  and  thrilled  to  know, 

This  unnamed  presence  that  it  sought; 
And  when  thy  heart  hath  found  it  so, 

'^ Love  is  the  name,'"  I  thought. 

Sometimes  when  sudden  afterglows 

In  futile  glory  storm  the  skies 
Within  their  transient  gold  and  rose 

The  secret  stirs  and  dies; 
Or  when  the  tramping  Morn  walks  o'er 

The  troubled  seas  with  feet  of  flame 
My  awed  heart  whispers,  "Ask  no  more, 

For  Beauty  is  the  name!" 

Or  dreaming  in  old  chapels  where 

The  dim  aisles  pulse  with  murmurings 
That  part  are  music,  part  are  prayer — 

(Or  rush  of  hidden  wings) — 
I  often  lift  a  startled  head 

To  some  saint's  carven  countenance, 
Half  fancying  that  the  lips  have  said, 

"All  names  mean  God  perchance." 

Don  Marquis  [187s- 


"In   God's   Eternal   Studios  "       2869 
"IN  GOD'S  ETERNAL  STUDIOS" 

From  "The  Studios  Photographic" 

By  every  light,  in  every  pose,  j 

In  God's  Eternal  Studios, 

The  human  heart,  with  frown  or  laugh, 

Is  posing  for  its  photograph. 

Sweet  smile;  sad,  serious  expression; 

Honor  triumphant  over  passion: 

Oh!  wonderful  are  the  effects 

He  through  Truth's  living  lens  detects, 

As,  instant,  watchful  for  the  best, 

Behind  the  curtain  without  rest, 

In  loving  eagerness  He  waits 

To  catch  our  souls  on  deathless  plates! 

Fear  not  the  darkness  that  surrounds 
Thy  character.    On  dark  backgrounds, 
With  light  from  Heaven  in  thy  face, 
What  tones  He  gets!    With  what  fine  grace 
He  molds  and  modulates  and  blends 
The  history  of  face  and  hands: 
Revealing  through  what  grief  and  bliss 
The  spirit  came  to  look  like  this! 
To  look  like  Him  Who  long  ago 
For  His  good  pleasure  planned  it  so, 
That  He  in  His  Eternal  Home 
IVIight  treasure  them  in  Time  to  Come! 

Through  unknown  fortunes  yet  to  be. 

Beneath  the  stars,  beside  the  sea, 

Between  the  birthday  and  the  grave, 

Teaching  the  tender  heart  be  brave, 

He  woos  our  better  from  our  worse, 

The  Artist  of  theUniverse! 

The  undiscouraged  Connoisseur  '  I 

Of  priceless  human  character! 

The  glory  of  Whose  presence  fills 

With  master  might  the  steadfast  hills!  ■  .,^ 

While  deep  within  our  souls  it  glows 

From  all  His  starry  studios! 

Paul  Sliivell  [1874- 


2870    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


INDIRECTION 

Fair  are  the  flowers  and  the  children,  but  their  subtle  sug- 
gestion is  fairer; 

Rare  is  the  roseburst  of  dawn,  but  the  secret  that  clasps  it 
is  rarer; 

Sweet  the  exultance  of  song,  but  the  strain  that  precedes  it 
is  sweeter; 

And  never  was  poem  yet  writ,  but  the  meaning  outmastered 
the  meter. 

Never  a  daisy  that  grows,  but  a  mystery  giif(f6th'the  grow- 
ing; 

Never  a  river  that  flows,  but  a  majesty  scepters  the  flowing; 

Never  a  Shakespeare  that  soared,  but  a  stronger  than  he 
did  enfold  him, 

Nor  ever  a  prophet  foretells,  but  a  mightier  seer  hath  fore- 
told him. 

Back  of  the  canvas  that  throbs  the  painter  is  hinted  and 
hidden ; 

Into  the  statue  that  breathes  the  soul  of  the  sculptor  is  bid- 
den; 

Under  the  joy  that  is  felt  He  the  infinite  issues  of  feeling; 

Crowning  the  glory  revealed  is  the  glory  that  crowns  the 
revealing. 

Great  are  the  symbols  pf  being,  but  that  which  is  symboled 
is  greater; -ivK-rj  o:h  :\I  odJ  noav/t-" 

Vast  the  create  and  beheld,  but  vaster  the  inward  creator; 

Back  of  the  sound  broods  the  silence,  back  of  the  gift  stands 
the  giving; 

Back  of  the  hand  that  receives  thriU  the  sensitive  nerves  of 
receiving. 

Space  is  as  nothing  to  spirit,  the  deed  is  outdone  by  the  do- 
ing; [-joh  ;)[id 

The  heart  of  the  wooer  is  warm,  but  w^armer  the  heart  of  the 
wooing; 


A  Grammarian's   Funeral  2871 

And  up  from  the  pits  where  these  shiver,  and  up  from  the 

heights  where  those  shine, 
Twin  voices  and  shadows  swim  starward,  and  the  essence 

of  Ufe  is  divine. 

Richard  Rcalf  [1834-18 7 8] 

A  GRAMMARIAN'S  FUNERAL   ■   ^f ''"''^ 

SHORTLY    AFTER    THE    REVIVAL    OE    LEARNING     IN    EUROPE 

Let  us  begin  and  carry  up  this  corpse. 

Singing  together. 
Leave  we  the  common  crofts,  the  vulgar  thorpes 

Each  in  its  tether 
Sleeping  safe  on  the  bosom  of  the  plain,  ,  j 

Cared-for  till  cock-crow: 
Look  out  if  yonder  be  not  day  again 

Rimming  the  rock-row! 
That's  the  appropriate  country;  there,  man's  thought, 

Rarer,  intenser. 
Self-gathered  for  an  outbreak,  as  it  ought. 

Chafes  in  the  censer. 
Leave  we  the  unlettered  plain  its  herd  and  crop; 

Seek  we  sepulture 
On  a  tall  mountain,  citied  to  the  top. 

Crowded  with  culture!  j" 

All  the  peaks  soar,  but  one  the  rest  excels;       ...  ,;rrr 

Clouds  overcome  it ; 
No!  yonder  sparkle  is  the  citadel's 

Circling  its  summit. 
Thither  our  path  lies;  wind  we  up  the  heights; 

Wait  ye  the  warning? 
Our  low  life  was  the  level's  and  the  night's; 

He's  for  the  morning. 
Step  to  a  tune,  square  chests,  erect  each  head. 

'Ware  the  beholders! 
This  is  our  master,  famous,  calm  and  dead. 

Borne  on  our  shoulders. 


2872     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Sleep,  crop  and  herd!  sleep,  darkling  thorpe  and  croft, 

Safe  from  the  weather! 
He,  whom  we  convoy  to  his  grave  aloft,  l 

Singing  together. 
He  was  a  man  born  with  thy  face  and  throat, 

Lyric  Apollo! 
Long  he  lived  nameless:  how  should  Spring  take  note 

Winter  would  follow? 
Till  lo,  the  httle  touch,  and  youth  was  gone! 

Cramped  and  diminished, 
Moaned  he,  "New  measures,  other  feet  anon! 

My  dance  is  finished"? 
No,  that's  the  world's  way:  (keep  the  mountain-side. 

Make  for  the  city!) 
He  knew  the  signal,  and  stepped  on  with  pride 

Over  men's  pity; 
Left  play  for  work,  and  grappled  with  the  world 

Bent  on  escaping: 
"What's  in  the  scroll,"  quoth  he,  "thou  keepest  furled? 

Show  me  their  shaping,  ''  -'i'  yjTarirni>l 

Theirs  who  most  studied  man,  the  bard" and 'sage,^^ 

Give!" — So,  he  gowned  him. 
Straight  got  by  heart  that  book  to  its  last  page: 

Learned,  we  found  him. 
Yea,  but  we  found  him  bald  too,  eyes  like  lead. 

Accents  uncertain: 
"Time  to  taste  life,"  another  would  have  said, 

"Up  with  the  curtain!" 
This  man  said  rather,  "Actual  life  comes  next? 

Patience  a  moment! 
Grant  I  have  mastered  learning's  crabbed  text. 

Still  there's  the  comment. 
Let  me  know  all!     Prate  not  of  most  or  least, 

Painful  or  easy ! 
Even  to  the  crumbs  I'd  fain  eat  up  the  feast. 

Ay,  nor  feel  queasy." 
Oh,  such  a  life  as  he  resolved  to  live. 

When  he  had  learned  it. 
When  he  had  gathered  all  books  had  to  give!   .      ... 

Sooner,  he  spurned  it.  inoK 


A  Grammarian's   Funeral  2873 

Image  the  whole,  then  execute  the  parts — 

Fancy  the  fabric 
Quite,  ere  you  build,  ere  steel  strike  fire  from  quartz, 

Ere  mortar  dab  brick! 

(Here's  the  town-gate  reached:  there's  the  market-place 

Gaping  before  us.) 
Yea,  this  in  him  was  the  peculiar  grace 

(Hearten  our  chorus!) 
That  before  living  he'd  learn  how  to  live — 

No  end  to  learning: 
Earn  the  means  first — God  surely  will  contrive 

Use  for  our  earning. 
Others  mistrust  and  say,  "But  time  escapes: 

Live  now  or  never!" 
He  said,  "What's  time?    Leave  Now  for  dogs  and  apes! 

Man  has  Forever." 
Back  to  his  book  then:  deeper  drooped  his  head: 

Calculus  racked  him : 
Leaden  before,  his  eyes  grew  dross  of  lead: 

Tussis  attacked  him. 
"Now,  master,  take  a  little  rest!" — not  he! 

(Caution  redoubled. 
Step  two  abreast,  the  way  winds  narrowly!) 

Not  a  whit  troubled. 
Back  to  his  studies,  fresher  than  at  first. 

Fierce  as  a  dragon 
He  (soul-hydroptic  with  a  sacred  thirst) 

Sucked  at  the  flagon. 
Oh,  if  we  draw  a  circle  premature, 

Heedless  of  far  gain, 
Greedy  for  quick  returns  of  profit,  sure 

Bad  is  our  bargain! 
Was  it  not  great?  did  not  he  throw  on  God, 

(He  loves  the  burthen) — 
God's  task  to  make  the  heavenly  period 

Perfect  the  earthen? 
Did  not  he  magnify  the  mind,  show  clear 

Just  what  it  all  meant? 
He  would  not  discount  life,  as  fools  do  here, 

Paid  by  instalment. 


2874    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

He  ventured  neck  or  nothing — heaven's  success 

Found,  or  earth's  failure: 
"Wilt  thou  trust  death  or  not?"     He  answered  "Yes! 

Hence  with  life's  pale  lure!" 
That  low.  man  seeks  a  httle  thing  to  do, 

Sees  it  and  does  it: 
This  high  man,  with  a  great  thing  to  pursue, 

Dies  ere  he  knows  it. 
That  low  man  goes  on  adding  one  to  one. 

His  hundred's  soon  hit : 
This  high  man,  aiming  at  a  million, 

Misses  an  unit. 
That,  has  the  world  here — should  he  need  the  next, 

Let  the  world  mind  him! 
This,  tiirows  himself  on  God,  and  unperplexed         r .        -^ 

Seeking  shall  find  him. 
So,  with  the  throttling  hands  of  death  at  strife. 

Ground  he  at  grammar; 
Still,  through  the  rattle,  parts  of  speech  were  rife: 

While  he  could  stammer 
He  settled  HotVs  business — let  it  be! — 

Properly  based  Oun — 
Gave  us  the  doctrine  of  the  enclitic  De, 

Dead  from  the  waist  down.  ,  -. 

Well,  here  s  the  platform,  here  s  the  proper  place:,  ^  ,   r  ..,| 

Hail  to  your  purlieus, 
All  ye  highfliers  of  the  feathered  race, 

Swallows  and  curlews!  r     ^' 

Here's  the  top-peak ;  the  multitude  below  ,.    ,,- 

Live,  for  they  can,  there:  ...x'- 

This  man  decided  not  to  Live  but  Know — 

Bury  this  man  there? 
Here — here's  his  place,  where  meteors  shoot,  clouds  form, 

Lightnings  are  loosened,  ,    tt\ 

Stars  come  and  go !     Let  joy  break  with  the  storm,      p«f,„ '  > 

Peace  let  the  dew  send!  1    q 

Lofty  designs  must  close  in  like  effects:  .  .      ,.^, 

Loftily  lying,  ,^,,j 

Leave  him — stiU  loftier  than  the  world  suspects. 

Living  and  dying.  ^^^^^^  Browning  [181 2-1889] 


The   Rubaiyat  of  Omar  Khayyam     2875 


THE   RUBAIYAT  of   OMAR   KHAYYAM 

Wake!     For  the  Sun  who  scattered  into  flight 
The  Stars  before  him  from  the  Field  of  Night, 

Drives  Night  along  with  them  from  Heaven,  and  strikes 
The  Sultan's  Turret  with  a  Shaft  of  Light. 

Before  the  phantom  of  False  morning  died, 
Methought  a  Voice  within  the  Tavern  cried, 
"When  all  the  Temple  is  prepared  within. 
Why  nods  the  drowsy  Worshiper  outside?" 

And,  as  the  Cock  crew,  those  who  stood  before 
The  Tavern  shouted — "Open  then  the  Door! 
You  know  how  little  while  we  have  to  stay, 
And,  once  departed,  may  return  no  more." 

Now  the  New  Year  reviving  old  Desires, 
The  thoughtful  Soul  to  Solitude  retires. 

Where  the  White  Hand  of  Moses  on  the  Bough 
Puts  out,  and  Jesus  from  the  ground  suspires. 

Iram  indeed  is  gone  with  all  his  Rose, 

And  Jamshyd's  Seven-ringed  Cup  where  no  one  knows; 

But  still  a  Ruby  kindles  in  the  Vine, 
And  many  a  Garden  by  the  Water  blows. 

And  David's  lips  are  locked;  but  in  divine 
High-piping  Pehlevi,  with  "Wine!  Wine!  Wine! 

Red  Wine!"^ — the  Nightingale  cries  to  the  Rose 
That  sallow  cheek  of  hers  t'  incarnadine. 

Come,  fill  the  Cup,  and  in  the  fire  of  Spring 
Your  Winter-garment  of  Repentance  fling: 

The  Bird  of  Time  has  but  a  little  way 
To  flutter — and  the  Bird  is  on  the  Wing. 

Whether  at  Naishapur  or  Babylon, 
Whether  the  Cup  with  sweet  or  bitter  run, 

The  Wine  of  Life  keeps  oozing  drop  by  drop, 
The  Leaves  of  Life  keep  falling  one  by  one. 


2876     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Each  Morn  a  thousand  Roses  brings,  you  say; 
Yes,  but  where  leaves  the  Rose  of  Yesterday? 

And  this  first  Summer  month  that  brings  the  Rose 
Shall  take  Jamshyd  and  Kaikobad  away. 

Well,  let  it  take  them!     What  have  we  to  do 
With  Kaikobad  the  Great,  or  Kaikhosru? 

Let  Zal  and  Rustum  bluster  as  they  will, 
Or  Hatim  call  to  Supper — heed  not  you. 

With  me  along  the  strip  of  Herbage  strown 
That  just  divides  the  desert  from  the  sown. 

Where  name  of  Slave  and  Sultan  is  forgot — 
And  peace  to  Mahmljd  on  his  golden  Throne! 

A  Book  of  Verses  underneath  the  Bough, 
A  Jug  of  Wine,  a  Loaf  of  Bread — and  Thou 

Beside  me  singing  in  the  Wilderness — 
Oh,  Wilderness  were  Paradise  enow! 

Some  for  the  Glories  of  this  World;  and  some 
Sigh  for  the  Prophet's  Paradise  to  come; 
Ah,  take  the  Cash,  and  let  the  Credit  go. 
Nor  heed  the  rumble  of  a  distant  Drum! 

Look  to  the  blowing  Rose  about  us — "Lo, 
Laughing,"  she  says,  "into  the  world  I  blow, 

At  once  the  silken  tassel  of  my  Purse 
Tear,  and  its  Treasure  on  the  Garden  throw." 

And  those  who  husbanded  the  Golden  grain. 
And  those  who  flung  it  to  the  winds  like  Rain, 

Alike  to  no  such  aureate  Earth  are  turned 
As,  buried  once.  Men  want  dug  up  again. 

The  Worldly  Hope  men  set  their  Hearts  upon 
Turns  Ashes — or  it  prospers;  and  anon. 

Like  Snow  upon  the  Desert's  dusty  Face, 
Lighting  a  little  hour  or  two — was  gone. 


The  Rubaiyat  of  Omar  Khayyam     2877 

Think,  in  this  battered  caravanserai 
Whose  Portals  are  alternate  Night  and  Day, 
How  Sultan  after  Sultan  with  his  Pomp 
Abode  his  destined  Hour,  and  went  his  way. 

They  say  the  Lion  and  the  Lizard  keep 

The  Courts  where  Jamshyd  gloried  and  drank  deep: 

And  Bahram,  that  great  Hunter — the  Wild  Ass 
Stamps  o'er  his  Head,  but  cannot  break  his  Sleep. 

I  sometimes  think  that  never  blows  so  red 
The  Rose  as  where  some  buried  Caesar  bled; 

That  every  Hyacinth  the  Garden  wears 
Dropped  in  her  Lap  from  some  once  lovely  Head. 

And  this  reviving  Herb  whose  tender  Green 
Fledges  the  River-Lip  on  which  we  lean — 

Ah,  lean  upon  it  lightly!  for  who  knows 
From  what  once  lovely  Lip  it  springs  unseen! 

Ah,  my  Beloved,  fill  the  Cup  that  clears 
To-day  of  past  Regret  and  future  Fears: 
To-morrow! — Why,  To-morrow  I  may  be 

Myself  with  Yesterday's  Seven  thousand  Years. 

For  some  we  loved,  the  loveliest  and  the  best 
That  from  his  Vintage  rolling  Time  hath  pressed, 

Have  drunk  their  Cup  a  Round  or  two  before. 
And  one  by  one  crept  silently  to  rest. 

And  we  that  now  make  merry  in  the  Room 
They  left,  and  Summer  dresses  in  new  bloom. 

Ourselves  must  we  beneath  the  Couch  of  Earth 
Descend — ourselves  to  make  a  Couch^for  whom? 

Ah,  make  the  most  of  what  we  yet  may  spend, 
Before  we  too  into  the  Dust  descend; 

Dust  into  Dust,  and  under  Dust,  to  lie, 
Sans  Wine,  sans  Song,  sans  Singer,  and — sans  End! 


2878     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Alike  for  those  who  for  To-day  prepare",''' '  "^  'irWT 
And  those  that  after  some  To-morrow  stare, 

A  Muezzin  from  the  Tower  of  Darkness  cries, 
"Fools!  your  Reward  is  neither  Here  nor  There!" 

Why,  all  the  Saints  and  Sages  who  discussed 
Of  the  two  Worlds  so  wisely — they  are  thrust 

Like  foolish  Prophets  forth ;  their  Words  to  Scorn 
Are  scattered,  and  their  Mouths  are  stopped  with  Dust. 

Myself  when  young  did  eagerly  frequent 
Doctor  and  Saint,  and  heard  great  argument 

About  it  and  about:  but  evermore 
Came  out  by  the  same  door  where  in  I  went. 

With  them  the  seed  of  Wisdom  did  I  sow,  "i^- 

And  with  mine  own  hand  wrought  to  make  it  grow;  ■  ^ 

And  this  was  all  the  Harvest  that  I  reaped — 
"I  came  like  Water,  and  like  Wind  I  go." 

Into  this  Universe,  and  Why  not  Knowing  f'''- 

Nor  Whence,  like  Water  willy-nilly  flowing; 

And  out  of  it,  as  Wind  along  the  Waste, 
I  know  not  Whither,  willy-nilly  blowing. 

What,  without  asking,  hither  hurried  Whence  ? 
And,  without  asking.  Whither  hurried  hencei '  '■■''>>■ 

Oh,  many  a  Cup  of  this  forbidden  Wine        '"'f^H 
Must  drown  the  memory  of  that  insolence!  ''^^ 

Up  from  Earth's  Center  through  the  Seventh  Gate 
I  rose,  and  on  the  Throne  of  Saturn  sate. 

And  many  a  Knot  unraveled  by  the  Road; 
But  not  the  Master-knot  of  Human  Fate. 

There  was  the  Door  to  which  I  found  no  Key; 
There  was  the  Veil  through  which  I  might  not  see; 

Some  Httle  talk  awhile  of  Me  and  Thee 
There  was — and  then  no  more  of  Thee  and  Me. 


The  Rubaiyat  of  Omar  Khayyam     2879 

Earth  could  not  answer;  nor  the  Seas  that  mourn 
In  flowing  Purple,  of  their  Lord  forlorn; 

Nor  rolling  Heaven,  with  all  his  Signs  revealed 
And  hidden  by  the  sleeve  of  Night  and  Morn. 

Then  of  the  Thee  in  Me  who  works  behind        '  ' 
The  Veil,  I  lifted  up  my  hands  to  find 

A  Lamp  amid  the  Darkness;  and  I  heard, 
As  from  Without — "The  Me  within  Thee  blind!" 

Then  to  the  Lip  of  this  poor  earthen  Urn 
I  leaned,  the  Secret  of  my  Life  to  learn: 

And  Lip  to  Lip  it  murmured — "While  you  live. 
Drink! — for,  once  dead,  you  never  shall  return." 

I  think  the  Vessel,  that  with  fugitive 
Articulation  answered,  once  did  Hve, 

And  drink;  and  ah!  the  passive  Lip  I  kissed, 
How  many  Kisses  might  it  take — and  give! 

For  I  remember  stopping  by  the  way 

To  watch  a  Potter  thumping  his  wet  Clay: 

And  with  its  all-obliterated  Tongue 
It  murmured — "Gently,  Brother,  gently,  pray!" 

And  has  not  such  a  Story  from  of  Old 
Down  Man's  successive  generations  rolled 

Of  such  a  cloud  of  saturated  Earth 
Cast  by  the  Maker  into  Human  mold? 

And  not  a  drop  that  from  our  Cups  we  throw 
For  Earth  to  drink  of,  but  may  steal  below 

To  quench  the  fire  of  Anguish  in  some  Eye 
There  hidden — far  beneath,  and  long  ago. 

As  then  the  Tulip  for  her  morning  sup 
Of  Heavenly  Vintage  from  the  soil  looks  up, 
Do  you  devoutly  do  the  like,  till  Heaven 
To  Earth  invert  you — Hke  an  empty  Cup. 


2  88o     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Perplexed  no  more  with  Human  or  Divine, 
To-morrow's  tangle  to  the  winds  resign, 

And  lose  your  fingers  in  the  tresses  of 
The  Cypress-slender  Minister  of  Wine. 

And  if  the  Wine  you  drink,  the  Lip  you  press, 
End  in  what  All  begins  and  ends  in — Yes; 

Think  then  you  are  To-day  what  Yesterday 
You  were — To-morrow  you  shall  not  be  less. 

So  when  the  Angel  of  the  darker  Drink 
At  last  shall  find  you  by  the  river-brink. 

And,  oftering  his  Cup,  invite  your  Soul 
Forth  to  your  Lips  to  quaff — you  shall  not  shrink. 

Why,  if  the  Soul  can  fling  the  Dust  aside, 
And  naked  on  the  Air  of  Heaven  ride, 

Wer't  not  a  Shame — wer't  not  a  Shame  for  him 
In  this  clay  carcase  crippled  to  abide? 

'Tis  but  a  Tent  where  takes  his  one-day's  rest    •£ 
A  Sultan  to  the  realm  of  Death  addressed;  ■ 

The  Sultan  rises,  and  the  dark  Ferrash 
Strikes,  and  prepares  it  for  another  Guest. 

And  fear  not  lest  Existence  closing  your 
Account,  and  mine,  should  know  the  like  no  more 

The  Eternal  Saki  from  that  Bowl  has  poured 
Millions  of  Bubbles  like  us,  and  will  pour. 

When  You  and  I  behind  the  Veil  are  passed. 
Oh,  but  the  long,  long  while  the  World  shall  last,; 

Which  of  our  Coming  and  Departure  heeds 
As  the  Sea's  self  should  heed  a  pebble-cast. 

A  Moment's  Halt — a  momentary  taste 
Of  Being  from  the  Well  amid  the  Waste — 

And  Lo! — the  phantom  Caravan  has  reached 
The  Nothing  it  set  out  from — Oh,  make  haste! 


The   Rubaiyat  of  Omar  Khayyam     2881 

Would  you  that  spangle  of  Existence  spend 
About  THE  Secret — quick  about  it,  Friend!       j.-! 

A  Hair  perhaps  divides  the  False  and  True — 
And  upon  what,  prithee,  does  life  depend? 

A  Hair  perhaps  divides  the  False  and  True;  -' 

Yes;  and  a  single  Alif  were  the  clue — 

Could  you  but  find  it — to  the  Treasure-house, 
And  peradventure  to  The  Master  too: 

Whose  secret  Presence,  through  Creation's  veins 
Running  Quicksilver-like  eludes  your  pains; 

Taking  all  shapes  from  Mah  to  Mahi;  and 
They  change  and  perish  all — but  He  remains; 

A  moment  guessed — then  back  behind  the  Fold 
Immersed  of  Darkness  round  the  Drama  rolled 

Which,  for  the  Pastime  of  Eternity, 
He  doth  Himself  contrive,  enact,  behold. 

But  if  in  vain,  down  on  the  stubborn  floor 

Of  Earth,  and  up  to  Heaven's  unopening  Door, 

You  gaze  To-day,  while  You  are  You — how  then 
To-morrow,  You  when  shall  be  You  no  more? 

Waste  not  your  Hour,  nor  in  the  vain  pursuit 
Of  This  and  That  endeavor  and  dispute; 

Better  be  jocund  with  the  fruitful  Grape 
Than  sadden  after  none,  or  bitter.  Fruit. 

You  know,  my  Friends,  with  what  a  brave  Carouse 
I  made  a  Second  Marriage  in  my  house; 

Divorced  old  barren  Reason  from  my  Bed, 
And  took  the  Daughter  of  the  Vine  to  Spouse. 

For  "Is"  and  "Is-not"  though  with  Rule  and  Line, 
And  "Up-and-Down"  by  Logic  I  define. 
Of  all  that  one  should  care  to  fathom ,  I 
Was  never  deep  in  anything  but — Wine. 


2882     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

All,  but  my  Computations,  People  say,  ,  // 

Reduced  the  Year  to  better  reckoning? — Nay,  ,j/.^ 

'Twas  only  striking  from  the  Calendar 
Unborn  To-morrow,  and  dead  Yesterday. 

And  lately,  by  the  Tavern  Door  agape. 

Came  shining  through  the  Dusk  an  Angel  Shape 

Bearing  a  Vessel  on  his  Shoulder;  and 
He  bid  me  taste  of  it;  and  'twas — the  Grape! 

The  Grape  that  can  with  Logic  absolute 
The  Two-and- Seventy  jarring  Sects  confute: 

The  sovereign  Alchemist  that  in  a  trice 
Life's  leaden  metal  into  Gold  transmute: 

The  mighty  Mahmud,  Allah-breathing  Lord, 
That  all  the  misbelieving  and  black  Horde 
Of  Fears  and  Sorrows  that  infest  the  Soul 
Scatters  before  him  with  his  whirlwind  Sword. 

Why,  be  this  Juice  the  growth  of  God,  who  dare  •  . 
Blaspheme  the  twisted  tendril  as  a  Snare? 

A  Blessing,  we  should  use  it,  should  we  not? 
And  if  a  Curse — why,  then,  Who  set  it  there? 

I  must  abjure  the  Balm  of  Life,  I  must. 

Scared  by  some  After-reckoning  ta'en  on  trust. 

Or  lured  with  Hope  of  some  Diviner  Drink, 
To  fill  the  Cup — when  crumbled  into  Dust! 

Oh  threats  of  Hell  and  Hopes  of  Paradise! 
One  thing  at  least  is  certain — This  Life  flies: 

One  thing  is  certain  and  the  rest  is  Lies; 
The  Flower  that  once  has  blown  for  ever  dies.      ,/i 

Strange,  is  it  not?  that  of  the  myriads  who 
Before  us  passed  the  door  of  Darkness  through,  , ,  /. 

Not  one  returns  to  tell  us  of  the  Road,  , 

Which  to  discover  we  must  travel  too.  ,  // 


The   Rubaiyat  of  Omar  Khayyam     2883 

The  Revelations  of  Devout  and  Learned 
Who  rose  before  us,  and  as  Prophets  burned, 

Are  all  but  Stories,  which,  awoke  from  Sleep, 
They  told  their  comrades  and  to  Sleep  returned. 

I  sent  my  Soul  through  the  Invisible 
Some  letter  of  that  After-life  to  spell : 

And  by  and  by  my  Soul  returned  to  me, 
And  answered,  "T  Myself  am  Heaven  and  Hell." 

Heaven  but  the  Vision  of  fulfilled  Desire, 

And  Hell  the  Shadow  from  a  Soul  on  fire  ■ 

Cast  on  the  Darkness  into  which  Ourselves 
So  late  emerged  from,  shall  so  soon  expire. 

We  are  no  other  than  a  moving  row 

Of  Magic  Shadow-shapes  that  come  and  go 

Round  with  the  Sun-illumined  Lantern  held 
In  Midnight  by  the  ]\Iaster  of  the  Show; 

But  helpless  Pieces  of  the  Game  He  plays 
Upon  this  Checker-board  of  Nights  and  Days; 

Hither  and  thither  moves,  and  checks,  and  slays, 
And  one  by  one  back  in  the  Closet  lays. 

The  Ball  no  question  makes  of  Ayes  and  Noes, 

But  Here  or  There,  as  strikes  the  Player,  goes; 

And  He  that  tossed  you  down  into  the  Field, 

He  knows  about  it  all — He  knows— HE  knows! 

The  Moving  Finger  writes;  and,  having  writ,  / 

IMoves  on:  nor  all  )'Our  Piety  nor  Wit 

Shall  lure  it  back  to  cancel  half  a  Line 
Nor  all  your  Tears  wash  out  a  Word  of  it 

And  that  inverted  Bowl  they  call  the  Sky, 
Whereunder  crawhng  cooped  we  live  and  die, 

Lift  not  your  hands  to  //  for  help — for  It 
As  impotently  moves  as  you  or  I. 


2884     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

With  Earth's  first  Clay  They  did  the  Last  Man  knead, 
And  there  of  the  Last  Harvest  sowed  the  Seed;       ri  // 

And  the  first  Morning  of  Creation  wrote 
What  the  Last  Dawn  of  Reckoning  shall  read. 

Yesterday  This  Day's  Madness  did  prepare;        -.  T 
To-morrow's  Silence,  Triumph,  or  Despair: 

Drink!  for  you  know  not  whence  you  came,  nor  why: 
Drink!  for  you  know  not  why  you  go,  nor  where. 

I  tell  you  this — When,  started  from  the  Goal, 
Over  the  flaming  shoulders  of  the  Foal 

Of  Heaven  Parwin  and  Mushtari  they  flung, 
In  my  predestined  Plot  of  Dust  and  Soul 

The  Vine  had  struck  a  fiber:  which  about 
If  clings  my  Being — let  the  Dervish  flout; 
Of  my  Base  metal  may  be  filed  a  Key, 
That  shall  unlock  the  Door  he  howls  without. 

And  this  I  know:  whether  the  one  True  Light 
Kindle  to  Love,  or  Wrath  consume  me  quite. 

One  flash  of  It  within  the  Tavern  caught 
Better  than  in  the  Temple  lost  outright. 

What!  out  of  senseless  Nothing  to  provoke 
A  conscious  Something  to  resent  the  yoke 

Of  unpermitted  Pleasure,  under  pain 
Of  Everlasting  Penalties,  if  broke!  .;, 

What!  from  his  helpless  Creature  be  repaid /oM  sxlT 
Pure  Gold  for  what  he  lent  him  dross-allayed — 

Sue  for  a  Debt  we  never  did  contract, 
And  cannot  answer— Oh  the  sorry  trade!         iijj  10/1 

Oh  Thou,  who  didst  with  pitfall  and  with  gin         lA 
Beset  the  Road  I  was  to  wander  in, 

Thou  wilt  not  with  Predestined  Evil  round 
Enmesh,  and  then  impute  my  Fall  to  Sin!  ,J\ 


The  Rubaiyat  of  Omar  Khayyam     2885 

Oh  Thou,  who  Man  of  Baser  Earth  didst  make, 
And  even  with  Paradise  devise  the  Snake: 

For  all  the  Sin  wherewith  the  Face  of  Man 
Js  blackened — Man's  forgiveness  give — and  take! 


As  under  cover  of  departing  Day 
Slunk  hunger-stricken  Ramazan  away, 

Once  more  within  the  Potter's  house  alone 
I  stood,  surrounded  by  the  Shapes  of  Clay. 

Shapes  of  aU  Sorts  and  Sizes,  great  and  small. 
That  stood  along  the  floor  and  by  the  wall; 

And  some  loquacious  vessels  were;  and  some 
Listened  perhaps,  but  never  talked  at  all. 

Said  one  among  them — "Surely  not  in  vain 
My  substance  of  the  common  Earth  was  ta'en 

And  to  this  Figure  molded,  to  be  broke. 
Or  trampled  back  to  shapeless  Earth  again." 

Then  said  a  Second — "Ne'er  a  peevish  Boy 
Would  break  the  Bowl  from  which  he  drank  in  Joy; 

And  He  that  with  his  hand  the  Vessel  made 
Will  surely  not  in  after  Wrath  destroy." 

After  a  momentary  silence  spake 
Some  Vessel  of  a  more  ungainly  make: 

"They  sneer  at  me  for  leaning  all  awry: 
What!  did  the  Hand  then  of  the  Potter  shake?" 

Whereat  some  one  of  the  loquacious  Lot — 
I  think  a  Sufi  pipkin — waxing  hot — 

"All  this  of  Pot  and  Potter— Tell  me  then, 
Who  is  the  Potter,  pray,  and  who  the  Pot?" 

"Why,"  said  another,  "Some  there  are  who  tell 
Of  one  who  threatens  he  will  toss  to  Hell 

The  luckless  Pots  he  marred  in  making — Pish! 
He's  a  Good  Fellow,  and  'twill  all  be  well." 


2886     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"Well,"  murmured  one,  "let  whoso  make  or  buy, 
My  Clay  with  long  Oblivion  is  gone  dry; 
But  fill  me  with  the  old  familiar  Juice, 
Methinks  I  might  recover  by  and  by." 

So  while  the  Vessels  one  by  one  w^ere  speaking. 
The  httle  Moon  looked  in  that  all  were  seeking: 

And  then  they  jogged  each  other,  "Brother!  Brother! 
Now  for  the  Porter's  shoulder-knot  a-creaking!" 


Ah,  with  the  Grape  my  fading  Life  provide. 
And  wash  the  Body  whence  the  Life  has  died, 

And  lay  me,  shrouded  in  the  living  Leaf, 
By  some  not  unfrequented  Garden-side. 

That  even  my  buried  Ashes  such  a  snare 
Of  Vintage  shall  fling  up  into  the  Air 

As  not  a  True-believer  passing  by 
But  shall  be  overtaken  unaware. 

Indeed  the  Idols  I  have  loved  so  long 

Have  done  my  credit  in  the  World  much  wrong: 

Have  drowned  my  Glory  in  a  shallow  Cup, 
And  sold  my  reputation  for  a  Song. 

Indeed,  indeed,  Repentance  oft  before 
I  swore — but  was  I  sober  when  I  swore? 

And  then,  and  then  came  Spring,  and  Rose-in-hand 
My  thread-bare  Penitence  apieces  tore. 

And  much  as  W'inc  has  played  the  Infidel, 
Arid  robbed  me  of  my  Robe  of  Honor — Well, 

I  often  wonder  what  the  Vintners  buy 
One  half  so  precious  as  the  stuff  they  sell.  /• 

Yet  Ah,  that  Spring  should  vanish  with  the  Rose! 
That  Youth's  sweet-scented  manuscript  should  close! 

The  Nightingale  that  in  the  branches  sang, 
Ah  whence,  and  whither  flown  again,  who  knows!  ; ; 


The    Kasidah  2887 

Would  but  the  Desert  of  the  Fountain  yield 
One  gHmpse — if  dimly,  yet  indeed,  revealed, 

To  which  the  fainting  Traveler  might  spring, 
As  springs  the  trampled  herbage  of  the  field! 

Would  but  some  winged  Angel  ere  too  late 
Arrest  the  yet  unfolded  Roll  of  Fate, 

And  make  the  stern  Recorder  otherwise 
Enregister,  or  quite  obliterate! 

All  Love!  could  you  and  I  with  Him  conspire 
To  grasp  this  sorry  Scheme  of  Things  entire, 
Would  not  we  shatter  it  to  bits — and  then 
Remold  it  nearer  to  the  Heart's  desire! 


Yon  rising  Moon  that  looks  for  us  again — 
How  oft  hereafter  wiU  she  wax  and  wane ; 

How  oft  hereafter  rising  look  for  us 
Through  this  same  Garden — and  for  one  in  vain! 

And  when  like  her,  oh  Saki,  you  shall  pass 
Among  the  Guests  Star-scattered  on  the  Grass, 

And  in  your  joyous  errand  reach  the  spot 
Where  I  made  One — turn  down  an  empty  Glass! 

Edii'ard  Fitzgerald  [1809-1883] 


THE  KASIDAH 

THE   LAY   OF   THE   HIGHER    LAW 
II 

In  these  drear  wastes  of  sea-born  land,  these  wilds  where 

none  may  dwell  but  He, 
What  visionary  Pasts  revive,  what  process  of  the  Years 

we  see: 

Gazing  beyond  the  thin  blue  line  that  rims  the  far  horizon- 
ring. 

Our  saddened  sight  why  haunt  these  ghosts,  whence  do 
chese  spectral  shadows  spring^ 


28  88      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

What  endless  questions  vex  the  thought,  of  Whence  and 

Whither,  When  and  How? 
What  fond  and  foohsh  strife  to  read  the  Scripture  writ  on 

human  brow;  • 

As  stand  we  perched  on  point  of  Time,  betwixt  the  two 

Eternities, 
Whose  awful  secrets  gathering  round  with  black  profound 

oppress  our  eyes. 

"This  gloomy  night,  these  grisly  waves,  these  winds  and 

whirlpools  loud  and  dread: 
What  reck  they  of  our  wretched  plight  who  Safety's  shore 

so  lightly  tread?" 

Thus  quoth  the  Bard  of  Love  and  Wine,  whose  dream  of 

Heaven  ne'er  could  rise 
Beyond  the  brimming  Kauser-cup  and  Houris  with   the 

white-black  eyes. 

Ah  me!  my  race  of  threescore  years  is  short,  but  long  enough 

to  pall 
My  sense  with  joyless  joys  as  these,  with  Love  and  Houris, 

Wine  and  all. 

Another  boasts  he  would  divorce  old  barren  Reason  from 

his  bed, 
And  wed  the  Vine-maid  in  her  stead; — fools  who  believe  a 

word  he  said! 

And  '"Dust  thou  art  to  dust  returning,'  ne'er  was  spoke 

of  human  soul," 
The  Soofi  cries:  'tis  well  for  him  that  hath  such  gift  to  ask 

its  goal. 

"And  this  is  all,  for  this  we're  born  to  weep  a  little  and  to 

die!' 
So  sings  the  shallow  bard  whose  life  still  labors  at  the  letter 

"I". 

"Ear  never  heard.  Eye  never  saw  the  bliss  of  those  who 
enter  in 


The   Kasidah  2889 

My  heavenly  kingdom,"  Isa  said,  who  wailed  our  sorrows 
and  our  sin: 

Too  much  of  words  or  yet  too  few!    What  to  thy  Godhead 

easier  than 
One  little  glimpse  of  Paradise  to  ope  the  eyes  and  ears  of 

man? 

"I  am  the  Truth!  I  am  the  Truth!"  we  hear  the  God- 
drunk  gnostic  cry; 

"The  microcosm  abides  in  Me;  Eternal  Allah's  naught  but 
I!" 

Mansur  was  wise,  but  wiser  they  who  smote  him  with  the 

hurled  stones; 
And,  though  his  blood  a  witness  bore,  no  wisdom-might 

could  mend  his  bones. 

"Eat,  drink,  and  sport;  the  rest  of  life's  not  worth  a  fillip," 

quoth  the  King; 
Methinks  the  saying  saith  too  much:  the  swine  would  say 

the  self-same  thing! 

Two-footed  beasts  that  browse  through  life,  by  Death  to 

serve  as  soil  designed, 
Bow  prone  to  Earth  whereof  they  be,  and  there  the  proper 

pleasures  find : 

But  you  of  finer,  nobler  stufT,  ye,  whom  to  Higher  leads  the 

High, 
What  binds  your  hearts  in  common  bond  with  creatures 

of  the  stall  and  sty? 

"In  certain  hope  of  Life-to-come  I  journey  through  this 

shifting  scene," 
The  Zahid  snarls  and  saunters  down  his  Vale  of  Tears  with 

confident  mien. 

Wiser  than  Amran's  Son  art  thou,  who  ken'st  so  well  the 
world-to-be. 

The  Future  when  the  Past  is  not,  the  Present  merest  dream- 
ery. 


2890     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

What  know'st  thou,  man,  of  Life?  and  yet,  for  ever  twixt 

the  womb,  the  grave. 
Thou  pratest  of  the  Coming  Life,  of  Heaven  and.  Hell  thou 

fain  must  rave. 

The  world  is  old  and  thou  art  young:  the  world  is  large 

and  thou  art  small: 
Cease,  atom  of  a  moment's  span,  to  hold  thyself  an  All-in- 

AU! 

IX 

How  then  shall  man  so  order  life  that  when  his  tale  of  years 

is  told, 
Like  sated  guest  he  wend  his  way;  how  shall  his  even  tenor 

hold— 

Despite  the  Writ  that  stores  the  skull;  despite  the  Table 

and  the  Pen; 
Maugre  the  Fate  that  plays  us  down,  her  board  the  world, 

her  pieces  men? 

How  when  the  light  and  glow  of  life  wax  dim  in  thickly 

gathering  gloom, 
Shall  mortal  scoff  at  sting  of  Death,  shall  scorn  the  victory 

of  the  Tomb?  -^i 

One  way,  two  paths,  one  end  the  grave.    This  runs  athwart 

the  flowery  plain. 
That  breasts  the  bush,  the  steep,  the  crag,  in  sun  and  wind 

and  snow  and  rain : 

Who  treads  the  first  must  look  adown,  must  deem  his  life 

an  all  in  all; 
Must  see  no  heights  where  man  may  rise,  must  sight  no 

depths  where  man  may  fall. 

Allah  in  Adam's  form  must  view:  adore  the  Maker  in  the 

made, 
Content  to  bask  in  Maya's  smile,  in  joys  of  pain,  in  lights 

of  shade. 


The    Kasidah  2891 

He  breaks  the  Law,  he  bums  the  Book,  he  sends  the  Moolah 

back  to  school; 
Laughs  at  the  beards  of  Saintly  men,  and  dubs  the  Prophet 

dolt  and  fool ; 

Embraces  Cypress'  taper- waist;  cools  feet  on  wavy  breast 

of  rill; 
Smiles  in  the  Nargis'  love-lorn  eyes,  and  'joys  the  dance 

of  Daffodil; 

Melts  in  the  saffron  light  of  Dawn  to  hear  the  moaning  of 

the  Dove; 
Delights  in  Sundown's  purpling  hues  when  Bulbul  woos  the 

Rose's  love; 

Finds  mirth  and  joy  in  Jamshid-bowl ;  toys  with  the  Daugh- 
ter of  the  vine; 

And  bids  the  beauteous  cup-boy  say,  "Master,  I  bring  thee 
ruby  wine!" 

Sips  from  the  maiden's  lips  the  dew;  brushes  the  bloom 

from  virgin  brow: — 
Such  is  his  fleshly  bliss  that  strives  the  Maker  through  the 

Made  to  know. 

I've  tried  them  all;  I  find  them  all  so  same  and  tame,  so 

drear,  so  dry. 
My  gorge  ariscth  at  the  thought;  I  commune  with  myself 

and  cry: — 

Better  the  myriad  toils  and  pains  that  make  the  man  to 

manhood  true; 
This  be  the  rule  that  guideth  life;  these  be  the  laws  for  me 

and  you: 

With  Ignorance  wage  eternal  war,  to  know  thy  self  for  ever 

strain; 
Thine  ignorance  of  thine  ignorance  is  thy  fiercest  foe,  thy 

deadliest  bane, 


2892      Poems   of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

That  blunts  thy  sense,  and  dulls  thy  taste:  that  deafs  thine 

ears,  and  blinds  thine  eyes; 
Creates  the  thing  that  never  was,  the  Thing  that  eyer.is 

defies.  L)nj5  J  lob 

The  finite  Atom  infinite  that  forms  thy  circle's  centre-dot, 
So  fuU-sufiicient  for  itself,  for  other  selves  existing  not, 

Finds  the  world  mighty  as  'tis  small;  yet  must  be  fought 

the  unequal  fray; 
A  myriad  giants  here;  and  there  a  pinch  of  dust,  a  clod  of 

clay. 

Yes!  maugre  all  thy  dreams  of  peace,  still  must  the  fight 

unfair  be  fought; 
Where  thou  mayest  learn  the  noblest  lore,  to  know  that  all 

we  know  is  naught. 

True  to  thy  Nature,  to  Thy  self.  Fame  and  Disfame  nor 

hope  nor  fear: 
Enough  to  thee  the  small  still  voice  aye  thundering  in  thine 

inner  ear. 

From  self-approval  seek  applause:  what  ken  not  men  thou 

kennest,  thou! 
Spurn  every  idol  others  raise:  before  thine  own  Ideal  bow: 

Be  thine  own  Deus:  make  self  free,  liberal  as  the  circling  air: 
Thy  Thought  to  thee  an  Empire  be;  break  every  prisoning 
lock  and  bar: 

Do  thou  the  Ought  to  self  aye  owed:  here  all  the  duties  meet 

and  blend, 
In  widest  sense,  withouten  care  of  what  began,  for  what 

shall  end. 

Thus,  as  thou  view  the  Phantom-forms  which  in  the  misty 

Past  were  thine. 
To  be  again  the  thing  thou  wast  with  honest  pride  thou 

mavest  decline: 


The   Kasidah  2893 

And,  glancing  down  the  range  of  years,  fear  not  thy  future 

self  to  see; 
Resigned  to  life,  to  death  resigned,  as  though  the  choice 

were  naught  to  thee. 

On  Thought  itself  feed  not  thy  Thought;  nor  turn  from  Sun 

and  Light  to  gaze 
At  darkling  cloisters  paved  with  tombs,  where  rot  the  bones 

of  bygone  days: 

"Eat  not  thy  heart,"  the  Sages  said:  "nor  mourn  the  Past, 

the  buried  Past:" 
Do  what  thou  dost,  be  strong,  be  brave;  and,  like  the  Star, 

nor  rest  nor  haste. 

Pluck  the  old  woman  from  thy  breast:  be  stout  in  woe,  be 

stark  in  weal; 
Do  good  for  Good  is  good  to  do:  spurn  bribe  of  Heaven  and 

threat  of  Hell. 

To  seek  the  True,  to  glad  the  heart,  such  is  of  life  the  Higher 

Law, 
Whose  difference  is  the  Man's  degree,  the  Man  of  gold,  the 

Man  of  straw. 

See  not  that  something  in  Mankind  that  rouses  hate  or  scorn 

or  strife; 
Better  the  worm  of  Izrail  than  Death  that  walks  in  form  of 

life 

Survey  thy  kind  as  One  whose  wants  in  the  great  Human 

Whole  unite; 
The  Homo  rising  high  from  earth  to  seek  the  Heavens  of 

Life-in-Light; 

And  hold  Humanity  one  man,  whose  universal  agony 
Still  strains  and  strives  to  gain  the  goal,   where  agonies 
shall  cease  to  be. 

Believe  in  all  things;  none  believe;  judge  not  nor  warp  by 
"Facts"  the  thought: 


2894     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

See  clear,  hear  clear,  though  life  may  seem  Maya  and  Mi- 
rage, Dream  and  Naught. 

;...■! 

Abjure  the  Why  and  seek  the  How:  the  God  and  gods  en- 
throned on  high, 

Are  silent  all,  are  silent  still;  nor  hear  thy  voice,  nor  deign 
reply. 

The  Now,  that  indivisible  point  which  studs  the  length  of 

infinite  line 
Whose  ends  are  nowhere,  is  thine  all,  the  puny  all  thou 

callest  thine. 

Perchance  the  law  some  Giver  hath:  Let  be!  let  be!  what 

canst  thou  know? 
A  myriad  races  came  and  went;  this  Sphinx  hath  seen  them 

come  and  go. 

oQ 
Haply  the  Law  that  rules  the  world  allows  to  man  the 

widest  range; 
And  haply  Fate's  a  Theist-word,  subject  to  human  chance 

and  change. 

This  "I"  may  find  a  future  Life,  a  nobler  copy  of  our  own, 
Where  every  riddle  shall  be  ree'd,  where  every  knowledge 
shall  be  known; 

Where  'twill  be  man's  to  see  the  whole  of  what  on  Earth 

he  sees  in  part; 
Where  change  shall  ne'er  surcharge  the  thought;  nor  hope 
fij;rt deferred  shall  hurt  the  heart. 

But! — faded  flower  and  fallen  leaf  no  more  shall  deck  the 

parent  tree; 
And  man  once  dropped  by  Tree  of  Life  what  hope  of  other 

life  has  he?  oioil  baJ 

The  shattered  bowl  shall  know  repair;  the  riven  lute  shall 

sound  once  more; 
But  who  shall  mend  the  clay  of  man,  the  stolen  breath  to 

man  restore? 


Gaudeamus   Igitur  2895 

The  shivered  clock  agam  shall  strike;  the  broken  reed  shall 

pipe  again ; 
But  we,  we  die,  and  Death  is  one,  the  doom  of  brutes,  the 

doom  of  men. 

Then,  if  Nirwana  round  our  life  with  nothingness,  'tis  haply- 
best; 

Thy  toils  and  troubles,  want  and  woe,  at  length  have  won 
their  guerdon — Rest. 

Cease,  Abdu,  cease!    Thy  song  is  sung,  nor  think  the  gain 

the  singer's  prize; 
Till  men  hold  Ignorance  deadly  sin,  till  man  deserves  his 

title  "Wise:" 

In  Days  to  come,  Days  slow  to  dawn,  when  Wisdom  deigns 
to  dwell  with  men, 

These  echoes  of  a  voice  long  stilled  haply  shall  wake  re- 
sponsive strain: 

Wend  now  thy  way  with  brow  serene,  fear  not  thy  humble 

tale  to  tell: — 
The  whispers  of  the  Desert-wind ;  the  Tinkling  of  the  camel's- 

bell. 

Richard  Francis  Burton  [1S21-1890] 


GAUDEAMUS  IGITUR* 

Let  us  live,  then,  and  be  glad 
While  young  hfe's  before  us! 

After  youthful  pastime  had. 

After  old  age,  hard  and  sad, 
Earth  will  slumber  o'er  us. 

Where  are  they  who  in  this  world, 

Ere  we  kept,  were  keeping? 
Go  ye  to  the  gods  above; 
Go  to  hell;  inquire  thereof: 

They  are  not:  they're  sleeping. 

For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3829. 


2896     Poems   of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Brief  is  life,  and  brevity 

Briefly  shall  be  ended: 
Death  comes  like  a  whidwind  strong, 
Bears  us  with  his  blast  along; 

None  shall  be  defended. 

Live  this  university. 

Men  that  learning  nourish! 
Live  each  member  of  the  same, 
Long  live  all  that  bear  its  name; 

Let  them  ever  flourish! 

Live  the  commonwealth  also, 

And  the  men  that  guide  it! 
Live  our  town  in  strength  and  health, 
Founders,  patrons,  by  whose  wealth 

We  are  here  provided! 

Live  all  gods!     A  health  to  you, 
Melting  maids  and  beauteous! 

Like  the  wives  and  women  too, 

Gentle,  loving,  tender,  true, 
Good,  industrious,  duteous! 

Perish  cares  that  pule  and  pine! 

Perish  envious  blamers! 
Die  the  Devil,  thine  and  mine! 
Die  the  starch-neck  Philistine! 
Scoffers  and  defamers! 

Translated  from  the  Latin  by 

John  Addington  Symonds  [1840-1893] 


LAURIGER  HORATIUS* 

Laurel-crowned  Horatius, 
True,  how  true  thy  saying! 

Swift  as  wind  flies  over  us 
Time,  devouring,  slaying. 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3831. 


The   Conclusion   of  the  Whole   Matter   2897.. 

Where  are,  oh!  lliose  goblets  full 

Of  wine,  honey-laden, 
Strifes  and  loves  and  bountiful 

Lips  of  ruddy  maiden? 

Grows  the  young  grape  tenderly,      ,,. 

And  the  maid  is  growing; 
But  the  thirsty  poet,  see,  f 

Years  on  him  are  snowing! 
What's  the  use  on  hoary  curls 

Of  the  bays  undying, 
If  we  may  not  kiss  the  girls. 

Drink  while  time's  a-flying? 
Translaled  from  the  Latin  by 

John  Addinglon  Symonds  [1840- 1893] 


THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THE  WHOLE  MATTER 

From  "  The  House  of  a  Hundred  Lights  " 

The  Great  Sword  Bearer  only  knows  just  when  He'll  wound 

my  heart, — not  I: 
But  since  He  is  the  one  who  gives  the  balm,  what  does  it 

signify? 

If  my  Control  should  lose  its  hold  on  Fortune's  collar  through 
some  hurt. 

What  then? — Why  then  I'd  simply  chng  to  old  gray  Resigna- 
tion's skirt. 

Of  all  the  languages  of  earth  in  which  the  human  kind  confer 
The  Master  Speaker  is  the  Tear:  it  is  the  Great  Interpreter. 

Man's  life  is  like  a  tide  that  weaves  the  sea  within  its  daily 

web. 
It  rises,  surges,  swells,  and  grows, — a  pause — then  comes  the 

evening  ebb. 

In  this  rough  field  of  earthly  life  I  have  reaped  cause  for 
tears  enough, 

Yet,  after  all,  I  think  I've  gleaned  my  modicum  of  Laughing- 
Stuff. 

Frederic  Ridgely  Torrcnce  [1875- 


2898      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


IN  MEMORIAM 

Strong  Son  of  God,  immortal  Love, 
Whom  we,  that  have  not  seen  thy  face, 
By  faith,  and  faith  alone,  embrace. 

Believing  where  we  cannot  prove; 

Thine  are  these  orbs  of  light  and  shade; 

Thou  madest  Life  in  man  and  brute; 

Thou  madest  Death;  and  lo,  thy  foot 
Is  on  the  skull  which  thou  hast  made. 

Thou  wilt  not  leave  us  in  the  dust: 
Thou  madest  man,  he  knows  not  why, 
He  thinks  he  was  not  made  to  die; 

And  thou  hast  made  him :  thou  art  just. 

^g'pjThou  seemest  human  and  divine,  ^      'ttt-t 

The  highest,  holiest  manhood,  thou. 
Our  wills  are  ours,  we  know  not  how; 
Our  wills  are  ours,  to  make  them  thine.    -^  '■ '  •• 

I         :■  :Our  little  systems  have  their  day; 

They  have  their  day  and  cease  to  be; 

They  are  but  broken  lights  of  thee, 
A^jsoidl  "And  thou,  O  Lord,  art  more  than  they. 

We  have  but  faith:  we  cannot  know. 
For  knowledge  is  of  things  we  see; 
And  yet  we  trust  it  comes  from  thee, 
r'UKo  hi  A  beam  in  darkness:  let  it  grow. 

tet  knowledge  grow  from  more  to  more, 
iyizb  eii  1'  But  more  of  reverence  in  us  dwell; 

That  mind  and  soul,  according  well, 
Off!  .  jiTioMay  make  one  music  as  before, 

But  vaster.    We  are  fools  and  slight; 
We  mock  thee  when  we  do  not  fear: 
But  help  thy  foolish  ones  to  bear; 
-miiAmiL  -^^^P  ^^y  ^^^^  worlds  to  bear  thy  light. 

Forgive  what  seemed  my  sin  in  me. 
What  seemed  my  worth  since  I  began; 


In   Memoriam  2899 

For  merit  lives  from  man  to  man, 
And  not  from  man,  O  Lord,  to  thee. 

Forgive  my  grief  for  one  removed, 
Thy  creature,  whom  I  found  so  fair. 
I  trust  he  lives  in  thee,  and  there 

I  find  him  worthier  to  be  loved. 

Forgive  these  wild  and  wandering  cries. 

Confusions  of  a  wasted  youth; 

Forgive  them  where  they  fail  in  truth, 
And  in  thy  wisdom  make  me  wise. 

I 

I  held  it  truth,  with  him  who  sings 
To  one  clear  harp  in  divers  tones. 
That  men  may  rise  on-  stepping-stones 

Of  their  dead  selves  to  higher  things. 

But  who  shall  so  forecast  the  years 

And  find  in  loss  a  gain  to  match? 

Or  reach  a  hand  through  time  to  catch 
The  far-ofi  interest  of  tears? 

Let  Love  clasp  Grief  lest  both  be  drowned, 

Let  darkness  keep  her  raven  gloss. 

Ah,  sweeter  to  be  drunk  with  loss, 
To  dance  with  Death,  to  beat  the  ground, 

Than  that  the  victor  Hours  should  scorn 
The  long  result  of  love,  and  boast, 
"Behold  the  man  that  loved  and  lost,' 

But  all  he  was  is  overworn.' 

xxvii 
I  envy  not  in  any  moods 

The  captive  void  of  noble  rage, 

The  linnet  born  within  the  cage. 
That  never  knew  the  summer  woods; 

I  envy  not  the  beast  that  takes 

His  license  in  the  field  of  time, 

Unfettered  by  the  sense  of  crime, 
To  whom  a  conscience  never  wakes; 


2900      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Nor,  what  may  count  itself  as  blest, 
The  heart  that  never  plighted  troth 
But  stagnates  in  the  weeds  of  sloth; 

Nor  any  want-begotten  rest. 

I  hold  it  true,  whate'er  befall; 

I  feel  it,  when  I  sorrow  most; 

'Tis  better  to  have  loved  and  lost 
Than  never  to  have  loved  at  all. 

LIV 

O,  yet  we  trust  that  somehow  good 
Will  be  the  final  goal  of  ill, 
To  pangs  of  nature,  sins  of  will, 

Defects  of  doubt,  and  taints  of  blood; 


V 


That  nothing  walks  with  aimless  feet; 
That  not  one  life  shall  be  destroyed, 
Or  cast  as  rubbish  to  the  void. 

When  God  hath  made  the  pile  complete; 

That  not  a  worm  is  cloven  in  vain; 
That  not  a  moth  with  vain  desire 
Is  shrivelled  in  a  fruitless  fire. 

Or  but  subserves  another's  gain. 

Behold,  we  know  not  anything; 
I  can  but  trust  that  good  shall  fall 
At  last — far  ofT — at  last,  to  all. 

And  every  winter  change  to  spring. 

So  runs  my  dream;  but  what  am  I? 

An  infant  crying  in  the  night ; 

An  infant  crying  for  the  light, 
And  with  no  language  but  a  cry. 

LV 

The  wish,  that  of  the  living  whole 
No  life  may  fail  beyond  the  grave, 
Derives  it  not  from  what  we  have 

The  hkest  God  within  the  soul? 


noitj  In    Memoriam  2901 

Are  God  and  Nature  thBii  at' Strife, 
That  Nature  lends  such  evil  dreams? 
So  careful  of  the  type  she  seems, 

So  careless  of  the  single  life, 

That  I,  considering  everywhere 

Her  secret  meaning  in  her  deeds. 

And  finding  that  of  fifty  seeds 
She  often  brings  but  one  to  bear, 

I  falter  where  I  firmly  trod,  t 

And  falling  with  my  weight  of  cares 
Upon  the  great  world's  allar-stairs 

That  slope  through  darkness  up  to  God, 

I  stretch  lame  hands  of  faith,  and  grope. 
And  gather  dust  and  chafT,  and  call 
To  what  I  feel  is  Lord  of  all, 

And  faintly  trust  the  larger  hope. 

LVI 

"So  careful  of  the  type?"  but  no. 
From  scarped  cliff  and  quarried  stone 
She  cries,  "A  thousand  types  are  gone; 

I  care  for  nothing,  all  shall  go. 

"Thou  makest  thine  appeal  to  me: 

I  bring  to  life,  I  bring  to  death; 

The  spirit  does  but  mean  the  breath: 
I  know  no  more."    And  he,  shall  he, 

Man,  her  last  work,  who  seemed  so  fair. 
Such  splendid  purpose  in  his  eyes. 
Who  rolled  the  psalm  to  wintry  skies, 

Who  built  him  fanes  of  fruitless  prayer. 

Who  trusted  God  was  love  indeed 
And  love  Creation's  final  law — 
Though  Nature,  red  in  tooth  and  claw 

With  ravine,  shrieked  against  his  creed — 

Who  loved,  who  suffered  countless  ills, 
Who  battled  for  the  True,  the  Just,    ' 


2902      Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Be  blown  about  the  desert  dust, 
Or  sealed  within  the  iron  hills? 

No  more?    A  monster  then,  a  dream, 
A  discord.    Dragons  of  the  prime, 
That  tare  each  other  in  their  slime, 

Were  mellow  music  matched  with  him. 

O  life  as  futile,  then,  as  frail! 

0  for  thy  voice  to  soothe  and  bless! 
What  hope  of  answer,  or  redress? 

Behind  the  veil,  behind  the  veil. 

LXXIII 

So  many  worlds,  so  much  to  do. 
So  little  done,  such  things  to  be, 
How  know  I  what  had  need  of  thee. 

For  thou  wert  strong  as  thou  wert  true? 

The  fame  is  quenched  that  I  foresaw. 
The  head  hath  missed  an  earthly  wreath: 

1  curse  not  Nature,  no,  nor  Death; 
For  nothing  is  that  errs  from  law. 

We  pass;  the  path  that  each  man  trod 
Is  dim,  or  wUl  be  dim,  with  weeds. 
What  fame  is  left  for  human  deeds 

In  endless  age?    It  rests  with  God. 

O  hollow  wraith  of  dying  fame. 
Fade  wholly,  while  the  soul  exults, 
And  self-infolds  the  large  results 

Of  force  that  would  have  forged  a  name. 

cvi 
Ring  out,  wild  bells,  to  the  wild  sky, 

The  flying  cloud,  the  frosty  light: 

The  year  is  dying  in  the  night; 
Ring  out,  wUd  bells,  and  let  him  die. 

Ring  out  the  old,  ring  in  the  new, 
Ring,  happy  bells,  across  the  snow: 
The  year  is  going,  let  him  go; 

Ring  out  the  false,  ring  in  the  true. 


In    Memoriam  2903 

Ring  out  the  grief  that  saps  the  mind, 
For  those  that  here  we  see  no  more; 
Ring  out  the  feud  of  rich  and  poor, 

Ring  in  redress  to  all  mankind. 

Ring  out  a  slowly  dying  cause, 

And  ancient  forms  of  party  strife; 

Ring  in  the  nobler  modes  of  life. 
With  sweeter  manners,  purer  laws. 

Ring  out  the  want,  the  care,  the  sin, 

The  faithless  coldness  of  the  times; 

Ring  out,  ring  out  my  mournful  rhymes. 
But  ring  the  fuller  minstrel  in. 

Ring  out  false  pride  in  place  and  blood, 

The  civic  slander  and  the  spite; 

Ring  in  the  love  of  truth  and  right. 
Ring  in  the  common  love  of  good. 

ij  iii 
Ring  out  old  shapes  of  foul  disease; 

Ring  out  the  narrowing  lust  of  gold; 

Ring  out  the  thousand  wars  of  old. 

Ring  in  the  thousand  years  of  peace. 

Ring  in  the  valiant  man  and  free, 
The  larger  heart,  the  kindlier  hand; 
Ring  out  the  darkness  of  the  land, 

Ring  in  the  Christ  that  is  to  be. 

cxvn 

O  days  and  hours,  your  work  is  this, 

To  hold  me  from  my  proper  place, 

A  little  while  from  his  embrace, 
For  fuller  gain  of  after  bliss; 

That  out  of  distance  might  ensue 

Desire  of  nearness  doubly  sweet, 

And  unto  meeting,  when  we  meet. 
Delight  a  himdredfold  accrue, 


■2904      Poems   of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

For  every  grain  of  sand  that  runs, 
And  every  span  of  shade  that  steals, 
And  every  kiss  of  toothed  wheels, 

And  all  the  courses  of  the  suns. 

CXXVI 

Love  is  and  was  my  lord  and  king, 
And  in  his  presence  I  attend 
To  hear  the  tidings  of  my  friend, 

Which  every  hour  his  couriers  bring.  ^:q 

Love  is  and  was  my  king  and  lord. 
And  will  be,  though  as  yet  I  keep 
Within  the  court  on  earth,  and  sleep 

Encompassed  by  his  faithful  guard, 

And  hear  at  times  a  sentinel 

Who  moves  about  from  place  to  place, 
And  whispers  to  the  worlds  of  space, 

In  the  deep  night,  that  all  is  well. 

cxxvii 

And  all  is  well,  though  faith  and  form 
Be  sundered  in  the  night  of  fear; 
Well  roars  the  storm  to  those  that  hear 

A  deeper  voice  across  the  storm, 

Proclaiming  social  truth  shall  spread; 

And  justice,  even  though  thrice  again 

The  red  fool-fury  of  the  Seine 
Should  pile  her  barricades  with  dead. 

But  ill  for  him  that  wears  a  crown, 
And  him,  the  lazar,  in  his  rags! 
They  tremble,  the  sustaining  crags; 

The  spires  of  ice  are  toppled  down. 

And  molten  up,  and  roar  in  flood; 
The  fortress  crashes  from  on  high, 
The  brute  earth  lightens  to  the  sky, 

And  the  great  ^on  sinks  in  blood,  '  '-^^^ 


In   Memoriani  2905 


And  compassed  by  the  fires  of  hell; 

While  thou,  dear  spirit,  happy  star, 

O'erlook'st  the  tumult  from  afar, 
And  smilest,  knowing  all  is  well. 

cxxx 

Thy  voice  is  on  the  rolling  air; 

I  hear  thee  where  the  waters  run ; 

Thou  standest  in  the  rising  sun, 
And  in  the  setting  thou  art  fair. 

What  art  thou  then?    I  cannot  guess; 

But  though  I  seem  in  star  and  flower 

To  feel  thee  some  diffusive  power, 
I  do  not  therefore  love  thee  less. 

My  love  involves  the  love  before; 

My  love  is  vaster  passion  now; 

Though  mixed  with  God  and  Nature  thou, 
I  seem  to  love  thee  more  and  more. 

Far  off  thou  art,  but  ever  nigh ; 

I  have  thee  still,  and  I  rejoice; 

I  prosper,  circled  with  thy  voice; 
I  shall  not  lose  thee  though  I  die. 

cxxxi 

O  living  will  that  shalt  endure 

When  all  that  seems  shall  suffer  shock, 
Rise  in  the  spiritual  rock. 

Flow  through  our  deeds  and  make  them  pure, 

That  we  may  lift  from  out  of  dust 

A  voice  as  unto  him  that  hears, 

A  cr>'  above  the  conquered  years 
To  one  that  with  us  works,  and  trust, 

With  faith  that  comes  of  self-control, 
The  truths  that  never  can  be  proved 
Until  we  close  with  all  we  loved. 

And  all  we  flow  from,  soul  in  soul. 

Alfred  Temiyson  [i8oQ-i8g2] 


2906      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


DRIFTWOOD 

I 

Heaven  is  lovelier  than  the  stars, 
The  sea  is  fairer  than  the  shore; 
I've  seen  beyond  the  sunset  bars 
A  color  more. 

A  thought  is  floating  round  my  mind, 
And  there  are  words  that  will  not  come. 
Do  you  believe,  as  I,  the  wind  '/ 

Somewhere  goes  home? 

n 

In  grassy  paths  my  spirit  walks. 
The  earth  I  travel  speaks  me  fair 
And  still  through  many  voices  talks 
Of  that  deep  oneness  which  we  are. 

I  love  to  see  the  rolling  sod 
Mixing  and  changing  ever  grow 
To  other  forms, — and  this  is  God 
And  all  of  God  and  all  we  know. 

I  love  to  feel  the  dead  dust  whirled 
About  my  face,  to  touch  the  dust;       ;  () 
And  this  large  muteness  of  the  world  / 
Gives  me  vitality  of  trust. 
.■ri;q  rrcjrl)  oi;;n( 

Here  on  the  earth  I  lie  a  space, 

The  quiet  earth  that  knows  no  strife.  '^  ^ 

I  mix  with  her  and  take  my  place 

In  the  dark  matter  that  is  life. 

IV 

Between  the  sun  and  moon 
A  voice,  now  vague,  now  clear — 
Do  you  hear? — 
Says,  "Wander  on." 


"O  World"  2907 

And  on  the  hearthstone  black 
The  embers  poignantly — 
Do  you  see? — 
Spell,  "Come  back." 

Trumbull  Stichicy  [i  874-1904] 

"WHAT  RICHES  HAVE  YOU" 

What  riches  have  you  that  you  deem  me  poor, 
Or  what  large  comfort  that  you  call  me  sad? 
Tell  me  what  makes  you  so  exceeding  glad: 
Is  your  earth  happy  or  your  heaven  sure? 
I  hope  for  heaven,  since  the  stars  endure 
And  bring  such  tidings  as  our  fathers  had. 
I  know  no  deeper  doubt  to  make  me  mad, 
I  need  no  brighter  love  to  keep  me  pure. 
To  me  the  faiths  of  old  are  daily  bread; 
I  bless  their  hope,  I  bless  their  wUl  to  save, 
And  my  deep  heart  still  meaneth  what  they  said. 
It  makes  me  happy  that  the  soul  is  brave, 
And,  being  so  much  kinsman  to  the  dead, 
I  walk  contented  to  the  peopled  grave. 

George  Santayana  [1863-        ] 

"O  WORLD" 

O  WORLD,  thou  choosest  not  the  better  part! 
It  is  not  wisdom  to  be  only  wise. 
And  on  the  inward  vision  close  the  eyes, 
But  it  is  wisdom  to  believe  the  heart. 
Columbus  found  a  world,  and  had  no  chart, 
Save  one  that  faith  deciphered  in  the  skies; 
To  trust  the  soul's  invincible  surmise 
Was  all  his  science  and  his  only  art. 
Our  knowledge  is  a  torch  of  smoky  pine 
That  lights  the  pathway  but  one  step  ahead 
Across  a  void  of  mystery  and  dread. 
Bid,  then,  the  tender  light  of  faith  to  shine 
By  which  alone  the  mortal  heart  is  led 
Unto  the  thinking  of  the  thought  divine. 

George  Saulayana  [1863-        ] 


2908      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


THE  RUSTIC  AT  THE  PLAY 

Our  youth  is  like  a  rustic  at  the  play 

That  cries  aloud  in  simple-hearted  fear, 
Curses  the  villain,  shudders  at  the  fray, 

And  weeps  before  the  maiden's  wreathed  bier. 
Yet  once  familiar  with  the  changeful  show, 

He  starts  no  longer  at  a  brandished  knife. 
But,  his  heart  chastened  at  the  sight  of  woe. 

Ponders  the  mirrored  sorrows  of  his  life. 

So  tutored  too,  I  watch  the  moving  art 
Of  all  this  magic  and  impassioned  pain 

That  tells  the  story  of  the  human  heart 
In  a  false  instance,  such  as  poets  feign; 
I  smile,  and  keep  within  the  parchment  furled 
That  prompts  the  passions  of  this  strutting  world. 
George  Saiitayana  [1863- 

TO  HASEKAWA  '^ 

Perhaps  it  is  no  matter  that  you  died. 

Life's  an  incognito  which  you  saw  through : 
You  never  told  on  life — you  had  your  pride; 

But  life  has  told  on  you. 

Walter  Conrad  Arensberg  [1S61- 


LIFE,  A  QUESTION 

Life.''  and  worth  living? 

Yes,  with  each  part  of  us — 

Hurt  of  us,  help  of  us,  hope  of  us,  heart  of  us. 

Life  is  worth  living.  , 

Ah!  with  the  whole  of  us. 

Will  of  us,  brain  of  us,  senses  and  soul  of  us. 

Is  life  worth  living? 

Aye,  with  the  best  of  us,  ; 

Heights  of  us,  depths  of  us, — 

Life  is  the  test  of  us! 

Corinne  Roosevelt  Robinson  [1861- 


Deservlngs  2909 


THE  EARTH  AND   MAN 

A  IJTTLE  sun,  a  little  rain,  /. 

A  soft  wind  blowing  from  the  west —       '' 
And  woods  and  fields  are  sweet  again, 

And  warmth  within  the  mountain's  breast. 

So  simple  is  the  earth  we  tread,  ' 

So  quick  with  love  and  life  her  frame: 

Ten  thousand  years  have  dawned  and  fled, 
And  still  her  magic  is  the  same. 

A  little  love,  a  little  trust, 

A  soft  impulse,  a  sudden  dream — 
And  life  as  dry  as  desert  dust 

Is  fresher  than  a  mountain  stream. 

So  simple  is  the  heart  of  man. 

So  ready  for  new  hope  and  joy: 
Ten  thousand  years  since  it  began 

Have  left  it  younger  than  a  boy. 

Stopfoni  Augustus  Brooke  [1832-1016] 


DESERVINGS 

This  is  the  height  of  our  deserts: 
A  little  pity  for  life's  hurts; 
A  little  rain,  a  little  sun, 
A  little  sleep  when  work  is  done. 

A  little  righteous  punishment. 
Less  for  our  deeds  than  their  intent; 
A  little  pardon  now  and  then. 
Because  we  are  but  struggling  men. 

A  little  light  to  show  the  way, 
A  little  guidance  where  we  stray; 
A  little  love  before  we  pass 
To  rest  beneath  the  kirkyard  grass. 


2910     Poems   of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

A  little  faith,  in  days  of  change, 
When  life  is  stark  and  bare  and  strange; 
A  solace  when  our  eyes  are  wet 
With  tears  of  longing  and  regret. 

True  it  is  that  we  cannot  claim 

Unmeasured  recompense  or  blame, 

Because  our  way  of  life  is  small: 

A  little  is  the  sum  of  all.  Unknown 

"A  LITTLE  WORK" 

From  "  Trilby  " 

A  LITTLE  work,  a  little  play 

To  keep  us  going — and  so,  good-day! 

A  little  warmth,  a  Httle  light 

Of  love's  bestowing— and  so,  good-night! 

A  little  fun,  to  match  the  sorrow 

Of  each  day's  growing — and  so,  good-morrow i 

A  little  trust  that  when  we  die  ,  ,  ^ 

We  reap  our  sowing!     And  so — good-bye! 

George  dii  Maurier  [1834-1806] 

MANS  DAYS 

A  SUDDEN  wakin',  a  sudden  weepin', 

A  li'l  suckin',  a  li'l  sleepin'; 

A  cheel's  full  joys  an'  a  cheel's  short  sorrows, 

Wi'  a  power  o'  faith  in  gert  to-morrows. 

Young  blood  red-hot  an'  the  love  of  a  maid, 

One  glorious  day  as '11  never  fade; 

Some  shadows,  some  sunshine,  some  triumphs,  some  tears, 

And  a  gatherin'  weight  o'  the  ilyin'  years. 

Then  old  man's  talk  o'  the  days  behind  'e. 
Your  darter's  youngest  darter  to  mind  'e; 
A  h'l  dreamin',  a  li'l  dyin': 
A  li'l  lew  corner  o'  airth  to  lie  in. 

Eden  PhiUpotts  [1862- 


A   Little  While  29  ii 


A  LITTLE  WHILE 

A  LITTLE  while  the  tears  and  laughter, 

The  willow  and  thi  rose — 
A  little  while,  and  what  comes  after  ^ 

No  man  knows.  '  ^ 

An  hour  to  sing,  to  love  and  linger.  ...     • 

Then  lutanist  and  lute 
Will  fall  on  silence,  song  and  singer 

Both  be  mute. 

Our  gods  from  our  desires  we  fashion.  .  .  . 

Exalt  our  baffled  lives, 
And  dream  their  vital  bloom  and  passion 

Still  survives; 

But  when  we're  done  with  mirth  and  weeping. 

With  myrtle,  rue,  and  rose. 
Shall  Death  take  Life  into  his  keeping?  .  .  . 

No  man  knows. 

What  heart  hath  not,  through  twilight  places, 

Sought  for  its  dead  again 
To  gild  with  love  their  pallid  faces?  .  .  . 

Sought  in  vain!  .  .  . 


Still  mounts  the  Dream  on  shining  pinion. 

Still  broods  the  dull  distrust  .  .  . 
Which  shall  have  ultimate  dominion. 

Dream,  or  dust? 


A  little  while  with  grief  and  laughter^  ■  ' 

And  then  the  day  will  close; 
The  shadows  gather  .  .  .  what  comes  after 
No  man  knows! 

Don  Marquis  [1878- 


THE  CONDUCT  OF  LIFE 

INTEGER  VIT.E* 

The  man  of  life  upright, 

Whose  guihless  heart  is  free 
From  all  dishonest  deeds, 

Or  thought  of  vanity; 

The  man  whose  silent  days 

In  harmless  joys  are  spent 
Whom  hope  cannot  delude, 

Nor  sorrow  discontent; 

That  man  needs  neither  towers 

Nor  armor  for  defense, 
Nor  secret  vaults  to  fly 

From  thunder's  violence: 

He  only  can  behold 
S3':'  '     With  unaffrighted  eyes 
The  horrors  of  the  deep 

And  terrors  of  the  skies.      '  • ' 

Thus,  scorning  all  the  cares 

That  fate  or  fortune  brings, 
He  makes  the  heaven  his  book,   ,,,•.. 

His  wisdom  heavenly  things; 

Good  thoughts  his  only  friends. 

His  wealth  a  well-spent  age, 
The  earth  his  sober  inn 

And  quiet  pilgrimage. 

After  Horace,  by  ThoDias  Campion  [?-i6ig) 

'For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3828 

2QI2 


The  Chambered  Nautikis  -913 


THE   CHAMBERED   NAUTILUS 

From  "  The  Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast  Table" 

This  is  the  ship  of  pearl,  which,  poets  feign, 

Sails  the  unshadowed  main, — 

The  venturous  bark  that  flings 
On  the  sweet  summer  wind  its  purpled  wings       , 
In  gulfs  enchanted,  where  the  Siren  sings. 

And  coral  reefs  lie  bare, 
Where  the  cold  sea-maids  rise  to  sun  their  streaming  hair. 

Its  webs  of  living  gauze  no  more  unfurl; 

Wrecked  is  the  ship  of  pearl! 

And  every  chambered  cell. 
Where  its  dim  dreaming  life  was  wont  to  dwell, 
As  the  frail  tenant  shaped  his  growing  shell. 

Before  thee  lies  revealed, — 
Its  irised  ceiling  rent,  its  sunless  crypt  unsealed! 

Year  after  year  beheld  the  silent  toil 

That  spread  his  lustrous  coil; 

Still,  as  the  spiral  grew. 
He  left  the  past  year's  dwelling  for  the  new. 
Stole  with  soft  step  its  shining  archway  through, 

Built  up  its  idle  door, 
Stretched  in  his  last-found  home,  and  knew  the  old  no  more. 

Thanks  for  the  heavenly  message  brought  by  thee, 

Child  of  the  wandering  sea. 

Cast  from  her  lap,  forlorn! 
From  thy  dead  lips  a  clearer  note  is  born 
Than  ever  Triton  blew  from  wreathed  horn! 

While  on  mine  ear  it  rings, 
Through  the  deep  caves  of  thought  I  hear  a  voice  that  sings- 
Build  thee  more  stately  mansions,  O  my  soul. 

As  the  swift  seasons  roll! 

Leave  thy  low-vaulted  past! 


2914    Poems  of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

Let  each  new  temple,  nobler  than  the  last, 
Shut  thee  from  heaven  with  a  dome  more  vast, 

Till  thou  at  length  art  free, 
Leaving  thine  outgrown  shell  by  life's  unresting  sea! 
Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [1809- 1894] 

A   PSALM  OF  LIFE 

WHAT  THE  HEART  OF  THE  YOUNG  MAN  SAH)  TO  THE  PSALMIST 

Tell  me  not,  in  mournful  numbers, 

Life  is  but  an  empty  dream! — 
For  the  soul  is  dead  that  slumbers, 

And  things  are  not  what  they  seem. 

^'■''  Life  is  real!     Life  is  earnest! 

And  the  grave  is  not  its  goal; 
Dust  thou  art,  to  dust  returnest, 
Was  not  spoken  of  the  soul. 

Not  enjoyment,  and  not  sorrow, 

Is  our  destined  end  or  way; 
But  to  act,  that  each  to-morrow 

Find  us  farther  than  to-day. 

Art  is  long,  and  Time  is  fleeting, 

And  our  hearts,  though  stout  and  brave, 

Still,  hke  muffled  drums,  are  beating 
Funeral  marches  to  the  grave. 

In  the  world's  broad  field  of  battle, 

In  the  bivouac  of  Life, 
Be  not  like  dumb,  driven  cattle! 

Be  a  hero  in  the  strife! 

Trust  no  Future,  howe'er  pleasant! 

Let  the  dead  Past  bury  its  dead! 
Act, — act  in  the  living  Present! 

Heart  within,  and  God  o'erhead! 

Lives  of  great  men  all  remind  us 

We  can  make  our  lives  sublime, 
And,  departing,  leave  behind  us 

Footprints  on  the  sands  of  time; 


Excelsior  2915 

Footprints,  that  perhaps  another, 

Sailing  o'er  life's  solemn  main, 
A  forlorn  and  shipwrecked  brother, 

Seeing,  shall  take  heart  again.       / 

Let  us,  then,  be  up  and  doing. 

With  a  heart  for  any  fate; 
Still  achieving,  stiU  pursuing. 

Learn  to  labor  and  to  wait. 

Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 


EXCELSIOR 

The  shades  of  night  were  falling  fast. 
As  through  an  Alpine  village  passed 
A  youth,  who  bore,  'mid  snow  and  ice, 
A  banner  with  the  strange  device, 
Excelsior! 

His  brow  was  sad;  his  eye  beneath, 
Flashed  like  a  falchion  from  its  sheath, 
And  like  a  silver  clarion  rung 
The  accents  of  that  unknown  tongue, 
Excelsior! 

In  happy  homes  he  saw  the  light 
Of  household  fires  gleam  warm  and  bright; 
Above,  the  spectral  glaciers  shone. 
And  from  his  lips  escaped  a  groan, 
Excelsior! 

"Try  not  the  Pass!"  the  old  man  said; 
"Dark  lowers  the  tempest  overhead, 
The  roaring  torrent  is  deep  and  wide!" 
And  loud  that  clarion  voice  replied. 
Excelsior! 

"Oh  stay,"  the  maiden  said,  "and  rest 
Thy  weary  head  upon  this  breast!" 
A  tear  stood  in  his  bright  blue  eye,  1 ; 
But  stUl  he  answered,  with  a  sigh, 
Excelsior ! 


2916    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"Beware  the  pine-tree's  withered  branch! 
Beware  the  awful  avalanche!" 
This  was  the  peasant's  last  Good-night, 
A  voice  replied,  far  up  the  height, 
Excelsior! 

At  break  of  day,  as  heavenward 
The  pious  monks  of  Saint  Bernard 
Uttered  the  oft-repeated  prayer, 
A  voice  cried  through  the  startled  air, 
Excelsior ! 

A  traveler,  by  the  faithful  hound. 
Half  buried  in  the  snow  was  found. 
Still  grasping  in  his  hand  of  ice 
That  banner  with  the  strange  device. 
Excelsior! 

There  in  the  twilight  cold  and  gray. 
Lifeless,  but  beautiful,  he  lay, 
And  from  the  sky,  serene  and  far, 
A  voice  fell,  like  a  falling  star, 
Excelsior! 
Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  [1807-188: 


THE  VILLAGE  BLACKSMITH 

Under  a  spreading  chestnut-tree 

The  village  smithy  stands; 
The  smith,  a  mighty  man  is  he. 

With  large  and  sinewy  hands; 
And  the  muscles  of  his  brawny  arms 

Are  strong  as  iron  bands. 

His  hair  is  crisp,  and  black,  and  long. 

His  face  is  Hke  the  tan; 
His  brow  is  wet  with  honest  sweat. 

He  earns  whate'er  he  can,     '  •  '■■^-'^  ^\ 
And  looks  the  whole  world  in  the  face'. 

For  he  owes  not  any  man. 


The  Village   Blacksmith  -91? 

Week  in,  week  out,  from  morn  till  night, 

You  can  hear  his  bellows  blow; 
You  can  hear  him  swing  his  heavy  sledge 

With  measured  beat  and  slow, 
Like  a  sexton  ringing  the  village  bell. 

When  the  evening  sun  is  low. 

And  children  coming  home  from  school 

Look  in  at  the  open  door; 
They  love  to  see  the  flaming  forge, 

And  hear  the  bellows  roar, 
And  catch  the  burning  sparks  that  fly 

Like  chafif  from  a  threshing-floor. 

He  goes  on  Sunday  to  the  church. 

And  sits  among  his  boys; 
He  hears  the  parson  pray  and  preach, 

He  hears  his  daughter's  voice. 
Singing  in  the  village  choir. 

And  it  makes  his  heart  rejoice. 

It  sounds  to  him  like  her  mother's  voice, 

Singing  in  Paradise ! 
He  needs  must  think  of  her  once  more, 

How  in  the  grave  she  lies; 
And  with  his  hard,  rough  hand  he  wipes 

A  tear  out  of  his  eyes. 

Toiling, — rejoicnig, — sorrowing, 

Onward  through  life  he  goes; 
Each  morning  sees  some  task  begin, 

Each  evening  sees  it  close; 
Something  attempted,  something  done, 

Has  earned  a  night's  repose. 

Thanks,  thanks  to  thee,  my  worthy  friend, 

For  the  lesson  Ihou  hast  taught! 
Thus  at  the  flaming  forge  of  life 

Our  fortunes  must  be  wrought; 
Thus  on  its  sounding  anvil  shaped 

Each  burning  deed  and  thought ! 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [i 807-1882] 


2918     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


FOUR  THINGS 

Four  things  a  man  must  learn  to  do 
If  he  would  make  his  record  true: 
To  think  without  confusion  clearly; 
To  love  his  fellow-men  sincerely ; 
To  act  from  honest  motives  purely; 
To  trust  in  God  and  Heaven  securely. 

Henry  Van  Dyke  [1852- 

LABOR  AND   LOVE 

Labor  and  love!  there  are  no  othei'  laws 
•     To  rule  the  liberal  action  of  that  soul 

Which  fate  hath  set  beneath  thy  brief  control, 
Or  lull  the  empty  fear  that  racks  and  gnaws; 
Labor!  then  like  a  rising  moon,  the  cause 

Of  life  shall  light  thine  hour  from  pole  to  pole, 

Thou  shalt  taste  health  of  purpose,  and  the  roll 
Of  simple  joys  unv/ind  without  a  pause. 
Love!  and  thy  heart  shall  cease  to  question  why 

Its  beating  pulse  was  set  to  rock  and  rave; 

Find  but  another  heart  this  side  the  grave 
To  soothe  and  cling  to, — thou  hast  life's  reply. 
Labor  and  love!  then  fade  without  a  sigh. 

Submerged  beneath  the  inexorable  wave. 

Edmund  Gosse  [184Q- 


WHAT  IS   GOOD 

"What  is  the  real  good?" 
I  asked  in  musing  mood. 

Order,  said  the  law  court; 
Knowledge,  said  the  school; 
Truth,  said  the  wise  man; 
Pleasure,  said  the  fool;  ■ 
Love,  said  the  maiden; 
Beauty,  said  the  page; 


A  Charge  ^919 

Freedom,  said  the  dreamer; 

Home,  said  the  sage; 

Fame,  said  the  soldier; 

Equity,  the  seer; — 

1' 
Spake  my  heart  full  sadly, 

"The  answer  is  not  here." 

Then  within  my  bosom 
Softly  this  I  heard : 
"Each  heart  holds  the  secret; 
Kindness  is  the  word." 

John  Boyle  O'Reilly  [1844-1890] 


FAITH 

Better  trust  all  and  be  deceived, 
And  weep  that  trust  and  that  deceiving, 
Than  doubt  one  heart  that,  if  believed, 
Had  blessed  one's  life  with  true  believing. 

Oh,  in  this  mocking  world,  too  fast 
The  doubting  fiend  o'ertakes  our  youth; 
Better  be  cheated  to  the  last 
Than  lose  the  blessed  hope  of  truth. 

Frances  Anne  Kemble  [1809- 1893] 


A  CHARGE 

If  thou  hast  squandered  years  to  grave  a  gem 
Commissioned  by  thy  absent  Lord,  and  while 

'Tis  incomplete, 
Others  would  bribe  thy  needy  skill  to  them — 

Dismiss  them  to  the  street! 

Should'st  thou  at  last  discover  Beauty's  grove. 
At  last  be  panting  on  the  fragrant  verge. 

But  in  the  track, 
Drunk  with  divine  possession,  thou  meet  Love — ■ 

Turn,  at  her  bidding,  back. 


2920     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

When  round  thy  ship  in  tempest  Hell  appears, 
And  every  specter  mutters  up  more  dire 

To  snatch  control 
And  loose  to  madness  thy  deep-kenneled  Fears — 

Then  to  the  helm,  O  Soul! 

Last,  if  upon  the  cold,  green-mantling  sea. 
Thou  cling,  alone  with  Truth,  to  the  last  spar, 
Both  castaway. 
And  one  must  perish — let  it  not  be  he 

Whom  thou  art  sworn  to  obey. 

Herbert  Trench  [1865- 

TO-DAY 

So  here  hath  been  dawning 

Another  blue  Day: 
Think,  wilt  thou  let  it 

Slip  useless  away? 

Out  of  Eternity 

This  new  Day  is  born; 
Into  Eternity, 

At  night,  will  return. 

Behold  it  aforetime 

No  eye  ever  did: 
So  soon  it  for  ever 

From  all  eyes  is  hid. 

Here  hath  been  dawning 

Another  blue  Day: 
Think,  wilt  thou  let  it 

Slip  useless  away? 

Thomas  Carlyle  [1795-1881] 

"MY  DAYS  AMONG  THE  DEAD  ARE  PASSED" 

My  days  among  the  Dead  are  passed, 

Around  me  I  behold, 
Where'er  these  casual  eyes  are  cast, 

The  mighty  minds  of  old : 


/ 


Opportunity  2921 

My  never-failing  friends  are  they, 
With  whom  I  converse  day  by  day. 

With  them  I  take  delight  in  weal, 

And  seek  relief  in  woe; 
And  while  I  understand  and  feel 

How  much  to  them  I  owe, 
^ly  cheeks  have  often  been  bedewed 
With  tears  of  thoughtful  gratitude. 

My  thoughts  are  with  the  Dead;  with  them 

I  live  in  long-past  years, 
Their  virtues  love,  their  faults  condemn, 

Partake  their  hopes  and  fears; 
And  from  their  lessons  seek  and  find 
Instruction  with  an  humble  mind. 

My  hopes  are  with  the  Dead ;  anon 

My  place  with  them  will  be. 
And  I  with  them  shaJI  travel  on 

Through  all  Futurity; 
Yet  leaving  here  a  name,  I  trust, 
That  will  not  perish  in  the  dust. 

Robert  Soulhcy  [1774-1843] 


OPPORTUNITY 


Master  of  human  destinies  am  I! 

Fame,  love,  and  fortune  on  my  footsteps  wait. 

Cities  and  fields  I  walk;  I  penetrate 

Deserts  and  seas  remote,  and  passing  by 

Hovel  and  mart  and  palace— soon  or  late 

I  knock  unbidden  once  at  every  gate! 

If  sleeping,  wake — if  feasting,  rise  before 
I  turn  away.     It  is  the  hour  of  fate, 
And  they  who  follow  me  reach  every  state 
Mortals  desire,  and  conquer  every  foe 


iQii     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Save  death;  but  those  who  doubt  or  hesitate, 
Condemned  to  failure,  penury,  and  woe, 
Seek  me  in  vain  and  uselessly  implore. 
I  answer  not,  and  I  return  no  more! 

John  James  Ingalls  [i 833-1  goo] 


OPPORTUNITY 

They  do  me  wrong  who  say  I  come  no  more 
When  once  I  knock  and  fail  to  find  you  in; 

For  every  day  I  stand  outside  your  door 

And  bid  you  wake,  and  rise  to  fight  and  win. 

Wail  not  for  precious  chances  passed  away! 

Weep  not  for  golden  ages  on  the  wane! 
Each  night  I  burn  the  records  of  the  day— 

At  sunrise  every  soul  is  born  again! 

Dost  thou  behold  thy  lost  youth  all  aghast? 

Dost  reel  from  righteous  Retribution's  blow? 
Then  turn  from  blotted  archives  of  the  past 

And  find  the  future's  pages  white  as  snow. 

Art  thou  a  mourner?     Rouse  thee  from  thy  spell; 

Art  thou  a  sinner?     Sins  may  be  forgiven; 
Each  morning  gives  thee  wings  to  flee  from  hell. 

Each  night  a  star  to  guide  thy  feet  to  heaven. 

Laugh  like  a  boy  at  splendors  that  have  sped, 
To  vanished  joys  be  blind  and  deaf  and  dumb; 

My  judgments  seal  the  dead  past  with  its  dead, 
But  never  bind  a  moment  yet  to  come. 

Though  deep  in  mire,  wring  not  your  hands  and  weep; 

I  lend  my  arm  to  all  who  say  "  I  can! " 
No  shame-faced  outcast  ever  sank  so  deep 

But  yet  might  rise  and  be  again  a  man! 

Walter  M alone  [i866-iqis] 


y 


The  Arrow  and  the  Song         2923 


OPPORTUNITY 

This  I  beheld,  or  dreamed  it  in  a  dream: — 
There  spread  a  cloud  of  dust  along  a  plain ; 
And  underneath  the  cloud,  or  in  it,  raged 
A  furious  battle,  and  men  yelled,  and  swords 
Shocked  upon  swords  and  shields.     A  prince's  banner 
Wavered,  then  staggered  backward,  hemmed  by  foes. 
A  craven  hung  along  the  battle's  edge, 
And  thought,  "Had  I  a  sword  of  keener  steel- 
That  blue  blade  that  the  king's  son  bears, — but  this 
Blunt  thing!"  he  snapped  and  flung  it  from  his  hand. 
And  lowering  crept  away  and  left  the  field. 
Then  came  the  king's  son,  wounded,  sore  bestead, 
And  weaponless,  and  saw  the  broken  sword. 
Hilt-buried  in  the  dry  and  trodden  sand, 
And  ran  and  snatched  it,  and  with  battle-shout 
Lifted  afresh  he  hewed  his  enemy  dov/n. 
And  saved  a  great  cause  that  heroic  day. 

Edward  Rowland  Sill  [1841-1887] 


THE  ARROW  AND   THE   SONG 

I  SHOT  an  arrow  into  the  air. 
It  fell  to  earth,  I  knew  not  where; 
For,  so  swiftly  it  flew,  the  sight 
Could  not  follow  it  in  its  flight. 

I  breathed  a  song  into  the  air, 
It  fell  to  earth,  I  knew  not  where;  .  ' 

For  who  has  sight  so  keen  and  strong. 
That  it  can  follow  the  flight  of  song? 

Long,  long  afteru^ard,  in  an  oak 
I  found  the  arrow,  still  unbroke; 
And  the  song,  from  beginning  to  end, 
I  found  again  in  the  heart  of  a  friend. 

Henry  W adsivorth  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 


2924     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


CALUMNY 

A  WHISPER  woke  the  air, 
A  soft,  light  tone,  and  low, 
Yet  barbed  with  shame  and  woe. 

Ah!  might  it  only  perish  there, 
Nor  farther  go! 

But  no!  a  quick  and  eager  ear 

Caught  up  the  httle,  meaning  sound; 

Another  voice  has  breathed  it  clear; 
And  so  it  wandered  round 

From  ear  to  lip,  from  hp  to  ear. 

Until  it  reached  a  gentle  heart 

That  throbbed  from  all  the  world  apart 
And  that — it  broke! 

It  was  the  only  heart  it  found, — 
The  only  heart  'twas  meant  to  find, 

When  first  its  accents  woke. 
It  reached  that  gentle  heart  at  last, 

And  that — it  broke! 

Frances  Sargent  Osgood  [181 1-1850] 


THE  EFFECT  OF  EXAMPLE 

We  scatter  seeds  with  careless  hand. 

And  dream  we  ne'er  shall  see  them  more; 
But  for  a  thousand  years 
Their  fruit  appears, 
In  weeds  that  mar  the  land, 
Or  healthful  shore. 

The  deeds  we  do,  the  words  wesay, — 
Into  still  air  they  seem  to  fleet. 
We  count  them  ever  past; 
But  they  shall  last, — 
In  the  dread  judgment  they 
And  we  shall  meet. 


Little  and  Great 


2925 


I  charge  thee  by  the  years  gone  by, 

For  the  love's  sake  of  brethren  dear, 
Keep  thou  the  one  true  way, 
In  work  and  pla}', 
Lest  in  that  world  their  cry 
Of  woe  thou  hear. 

John  Keble  [1792-1866] 


LITTLE  AND   GREAT 

A  TRAVELER  on  a  dusty  road 

Strewed  acorns  on  the  lea; 
And  one  took  root  and  sprouted  up, 

And  grew  into  a  tree. 
Love  sought  its  shade  at  evening-time, 

To  breathe  its  early  vows ; 
And  Age  was  pleased,  in  heats  of  noon, 

To  bask  beneath  its  boughs. 
The  dormouse  loved  its  dangling  twigs, 

The  birds  sweet  music  bore — 
It  stood  a  glory  in  its  place, 
■    A  blessing  evermore. 

A  little  spring  had  lost  its  way 

Amid  the  grass  and  fern; 
A  passing  stranger  scooped  a  well 

Where  weary  men  might  turn; 
He  walled  it  in,  and  hung  with  care 

A  ladle  at  the  brink; 
He  thought  not  of  the  deed  he  did, 

But  judged  that  Toil  might  drink. 
He  passed  again;  and  lo!  the  well. 

By  summer  never  dried, 
Had  cooled  ten  thousand  parched  tongues. 

And  saved  a  life  beside. 

A  dreamer  dropped  a  random  thought; 

'Twas  old,  and  yet  'twas  new; 
A  simple  fancy  of  the  brain. 

But  strong  in  being  true. 


2926     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

It  shone  upon  a  genial  mind, 

And,  lo!  its  light  became 
A  lamp  of  life,  a  beacon  ray, 

A  monitory  flame: 
The  thought  was  small;  its  issue  great; 

A  watch-fire  on  the  hill, 
It  sheds  its  radiance  far  adown, 

And  cheers  the  valley  still. 

A  nameless  man,  amid  the  crowd 

That  thronged  the  daily  mart, 
Let  fall  a  word  of  hope  and  love, 

Unstudied  from  the  heart; — 
A  whisper  on  the  tumult  thrown, 

A  transitory  breath, — 
It  raised  a  brother  from  the  dust. 

It  saved  a  soul  from  death. 
O  germ!  O  fount!  O  word  of  love! 

O  thought  at  random  cast! 
Ye  were  but  Httle  at  the  first. 

But  mighty  at  the  last. 

Charles  Mackay  [1814-1889] 


THE  SIN  OF  OMISSION 

It  isn't  the  thing  you  do,  dear; 

It's  the  thing  you  leave  undone, 
Which  gives  you  a  bit  of  heartache 

At  the  setting  of  the  sun. 
The  tender  word  forgotten, 

The  letter  you  did  not'  write, 
The  flower  you  might  have  sent,  dear, 

Are  your  haunting  ghosts  to-night. 

The  stone  you  might  have  lifted 

Out  of  a  brother's  way, 
The  bit  of  heartsome  counsel 

You  were  hurried  too  much  to  say; 


The  Flower  2927 


The  loving  touch  of  the  hand,  dear, 
The  gentle  and  winsome  tone, 

That  you  had  no  time  nor  thought  for, 
With  troubles  enough  of  your  own. 

The  little  acts  of  kindness, 

So  easily  out  of  mind; 
Those  chances  to  be  angels 

Which  every  one  may  find — 
They  come  in  night  and  silence — 

Each  chill,  reproachful  wraith — 
When  hope  is  faint  and  flagging 

And  a  bhght  has  dropped  on  faith. 

For  life  is  all  too  short,  dear, 

And  sorrow  is  all  too  great; 
So  suffer  our  great  compassion 

That  tarries  until  too  late; 
And  it's  not  the  thing  you  do,  dear, 

It's  the  thing  you  leave  undone. 
Which  gives  you  the  bit  of  heartache 

At  the  setting  of  the  sun. 

Margaret  Saiigster  [183  J 


THE   FLOWER 

Once  in  a  golden  hour 
I  cast  to  earth  a  seed. 

Up  there  came  a  flower. 
The  people  said,  a  weed. 

To  and  fro  they  went 

Through  my  garden-bower, 
And  muttering  discontent 

Cursed  me  and  my  flower. 

Then  it  grew  so  tall 

It  wore  a  crown  of  light. 

But  thieves  from  o'er  the  wall 
Stole  the  seed  by  night; 


2928     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Sowed  it  far  and  wide 

By  every  town  and  tower, 
Till  all  the  people  cried, 

"Splendid  is  the  flower." 

Read  my  little  fable: 

He  that  runs  may  read. 
Most  can  raise  the  flowers  now, 

For  aU  have  got  the  seed. 

And  some  are  pretty  enough, 

And  some  are  poor  indeed; 
And  now  again  the  people 

Call  it  but  a  weed. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [iSog-iSgzl 

STANZAS 

Often  rebuked,  yet  always  back  returning 
To  those  first  feelings  that  were  born  with  me, 

And  leaving  busy  chase  of  wealth  and  learning 
For  idle  dreams  of  things  that  cannot  be: 

To-day,  I  will  seek  not  the  shadowy  region; 

Its  unsustaining  vastness  waxes  drear; 
And  visions  rising,  legion  after  legion. 

Bring  the  unreal  world  too  strangely  near. 

I'll  walk,  but  not  in  old  heroic  traces, 

And  not  in  paths  of  high  morality, 
And  not  among  the  half-distinguished  faces. 

The  clouded  forms  of  long-past  history. 

I'll  walk  where  my  own  nature  would  be  leading: 

It  vexes  me  to  choose  another  guide: 
Where  the  gray  flocks  in  ferny  glens  are  feeding; 

Where  the  wild  wind  blo\Vs  on  the  mountain  side. 

What  have  those  lonely  mountains  worth  revealing? 

More  glory  and  more  grief  than  I  can  tell: 
The  earth  that  wakes  one  human  heart  to  feeling 

Can  center  both  the  worlds  of  Heaven  and  Hell. 

Emily  Bronte  [1818-1848] 


Recompense  2929 

SOLITUDE 

Laugh,  and  the  world  laughs  with  you; 

Weep,  and  you  weep  alone, 
For  the  sad  old  earth  must  borrow  its  mirth, 

But  has  trouble  enough  of  its  own. 
Sing,  "and  the  hills  will  answer; 

Sigh,  it  is  lost  on  the  air, 
The  echoes  bound  to  a  joyful  sound, 

But  shrink  from  voicing  care. 

Rejoice,  and  men  will  seek  you ; 

Grieve,  and  they  turn  and  go. 
They  want  full  measure  of  all  your  pleasure, 

But  they  do  not  need  your  woe. 
Be  glad,  and  your  friends  are  many; 

Be  sad,  and  you  lose  them  all, — 
There  are  none  to  decline  your  nectared  wine, 

But  alone  you  must  drink  life's  gall. 

Feast,  and  your  halls  are  crowded ; 

Fast,  and  the  world  goes  by. 
Succeed  and  give,  and  it  helps  you  live, 

But  no  man  can  help  you  die. 
There  is  room  in  the  halls  of  pleasure 

For  a  long  and  lordly  train. 
But  one  by  one  we  must  all  file  on 

Through  the  narrow  aisles  of  pain. 

FJla  Wheeler  Wifcox  [1855- 

RECOMPENSE 

The  gifts  that  to  our  breasts  we  fold 

Are  brightened  by  our  losses. 
The  sweetest  joys  a  heart  can  hold 

Grow  up  between  its  crosses. 
And  on  life's  pathway  many  a  mile 

Is  made  more  glad  and  cheery. 
Because,  for  just  a  little  while, 

The  way  seemed  dark  antl  flreary. 

Nixon  Waterman  [1859- 


2930      Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


THE  LESSON  OF  THE  WATER-MILL 

Listen  to  the  Water-Mill; 
Through  the  Hve-long  day 
How  the  dicking  of  its  wheel 
Wears  the  hours  away! 
Languidly  the  Autumn  wind 
Stirs  the  forest  leaves, 
From  the  field  the  reapers  sing, 
Binding  up  their  sheaves; 
And  a  proverb  haunts  my  mind 
As  a  spell  is  cast, 
.'rfij^'The  miU  cannot  grind 

With  the  water  that  is  past." 

Autumn  winds  revive  no  more 

Leaves  that  once  are  shed, 

And  the  sickle  cannot  reap 

Corn  once  gathered; 

Flov/s  the  rufHed  streamlet  on, 

Tranquil,  deep,  and  still, 

Never  gliding  back  again  -' 

To  the  watet-miU; 

Truly  speaks  the  proverb  old. 

With  a  meaning  vast, — 

"The  mill  cannot  grind  ■: 

With  the  water  that  is  past."  ■ 

Take  the  lesson  to  thyself 

True  and  loving  heart; 

Golden  youth  is  fleeting  by, 

Summer  hours  depart; 

Learn  to  make  the  most  of  Ufe, 

Lose  no  happy  day, 

Time  will  never  bring  thee  back 

Chances  swept  away! 

Leave  no  tender  word  unsaid, 

Love  while  love  shall  last; 

"The  mill  cannot  grind 

With  the  water  that  is  past." 


Life 


2931 


Work  while  yet  the  daylight  shines, 

Man  of  strength  and  will!  'f  gnbiBM 

Never  does  the  streamlet  glide 

Useless  by  the  mill; 

Wait  not  till  to-morrow's  sun 

Beams  upon  thy  way, 

All  that  thou  canst  call  thine  own 

Lies  in  thy  "to-day"; 

Power  and  intellect  and  health 

May  not  always  last, 

"The  mill  cannot  grind 

With  the  water  that  is  past." 

O  the  wasted  hours  of  life 

That  have  drifted  by! 

O  the  good  that  might  have  been, — 

Lost,  without  a  sigh! 

Love,  that  we  might  once  have  saved 

By  a  single  word, 

Thoughts  conceived,  but  never  penned, 

Perishing  unheard; — 

Take  the  proverb  to  thine  heart, 

Take,  and  hold  it  fast, — 

"The  mill  cannot  grind 

With  the  water  that  is  past." 

Sarah  Dondney  [1843- 


LIFE 

I  MADE  a  posy,  while  the  day  ran  by: 
Here  will  I  smell  my  remnant  out,  and  tie 

My  life  within  this  band. 
But  Time  did  beckon  to  the  flowers,  and  they 
By  noon  most  cunningly  did  steal  away, 

And  withered  in  my  hand. 

My  hand  was  next  to  them,  and  then  my  heart; 
I  took,  without  more  thinking,  in  good  part 

Time's  gentle  admonition; 


2932      Poems   of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

Who  did  so  sweetly  Death's  sad  taste  convey, 
Making  my  mind  to  smell  my  fatal  day, 

Yet  sugaring  the  suspicion. 

Farewell,  dear  flowers!  sweetly  your  time  ye  spent, 
Fit,  while  ye  lived,  for  smell  or  ornament. 

And  after  death  for  cures. 
I  follow  straight,  without  complaints  or  grief; 
Since,  if  my  scent  be  good,  I  care  not  if 

It  be  as  short  as  yours. 

George  Herbert  [1593-1633] 

BE  TRUE 

Thou  must  be  true  thyself. 

If  thou  the  truth  wouldst  teach; 

Thy  soul  must  overflow,  if  thou 
Another's  soul  wouldst  reach! 

It  needs  the  overflow  of  heart 
.b'j       To  give  the  lips  full  speech. 

Think  truly,  and  thy  thoughts 
Shall  the  world's  famine  feed; 

Speak  truly,  and  each  word  of  thine 
ShaU  be  a  fruitful  seed; 

Live  truly,  and  thy  life  shall  be 
A  great  and  noble  creed. 

H oral  ins  Bonar  [i8o8-i88g] 

TO-DAY 

Why  fear  to-morrow,  timid  heart? 

Why  tread  the  future's  way? 
We  only  need  to  do  our  part 

To-day,  dear  child,  to-day. 

The  past  is  written!     Close  the  book 

On  pages  sad  and  gay; 
Within  the  future  do  not  look, 

But  live  to-day — to-day. 


A  Thanksgiving  ^933 

'Tis  this  one  hour  that  God  has  given; 

His  Now  we  must  obey; 
And  it  will  make  our  earth  his  heaven 

To  live  to-day — to-day. 

Lydia  Avery  Coonley  Ward  [1845- 


THE  VALLEY  OF  VAIN  VERSES 

The  grief  that  is  but  feigning, 
And  weeps  melodious  tears 
Of  delicate  complaining 
From  self-indulgent  years; 
The  mirth  that  is  but  madness, 
And  has  no  inward  gladness 
Beneath  its  laughter,  straining 
To  capture  thoughtless  ears; 

The  love  that  is  but  passion 
Of  amber-scented  lust; 
The  doubt  that  is  but  fashion; 
The  faith  that  has  no  trust; — 
These  Thamyris  disperses, 
In  the  VaUey  of  Vain  Verses 
Below  the  Mount  Parnassian, 
And  they  crumble  into  dust. 

Henry  Van  Dyke  [1852- 


A  THANKSGIVING 

Lord,  for  the  erring  thought 
Not  unto  evU  wrought; 
Lord,  for  the  wicked  will 
Betrayed  and  baffled  still; 
For  the  heart  from  itself  kept: 
Our  Thanksgiving  accept! 

For  ignorant  hopes  that  were 
Broken  to  our  blind  prayer; 
For   pain,   death,   sorrow — sent 
Unto  our  chastisement; 


2934      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

For  all  loss  of  seeming  good: 
Quicken  our  gratitude! 

William  Dean  Howells  [1837- 


THE   LADY   POVERTY 

The  Lady  Poverty  was  fair:        ,,,  .. 
But  she  has  lost  her  looks  of  late, 
With  change  of  times  and  change  of  air. 
Ah  slattern,  she  neglects  her  hair, 
Her  gown,  her  shoes.     She  keeps  no  state 
As  once  when  her  pure  feet  were  bare. 

Or — almost  worse,  if  worse  can  be — 
She  scolds  in  parlors;  dusts  and  trims, 
Watches  and  counts.     Oh,  is  this  she 
Whom  Francis  met,  whose  step  was  free. 
Who  with  Obedience  caroled  hymns, 
In  Umbria  walked  with  Chastity? 

Where  is  her  ladyhood?  Not  here, 
Not  among  modern  kinds  of  men; 
But  in  the  stony  fields,  where  clear 
Through  the  thin  trees  the  skies  appear; 
In  delicate  spare  soil  and  fen. 
And  slender  landscape  and  austere. 

Alice  Meynell  [1853- 


THE  LADY  POVERTY 

I  MET  her  on  the  Umbrian  Hills, 

Her  hair  unbound,  her  feet  unshod; 

As  one  whom  secret  glory  fills 
She  walked — alone  with  God. 

I  met  her  in  the  city  street ; 

Oh,  how  changed  was  her  aspect  then! 
With  heavy  eyes  and  weary  feet 

She  walked  alone — with  men. 

Jacob  Fischer  [18 


Character  of  the   Happy   Warrior     2935 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  HAPPY  WARRIOR 

Who  is  the  happy  Warrior?    Who  is  he 
That  every  man  in  arms  should  wish  to  be? 

It  is  the  generous  spirit,  who,  when  brought 
Among  the  tasks  of  real  life,  hath  wrought 
Upon  the  plan  that  pleased  his  boyish  thought:  • 
Whose  high  endeavors  are  an  inward  light 
Xhat  makes  the  path  before  him  always  bright:  ^ 
Who,  with  a  natural  instinct  to  discern 
What  knowledge  can  perform,  is  diligent  to  learn; 
Abides  by  this  resolve,  and  stops  not  there, 
But  makes  his  moral  being  his  prime  care; 
Who,  doomed  to  go  in  company  with  pain, 
And  fear,  and  bloodshed,  miserable  train! 
Turns  his  necessity  to  glorious  gain; 
In  face  of  these  doth  exercise  a  power 
Which  is  our  human  nature's  highest  dower; 
Controls  them  and  subdues,  transmutes,  bereaves 
Of  their  bad  influence,  and  their  good  receives:  - 
By  objects,  which  might  force  the  soul  to  abate 
Her  feeling,  rendered  more  compassionate; 
Is  placable — because  occasions  rise 
So  often  that  demand  such  sacrifice; 
More  skilful  in  self-knowledge,  even  more  pure, 
As  tempted  more;  more  able  to  endure, 
As  more  exposed  to  suffering  and  distress; 
Thence,  also,  more  alive  to  tenderness. 

'Tis  he  whose  law  is  reason;  who  depends 
Upon  that  law  as  on  the  best  of  friends; 
Whence,  in  a  state  where  men  are  tempted  still  1 
To  evil  for  a  guard  against  worse  ill. 
And  what  in  quality  or  act  is  best 
Doth  seldom  on  a  right  foundation  rest, 
He  labors  good  on  good  to  fix,  and  owes 
To  virtue  every  triumph  that  he  knows: 
Who,  if  he  rise  to  station  of  command. 
Rises  by  open  means;  and  there  will  stand 


2936     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

On  honorable  terms,  or  else  retire, 
And  in  himself  possess  his  own  desire; 
Who  comprehends  his  trust,  and  to  the  same 
Keeps  faithful  with  a  singleness  of  aim; 
And  therefore  does  not  stoop,  nor  lie  in  wait 
For  wealth,  or  honors,  or  for  worldly  state; 
Whom  they  must  follow;  on  whose  head  must  fall, 
Like  showers  of  manna,  if  they  come  at  all: 
Whose  powers  shed  round  him  in  the  common  strife. 
Or  mild  concerns  of  ordinary  life, 
A  constant  influence,  a  peculiar  grace; 
•  But  who,  if  he  be  called  upon  to  face 
Some  awful  moment  to  which  Heaven  has  joined 
Great  issues,  good  or  bad  for  human  kind. 
Is  happy  as  a  lover;  and  attired 
With  sudden  brightness,  like  a  man  inspired; 
»"     And,  through  the  heat  of  conflict,  keeps  the  law 
In  calmness  made,  and  sees  what  he  foresaw; 
Or  if  an  unexpected  call  succeed. 
Come  when  it  will,  is  equal  to  the  need: 
He  who,  though  thus  endued  as  with  a  sense 
And  faculty  for  storm  and  turbulence. 
Is  yet  a  soul  whose  master-bias  leans 
To  homefelt  pleasures  and  to  gentle  scenes; 
Sweet  images!  which,  wheresoe'er  he  be, 
Are  at  his  heart;  and  such  fidelity 
It  is  his  darling  passion  to  approve; 
More  brave  for  this,  that  he  hath  much  to  love. 
'Tis,  finally,  the  Man,  who,  lifted  high, 
Conspicuous  object  in  a  Nation's  eye. 
Or  left  unthought-of  in  obscurity, — 
Who,  with  a  toward  or  untoward  lot, 
Prosperous  or  adverse,  to  his  wish  or  not — 
Plays,  in  the  many  games  of  life,  that  one         ,'V 
Where  what  he  most  doth  value  must  be  won:  /. 
Whom  neither  shape  of  danger  can  dismay. 
Nor  thought  of  tender  happiness  betray; 
Who,  not  content  that  former  worth  stand  fast, 
Looks  forward,  persevering  to  the  last. 
From  ■*veU  to  better,  daily  self-surpassed:        A'/V 


The  Great  Adventure  -937" 

Who,  whether  praise  of  him  must  walk  the  earth 
For  ever,  and  to  noble  deeds  give  birth, 
Or  he  must  fall,  to  sleep  without  his  fame, 
And  leave  a  dead  unprofitable  name — • 
Finds  comfort  in  himself  and  in  his  cause; 
And,  while  the  mortal  mist  is  gathering,  draws 
His  breath  in  confidence  of  Heaven's  applause. 

,.    This  is  the  happy  Warrior;  this  is  he 

That  every  man  in  arms  should  wish  to  be. 

Waiiam  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 

THE  GREAT  ADVENTURE 

'Tis  sweet  to  hear  of  heroes  dead. 

To  know  them  stUl  alive; 
But  sweeter  if  we  earn  their  bread, 

And  in  us  they  survive. 

Ye  skies,  drop  gently  round  my  breast 

And  be  my  corselet  blue; 
Ye  earth,  receive  my  lance  in  rest, 

My  faithful  charger  you: 

£  ].  Ye  stars  my  spear-heads  in  the  sky. 

My  arrow- tips  ye  are: 

I  see  the  routed  foemen  fly 

My  bright  spears  fixed  [for  war]. 

Give  me  an  angel  for  a  foe! 

Fix  now  the  place  and  time! 
And  straight  to  meet  him  I  will  go 

Above  the  starry  chime: 

And  with  our  clashing  bucklers'  clang 

The  heavenly  spheres  shall  ring, 
While  bright  the  northern  lights  shall  hang 

Beside  our  tourneying. 

And  if  she  lose  her  champion  true, 

Tell  Heaven  not  to  despair. 
For  I  will  be  her  champion  new,  ./ 

Her  fame  I  will  repair. 

Henry  David  Thoreau  [1817-1862] 


2938      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"HE  WHOM  A  DREAM  HATH  POSSESSED  " 

He  whom  a  dream  hath  possessed  knoweth  no  more  of 
doubting, 
For  mist  and  the  blowing  of  winds  and  the  mouthing  of 
words  he  scorns; 
Not  the  sinuous  speech  of  schools  he  hears,  but  a  knightly 
shouting, 
And  never  comes  darkness  down,  yet  he  greeteth  a  mil- 
lion morns. 

He  whom  a  dream  hath  possessed  knoweth  no  more  of  roam- 
ing; 
All  roads  and  the  flowing  of  waves  and  the  speediest 
flight  he  knows, 
But  wherever  his  feet  are  set,  his  soul  is  forever  homing, 
And  going,  he  comes,  and  coming  he  heareth  a  call  and 
goes. 

He  whom  a  dream  hath  possessed  knoweth  no  more  of 
sorrow, 
At  death  and  the  dropping  of  leaves  and  the  fading  of  suns 
he  smiles. 
For  a  dream  remembers  no  past  and  scorns  the  desire  of  a 
morrow. 
And  a  dream  in  a  sea  of  doom  sets  surely  the  ultimate  isles. 

He  whom  a  dream  hath  possessed  treads  the  impalpable 
marches, 
From  the  dust  of  the  day's  long  road  he  leaps  to  a  laughing 
star, 
And  the  ruin  oi  worlds  that  fall  he  views  from  eternal  arches, 
And  rides  God's  battle-field  in  a  flashing  and  golden  car. 
Shacmas  OShcel  [1886- 

MASTERY 

I  WOULD  not  have  a  god  come  in 
To  shield  me  suddenly  from  sin, 
And  set  my  house  of  life  to  rights; 
Nor  angels  with  bright  burning  wings 
Ordering  my  earthly  thoughts  and  things; 


(foijDsR .  A  Prayer  2939 

Rather  my  own  frail  guttering  lights 
Wind-blown  and  nearly  beaten  out, 
Rather  the  terror  of  the  nights 
And  long  sick  groping  after  doubt, 
Rather  be  lost  than  let  my  soul 
Slip  vaguely  from  my  own  control — 
Of  my  own  spirit  let  me  be 
In  sole  though  feeble  mastery. 

Sara  Teasdale  [1884- 

A  PRAYER 

I  KNEEL  not  now  to  pray  that  thou 

Make  white  one  single  sin, — 
I  only  kneel  to  thank  thee.  Lord, 

For  what  I  have  not  been; 

For  deeds  which  sprouted  in  my  heart 
But  ne'er  to  bloom  were  brought. 

For  monstrous  vices  which  I  slew 
In  the  shambles  of  my  thought — 

Dark  seeds  the  world  has  never  guessed 

By  hell  and  passion  bred, 
Which  never  grew  beyond  the  bud 

That  cankered  in  my  head.  ' 

Some  said  I  was  a  righteous  man — 

Poor  fools!    The  gallow's  tree 
(If  thou  hadst  let  one  foot  to  slip) 

Had  grown  a  limb  for  me. 

So  for  the  Man  I  might  have  been 
My  heart  must  cease  to  mourn — 

'Twere  best  to  praise  the  living  Lord 
For  monsters  never  born, 

To  bend  the  spiritual  knee 
(Knowing  myself  within) 
And  thank  the  kind,  benignant  God 
For  what  I  have  not  been. 

Harry  Kemp  [1883- 


2940     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

PRAYER 

God,  though  this  Hfe  is  but  a  wraith, 
Although  we  know  not  what  we  use, 

Although  we  grope  with  little  faith, 
Give  me  the  heart  to  fight — and  lose. 

Ever  insurgent  let  me  be, 

Make  me  more  daring  than  devout; 

From  sleek  contentment  keep  me  free, 
And  fill  me  with  a  buoyant  doubt. 

Open  my  eyes  to  visions  girt 

With  beauty,  and  with  wonder  lit — 

But  let  me  always  see  the  dirt. 
And  all  that  spawn  and  die  in  it. 

Open  my  ears  to  music;  let 

Me  thrill  with  Spring's  first  flutes  and  drums — 
But  never  let  me  dare  forget 

The  bitter  ballads  of  the  slums. 

From  compromise  and  things  half-done, 
Keep  me,  with  stern  and  stubborn  pride; 

And  when,  at  last,  the  fight  is  won, 
God,  keep  me  still  unsatisfied. 

Louis  Untermeyer  [1885- 

PRAYER  FOR  PAIN 

I  DO  not  pray  for  peace  nor  ease, 
Nor  truce  from  sorrow: 
No  suppliant  on  servile  knees 
Begs  here  against  to-morrow! 

Lean  flame  against  lean  flame  we  flash, 
O  Fates  that  meet  me  fair; 
Blue  steel  against  blue  steel  we  clash — 
Lay  on,  and  I  shall  dare! 

But  Thou  of  deeps  the  awful  Deep, 
Thou  breather  in  the  clay, 


noboafta^t   bn  Carry   On  !  2941 

Grant  this  my  only  prayer — Oh  keep 
My  soul  from  turning  gray! 

For  until  now,  whatever  wrought 
Against  my  sweet  desires, 
My  days  were  smitten  harps  strung  taut, 
My  nights  were  slumbrous  lyres. 

And  howsoe'er  the  hard  blow  rang 
Upon  my  battered  shield, 
Some  lark -like,  soaring  spirit  sang 
Above  my  battle-field; 

And  through  my  soul  of  stormy  night 
The  zigzag  blue  flame  ran. 
I  asked  no  odds — I  fought  my  fight — 
Events  against  a  man. 

But  now — at  last — the  gray  mist  chokes 
And  numbs  me.    Leave  me  pain! 
Oh,  let  me  feel  I  he  biting  strokes 
That  I  may  fight  again! 

John  G.  Neihardl  [1881- 

CARRY  ON! 

It's  easy  to  fight  when  everything's  right, 

And  you're  mad  with  the  thrill  and  the  glory; 

It's  easy  to  cheer  when  victory's  near, 

And  wallow  in  fields  that  are  gory. 

It's  a  different  song  when  everything's  wrong, 

When  you're  feeling  infernally  mortal; 

When  it's  ten  against  one,  and  hope  there  is  none, 

Buck  up,  little  soldier,  and  chortle: 

Carry  on!    Carry  on! 
There  isn't  much  punch  in  your  blow. 
You're  glaring  and  staring  and  hitting  out  blind; 
You're  muddy  and  bloody,  but  never  you  mind. 
Carry  on !    Carry  on ! 
You  haven't  the  ghost  of  a  show. 
It's  looking  like  death,  but  while  you've  a  breath, 
Carry  on,  my  son!    Carry  on! 


294'2      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  so  in  the  strife  of  the  battle  of  Hfe 
It's  easy  to  fight  when  you're  winning; 
It's  easy  to  slave,  and  starve  and  be  brave, 
When  the  dawn  of  success  is  beginning. 
But  the  man  who  can  meet  despair  and  defeat 
With  a  cheer,  there's  the  man  of  God's  choosing; 
The  man  who  can  fight  to  Heaven's  own  height 
Is  the  man  who  can  fight  when  he's  losing. 

Carry  on!    Carry  on! 
Things  never  were  looming  so  black. 
But  show  that  you  haven't  a  cowardly  streak, 
And  though  you're  unlucky  you  never  are  weak. 
Carry  on!    Carry  on! 
Brace  up  for  another  attack. 
It's  looking  like  hell,  but — you  never  can  tell: 
Carry  on,  old  man!    Carry  on! 

There  are  some  who  drift  out  in  the  deserts  of  doubt, 
And  some  who  in  brutishness  wallow; 
There  are  others,  I  know,  who  in  piety  go 
Because  of  a  Heaven  to  follow. 
But  to  labor  with  zest,  and  to  give  of  your  best, 
For  the  sweetness  and  joy  of  the  giving; 
To  help  folks  along  with  a  hand  and  a  song; 
Why,  there's  the  real  sunshine  of  living. 

Carry  on!    Carry  on! 
Fight  the  good  fight  and  true; 
Believe  in  your  mission,  greet  life  with  a  cheer; 
There's  big  work  to  do,  and  that's  why  you  are  hisrp. 
Carry  on!    Carry  on!  ■  ^\  „.,^Yy- 

Let  the  world  be  the  better  for  you;  .,:j 

And  at  last  when  you  die,  let  this  be  your  cry: 
Carry  on,  my  soul!    Carry  on! 

Robert  W.  Service  [1874- 

THE  FIGHTING  FAILURE 

He  has  come  the  way  of  the  fighting  men  and  fought  by  the 

rules  of  the  Game. 
And  out  of  Life  he  has  gathered— what?    A  living — and 

little  fame.  '«  Xt^'^'-'' 


The   Fighting   Failure  ^943 

Ever  and  ever  the  Goal  looms  near — seeming  each  time 

worth  while, 
But  ever  it  proves  a  mirage  fair — ever  the  grim  gods  smile. 
And  so,  with  lips  hard  set  and  white,  he  buries  the  hope 

that  is  gone —  '/ 

His  fight  is  lost — and  he  knows  it  is  lost — and  yet  he  'is 

fighting  on.  I'f 

Out  of  the  smoke  of  the  battle-line,  watching  men  win  their 

way 
And  cheering  with  those  who  cheer  success,  he  enters  again 

the  fray. 
Licking  the  blood  and  dust  from  his  lips,  wiping  the  sweat 

from  his  eyes. 
He  does  the  work  he  is  set  to  do,  and—"  therein  honor  lies." 
Brave  they  were,  those  men  he  cheered,  theirs  is  the  winners' 

thrill; 
His  fight  is  lost— and  he  knows  it  is  lost — and  yet  he  is 

fighting  still. 

And  those  who  have  won,  have  rest  and  peace;  and  those 

who  have  died,  have  more; 
But  weary  and  spent,  he  cannot  stop,  seeking  the  ultimate 

score. 
Courage  was  theirs  for  a  little  time — but  what  of  the  man 

who  sees 
That  lose  he  must,  yet  will  not  beg,  for  mercy,  upon  his  knees? 
Side  by  side  with  grim  Defeat,  he  struggles  at  dusk  or  dawn ; 
His  fight  is  lost — and  he  knows  it  is  lost— and  yet,  he  is 

fighting  on. 

Praise  for  the  warriors  who  succeed,  and  tears  for  the  van- 
quished dead. 

The  world  will  hold  them  close  to  Her  heart,  wreathing 
each  honored  head; 

But  there  in  the  ranks,  soul-sick,  time-tried,  he  battles 
against  the  odds. 

Sans  hope,  but  true  to  his  colors  torn,  the  plaything  of  the 
gods! 

Uncover  when  he  goes  by  at  last!    Held  to  his  task  by  will — 

The  fight  is  lost — and  he  knows  it  is  lost— and  yet  he  is 
fighting  still!  Everard  J.  Applelon  [1872- 


2944     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 


iJV.l 


THE  PRAYER  OF  BEATEN  MEN    ,toy/ 

From  "  The  House  of  Broken  Swords  "  lOV'J  luff 


We  are  the  fallen,  who,  with  helpless  faces 
Low  in  the  dust,  in  stiffening  ruin  lay, 

Felt  the  hoof's  beat,  and  heard  the  rattling  traces 
As  o'er  us  drove  the  chariots  of  the  fray. 


■:/, 


■di  \o  iuO 


We  are  the  fallen,  who  by  ramparts  gory. 

Awaiting  death,  heard  the  far  shouts  begin,  '  r/- 

And  with  our  last  glance  gUmpsed  the  victor's  glory 

For  which  we  died,  but  dying  might  not  win.  „...,„^i.j 

noil 
We  were  but  men.     Always  our  eyes  were  holden, ,  ^.^^^^  ^pj 

We  could  not  read  the  dark  that  walled  us  round,,}*  ^yr-;Cj- 

Nor  deem  our  futile  plans  with  thine  enfolden — 

We  fought,  not  knowing  God  was  on  the  ground. 

Give  us  our  own;  and  though  in  realms  eternal 
The  potsherd  and  the  pot,  behke,  are  one,    fv/^  oaodi  bnk 

Make  our  old  world  to  know  that  with  supernal    '     -' 
Powers  we  were  matched,  and  by  the  stars  o'erthrown. 

Ay,  grant  our  ears  to  hear  the  foolish  praising  ■,".  n,,,'^ 

Of  men — old  voices  of  our  lost  home-land. 
Or  else,  the  gateways  of  this  dim  world  raising, 

Give  us  our  swords  again,  and  hold  thy  hand.  ,;p 

William  Hervey  Woods  [1852- 


THE  LAST  WORD 

Creep  into  thy  narrow  bed, 
Creep,  and  let  no  more  be  said! 
Vain  thy  onset!  all  stands  fast. 
Thou  thyself  must  break  at  last. 

Let  the  long  contention  cease! 
Geese  are  swans,  and  swans  are  geese, 
Let  them  have  it  how  they  will! 
Thou  art  tired;  best  be  still. 


uil 


ill 
ii'T 


lo  Victis  -945 

They  out-talked  thee,  hissed  thee,  tore  thee? 
Better  men  fared  thus  before  thee; 
Fired  their  ringing  shot  and  passed. 
Hotly  charged — and  sank  at  last. 

Charge  once  more,  then,  and  be  dumb! 
Let  the  victors,  when  they  come, 
When  the  forts  of  folly  fall. 
Find  thy  body  by  the  wall! 

Matthav  Arnold  [1822-1888I 


10  VICTIS 

From  "  He  and  She  " 

I  SING  the  hymn  of  the  conquered,  who  fell  in  the  Battle  of 
Life, 

The  hymn  of  the  wounded,  the  beaten,  who  died  over- 
whelmed in  the  strife; 

Not  the  jubilant  song  of  the  victors,  for  whom  the  resound- 
ing acclaim 

Of  nations  was  lifted  in  chorus,  whose  brows  wore  the  chap- 
let  of  fame. 

But  the  hymn  of  the  low  and  the  humble,  the  weary,  the 
broken  in  heart. 

Who  strove  and  who  failed,  acting  bravely  a  silent  and  des- 
perate part; 

Whose  youth  bore  no  flower  on  its  branches,  whose  hopes 
burned  in  ashes  away. 

From  whose  hands  slipped  the  prize  they  had  grasped  at, 
who  stood  at  the  dying  of  day 

With  the  wreck  of  their  life  all  around  them,  unpiticd,  un- 
heeded, alone. 

With  Death  swooping  down  o'er  their  failure,  and  all  but 
their  faith  overthrown, 

While  the  voice  of  the  world  shouts  its  chorus — its  paean  for 
those  who  have  won; 

While  the  trumpet  is  sounding  triumphant  and  high  to  the 
breeze  and  the  sun 


2946     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Glad  banners  are  waving,  hands  clapping  and  hurrying  feet 
Thronging  after  the  laurel-crowned  victors,  I  stand  on  the 

field  of  defeat 
In  the  shadow,  with  those  who  are  fallen,  and  wounded,  and 

dying,  and  there 
Chant  a  requiem  low,  place  my  hand  on  their  pain-knotted 

brows,  breathe  a  prayer, 
Hold  the  hand  that  is  helpless  and  whisper^  "They  only  the 

victory  win  "1  v/il  t 

Who  have  fought  the  good  fight  and  have  vanquished  the 

demon  that  tempts  us  within. 
Who  have  held  to  their  faith  unseduced  by  the  prize  that  the 

world  holds  on  high. 
Who  have  dared  for  a  high  cause  to  suffer,  resist,  fight — if 

need  be,  to  die." 
Speak,  History!     Who  are  life's  victors?     Unroll  the  long 

annals  and  say. 
Are  they  those  whom  the  world  called  the  victors, — who 

won  the  success  of  a  day? 
The  martyrs,  or  Nero?    The  Spartans  who  fell  at  Ther- 
mopylae's tryst. 
Or   the   Persians   and   Xerxes?     His .  judges,  or  Socrates? 

Pilate,  or  Christ? 

William  Welmore  Story  [1810-1895] 

"THEY  WENT  FORTH  TO  BATTLE  BUT  THEY 
ALWAYS  FELL" 

They  went  forth  to  battle  but  they  always  fell; 
Their  eyes  were  fixed  above  the  sullen  shields; 

Nobly  they  fought  and  bravely,  but  not  well, 

And  sank  heart-wounded  by  a  subtle  spell. 
They  knew  not  fear  that  to  the  foeman  yields, 
They  were  not  weak,  as  one  who  vainly  wields 

A  futile  weapon;  yet  the  sad  scrolls  tell  •tr// 

How  on  the  hard-fought  field  they  always  fell. 

It  was  a  secret  music  that  they  heard, 

A  sad  sweet  plea  for  pity  and  for  peace; 
And  that  which  pierced  the  heart  was  but  a  word, 
Though  the  white  breast  was  red-lipped  where  the  sword 


r-  .  The    Masters  ^947 

Pressed  a  fierce  cruel  kiss,  to  put  surcease 
On  its  hot  thirst,  but  -drank  a  hot  increase. 
Ah,  they  by  some  strange  troubhng  doubt  were  stirred. 
And  died  for  hearing  what  no  foeman  heard. 

They  went  forth  to  battle  but  they  always  fell: 
Their  might  was  not  the  might  of  lifted  spears; 

Over  the  battle-clamor  came  a  spell 

Of  troubling  music,  and  they  fought  not  well. 
Their  wreaths  are  willows  and  their  tribute,  tears; 
Their  names  are  old  sad  stories  in  men's  ears; 

Yet  they  will  scatter  the  red  hordes  of  Hell, 

Who  went  to  battle  forth  and  always  fell. 

Shacmas  O  Shed  [1886- 


THE  MASTERS 

Oh,  Masters,  you  who  rule  the  world, 

Will  you  not  wait  with  me  awhile, 
When  swords  are  sheathed  and  sails  are  furled, 

And  all  the  fields  with  harvest  smile? 
I  would  not  waste  your  time  for  long, 

I  ask  you  but,  when  you  are  tired, 
To  read  how  by  the  weak,  the  strong 

Are  weighed  and  worshiped  and  desired. 

W^hcn  weary  of  the  Mart,  the  Loom, 

The  Withering-house,  the  Riffle-blocks, 
The  Barrack-square,  the  Engine-room, 

The  pick-axe,  ringing  on  the  rocks, — 
When  tents  are  pitched  and  work  is  done, 

While  restful  twilight  broods  above. 
By  fresh-lit  lamp,  or  dying  sun, 

See  in  my  songs  how  women  love. 

W^e  shared  your  lonely  watch  by  night, 
We  knew  you  faithful  at  the  helm, 

Our  thoughts  went  with  you  1!hrough  the  fight, 
That  saved  a  soul, — or  wrecked  a  realm; 


2948     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Ah,  how  our  hearts  leapt  forth  to  you, 
In  pride  and  joy,  when  you  prevailed, 

And  when  you  died,  serene  and  true: 
— We  wept  in  silence  when  you  failed! 

Oh,  brain,  that  did  not  gain  the  gold! 

Oh,  arm,  that  could  not  wield  the  sword, 
Here  is  the  love,  that  is  not  sold. 

Here  are  the  hearts  to  hail  you  Lord! 

You  played  and  lost  the  game?    What  then? 

The  rules  are  harsh  and  hard,  v^'e  know; 
You,  still,  oh,  brothers,  are  the  men 

Whom  we  in  secret  reverence  so. 
Your  work  was  waste?    Maybe  your  share 

Lay  in  the  hour  you  laughed  and  kissed; 
Who  knows  but  that  your  son  shall  wear 

The  laurels  that  his  father  missed? 

Ay,  you  who  win,  and  you  who  lose, 

Whether  you  triumph, — or  despair, — 
When  your  returning  footsteps  choose 

The  homeward  track,  our  love  is  there. 
For,  since  the  world  is  ordered  thus, 

To  you,  the  fame,  the  stress,  the  sword, 
We  can  but  v/ait,  until  to  us 

You  give  yourselves,  for  our  reward. 

To  Whaler's  deck  and  Coral  beach. 

To  lonely  Ranch  and  Frontier-Fort, 
Beyond  the  narrow  bounds  of  speech 

I  lay  the  cable  of  my  thought. 
I  fain  would  send  my  thanks  to  you, 

(Though  who  am  I,  to  give  you  praise?) 
Since  what  you  are,  and  work  you  do 

Are  lessons  for  our  easier  ways. 

'Neath  alien  stars  your  camp-fires  glow, 
I  know  you  not, — your  tents  are  far. 

My  hope  is  but  in  song  to  show 
How  honbred  and  how  dear  you  are. 

Laurence  Hope  [1865-1904] 


The   Kings  ^949 


THE  KINGS 

A  MAN  said  unto  his  Angel: 
"My  spirits  are  fallen  low, 
And  I  cannot  carry  this  battle: 
O  brother!  where  might  I  go? 

"The  terrible  Kings  are  on  me 
With  spears  that  are  deadly  bright; 
Against  me  so  from  the  cradle 
Do  fate  and  my  fathers  fight." 

Then  said  to  the  man  his  Angel: 
"Thou  wavering  witless  soul, 
Back  to  the  ranks!    What  matter 
To  win  or  to  lose  the  whole, 

"As  judged  by  the  little  judges 
Who  hearken  not  well,  nor  see? 
Not  thus,  by  the  outer  issue, 
The  Wise  shall  interpret  thee. 

"Thy  will  is  the  sovereign  measure 
And  only  event  of  things: 
The  puniest  heart,  defying, 
Were  stronger  than  all  these  Kings. 

"Though  out  of  the  past  they  gather^ 
Mind's  Doubt  and  Bodily  Pain, 
And  pallid  Thirst  of  the  Spirit 
That  is  kin  to  the  other  twain, 

"And  Grief,  in  a  cloud  of  banners. 
And  ringleted  Vain  Desires, 
And  Vice  with  the  spoils  upon  him 
Of  thee  and  thy  beaten  sires, — 

"W^hile  Kings  of  eternal  evil 
Yet  darken  the  hills  about. 
Thy  part  is  with  broken  saber 
To  rise  on  the  last  redoubt; 


2950     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"To  fear  not  sensible  failure, 
Nor  covet  the  game  at  all, 
But  fighting,  fighting,  fighting. 
Die,  driven  against  the  wall!" 

Louise  Imogen  Guiney  [1861- 


FAILURES 

They  bear  no  laurels  on  their  sunless  brows. 

Nor  aught  within  their  pale  hands  as  they  go; 

They  look  as  men  accustomed  to  the  slow 
And  level  onward  course  'neath  drooping  boughs. 
Who  may  these  be  no  trumpet  doth  arouse. 

These  of  the  dark  processionals  of  woe, 

Unpraised,  unblamed,  but  whom  sad  Acheron's  flow 
Monotonously  lulls  to  leaden  drowse? 
These  are  the  Failures.    Clutched  by  Circumstance, 

They  were — say  not  too  weak! — too  ready  prey 
To  their  own  fear  whose  fixed  Gorgon  glance 

Made  them  as  stone  for  aught  of  great  essay; — 
Or  else  they  nodded  when  their  Master-Chance 

Wound  his  one  signal,  and  went  on  his  way. 

Arthur  Upson  [187 7-1908] 

DON  QUIXOTE 

Behind  thy  pasteboard,  on  thy  battered  hack, 
Thy  lean  cheek  striped  with  plaster  to  and  fro, 
Thy  long  spear  leveled  at  the  unseen  foe. 
And  doubtful  Sancho  trudging  at  thy  back. 
Thou  wert  a  figure  strange  enough,  good  lack! 
To  make  Wiseacredom,  both  high  and  low. 
Rub  purblind  eyes,  and  (having  watched  thee  go), 
Dispatch  its  Dogberrys  upon  thy  track: 
Alas!  poor  Knight!     Alas!  poor  soul  possessed! 
Yet  would  to-day,  when  Courtesy  grows  chill, 
And  life's  fine  loyalties  are  turned  to  jest, 
Some  fire  of  thine  might  burn  within  us  still! 
Ah!  would  but  one  might  lay  his  lance  in  rest. 
And  charge  in  earnest — were  it  but  a  mill. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


A  Prayer  '^95^ 


A  PRAYER 

Lord,  not  for  light  in  darkness  do  we  pray, 
Not  that  the  veil  be  lifted  from  our  eyes, 
Nor  that  the  slow  ascension  of  our  day 
Be  otherwise. 

Not  for  a  clearer  vision  of  the  things 
Whereof  the  fashioning  shall  make  us  great. 
Nor  for  remission  of  the  peril  and  stings 
Of  time  and  fate. 

Not  for  a  fuller  knowledge  of  the  end 
Whereto  we  travel,  bruised  yet  unafraid, 
Nor  that  the  little  heahng  that  we  lend 
Shall  be  repaid. 

Not  these,  O  Lord.     We  would  not  break  the  bars 
Thy  wisdom  sets  about  us;  we  shall  climb 
Unfettered  to  the  secrets  of  the  stars 
In  thy  good  time. 

We  do  not  crave  the  high  perception  swift 
When  to  refrain  were  well,  and  when  fulfil, 
Nor  yet  the  understanding  strong  to  sift 
The  good  from  ill. 

Not  these,  O  Lord.     For  these  thou  hast  revealed. 
We  know  the  golden  season  when  to  reap 
The  heavy-fruited  treasure  of  the  field. 
The  hour  to  sleep. 

Not  these.     We  know  the  hemlock  from  the  rose, 
The  pure  from  stained,  the  noble  from  the  base, 
The  tranquil  holy  light  of  truth  that  glows 
On  Pity's  face. 

W^e  know  the  paths  wherein  our  feet  should  press. 
Across  our  hearts  are  written  thy  decrees. 
Yet  now,  O  Lord,  be  merciful  to  bless 
With  more  than  these. 


2952     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Grant  us  the  will  to  fashion  as  we  feel, 
Grant  us  the  strength  to  labor  as  we  know, 
Grant  us  the  purpose,  ribbed  and  edged  with  steel, 
To  strike  the  blow. 

Knowledge  we  ask  not — knowledge  thou  hast  lent; 
But  Lord,  the  will — there  lies  our  bitter  need. 
Give  us  to  build  above  the  deep  intent 
The  deed,  the  deed. 

John  Drinkwatcr  [18S2- 


BATTLE   CRY 

More  than  half  beaten,  but  fearless. 

Facing  the  storm  and  the  night; 
Breathless  and  reeling,  but  tearless. 

Here  in  the  lull  of  the  fight, 
I  who  bow  not  but  before  Thee, 

God  of  the  fighting  Clan, 
Lifting  my  fists  I  implore  Thee, 

Give  me  the  heart  of  a  Man! 

What  though  I  hve  with  the  winners. 

Or  perish  with  those  who  fall? 
Only  the  cowards  are  sinners. 

Fighting  the  fight  is  all. 
Strong  is  my  Foe — he  advances! 

Snapped  is  my  blade,  O  Lord! 
See  the  proud  banners' and  lances! 

O  spare  me  this  stub  of  a  sword! 

Give  me  no  pity,  nor  spare  me; 

Calm  not  the  wrath  of  my  Foe. 
See  where  he  beckons  to  dare  me! 

Bleeding,  half-beaten — I  go. 
Not  for  the  glory  of  winning, 

Not  for  the  fear  of  the  night; 
Shunning  the  battle  is  sinning — 

O  spare  me  the  heart  to  fight! 


The  Joyful  Wisdom  2953 

.   Red  is  the  mist  about  me; 

Deep  is  the  wound  in  my  side; 
"Coward"  thou  criest  to  flout  me? 

O  terrible  Foe,  thou  hast  hed! 
Here  with  my  battle  before  me, 

God  of  the  fighting  Clan, 
Grant  that  the  woman  who  bore  me 
Suffered  to  suckle  a  man! 

John  G.  Neihardl  [1881- 

RABIA 

Rabia,  sick  upon  her  bed. 
By  two  saints  was  visited, — 

Holy  Malik,  Hassan  w-ise — 
Men  of  mark  in  Moslem  eyes. 

Hassan  says,  "Whose  prayer  is  pure, 
Will  God's  chastisement  endure." 

Malik,  from  a  deeper  sense 
Uttered  his  experience: 

"He  who  loves  his  Master's  choice 
Will  in  chastisement  rejoice." 

Rabia  saw  some  selfish  will 
In  their  maxims  lingering  still. 

And  replied,  "O  men  of  grace! 
He  who  sees  his  Master's  face 

Will  not,  in  his  prayer,  recall 
That  he  is  chastised  at  all." 
From  the  Arabic,  by  James  Frcc7)ia>i  Clarke  [1S10-1S88] 

THE  JOYFUL  WISDOM 

From  "  The  Angel  in  the  House  " 

Would  Wisdom  for  herself  be  wooed. 
And  wake  the  foolish  from  his  dream, 

She  must  be  glad  as  well  as  good, 
And  must  not  only  be,  but  seem. 


2954     JPoeiTis  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Beauty  and  joy  are  hers  by  right; 

And,  knowing  this,  I  wonder  less 
That  she's  so  scorned,  when  falsely  dight 

In  misery  and  ugliness. 
What's  that  which  Heaven  to  man  endears, 

And  that  which  eyes  no  sooner  see 
Than  the  heart  says,  with  floods  of  tears, 

"Ah,  that's  the  thing  which  I  would  be!" 
Not  childhood,  full  of  frown  and  fret; 

Not  youth,  impatient  to  disown 
Those  visions  high,  which  to  forget 

Were  worse  than  never  to  have  known; 
Not  worldlings,  in  whose  fair  outside, 

Nor  courtesy  nor  justice  fails. 
Thanks  to  cross-pulling  vices  tied, 

Like  Samson's  foxes,  by  the  tails; 
Not  poets;  real  things  are  dreams, 

When  dreams  are  as  reaHties, 
And  boasters  of  celestial  gleams 

Go  stumbling  aye  for  want  of  eyes; 
Not  patriots  nor  people's  men. 

In  whom  two  worse-matched  evils  meet 
Than  ever  sought  Adullam's  den, 

Base  conscience  and  a  high  conceit; 
Not  new-made  saints,  their  feehngs  iced, 

Their  joy  in  man  and  nature  gone, 
Who  sing  "O  easy  yoke  of  Christ!" 

But  find  'tis  hard  to  get  it  on;^  '^f^^'- 
Not  great  men,  even  when  they're  good; 

The  good  man  whom  the  time  makes  great, 
By  some  disgrace  of  chance  or  blood, 

God  fails  not  to  humihate; 
Not  these:  but  souls,  found  here  and  there. 

Oases  in  our  waste  of  sin, 
Where  everything  is  well  and  fair. 

And  Heaven  remits  its  discipline; 
Whose  sweet  subdual  of  the  world 

The  worldling  scarce  can  recognize, 
And  ridicule,  against  it  hurled, 

Drops  with  a  broken  sting,  and  dies; 


Ode  to   Duty  '^955 


Who  nobly,  if  they  cannot  know 

Whether  a  'scutcheon's  dubious  field 
Carries  a  falcon  or  a  crow, 

Fancy  a  falcon  on  the  shield; 
Yet,  ever  careful  not  to  hurt 

God's  honor,  who  creates  success. 
Their  praise  of  even  the  best  desert 

Is  but  to  have  presumed  no  less ; 
Who,  should  their  own  life  plaudits  bring, 

Are  simply  vexed  at  heart  that  such 
An  easy,  yea,  delightful  thing 

Should  move  the  minds  of  men  so  much. 
They  live  by  law,  not  like  the  fool. 

But  Hke  the  bard,  who  freely  sings 
In  strictest  bonds  of  rhyme  and  rule. 

And  finds  in  them,  not  bonds,  but  wings. 
Postponing  still  their  private  ease 

To  courtly  custom,  appetite. 
Subjected  to  observances, 

To  banquet  goes  with  full  delight; 
Nay,  continence  and  gratitude 

So  cleanse  their  lives  from  earth's  alloy, 
They  taste,  in  Nature's  common  food, 

Nothing  but  spiritual  joy. 
They  shine  like  Moses  in  the  face, 

And  teach  our  hearts,  without  the  rod, 
That  God's  grace  is  the  only  grace, 

And  all  grace  is  the  grace  of  God. 

Covaitry  Palmorc  [1823-1! 

ODE  TO  DUTY 

Stern  Daughter  of  ihc  Voice  of  God! 

O  Duty!  if  that  name  thou  love, 

Who  art  a  light  to  guide,  a  rod 

To  check  the  erring  and  reprove ; 

Thou,  who  art  victory  and  law 

When  empty  terrors  overawe; 

From  vain  temptations  dost  set  free; 

And  calm'st  the  weary  strife  of  fxail  humanity! 


'^95^    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

There  are  who  ask  not  if  thine  eye 
Be  on  them;  who,  in  love  and  truth, 
Where  no  misgiving  is,  rely 
Upon  the  genial  sense  of  youth : 
Glad  Hearts!  without  reproach  or  blot, 
Who  do  thy  work,  and  know  it  not: 

0,  if  through  confidence  misplaced 

They  fail,  thy  saving  arms,  dread  Power!  around  them  cast. 

Serene  will  be  our  days  and  bright, 

And  happy  will  our  nature  be. 

When  love  is  an  unerring  light. 

And  joy  its  own  security. 

And  they  a  blissful  course  may  hold 

Even  now,  who,  not  unwisely  bold, 

Live  in  the  spirit  of  this  creed; 

Yet  seek  thy  firm  support,  according  to  their  need. 

1,  loving  freedom,  and  untried; 
No  sport  of  every  random  gust, 
Yet  being  to  myself  a  guide, 

Too  blindly  have  reposed  my  trust: 

And  oft,  when  in  my  heart  was  heard 

Thy  timely  mandate,  I  deferred 

The  task,  in  smoother  walks  to  stray; 

But  thee  I  now  would  serve  more  strictly,  if  I  may. 

Through  no  disturbance  of  my  soul. 

Or  strong  compunction  in  me  wrought, 

I  supplicate  for  thy  control; 

But  in  the  quietness  of  thought: 

Me  this  unchartered  freedom  tires; 

I  feel  the  weight  of  chance-desires; 

My  hopes  no  more  must  change  their  name, 

I  long  for  a  repose  that  ever  is  the  same. 

Stern  Lawgiver!  yet  thou  dost  wear 
The  Godhead's  most  benignant  grace; 
Nor  know  we  anything  so  fair 
As  is  the  smile  upon  thy  face: 


Chant  Royal   of  High  Virtue       2957 

Flowers  laugh  before  Ihee  on  their  beds, 
And  fragrance  in  thy  footing  treads; 
Thou  dost  preserve  the  stars  from  wrong; 
And  the  most  ancient  heavens,  through  Thcc,  are  fresh  and 
strong. 

To  humbler  functions,  awful  Power!  -^ 

I  call  thee :  I  myself  commend  • 

Unto  thy  guidance  from  this  hour; 

O,  let  my  weakness  have  an  end! 

Give  unto  me,  made  lowly  wise, 

The  spirit  of  self-sacrifice; 

The  confidence  of  reason  give; 

And  in  the  light  of  truth  thy  Bondman  let  me  live! 

William  Wordsworth  [i 770-1850] 

CHANT  ROYAL  OF  HIGH  VIRTUE 

Who  lives  in  suit  of  armor  pent. 

And  hides  himself  behind  a  wall, 
For  him  is  not  the  great  event. 

The  garland,  nor  the  Capitol. 
And  is  God's  guerdon  less  than  they? 
Nay,  moral  man,  I  tell  thee  Nay: 
Nor  shall  the  flaming  forts  be  won 
By  sneaking  negatives  alone. 

By  Lenten  fast  or  Ramazan, 
But  by  the  challenge  proudly  thrown — 

Virtue  is  that  beseems  a  Man! 

God,  in  his  Palace  resident 

Of  Bliss,  beheld  our  sinful  ball. 
And  charged  His  own  Son  innocent 

Us  to  redeem  from  Adam's  fall. 
— "Yet  must  it  be  that  men  Thee  slay." 
— "Yea,  though  it  must,  must  I  obey," 
Said  Christ, — and  came.  His  royal  Son, 
To  die,  and  dying  to  atone 

For  harlot  and  for  publican. 
Read  on  that  rood  He  died  upon — 

Virtue  is  that  beseems  a  Maul 


2958     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

And  by  that  rood  where  He  was  bent'^"^'^^'^  siowoI'T 
I  saw  the  world's  great  captains  all        '^^'^      ""' 
Go  riding  to  the  tournament—  ^•^''  "*^^ ' 


Cyrus  the  Great  and  Hannibal, 
Caesar  of  Rome  and  Attila, 
Lord  Charlemagne  and  his  array, 
Lord  Alisaundrc  of  Macedon — 
With  flaming  lance  and  habergeon 

They  passed,  and  to  the  rataplan 
Of  drums  gave  salutation — 

Virtue  is  thai  beseems  a  Man! 

Had  tall  Achilles  lounged  in  tent 

For  aye,  and  Xanthus  neighed  in  stall. 
The  towers  of  Troy  had  ne'er  been  shent, 

Nor  stayed  the  dance  in  Priam's  hall. 
Bend  o'er  thy  book  till  thou  be  gray, 
Read,  mark,  perpend,  digest,  survey — 
Instruct  thee  deep  as  Solomon — 
One  only  chapter  thou  shalt  con, 

One  lesson  learn,  one  sentence. scanj.;. 
One  title  and  one-  colophon —        .^  .  ,     .. 

Virtue  is  that  beseems  a  Man! 

High  Virtue's  hest  is  eloquent 

With  spur  and  not  with  martingall: 
Sufliceth  not  thou'rt  continent: 

Be  courteous,  brave,  and  liberal. 
God  fashioned  thee  of  chosen  clay 
For  service,  nor  did  ever  say 
"Deny  thee  this,"  "Abstain  from  yon," 
Save  to  inure  thee,  thew  and  bone, 

To  be  confirmed  of  the  clan 
That  made  immortal  Marathon — 

Virtue  is  that  beseems  a  Man! 

ENVOY 

Young  Knight,  the  lists  are  set  to-day; 
Hereafter  shall  be  long  to  pray 
In  sepulture  with  hands  of  stone. 
Ride,  then!  outride  the  bugle  blownl 


n  o 


rfj  bn/ 


Sacrifice  ^959 

And  gaily  dinging  down  the  van 
Charge  with  a  cheer — Set  on !  Set  on ! 
Virtue  is  that  beseems  a  Man  I 

Arthur  T.  Qnillcr-Couch  [1863- 

THE   SPLENDID   SPUR 

Not  on  the  neck  of  prince  or  hound; 

Nor  on  a  woman's  finger  twined, 
May  gold  from  the  deriding  ground 

Keep  sacred  that  we  sacred  bind:  ^ 

Only  the  heel  '-'"-•• 

Of  splendid  steel  ' 

Shall  stand  secure  on  sliding  fate, 
When  golden  navies  weep  their  freight. 

The  scarlet  hat,  the  laureled  stave 

Are  measures,  not  the  springs,  of  worth; 
In  a  wife's  lap,  as  in  a  grave, 

Man's  airy  notions  mix  with  earth. 
Seek  other  spur 
Bravely  to  stir 
The  dust  in  this  loud  world,  and  tread 
Alp-high  among  the  whispering  dead. 

Trust  in  thyself, — then  spur  amain : 
So  shall  Charybdis  wear  a  grace, 
Grim  ^tna  laugh,  the  Libyan  plain 
Take  roses  to  her  shriveled  face. 
This  orb — this  round 
Of  sight  and  sound — 
Count  it  the  lists  that  God  hath  buUt 
For  haughty  hearts  to  ride  a-tilt. 

Arthur  T.  Quillcr-Couch  [1863- 

SACRIFICE 

Though  love  repine,  and  reason  chafe, 
There  came  a  voice  without  reply, — 
"  'Tis  man's  perdition  to  be  safe, 
When  for  the  truth  he  ought  to  die." 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-1882] 


Q^Q- 


THE  TRANSCENDENTALISTS 

CONSCIENCE 

From  "  A  Week  on  the  Concord  and  Merrimack  Rivers  " 

Conscience  is  instinct  bred  in  the  house,  f 
Feeling  and  Thinking  propagate  the  sin 
By  an  unnatural  breeding  in  and  in. 
I  say,  Turn  it  out  of  doors, 
Into  the  moors. 

I  love  a  life  whose  plot  is  simple, 
And  does  not  thicken  with  every  pimple, 
A  soul  so  sound  no  sickly  conscience  binds  it, 
That  makes  the  universe  no  worse  than  't  finds  it. 
I  love  an  earnest  soul, 
Whose  mighty  joy  and  sorrow 
Are  not  drowned  in  a  bowl, 
And  brought  to  life  to-morrow; 
That  lives  one  tragedy. 
And  not  seventy; 
A  conscience  worth  keeping. 
Laughing  not  weeping; 
A  conscience  wise  and  steady, 
And  forever  ready; 
Not  changing  with  events. 
Dealing  in  compliments; 
A  conscience  exercised  about 
Large  things,  which  one  may  doubt. 
I  love  a  soul  not  all  of  wood. 
Predestined  to  be  good. 
But  true  to  the  backbone 
Unto  itself  alone 
And  false  to  none; 
Born  to  its  own  afifairs, 
Its  own  joys  and  own  cares; 
By  whom  the  work  which  God  begu'rf'^" '^''^ 
Is  finished,  and  not  undone; 
2960 


Inspiration  2961 

Taken  up  where  he  left  off, 

Whether  to  worship  or  to  scoff; 

If  not  good,  why  then  evil, 

If  not  good  god,  good  devil. 

Goodness! — you  hypocrite,  come  out  of  that, 

Live  your  life,  do  your  work,  then  take  your  hat. 

I  have  no  patience  towards 

Such  conscientious  cowards. 

Give  me  simple  laboring  folk, 

Who  love  their  w'ork. 

Whose  virtue  is  a  song 

To  cheer  God  along. 

Henry  David  Tlioreau  [1817-1862] 


MY  PRAYER 

Great  God,  I  ask  thee  for  no  meaner  pelf 
Than  that  I  may  not  disappoint  myself; 
That  in  my  action  I  may  soar  as  high 
As  I  can  now  discern  with  this  clear  eye. 

And  next  in  value,  which  thy  kindness  lends. 
That  I  may  greatly  disappoint  my  friends, 
Howe'er  they  think  or  hope  that  it  may  be, 
They  may  not  dream  how  thou'st  distinguished  me. 

That  my  weak  hand  may  equal  my  firm  faith, 
And  my  life  practise  more  than  my  tongue  saith; 
That  my  low  conduct  may  not  show. 

Nor  my  relenting  lines. 
That  I  thy  purpose  did  not  know, 
Or  overrated  thy  designs. 

Henry  David  Tlioreau  [18 17- 1862] 


.      INSPIRATION 

If  with  light  head  erect  I  sing, 

Though  all  the  Muses  lend  their  force, 

From  my  poor  love  of  anything, 

The  verse  is  weak  and  shallow  as  its  source. 


2962     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

But  if  with  bended  npck  I  grope 

Listening  behind  me  for  my  wit,  , 

With  faith  superior  to  hope, 

More  anxious  to  keep  back  than  forward  it, — 

Making  my  soul  accompHce  there 

Unto  the  flame  my  heart  hath  ht. 

Then  will  the  verse  forever  wear, — 

Time  cannot  bend  the  line  which  God  has  writ. 

I  hearing  get,  who  had  but  ears, 

And  sight,  who  had  but  eyes  before; 

I  moments  live,  who  lived  but  years. 

And  truth  discern,  who  knew  but  learning's  lore. 

Now  chiefly  is  my  natal  hour, 

And  only  now  my  prime  of  life; 

Of  manhood's  strength  it  is  the  flower, 

'Tis  peace's  end,  and  war's  beginning  strife.      t-p 

It  comes  in  summer's  broadest  noon, 
By  a  gray  wall,  or  some  chance  place, 
Unseasoning  time,  insulting  June, 
And  vexing  day  with  its  presuming  face. 

I  will  not  doubt  the  love  untold 
Which  not  my  worth  nor  want  hath  bought. 
Which  wooed  me  young,  and  wooes  me  old, 
And  to  this  evening  hath  me  brought. 

Henry  David  Thoreau  [181 7-1 862] 


EACH  AND  ALL 

Little  thinks,  in  the  field,  yon  red-cloaked  clown 

Of  thee  from  the  hill-top  looking  down; 

The  heifer  that  lows  in  the  upland  farm. 

Far-heard,  lows  not  thine  ear  to  charm; 

The  sexton,  tolling  his  bell  at  noon, 

Deems  not  that  great  Napoleon 

Stops  his  horse,  and  lists  with  delight. 

Whilst  his  files  sweep  round  yon  Alpine  height; 


1    ;t33ft3>{        Each  and  All  2963 

Nor  knowest  thou  what  argument 

Thy  hfe  to  thy  neighbor's  creed  has  lent. 

All  are  needed  by  each  one; 

Nothing  is  fair  or  good  alone. 

I  thought  the  sparrow's  note  from  heaven, 

Singing  at  dawn  on  the  alder  bough; 

I  brought  him  home,  in  his  nest,  at  even; 

He  sings  the  song,  but  it  cheers  not  now, 

For  I  did  not  bring  home  the  river  and  sky; — 

He  sang  to  my  ear, — they  sang  to  my  eye. 

The  delicate  shells  lay  on  the  shore; 

The  bubbles  of  the  latest  wave 

P'resh  pearls  to  their  enamel  gave, 

And  the  bellowing  of  the  savage  sea 

Greeted  their  safe  escape  to  me. 

I  wiped  away  the  weeds  and  foam, 

I  fetched  my  sea-born  treasures  home; 

But  the  poor,  unsightly,  noisome  things   . 

Had  left  their  beauty  on  the  shore. 

With  the  sun  and  the  sand  and  the  wild  uproar. 

The  lover  watched  his  graceful  maid, 

As  'mid  the  virgin  train  she  strayed; 

Nor  knew  her  beauty's  best  attire 

Was  woven  still  by  the  snow-white  choir. 

At  last  she  came  to  his  hermitage. 

Like  the  bird  from  the  woodlands  to  the  cage; — 

The  gay  enchantment  was  undone, 

A  gentle  wife,  but  fairy  none. 

Then  I  said,  "1  covet  truth; 

Beauty  is  unripe  childhood's  cheat; 

I  leave  it  behind  with  the  games  of  youth:" — 

As  I  spoke,  beneath  my  feet 

The  ground-pine  curled  its  pretty  wreath,  '" 

Running  ctver  the  club-moss  burrs; 

I  inhaled  the  violet's  breath; 

Around  me  stood  the  oaks  and  firs; 

Pine-cones  ajid  acorns  lay  on  the  ground; 


2964     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Over  me  soared  the  eternal  sky, 

Full  of  light  and  of  deity; 

Again  I  saw,  again  I  heard, 

The  rolling  river,  the  morning  bird; — 

Beauty  through  my  senses  stole; 

I  yielded  myself  to  the  perfect  whole. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-188:* 


BRAHMA 

If  the  red  slayer  think  he  slays. 

Or  if  the  slain  think  he  is  slain, 
They  know  not  well  the  subtle  ways 

I  keep,  and  pass,  and  turn  again. 

Far  or  forgot  to  me  is  near; 

Shadow  and  sunlight  are  the  same; 
The  vanished  gods  to  me  appear; 

And  one  to  me  are  shame  and  fame. 

They  reckon  iU  who  leave  me  out; 

When  me  they  fly,  I  am  the  wings; 
I  am  the  doubter  and  the  doubt. 

And  I  the  hymn  the  Brahmin  sings. 

The  strong  gods  pine  for  my  abode. 
And  pine  in  vain  the  sacred  Seven; 

But  thou,  meek  lover  of  the  good! 
Find  me,  and  turn  thy  back  on  heaven. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-1882] 


BACCHUS 

Bring  me  wine,  but  wine  which  never  grew 

In  the  belly  of  the  grape, 

Or  grew  on  vine  whose  tap-roots,  reaching  through 

Under  the  Andes  to  the  Cape, 

Suffered  no  savor  of  the  earth  to  'scape. 


Bacchus  '^9^5 

Let  its  grapes  the  morn  salute 

From  a  nocturnal  root, 

Which  feels  the  acrid  juice 

Of  Styx  and  Erebus; 

And  turns  the  woe  of  Night, 

By  its  own  craft,  to  a  more  rich  delight. 

We  buy  ashes  for  bread; 

We  buy  diluted  wine; 

Give  me  of  the  true, — 

Whose  ample  leaves  and  tendrils  curled 

Among  the  silver  hills  of  heaven 

Draw  everlasting  dew; 

Wine  of  wine, 

Blood  of  the  world. 

Form  of  forms,  and  mold  of  statures, 

That  I  intoxicated, 

And  by  the  draught  assimilated,  j 

May  float  at  pleasure  through  all  natures; 

The  bird-language  rightly  spell. 

And  that  which  roses  say  so  well. 

Wine  that  is  shed 

Like  the  torrents  of  the  sim 

Up  the  horizon  walls. 

Or  like  the  Atlantic  streams,  which  run 

When  the  South  Sea  calls. 

W^ater  and  bread, 
Food  which  needs  no  transmuting, 
Rainbow-flowering,  wisdom-fruiting, 
Wine  which  is  already  m.an, 
Food  which  teach  and  reason  can. 

Wine  which  Music  is, —  '  *^ 

Music  and  wine  are  one, —  ''A 

That  I,  drinking  this,  -iH  !?«'*! 

Shall  hear  far  Chaos  talk  with  me!;'  '  '  ' '" 
Kings  unborn  shall  walk  with  me, 


2966    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  the  poor  grass  shall  plot  and  plan 
What  it  will  do  when  it  is  man. 
Quickened  so,  will  I  unlock 
Every  crypt  of  every  rock. 

I  thank  the  joyful  juice 
For  aU  I  know; — 
Winds  of  remembering 
Of  the  ancient  being  blow, 
And  seeming-solid  walls  of  use 
Open  and  flow.  . 

Pour,  Bacchus!  the  remembering  wine; 

Retrieve  the  loss  of  me  and  mine! 

Vine  for  vine  be  antidote, 

And  the  grape  requite  the  lote! 

Haste  to  cure  the  old  despair; — 

Reason  in  Nature's  lotus  drenched. 

The  memory  of  ages  quenched; 

Give  them  again  to  shine; 

Let  wine  repair  what  this  undid; 

And  where  the  infection  slid, 

A  dazzling  memory  revive; 

Refresh  the  faded  tints, 

Recut  the  aged  prints. 

And  write  my  old  adventures  with  the  pen 

Which  on  the  first  day  drew. 

Upon  the  tablets  blue, 

The  dancing  Pleiads  and  eternal'men. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803- 188 2] 

,yiiijii.i- 

THE   PROBLEM 

I  LIKE  a  church;  I  like  a  cowl; 

I  love  a  prophet  of  the  soul; 

And  on  my  heart  monastic  aisles 

Fall  like  sweet  strains,  or  pensive  smiles: 

Yet  not  for  all  his  faith  can  see 

Would  I  that  cowled  churchman  be. 


The  Problem  2967 


'J. 


Why  should  the  vest  on  him  allure, 
Which  I  could  not  on  me  endure? 

Not  from  a  vain  or  shallow  thought 

His  awful  Jove  young  Phidias  brought; 

Never  from  lips  of  cunning  fell 

The  thrilling  Delphic  oracle; 

Out  from  the  heart  of  nature  rolled 

The  burdens  of  the  Bible  old; 

The  litanies  of  nations  came, 

Like  the  volcano's  tongue  of  flame. 

Up  from  the  burning  core  below, — 

The  canticles  of  love  and  woe:  -, 

i.l 
The  hand  that  rounded  Peter's  dome,        , 

And  groined  the  aisles  of  Christian  Rome, 

Wrought  in  a  sad  sincerity; 

Himself  from  God  he  could  not  free; 

He  buildcd  better  than  he  knew; —  .,..-, 

The  conscious  stone  to  beauty  grew. 

Know'st  thou  what  wove  yon  woodbird's  nest 
Of  leaves,  and  feathers  from  her  breast? 

Or  how  the  fish  outbuilt  her  shell,       ._ 

Painting  with  morn  each  annual  cell?    \  '  ._ 

Or  how  the  sacred  pine-tree  adds 

To  her  old  leaves  new  myriads? 

Such  and  so  grew  these  holy  piles. 

Whilst  love  and  terror  laid  the  tiles. 

Earth  proudly  wears  the  Parthenon, 

As  the  best  gem  upon  her  zone. 

And  Morning  opes  with  haste  her  lids, 

To  gaze  upon  the  Pyramids; 

O'er  England's  abbeys  bends  the  sky, 

As  on  its  friends,  with  kindred  eye;       j 

For,  out  of  Thought's  interior  sphere,-x 

These  wonders  rose  to  upper  air; 

And  Nature  gladly  gave  them  place. 

Adopted  them  into  her  race, 

And  granted  them  an  equal  date 

With  Andes  and  with  Ararat. 


2968     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

These  temples  grew  as  grows  the  grass; 

Art  might  obey,  but  not  surpass.        ^^ioiri// 

The  passive  Master  lent  his  hand 

To  the  vast  soul  that  o'er  him  planned; 

And  the  same  power  that  reared  the  shrine  " 

Bestrode  the  tribes  that  knelt  within. 

Ever  the  fiery  Pentecost 

Girds  with  one  flame  the  countless  host, 

Trances  the  heart  through  chanting  choirs, 

And  through  the  priest  the  mind  inspires. 

The  word  unto  the  prophet  spoken 

Was  writ  on  tables  yet  unbroken; 

The  word  by  seers  or  sibyls  told, 

In  groves  of  oak,  or  fanes  of  gold, 

Still  floats  upon  the  morning  wind,  ^- 

Still  whispers  to  the  willing  mind. 

One  accent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ' 

The  heedless  world  hath  never  lost. 

I  know  what  say  the  fathers  wise, — 

The  Book  itself  before  me  hes, — 

Old  Chrysostom,  best  iVugustine,  "'" 

And  he  who  blent  both  in  his  line,         ''     ■ 

The  younger  Golden  Lips  or  mines, 

Taylor,  the  Shakespeare  of  divines. 

His  words  are  music  in  my  ear, 

I  see  his  coAvled  portrait  dear; 

And  yet,  for  all  his  faith  could  see, 

I  would  not  the  good  bishop  be. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [i 803-1 882] 


EVENING  HYMN 

Slowly  by  God's  hand  unfurled, 
Down  around  the  weary  world 
Falls  the  darkness;  oh,  how  still 
Is  the  working  of  Thy  will! 

Mighty  Maker!     Here  am  I,—    - 

Work  in  me  as  silently,  -^^^^  ^^iW 


The    Higher  Good  2969 

Veil  the  day's  distracting  sights, 
Show  me  heaven's  eternal  hghts. 

From  the  darkened  sky  come  forth 
Countless  stars,  a  wondrous  birth! 
So  may  gleams  of  glory  dart 
Through  the  dim  abyss,  my  heart ; 

Living  worlds  to  view  be  brought. 
In   the   boundless  realms  of   thought, 
High  and  infinite  desires, 
Burning  like  those  upper  fires. 

Holy  truth,  eternal  right, 
Let  them  break  upon  my  sight. 
Let  them  shine  unclouded,  still, 
And  with  Ught  my  being  fill. 

Thou  art  there.     Oh,  let  me  know, 
Thou  art  here  within  me  too ; 
Be  the  perfect  peace  of  God 
Here  as  there  now  shed  abroad. 

May  my  soul  attuned  be 
To  that  perfect  harmony. 
Which,  beyond  the  power  of  sound, 
Fills  the  universe  around. 

William  Henry  Furucss  [i 802-1  8q6] 


THE  HIGHER   GOOD 

Father,  I  will  not  ask  for  wealth  or  fame, 

Though  once  they  would  have  joyed  my  carnal  sense: 

I  shudder  not  to  bear  a  hated  name, 

Wanting  all  wealth,  myself  my  sole  defense. 

But  give  me,  Lord,  eyes  to  behold  the  truth; 

A  seeing  sense  that  knows  the  eternal  right; 

A  heart  with  pity  filled,  and  gentlest  ruth; 

A  manly  faith  that  makes  all  darkness  light: 


2970     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Give  me  the  power  to  labor  for  mankind; 
Make  me  the  mouth  of  such  as  cannot  speak; 
Eyes  let  me  be  to  groping  men  and  blind; 
A  conscience  to  the  base;  and  to  the  weak 
Let  me  be  hands  and  feet;  and  to  the  foolish,  mind; 
And  lead  still  further  on  such  as  thy  kingdom  seek. 
Theodore  Parker  [i8io-i86c 


THE  IDLER 

I  IDLE  stand  that  I  may  find  employ, 

Such  as  my  Master  when  He  comes  will  give; 

I  cannot  find  in  mine  own  work  my  joy, 

But  wait,  ilthough  in  waiting  I  must  live; 

My  body  shall  not  turn  which  way  it  will. 

But  stand  till  I  the  appointed  road  can  find, 

And  journeying  so  his  messages  fulfil, 

And  do  at  every  step  the  work  designed. 

Enough  for  me,  still  day  by  day  to  wait 

Till  Thou  who  form'st  me  find'st  me  too  a  task, 

A  cripple  lying  at  the  rich  man's  gate, 

Content  for  the  few  crumbs  I  get  to  ask, 

A  laborer  but  in  heart,  while  bound  my  hands 

Hang  idly  down  still  waiting  thy  commands. 

Jones  Very  [18 13-1880] 


QUESTIONINGS 

Hath  this  world,  without  me  wrought, 

Other  substance  than  my  thought? 

Lives  it  by  my  sense  alone. 

Or  by  essence  of  its  own? 

Will  its  life,  with  mine  begun. 

Cease  to  be  when  that  is  done,  n'ibuAz  I 

Or  another  consciousness 

With  the  self-same  forms  impress? 

Doth  yon  fire-ball,  poised  in  air, 
Hang  by  m.y  permission  there? 


Questionings  ^971 

Are  the  clouds  that  wander  by 
But  the  offspring  of  mine  eye, 
Born  with  every  glance  I  cast, 
Perishing  when  that  is  past? 
And  those  thousand,  thousand  eyes, 
Scattered  through  the  twinkling  skies. 
Do  they  draw  their  life  from  mine. 
Or  of  their  own  beauty  shine? 

Now  I  close  my  eyes,  my  ears. 

And  creation  disappears; 

Yet  if  I  but  speak  the  word, 

All  creation  is  restored. 

Or,  more  wonderful,  within 

New  creations  do  begin; 

Hues  more  bright  and  forms  more  rare 

Than  reality  doth  wear 

Flash  across  my  inward  sense, 

Born  of  the  mind's  omnipotence. 

Soul!  that  all  informest,  say! 
Shall  these  glories  pass  away? 
Will  those  planets  cease  to  blaze 
When  these  eyes  no  longer  gaze? 
And  the  Hfe  of  things  be  o'er 
When  these  pulses  beat  no  more?       .^ 

Thought!  that  in  me  works  and  lives, — 

Life  to  all  things  living  gives, — 

Art  thou  not  thyself,  perchance, 

But  the  universe  in  trance? 

A  reflection  inly  flung 

By  that  world  thou  fanciedst  sprung 

From  thyself — thyself  a  dream — 

Of  the  world's  thinking  thou  the  theme? 

Be  it  thus,  or  be  thy  birth  ♦ 

From  a  source  above  the  earth — 
Be  thou  matter,  be  thou  mind, 
In  thee  alone  myself  I  find, 


2972     Poems  of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

And  through  thee  alone,  for  me,    -  A 

Hath  this  world  reaUty. 

Therefore,  in  thee  wiU  I  live, 

To  thee  all  myself  will  give, 

Losing  stiU,  that  I  may  find 

This  bounded  self  in  boundless  Mind. 

Frederic  Henry  Hedge  [i8os-i8go] 


THE   GREAT  VOICES 

A  VOICE  from  the  sea  to  the  mountains, 
From  the  mountains  again  to  the  sea; 

A  caU  from  the  deep  to  the  fountains: 
O  spirit!  be  glad  and  be  free! 

A  cry  from  the  floods  to  the  fountains, 
And  the  torrents  repeat  the  glad  song 

As  they  leap  from  the  breast  of  the  mountains: 
O  spirit!  be  free  and  be  strong! 

The  pine  forests  thrill  with  emotion 

Of  praise  as  the  spirit  sweeps  by; 
With  a  voice  like  the  murmur  of  ocean 

To  the  soul  of  the  listener  they  cry. 

Oh,  sing,  human  heart,  like  the  fountains, 

With  joy  reverential  and  free; 
Contented  and  calm  as  the  mountains, 

And  deep  as  the  woods  and  the  sea. 

Charles  Timothy  Brooks  [18 13-1883] 


BEAUTY  AND   DUTY 

I  SLEPT,  and  dreamed  that  life  was  beauty; 
I  woke,  and  found  that  life  was  duty. 
Was  thy  dream  then  a  shadowy  lie? 
Toil  «n,  sad  heart,  courageously, 
And  thou  shalt  find  thy  dream  to  be 
A  noonday  light  and  truth  to  thee. 

Ellen  Hooper  [18     - 


Inspiration  2973 


THE  STRAIGHT  ROAD 

Beauty  may  be  the  path  to  highest  good, 
And  some  successfully  have  it  pursued. 
Thou,  who  wouldst  follow,  be  well  warned  to  see 
That  way  prove  not  a  curved  road  to  thee. 
The  straightest  path  perhaps  which  may  be  sought. 
Lies  through  the  great  laighway  men  call  "I  ought." 

Ellen  Hooper  [i8    - 


THE  WAY 

They  find  the  way  who  linger  where 
The  soul  finds  fullest  life; 
The  battle  brave  is  carried  on 
By  all  who  wait,  and  waiting,  dare 
Deem  each  day's  least  that's  fitly  done 
A  victory  worthy  to  be  won, 
Nor  seek  their  gain  with  strife. 

Sidney  Henry  Morse  [i8    - 


INSPIRATION 

Life  of  Ages,  richly  poured. 
Love  of  God,  unspent  and  free, 

Flowing  in  the  Prophet's  word 
And  the  People's  Hberty! 

Never  was  to  chosen  race 
That  unstinted  tide  confined ; 

Thine  is  every  time  and  place, 

Fountain  sweet  of  heart  and  mind! 

Secret  of  the  morning  stars, 
Motion  of  the  oldest  hours. 

Pledge  through  elemental  wars 
Of  the  coming  spirit's  powers! 


2974     t*oems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Rolling  planet,  flaming  sun, 
Stand  in  nobler  man  complete; 

Prescient  laws  Thine  errands  run. 
Frame  the  shrine  for  Godhead  meet. 

Homeward  led,  the  wondering  eye 
Upward  yearned  in  joy  or  awe. 

Found  the  love  that  waited  nigh. 
Guidance  of  Thy  guardian  Law. 

In  the  touch  of  earth  it  thrilled; 

Down  from  mystic  skies  it  burned; 
Right  obeyed  and  passion  stilled 

Its  eternal  gladness  earned. 

Breathing  in  the  thinker's  creed,  i  i 

Pulsing  in  the  hero's  blood. 
Nerving  simplest  thought  and  deed, 

Freshening  time  with  truth  and  goo»5.. 

Consecrating  art  and  song, 

Holy  book  and  pilgrim  track. 
Hurling  floods  of  tyrant  wrong 

From  the  sacred  limits  back, — 

Life  of  Ages,  richly  poured. 
Love  of  God,  unspent  and  free, 

Flow  still  in  the  Prophet's  word 
And  the  People's  liberty!  :  T 

Samuel  Johnson  [1822-1882] 

I  IN  THEE,  AND   THOU  IN   ME 

i  AM  but  clay  in  thy  hands;  but  thou  art  the  all-loving  artist: 
Passive  I  lie  in  thy  sight,  yet  in  my  selfhood  I  strive 

So  to  embody  the  life  and  love  thou  ever  impartest 
That  in  my  spheres  of  the  finite  I  may  be  truly  alive. 

Knowing  thou  needest  this  form,  as  I  thy  divine  inspiration, 
Knowing  thou  shapest  the  clay  with  a  vision  and  purpose 
divine, 

So  would  I  answer  each  touch  of  thy  hand  in  its  loving  creation, 
That  in  my  conscious  life  thy  power  and  beauty  may  shine. 


/iiayi    ,  Cjnosis  -975 

Reflecting  the  noble  intent  thou  hast  in  forming  thy  crea- 
tures; 
Waking  from  sense  into  hfe  of  the  soul,  and  the  image  of 
thee; 
Working  with  thee  in  thy  work  to  model  humanity's  features 
Into  the  likeness  of  God,  myself  from  myself  I  would 
free. 

One  with  all  human  existence,  no  one  above  or  below  me; 
Lit  by  thy  wisdom  and  love,  as  roses  are  steeped  in  the 
morn; 
Growing  from  clay  to  statue,  from  statue  to  flesh,  till  thou 
know  me 
Wrought  into  manhood  celestial,  and  in  thine  image  re- 
born. 

So  in  thy  love  will  I  trust,  bringing  me  sooner  or  later 

Past  the  dark  screen  that  divides  these  shows  of  the  finite 
from  thee. 
Thine,  thine  only,  this  warm  dear  life,  O  loving  Creator! 
Thine  the  invisible  future,  bom  of  the  present,  must  be. 
Christopher  Pearse  Crunch  [1813-1892] 


GNOSIS 

Thought  is  deeper  than  all  speech, 
Feeling  deeper  than  all  thought; 

Souls  to  souls  can  never  teach 

What  unto  themselves  was  taught 

We  are  spirits  clad  in  veils; 

Man  by  man  was  never  seen; 
All  our  deep  communing  fails 

To  remove  the  shadowy  screen. 

Heart  to  heart  was  never  known ; 

Mind  with  mind  did  never  meet; 
We  are  columns  left  alone 

Of  a  temple  once  complete. 


2976    Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Like  the  stars  that  gem  the  sky, 
Far  apart,  though  seeming  near, 

In  our  light  we  scattered  lie; 
AU  is  thus  but  starlight  here. 

What  is  social  company 

But  a  babbling  summer  stream? 

What  our  wise  philosophy 
But  the  glancing  of  a  dream? 

Only  when  the  sun  of  love 
j;,^j:  Melts  the  scattered  stars  of  thought, 

Only  when  we  live  above 
:,   _        What  the  dim-eyed  world  hath  taught, 

Only  when  our  souls  are  fed 

By  the  fount  which  gave  them  birth, 
slinit  aril  ■^^'^  ^^  inspiration  led 

Which  they  never  drew  from  earth, 

.^  We,  like  parted  drops  of  rain,  ,^|^ 

;  Swelling  till  they  meet  and  run, 

Shall  be  all  absorbed  again, 
Melting,  flowing  into  one. 

Christopher  Pearse  Cranch  [1813-1802] 


THE   FUTURE 

What  may  we  take  into  the  vast  Forever? 

That  marble  door 
Admits  no  fruit  of  all  our  long  endeavor, 

No  fame-wreathed  crown  we  wore, 

No  garnered  lore. 

What  can  we  bear  beyond  the  unknown  portal? 

No  gold,  no  gains 
Of  all  our  toiling:  in  the  life  immortal 

No  hoarded  wealth  remains, 

Nor  gilds,  nor  stains. 


Love's   Lord  ^977 

Naked  from  out  that  far  abyss  behind  us 

We  entered  here: 
No  word  came  with  our  coming,  to  remind  us 

What  wondrous  world  was  near, 

No  hope,  no  fear. 

Into  the  silent,  starless  Night  before  us, 

Naked  we  glide: 
No  hand  has  mapped  the  constellations  o'er  us, 

No  comrade  at  our  side, 

No  chart,  no  guide. 

Yet  fearless  toward  that  midnight,  black  and  hollow, 
Our  footsteps  fare; 
'^  The  beckoning  of  a  Father's  hand  we  follow — 
His  love  alone  is  there, 
No  curse,  no  care. 

Edward  Rowland  Sill  [iS^i-i&Sy] 


LOVE'S  LORD 

When  weight  of  all  the  garnered  years 
Bows  me,  and  praise  must  tind  relief 

In  harvest-song,  and  smiles  and  tears 
Twist  in  the  band  that  binds  my  sheaf; 

Thou  known  Unknown,  dark,  radiant  sea 
In  whom  we  live,  in  whom  we  move, 

My  spirit  must  lose  itself  in  Thee, 
Crying  a  name — Life,  Light,  or  Love. 

Edward  Dowdcn  [1S43-1913] 


tI  h^Ir.'A 


A  MIND  CONTENT 

"JOG  ON,  JOG  ON" 

From  "  The  Winter's  Tale  " 

Jog  on,  jog  on  the  foot-path  way, 

And  merrily  hent  the  stile-a; 
A  merry  heart  goes  all  the  day. 

Your  sad  tires  in  a  mile-a. 

William  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 


ON  A  CONTENTED   MIND 

When  all  is  done  and  said, 

In  the  end  this  shall  you  find: 
He  most  of  all  doth  bathe  in  bliss 

That  hath  a  quiet  mind ; 
And,  clear  from  worldly  cares^'ov/  vi3hV/ 

To  deem  can  be  content 
The  sweetest  time  in  all  his  life 

In  thinking  to  be  spent. 

The  body  subject  is 

To  fickle  Fortune's  power, 
And  to  a  million  of  mishaps 

Is  casual  every  hour; 
And  Death  in  time  doth  change 

It  to  a  clod  of  clay; 
When  as  the  mind,  which  is  divine. 

Runs  never  to  decay. 

Companion  none  is  like 

Unto  the  mind  alone. 
For  many  have  been  harmed  by  speech,- 

Through  thinking,  few,  or  nol}" 
2978 


The   Means  to  Attain   Happy   Life     2979 

Fear  oftentimes  rcstraineth  words, 
But  makes  not  thoughts  to  cease; 

And  he  speaks  best  that  hath  the  skill 
When  for  to  hold  his  peace. 

Our  wealth  leaves  us  at  death, 

Our  kinsmen  at  the  grave; 
But  virtues  of  the  mind  unto 

The  heavens  with  us  we  have; 
Wherefore,  for  virtue's  sake, 

I  can  be  well  content 
The  sweetest  time  of  all 'my  life 

To  deem  in  thinking  spent. 

Thomas  Vaux  [1510-1556] 


M^SIA'S   SONG 

From  "  Farewell  to  Folly  " 

Sweet  are  the  thoughts  that  savor  of  content, 

The  quiet  mind  is  richer  than  a  crown, 
Sweet  are  the  nights  in  careless  slumber  spent, 

The  poor  estate  scorns  Fortune's  angry  frown: 
Such  sweet  content,  such  minds,  such  sleep,  such  bliss. 
Beggars  enjoy,  when  princes  oft  do  miss. 

The  homely  house  that  harbors  quiet  rest, 
The  cottage  that  affords  no  pride  nor  care, 

The  mean  that  'grees  with  countr}'  music  best, 
The  sweet  consort  of  mirth  and  modest  fare, 

Obscured  life  sets  down  a  type  of  bliss: 

A  mind  content  both  crown  and  kingdom  is. 

Robert  Greene  [i56o?-i502] 


THE   MEANS  TO  ATTAIN   HAPPY  LIFE 

]Martial,  the  things  that  do  attain 
The  happy  life  be  these,  I  find: 
The  riches  left,  not  got  with  pain; 
The  fruitful  ground;  the  quiet  mind; 


2980     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

The  equal  friend;  no  grudge,  no  strife; 
No  charge  of  rule,  no  governance; 
Without  disease,  the  healthful  life; 
The  household  of  continuance; 
The  mean  diet,  no  delicate  fare; 
True  wisdom  joined  with  simpleness; 
The  night  discharged  of  all  care, 
Where  wine  the  wit  may  not  oppress; 
The  faithful  wife,  without  debate; 
Such  sleeps  as  may  beguile  the  night:. 
Contented  with  .thine  own  estate. 
Nor  wish  for  death,  nor  fear  his  might. 

After  Martial,  by  Henry  Howard  [isi7?-i547] 


RISPOSTA 

There  is  a  jewel  which  no  Indian  mines 
Can  buy,  no  chemic  art  can  counterfeit; 
It  makes  men  rich  in  greatest  poverty; 
Makes  water  wine,  turns  wooden  cups  to  gold, 
The  homely  whistle  to  sweet  music's  strain: 
Seldom  it  comes,  to  few  from  heaven  sent. 
That  much  in  httle,  all  in  naught — Content. 

Unknown 

A  CONTENTED  MIND 

I  WEIGH  not  fortune's  frown  or  smile; 

I  joy  not  much  in  earthly  joys; 
I  seek  not  state,  I  reck  not  style; 

I  am  not  fond  of  fancy's  toys: 
I  rest  so  pleased  with  what  I  have, 
I  wish  no  more,  no  more  I  crave. 

:_L-i   I  quake  not  at  the  thunder's  crack; 

I  tremble  not  at  news  of  war; 
I  swouad  not  at  the  news  of  wrack; 

I  shrink  not  at  a  blazing  star; 
I  fear  not  loss,  I  hope  not  gain, 
I  envy  none,  I  none  disdain. 


The   Happy   Heart  2981 

I  see  ambition  never  pleased; 

I  see  some  Tantals  starved  in  store; 
I  see  gold's  dropsy  seldom  eased; 

I  see  even  Midas  gape  for  more; 
I  neither  want  nor  yet  abound, — 
Enough's  a  feast,  content  is  crowned. 

I  feign  not  friendship  where  I  hate; 

I  fawn  not  on  the  great  (in  show) ; 
I  prize,  I  praise  a  mean  estate, — 

Neither  too  lofty  nor  too  low: 
This,  this  is  all  my  choice,  my  cheer, — 
A  mind  content,  a  conscience  clear. 

Joshua  Sylvester  [1563-1618] 


THE   HAPPY  HEART 

From  "  Patient  Grissell  " 

Art  thou  poor,  yet  hast  thou  golden  slumbers? 

O   sweet    content! 
Art  thou  rich,  yet  is  thy  mind  perplexed? 

O  punishment! 
Dost  thou  laugh  to  see  how  fools  are  vexed 
To  add  to  golden  numbers,  golden  numbers? 
O  sweet  content!     O  sweet,  O  sweet  content! 

Work  apace,  apace,  apace,  apace; 

Honest  labor  bears  a  lovely  face; 
Then  hey  nonny  nonny,  hey  nonny  nonny! 

Canst  drink  the  waters  of  the  crisped  spring? 

O    sweet    content ! 
Swimm'st  thou  in  wealth,  yet  sink'st  in  thine  own  tears? 

0  punishment! 
Then  he  that  patiently  want's  burden  bears 
No  burden  bears,  but  is  a  king,  a  king! 
O  sweet  content!     O  sweet,  O  sweet  content! 
Work  apace,  apace,  apace,  apace; 
Honest  labor  bears  a  lovely  face; 
Then  hey  nonny  nonny,  hey  nonny  nonny! 

Thomas  Dekker  [i57o?-i64i?] 


2982     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


THE   MILLER   OF   THE   DEE 

There  dwelt  a  miller,  hale  and  bold, 

Beside  the  River  Dee; 
He  wrought  and  sang  from  morn  till  night, 

No  lark  more  bhthe  than  he; 
And  this  the  burden  of  his  song 

Forever  used  to  be, 
"I  en\y  no  man,  no,  not  I, 

And  no  one  envies  me ! "  ^-j  |- 

''Thou'rt  wrong,  my  friend!"  said  old  King  Hal. 

"As  wrong  as  wrong  can  be; 
For  could  my  heart  be  light  as  thine, 

I'd  gladly  change  with  thee. 
And  tell  me  now  what  makes  thee  sing 

With  voice  so  loud  and  free. 
While  I  am  sad,  though  I'm  the  King, 

Beside  the  River  Dee?" 

The  miller  smiled  and  doffed  his  cap: 

"I  earn  my  bread,"  quoth  he; 
"I  love  my  mfe,  I  love  my  friend, 

I  love  my  children  three. 
I  owe  no  one  I  cannot  pay, 

I  thank  the  River  Dee, 
That  turns  the  mill  that  grinds  the  corn 

To  feed  my  babes  and  me!" 

"Good  friend,"  said  Hal,  and  sighed  the  while, 

"Farewell!  and  happy  be; 
But  say  no  more,  if  thou'dst  be  true. 

That  no  one  envies  thee. 
Thy  mealy  cap  is  worth  mj^  cro\\'n ; 

Thy  miU  my  kingdom's  fee! 
Such  men  as  thou  are  England's  boast, 

Oh,  miller  of  the  Dee!" 

Charles  Mack  ay  [1814-185 


The  Good   Day  .   2983 


A  PHILOSOPHER 

To  take  things  as  they  be — 

That's  my  philosophy. 
No  use  to  holler,  mope,  or  cuss — 
If  they  was  changed  they  might  be  wuss. 

If  rain  is  pourin'  down, 

An'  lightnin's  buzzin'  roun', 
I  ain't  a-fearin'  we'll  be  hit, 
But  grin  that  I  ain't  out  in  it. 

If  I  got  deep  in  debt — 

It  hasn't  happened  yet — 
And  owed  a  man  two  dollars,  Gee! 
Why,  I'd  be  glad  it  wasn't  three! 

If  some  one  come  along. 

And  tried  to  do  me  wrong. 
Why  I  should  sort  of  take  a  whim 
To  thank,  the  Lord  I  wasn't  him. 

I  never  seen  a  night 

So  dark  there  wasn't  light 
Somewheres  about  if  I  took  care 
To  strike  a  match  and  find  out  where. 

John  Kcmirick  Bangs  [1S62- 


THE  GOOD  DAY 

When'  the  golden  sun  he  knelt 
On  the  far  horizon's  brim, 
Casting  oft"  the  cloaks  of  night, 
At  my  bed  I  bowed  with  him. 

Said  my  prayer,  and.  as  he  rose, 
Rose  up  too,  and  went  my  way, 
Fed  the  beast  and  cleaned  the  byre, 
Bent  my  back  above  the  hay. 


2984    .Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

When  at  noon  full  hot  he  paused, 
Then  I  spread  my  cloth,  and  ate 
Meat  that  had  its  life  from  him, 
Meat  and  fruit  from  his  estate, 

Rose  refreshed,  and  took  my  scythe, 
Toiled  until,  as  dusk  drew  nigh, 
Passing  hence,  the  moon  his  bride," 
Held  her  glowing  monstrance  high, 

Bade  me  see  him  still,  then,  blessed. 
Sent  me  home  with  joyful  tread. 
Where  the  two  dear  hands  I  love 
Poured  the  wine,  and  broke  the  bread. 

Henry  Howarlh  Bashford  [1880- 


"I  SAW  THE  CLOUDS" 

I  SAW  the  clouds  among  the  hills 
Trailing  their  plumes  of  rainy  gray. 

The  purple  of  the  woods  behind 
Fell  down  to  where  the  valley  lay 

In  sweet  satiety  of  rain, 

With  ripened  fruit,  and  full  filled  grain. 

1  saw  the  graves,  upon  the  plain, 
Of  pioneers,  who  took  the  land, 

And  tamed  the  stubborn  elements 
Till  they  were  gentle  to  the  hand. 

Their  children,  now  in  fortune's  ways, 

Dwell  in  their  father's  palaces. 

I  saw  some  old  forgotten  lays; 

And  treasured  volumes  I  passed  by. 
They  were  but  repetitions  cheap 

For  any  hucksterer  to  buy. 
The  clouds,  the  graves,  the  worn  old  song, 
I  bear  them  in  my  heart  along. 

Hervey  White  fi866- 


Coronation 


CORONATION 


2985 


At  the  king's  gate  the  subtle  noon 

Wove  filmy  yellow  nets  of  sun; 
Into  the  drowsy  snare  too  soon 

The  ^ferds  fell  one  by  one. 

Through  the  king's  gate,  unquestioned  then, 
A  beggar  went,  and  laughed,  "This  brings 

Me  chance,  at  last,  to  see  if  men 
Fare  better,  being  kings." 

The  king  sat  bowed  beneath  his  crown, 
Propping  his  face  with  listless  hand; 

Watching  the  hour-glass  sifting  down 
Too  slow  its  shining  sand. 

"Poor  man,  what  wouldst  thou  have  of  me?" 

The  beggar  turned,  and  pitying, 
Replied,  hke  one  in  dream,  "Of  thee, 

Nothing.     I  want  the  king." 

Uprose  the  king,  and  from  his  head 
Shook  of!  the  crown,  and  threw  it  by. 

"O  man,  thou  must  have  known,"  he  said, 
"A  greater  king  than  I." 

Through  all  the  gates,  unquestioned  then, 
Went  king  and  beggar  hand  in  hand. 

Whispered  the  king,  "Shall  I  know  when 
Before  his  throne  I  stand?  " 

The  beggar  laughed.     Free  winds  in  haste 
Were  wiping  from  the  king's  hot  brow 

The  crimson  lines  the  crown  had  traced. 
"This  is  his  presence  now." 

At  the  king's  gate,  the  crafty  noon 

Unwove  its  yeUow  nets  of  sun ; 
Out  of  their  sleep  in  terror  soon 

The  guards  waked  one  by  one. 


2986     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"Ho  here!     Ho  there!     Has  no  man  seen 
The  king? "     The  cry  ran  to  and  fro; 

Beggar  and  king,  they  laughed,  I  ween, 
The  laugh  that  free  men  know. 

On  the  king's  gate  the  moss  grew  gray; 

The  king  came  not.     They  called  Wm  dead; 
And  made  his  eldest  son  one  day 

Slave  in  his  father's  stead. 

Helen  Hunt  Jackson  [i83i-i885{ 

THE   CHARACTER  OF  A   HAPPY  LIFE 

How  happy  is  he  born  and  taught 

That  serveth  not  another's  will; 
Whose  armor  is  his  honest  thought, 

And  simple  truth  his  utmost  skill! 

Whose  passions  not  his  masters  are; 

Whose  soul  is  still  prepared  for  death, 
Not  tied  unto  the  world  by  care 

Of  public  fame  or  private  breath; 

Who  envies  none  that  chance  doth  raise, 
Nor  vice;  who  never  understood  ,;; 

How  deepest  wounds  are  given  by  praise; 
Nor  rules  of  state,  but  rules  of  good; 

Who  hath  his  life  from  rumors  freed; 

Whose  conscience  is  his  strong  retreat; 
Whose  state  can  neither  flatterers  feed, 

Nor  ruin  make  oppressors  great; 

Who  God  doth  late  and  early  pray 
More  of  His  grace  than  gifts  to  lend; 

And  entertains  the  harmless  day 
With  a  well-chosen  book  or  friend; 

— This  man  is  freed  from  servile  bands 
Of  hope  to  rise,  or  fear  to  fall :  '  '' ■ 

Lord  of  himself,  though  not  of  lands, 
And  having  nothing,  yet  hath  all. 

Henry  Wotlon  [156S-1639] 


"My   Mind  to   Me  a   Kingdom   Is"    2987 


"MY  MIND   TO  ]\rE  A   KINGDOM  IS" 

My  mind  to  me  a  kingdom  is, 

Such  present  jo3's  therein  I  find, 
That  it  excels  all  other  bliss 

That  earth  affords  or  grows  by  kind : 
Though  much  I  want  which  most  would  have, 
Yet  still  my  mind  forbids  to  crave. 

No  princely  pomp,  no  wealthy  store. 

No  force  to  win  the  victory, 
No  wily  wit  to  salve  a  sore, 

No  shape  to  feed  a  loving  eye ; 
To  none  of  these  I  yield  as  thrall: 
For  why?     My  mind  doth  serve  for  all.    .  , 

I  see  how  plenty  [surfeits]  oft, 

And  hasty  climbers  soon  do  fall; 
I  see  that  those  which  are  aloft 

Mishap  doth  threaten  most  of  all; 
They  get  with  toil,  they  li^eep  with  fear: 
Such  cares  my  mind  could  never  bear. 

Content  to  live,  this  is  my  stay; 

I  seek  no  more  than  may  suffice; 
I  press  to  bear  no  haughty  sway; 

Look,  what  I  lack  my  mind  supplies: 
Lo,  thus  I  triumph  like  a  king, 
Content  with  that  my  mind  doth  bring. 

Some  have  too  much,  yet  still  do  crave; 

I  little  have,  and  seek  no  more. 
They  are  but  poor,  though  much  they  have,. 

And  I  am  rich  with  little  store: 
They  poor,  I  rich;  they  beg,  I  give; 
They  lack,  I  leave;  they  pine,  I  live. 

I  laugh  not  at  another's  loss; 

I  grudge  not  at  another's  gain; 
No  worldly  waves  my  mind  can  toss; 

My  state  at  one  firth  still  remain: 


2988     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

I  fear  no  foe,  I  fawn  no  friend ; 

I  loathe  not  life,  nor  dread  my  end.  . ,, 

Some  weigh  their  pleasure  by  their  lust,  M 
Their  wisdom  by  their  rage  of  will;ijijd 

Their  treasure  is  their  only  trust;  '  'f.rlT 
A  cloaked  craft  their  store  of  skill: 

But  all  the  pleasure  that  I  find 

Is  to  maintain  a  quiet  mind.  Y 

My  wealth  is  health  and  perfect  ease; 

My  conscience  clear  my  chief  defense; 
I  neither  seek  by  bribes  to  please, 

Nor  by  deceit  to  breed  offense: 
Thus  do  I  live;  thus  will  I  die; 
Would  all  did  so  as  well  as  I ! 

Edward  Dyer  [is5o?-i6o7] 


WRITTEN  AT  AN  INN  AT  HENLEY 

To  thee,  fair  freedom!  I  retire 

From  flattery,  cards,  and  dice,  and  din; 
Nor  art  thou  found  in  mansions  higher 

Than  the  low  cot,  or  humble  inn. 

'Tis  here  with  boundless  power  I  reign; 

And  every  health  which  I  begin, 
C  onverts  dull  port  to  bright  champagne; 

Such  freedom  crowns  it,  at  an  inn. 

I  fly  from  pomp,  I  fly  from  plate! 

I  fly  from  falsehood's  specious  grin! 
Freedom  I  love,  and  form  I  hate, 

And  choose  my  lodgings  at  an  inn. 

Here,  waiter!  take  my  sordid  ore. 

Which  lackeys  else  might  hope  to  win; 

It  buys,  what  courts  have  not  in  store; 
It  buys  me  freedom  at  an  inn. 


Careless   Content  2989 

Whoc  cr  has  traveled  life's  dull  round, 
Where'er  his  stages  ma}'  have  been, 

May  sigh  to  think  he  still  has  found 
The  warmest  welcome,  at  an  inn. 

William  Shcnslone  [17 14-1763] 


CARELESS   CONTENT 

I  AM  content,  I  do  not  care, 
Wag  as  it  will  the  world  for  me ! 

When  fuss  and  fret  was  all  my  fare 
It  got  no  ground  that  I  could  see; 

So  when  away  my  caring  went 

I  counted  cost  and  was  content. 


7/ 


With  more  of  thanks  and  less  of  thought 
I  strive  to  make  my  matters  meet; 

To  seek  what  ancient  sages  sought. 
Physic  and  food  in  sour  and  sweet; 

To  take  what  passes  in  good  part 

And  keep  the  hiccups  from  the  heart. 

With  good  and  gently-humored  hearts 
I  choose  to  chat  where'er  I  come, 

Whate'cr  the  subject  be  that  starts;     ,jp 
But  if  I  get  among  the  glum 

I  hold  my  tongue  to  tell  the  troth. 

And  keep  my  breath  to  cool  my  broth. 

For  chance  or  change  of  peace  or  pain,  tj 
For  Fortune's  favor  or  her  frown, 

For  lack  or  glut,  for  loss  or  gain, 
I  never  dodge  nor  up  nor  down. 

But  swing  what  way  the  ship  shall  swim., 

Or  tack  about  with  equal  trim. 

I  suit  not  where  I  shall  not  speed. 
Nor  trace  the  turn  of  every  tide. 

If  simple  sense  will  not  succeed 
I  made  no  bustling,  but  abide. 


2990     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

For  shining  wealth  or  scaring  woe 
I  force  no  friend,  I  fear  no  foe. 

Of  ups  and  downs,  of  ins  and  outs, 
f ,  Ov ,  - ,    Of  they're-i'-th'-wrong  and  we 're-i'-th '-right, 
I  shun  the  rancors  and  the  routs; 

And,  wishing  well  to  every  wight, 
Whatever  turn  the  matter  takes, 
I  deem  it  all  but  ducks  and  drakes. 

With  whom  I  feast  I  do  not  fawn, 
Nor  if  the  folks  should  flout  me,  faint. 

If  wonted  welcome  be  withdrawn 
I  cook  no  kind  of  a  complaint. 

With  none  disposed  to  disagree, 

I  like  them  best  who  best  like  me. 

Not  that  I  rate  myself  the  rule 
How  all  my  betters  should  behave; 

But  fame  shall  find  me  no  man's  fool, 
Nor  to  a  set  of  men  a  slave; 

I  love  a  friendship  free  and  frank, 

But  hate  to  hang  upon  a  hank. 

Fond  of  a  true  and  trusty  tie, 

I  never  loose  where'er  I  link, 
Though  if  a  business  budges  by 

I  talk  thereon  just  as  I  think; 
My  word,  my  work,  my  heart,  my  hand. 
Still  on  a  side  together  stand. 

If  names  or  notions  make  a  noise. 
Whatever  hap  the  question  hath 

The  point  impartially  I  poise. 

And  read  and  write,  but  without  wrath; 

For,  should  I  burn  or  break  my  brains, 

Pray,  who  will  pay  me  for  my  pains? 

I  love  my  neighbor  as  myself — 
Myself  like  him  too,  by  his  leave! 

Nor  to  his  pleasure,  power  or  pelf 
Came  I  to  crouch,  as  I  conceive! 


The   Golden   Mean  2991 

Dame  Nature  doubtless  has  designed 
A  man  the  monarch  of  his  mind. 

Now  taste  and  try  this  temper,  sirs, 
Mood  it  and  brood  it  in  your  breast; 

Or,  if  ye  ween  for  worldly  stirs 

That  man  does  right  to  mar  his  rest, 

Let  me  be  deft  and  debonair, 

I  am  content,  I  do  not  care! 

John  Byrotn  [1692-1763] 


THE   GOLDEN   MEAN* 

Receive,  dear  friend,  the  truths  I  teach, 
So  shalt  thou  live  beyond  the  reach 

Of  adverse  Fortune's  power; 
Not  always  tempt  the  distant  deep, 
Nor  always  timorously  creep 

Along  the  treacherous  shore. 

He  that  holds  fast  the  golden  mean, 
And  lives  contentedly  between 

The  little  and  the  great. 
Feels  not  the  wants  that  pinch  the  poor, 
Nor  plagues  that  haunt  the  rich  man's  door, 

Imbittering  all  his  state. 

The  tallest  pines  feel  most  the  power 
Of  wintry  blasts;  the  loftiest  tower 

Comes  heaviest  to  the  ground; 
The  bolts,  that  spare  the  mountain's  side, 
His  cloud-capped  eminence  divide. 

And  spread  the  ruin  round. 

The  well-informed  philosopher 
Rejoices  with  a  wholesome  fear, 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3829. 


2992     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  hopes,  in  spite  of  pain; 
If  Winter  bellow  from  the  north, 
Soon  the  sweet  Spring  comes  dancing  forth, 

And  Nature  laughs  again. 

What  if  thine  heaven  be  overcast? 
The  dark  appearance  will  not  last; 

Expect  a  brighter  sky. 
The  God,  that  strings  the  silver  bow, 
Awakes  sometimes  the  Muses  too, 

And  lays  his  arrows  by. 

If  hindrances  obstruct  thy  way, 
Thy  magnanimity  display, 

And  let  thy  strength  be  seen; 
But  O!  if  Fortune  fill  thy  sail 
With  more  than  a  propitious  gale, 

Take  half  thy  canvas  in. 

After  Horace,  by  William  Cowper  [1731-1800] 


"ITS  AIN  DRAP  0'  DEW" 

Confide  ye  aye  in  Providence, 

For  Providence  is  kind: 
An'  bear  ye  a'  life's  changes 

Wi'  a  calm  an'  tranquil  mind. 
Though  pressed  and  hemmed  on  every  side, 
Ha'e  faith,  an'  ye'll  win  through; 
For  ilka  blade  o'  grass 
Keeps  its  ain  drap  o'  dew. 

Gin  reft  frae  friends,  or  crossed  in  love. 

As  whiles  nae  doubt  ye've  been. 
Grief  lies  deep-hidden  in  your  heart, 

Or  tears  flow  frae  your  e'en, 
Believe  it  for  the  best,  and  trow 
There's  good  in  store  for  you; 
For  ilka  blade  o'  grass 
Keeps  its  ain  drap  0'  dew. 


"En  Voyage  "io  ?rfcio'^   2993 

In  lang,  lang  days  o'  simmer, 

When  the  clear  and  cloudless  sky 
Refuses  ae  wee  drap  o'  rain 

To  nature,  parched  and  dry, 
The  genial  night,  with  balmy  breath, 
Gars  verdure  spring  anew, 
An'  ilka  blade  0'  grass 
Keeps  its  ain  drap  o'  dew. 

Sae  lest  'mid  fortune's  sunshine 

We  should  feel  owre  proud  an'  hie, 
An'  in  our  pride  forget  to  wipe 
The  tear  frae  poortith's  e'e. 
Some  wee  dark  cloud.'^  o'  sorrow  come, 
We  ken  na  whence  nor  hoo ; 
But  ilka  blade  o'  grass 
Keeps  its  ain  drap  o'  dew. 

James  Ballantine  [180S-1877] 

RESIGNATION 

Why,  why  repine,  my  pensive  friend, 

At  pleasures  slipped  away? 
Some  the  stern  Fates  will  never  lend, 

And  all  refuse  to  stay. 

I  see  the  rainbow  in  the  sky, 

The  dew  upon  the  grass; 
I  see  them,  and  I  ask  not  why 

They  glimmer  or  they  pass. 

With  folded  arms  I  linger  not 

To  call  ihem  back ;  'twere  vain : 
In  this,  or  in  some  otlier  spot, 

I  know  they'll  shine  again. 

Walter  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 

"EN  VOYAGE" 

Whichever  way  the  wind  doth  blow. 
Some  heart  is  glad  to  have  it  so; 
Then  blow  it  east  or  blow  it  west, 
The  wind  that  blows,  that  wind  is  best. 


2994     i^oems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

My  little  craft  sails  not  alone: 
A  thousand  fleets  from  every  zone 
Are  out  upon  a  thousand  seas; 
And  what  for  me  were  favoring  breeze 
Might  dash  another,  with  the  shock 
Of  doom,  upon  some  hidden  rock. 

And  so  I  do  not  care  to  pray 

For  winds  to  waft  me  on  my  way, 

But  leave  it  to  a  Higher  Will 

To  stay  or  speed  me;  trusting  still 

That  all  is  well,  and  sure  that  He 

Who  launched  my  bark  will  sail  with  me 

Through  storm  and  calm,  and  will  not  fail, 

Whatever  breezes  may  prevail. 

To  land  me,  every  peril  past. 

Within  his  sheltering  haven  at  last. 

Then,  whatsoever  wind  doth  blow. 
My  heart  is  glad  to  have  it  so ; 
And  blow  it  east  or  blow  it  west. 
The  wind  that  blows,  that  wind  is  best. 

Caroline  Atwater  Mason  [1853- 


THE  HAPPIEST  HEART 

Who  drives  the  horses  of  the  sun 
Shall  lord  it  but  a  day; 
Better  the  lowly  deed  were  done. 
And  kept  the  humble  way. 

The  rust  will  find  the  sword  of  fame, 
The  dust  will  hide  the  crown; 
Ay,  none  shall  nail  so  high  his  name 
Time  will  not  tear  it  down. 

The  happiest  heart  that  ever  beat 
Was  in  some  quiet  breast  ,'•" 

That  found  the  common  daylight  sweet, 
And  left  to  Heaven  the  rest. 

John  Vance  Cheney  [1848- 


Sapientia  Lunae  ^995 

GOOD-BYE     ' 

Good-bye,  proud  world!     I'm  going  home: 
Thou  art  not  my  friend,  and  I'm  not  thine. 
Long  through  thy  weary  crowds  I  roam; 
A  river-ark  on  the  ocean  brine, 
Long  I've  been  tossed  hke  the  driven  foam; 
But  now,  proud  world!  I'm  going  home. 

Good-bye  to  Flattery's  fawning  face; 
To  Grandeur  with  his  wise  grimace; 
To  upstart  Wealth's  averted  eye; 
To  supple  Office,  low  and  high; 
To  crowded  halls,  to  court  and  street; 
To  frozen  hearts  and  hasting  feet; 
To  those  who  go,  and  those  who  come; 
Good-bye,  proud  world!  I'm  going  home. 

I  am  going  to  my  own  hearth-stone, 
Bosomed  in  yon  green  hills  alone, — 
A  secret  nook  in  a  pleasant  land. 
Whose  groves  the  frolic  fairies  planned; 
Where  arches  green,  the  livelong  day. 
Echo  the  blackbird's  roundelay, 
And  vulgar  feet  have  never  trod — 
A  spot  that  is  sacred  to  thought  and  God. 

O,  when  I  am  safe  in  my  sylvan  home, 
I  tread  on  the  pride  of  Greece  and  Rome; 
And  when  I  am  stretched  beneath  the  pines, 
Where  the  evening  star  so  holy  shines, 
I  laugh  at  the  lore  and  the  pride  of  man. 
At  the  sophist  schools,  and  the  learned  clan; 
For  what  are  they  all,  in  their  high  conceit, 
When  man  in  the  bush  with  God  may  meet?  r 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-1882]  [• 

/■ 
SAPIENTIA  LVNJE 

The  wisdom  of  the  world  said  unto  me: 
"Go  forth  and  run,  the  race  is  to  the  brave; 

Perchance  some  honor  tarrieth  for  thee  /" 

"As  tarrieth,"  I  said,  "for  sure,  the  grave." 


2996     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

For  I  had  pondered  on  a  rune  of  roses, 
Which  to  her  votaries  the  moon  discloses. 

The  wisdom  of  the  world  said:  "There  are  bays: 

Go  forth  and  run,  for  victory  is  good, 
After  the  stress  of  the  laborious  days." 

"Yet,"  said  I,  "shall  I  be  the  worms'  sweet  food," 
As  I  went  musing  on  a  rune  of  roses, 
Which  in  her  hour,  the  pale,  soft  moon  discloses. 

Then  said  my  voices:  "Wherefore  strive  or  run. 

On  dusty  highways  ever,  a  vain  race  ?  : 

The  long  night  cometh,  starless,  void  of  sun,  • !' 

What  light  shall  serve  thee  like  her  golden  face  ?"\ 

For  I  had  pondered  on  a  rune  of  roses,  oHi  oT 

And  knew  some  secrets  which  the  moon  discloses. 

"Yea,"  said  I,  "for  her  eyes  are  pure  and  sweet  ^. 

As  lilies,  and  the  fragrance  of  her  hair 
Is  many  laurels;  and  it  is  not  meet 

To  run  for  shadows  when  the  prize  is  here"; 
And  I  went  reading  in  that  rune  of  roses 
Which  to  her  votaries  the  moon  discloses. 

Ernest  Dowson  [1867-1900] 

THE  BEASTS 

From  "  Song  of  Myself  " 

I  THINK  I  could  turn  and  live  with  animals,  they  are  so  placid 

and  self-contained; 
I  stand  and  look  at  them  long  and  long. 

They  do  not  sweat  and  whine  about  their  condition; 

They  do  not  lie  awake  in  the  dark  and  weep  for  their  sins; 

They  do  not  make  me  sick  discussing  their  duty  to  God; 

Not  one  is  dissatisfied — not  one  is  demented  with  the  mania 
of  owning  things; 

Not  one  kneels  to  another,  nor  to  his  kind  that  lived  thou- 
sands of  years  ago; 

Not  one  is  respectable  or  industrious  over  the  whole  earth. 

Walt  Whitman  [1819-1892] 


Diogenes  ^997 


IMMORAL 

I  KEEP  walking  around  myself,  mouth  open  with  amazement: 
For  by  all  the  ethical  rules  of  life,  I  ought  to  be  solemn  and 

sad, 
But,  look  you,  I  am  bursting  with  joy. 

1  scold  myself: 

I  say;  Boy,  your  work  has  gone  to  pot: 

Vou  have  scarcely  enough  money  to  last  out  the  week: 

And  think  of  your  responsibilities! 

Whereupon,  my  heart  bubbles  over, 

I  puff  on  my  pipe,  and  think  how  solemnly  the  world  goes 

by  my  window. 
And  how  childish  people  are,  wrinkling  their  foreheads  over 

groceries  and  rent. 

For  here  jets  hfe  fresh  and  stinging  in  the  vivid  air: 

The  winds  laugh  to  the  jovial  Earth: 

The  day  is  keen  with  Autumn's  fine  flavor  of  having  done 

the  year's  work : 
Earth,  in  her  festival,  calls  her  children  to  the  crimson 

revels. 
The  trees  are  a  drunken  riot:  the  sunshine  is  dazzling  .  .  . 

Yes,  I  ought,  I  suppose,  to  be  saddened  and  tragic: 
But  joy  drops  from  me  like  ripe  apples. 

James  Oppenlicim  [18S2- 


DIOGENES 

A  HUT,  and  a  tree. 

And  a  hill  for  me. 
And  a  piece  of  a  weedy  meadow. 

I'll  ask  no  thing, 

Of  God  or  king. 
But  to  clear  away  his  shadow. 

Max  Eastman  [i88j- 


299^      Poems   ot   Sentiment  and    Reflection 


LEISURE 

What  is  this  life  if,  full  of  care, 

We  have  no  time  to  stand  and  stare.  -  ■ 

No  time  to  stand  beneath  the  boughs 

And  stare  as  long  as  sheep  or  cows.  i| 

No  time  to  see,  when  woods  we  pass. 
Where  squirrels  hide  their  nuts  in  grass. 

No  time  to  see,  in  broad  daylight, 
Streams  full  of  stars,  like  skies  at  night. 

No  time  to  turn  at  Beauty's  glance. 

And  watch  her  feet,  how  they  can  dance.  [ 

No  time  to  wait  till  her  mouth  can 
Enrich  that  smile  her  eyes  began. 

A  poor  life  this  if,  full  of  care. 
We  have  no  time  to  stand  and  stare.  j     a 

William  H.  Davies  [1870-     ,  jp 
;t 
POOR  KINGS 

God's  pity  on  poor  kings, 

They  know  no  gentle  rest; 
The  North  and  South  cry  out. 

Cries  come  from  East  and  West — 
"Come,  open  this  new  Dock, 

Building,  Bazaar  or  Fair." 
Lord,  what  a  wretched  Hfe 

Such  men  must  bear. 

They're  followed,  watched  and  spied, 

No  liberty  they  know; 
Some  eye  will  watch  them  still, 

No  matter  where  they  go. 
When  in  green  lanes  I  muse. 

Alone,  and  hear  birds  sing, 
God's  pity  then,  say  I, 

On  some  poor  king. 

William  H   Davies  [1870- 


FRIENDSHIP  AND  BROTPIERHOOD 

SALVE! 

To  live  within  a  cave — it  is  most  good; 

But,  if  God  make  a  day, 

And  some  one  come,  and  say, 
"Lo!  I  have  gathered  fagots  in  the  wood!" 

E'en  let  him  stay. 
And  light  a  fire,  and  fan  a  temporal  mood! 

So  sit  till  morning!  when  the  light  is  grown 

That  he  the  path  can  read. 

Then  bid  the  man  God-speed! 
His  morning  is  not  thine :  yet  must  thou  own 
They  have  a  cheerful  warmth — those  ashes  on  the  stone. 
Thomas  Edward  Brown  [1830-1897] 


ABOU  BEN  ADHEM 

Abou  Ben  Adhem  (may  his  tribe  increase!) 
Awoke  one  night  from  a  deep  dream  of  peace. 
And  saw,  within  the  moonlight  in  his  room, 
Making  it  rich,  and  like  a  lily  in  bloom, 
An  angel  writing  in  a  book  of  gold : — 
Exceeding  peace  had  made  Ben  Adhcm  bold, 
And  to  the  Presence  in  the  room  he  said, 
"What  writest  thou?" — The  vision  raised  its  head, 
And  with  a  look  made  of  all  sweet  accord. 
Answered,  "The  names  of  those  who  love  the  Lord.' 
"And  is  mine  one?"  said  Abou.    "Nay,  not  so," 
Replied  the  Angel.    Abou  spoke  more  low, 
But  cheerly  still;  and  said,  "I  pray  thee,  then. 
Write  me  as  one  that  loves  his  fellow-men." 
2999 


3000    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

The  angel  wrote,  and  vanished.    The  next  night 

It  came  again  with  a  great  wakening  light, 

And  showed  the  names  whom  love  of  God  had  blessed, 

And  lo!  Ben  Adhem's  name  led  all  the  rest. 

Leigh  Hunt  [1784-1859] 


lA 


ENVOY 

From  "  More  Songs  from  Vagabondia  " 


Whose  furthest  footstep  never  strayed 
Beyond  the  village  of  his  birth. 
Is  but  a  lodger  for  the  night 
In  this  old  wayside  inn  of  earth. 

To-morrow  he  shall  take  his  pack, 
And  set  out  for  the  ways  beyond, 
On  the  old  trail  from  star  to  star, 
An  alien  and  a  vagabond. 

II 

If  any  record  of  our  names 
Be  blown  about  the  hills  of  time. 
Let  no  one  sunder  us  in  death, — 
The  man  of  paint,  the  men  of  rhyme. 

Of  all  our  good,  of  all  our  bad. 
This  one  thing  only  is  of  worth, — 
We  held  the  league  of  heart  to  heart 
The  only  purpose  of  the  earth. 

Richard  Hovey  [1864- 


FRIENDS 


You  ask  me  "why  I  like  him."    Nay, 
I  cannot;  nay,  I  would  not,  say. 
I  think  it  vile  to  pigeonhole 
The  pros  and  cons  of  a  kindred  soul. 


A  Fr.iend  3001 

You  "wonder  he  should  be  my  friend." 
But  then  why  should  you  comprehend? 
Thank  God  for  this — a  new — surprise: 
My  eyes,  remember,  are  not  your  eyes. 

Cherish  this  one  small  mystery; 
And  marvel  not  that  love  can  be 
"In  spite  of  all  his  many  flaws." 
In  spite?    Supposing  I  said  "Because." 

A  truce,  a  truce  to  questioning: 
"We  two  are  friends"  tells  everything. 
Yet  if  you  must  know,  this  is  why: 
Because  he  is  he  and  I  am  I. 

Edward  V  err  all  Lucas  [1868- 


A  FRIEND 

All  that  he  came  to  give, 
He  gave  and  went  again: 
I  have  seen  one  man  live, 
I  have  seen  one  man  reign, 
With  all  the  graces  in  his  train. 

As  one  of  us,  he  wrought 
Things  of  the  common  hour: 
Whence  was  the  charmed  soul  brought, 
That  gave  each  act  such  power; 
The  natural  beauty  of  a  flower? 

Magnificence  and  grace. 
Excellent  courtesy: 
A  brightness  on  the  face, 
Airs  of  high  memory: 
Whence  came  all  these,  to  such  as  he? 

Like  young  Shakespearean  kings, 
He  won  the  adoring  throng: 
And  as  Apollo  sings, 
He  triumphed  with  a  song: 
Triumphed,  and  sang,  and  passed  along. 


3002     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

With  a  light  word,  he  took 
The  hearts  of  men  in  thrall: 
And,  with  a  golden  look, 
Welcomed  them,  at  his  call 
Giving  their  love,  their  strength,  their  all. 

No  man  less  proud  than  he. 
Nor  cared  for  homage  less: 
Only,  he  could  not  be 
Far  off  from  happiness: 
Nature  was  bound  to  his  success. 

Weary,  the  cares,  the  jars, 
„,c,  The  lets,  of  every  day: 

But  the  heavens  filled  with  stars, 
Chanced  he  upon  the  way: 
And  where  he  stayed,  all  joy  would  stay. 

Now  when  the  night  draws  down, 
When  the  austere  stars  burn; 
Roaming  the  vast  live  town, 
My  thoughts  and  memories  yearn 
Toward  him,  who  never  will  return. 

Yet  have  I  seen  him  live, 
And  owned  my  friend,  a  king: 
All  that  he  came  to  give, 
He  gave  and  I,  who  sing 
His  praise,  bring  all  I  have  to  bring. 

Lionel  Johnson  [1867-1902J 


BILL  AND  JOE 

Come,  dear  old  comrade,  you  and  I 
Will  steal  an  hour  from  days  gone  by. 
The  shining  days  when  life  was  new. 
And  all  was  bright  with  morning  dew, 
The  lusty  days  of  long  ago, 
When  you  were  Bill  and  I  was  Joe: 


\ 


Bill  and  Joe  3003 

Your  name  may  flaunt  a  titled  trail, 
Proud  as  a  cockerel's  rainbow  tail; 
And  mine  as  brief  appendix  wear 
As  Tarn  O'Shanter's  luckless  mare; 
To-day,  old  friend,  remember  still 
That  I  am  Joe  and  you  are  Bill. 

You've  won  the  great  world's  envied  prize, 
And  grand  you  look  in  people's  eyes, 
With  HON.  and  LL.  D. 
In  big  brave  letters,  fair  to  see, — 
Your  list,  old  fellow!  off  they  go! — 
How  are  you,  Bill?    How  are  you,  Joe? 

You've  worn  the  judge's  ermined  robe; 
You've  taught  your  name  to  half  the  globe; 
You've  sung  mankind  a  deathless  strain; 
You've  made  the  dead  past  live  again: 
The  world  may  call  you  what  it  will, 
But  you  and  I  are  Joe  and  Bill. 

The  chaffing  young  folks  stare  and  say, 
"See  those  old  buffers,  bent  and  gray, — 
They  talk  like  fellows  in  their  teens! 
Mad,  poor  old  boys!    That's  what  it  means," — 
And  shake  their  heads;  they  little  know 
The  throbbing  hearts  of  Bill  and  Joe! — 

How  Bill  forgets  his  hour  of  pride. 
While  Joe  sits  smUing  at  his  side; 
How  Joe,  in  spite  of  time's  disguise. 
Finds  the  old  schoolmate  in  his  eyes, — 
Those  calm,  stern  eyes  that  melt  and  fill 
As  Joe  looks  fondly  up  at  Bill. 

Ah,  pensive  scholar,  what  is  fame? 
A  fitful  tongue  of  leaping  flame; 
A  giddy  whirlwind's  fickle  gust. 
That  lifts  a  pinch  of  mortal  dust ; 
A  few  swift  years,  and  who  can  show 
Which  dust  was  Bill  and  which. was  Joe? 


3004    Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

The  weary  idol  takes  his  stand, 

Holds  out  his  bruised  and  aching  hand, 

While  gaping  thousands  come  and  go, — 

How  vain  it  seems,  this  empty  show! 

Till  all  at  once  his  pulses  thrill; — 

'Tis  poor  old  Joe's  "God  bless  you,  Bill!" 

And  shaU  we  breathe  in  happier  spheres 
The  names  that  pleased  our  mortal  ears; 
In  some  sweet  lull  of  harp  and  song, 
For  earth-born  spirits  none  too  long, 
Just  whispering  of  the  world  below 
Where  this  was  Bill  and  that  was  Joe? 

No  matter;  while  our  home  is  here 
No  sounding  name  is  half  so  dear; 
When  fades  at  length  our  lingering  day, 
Who  cares  what  pompous  tombstones  say? 
Read  on  the  hearts  that  love  us  still. 
Hie  jacei  Joe.    Hicjacei  Bill. 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  [1800-1894] 

"AS  TOILSOME  I  WANDERED  VIRGINIA'S  WOODS" 

As  toilsome  I  wandered  Virginia's  woods. 

To  the  music  of  rustling  leaves  kicked  by  my  feet,  (for  'twas 

autumn,) 
I  marked  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  the  grave  of  a  soldier; 
Mortally  wounded  he  and  buried  on  the  retreat,  (easily  all 

could  I  understand,) 
The  halt  of  a  mid-day  hour,  when  up!  no  time  to  lose — yet 

this  sign  left. 
On  a  tablet  scrawled  and  nailed  on  the  tree  by  the  grave. 
Bold,  cautious,  true,  and  my  loving  comrade. 

Long,  long  I  muse,  then  on  my  way  go  wandering. 

Many  a  changeful  season  to  follow,  and  many  a  scene  of  life, 

Yet  at  times  through  changeful  season  and  scene,  abrupt, 

alone,  or  in  the  crowded  street, 
Comes  before  me  the  unknown  soldier's  grave,  comes  the 

inscription  rude  in  Virginia's  woods, 
Bold,  cautious,  true,  and  my  loving  comrade. 

Walt  Whitman  [181Q-1892] 


Comrades  S^'^S 

GONE 

About  the  little  chambers  of  my  heart 

Friends  have  been  coming  agoing — many  a  year. 

The  doors  stand  open  there. 
Some,  lightly  stepping,  enter;  some  depart. 

Freely  they  come  and  freely  go,  at  will. 

The  walls  give  back  their  laughter;  all  day  long 

They  fill  the  house  with  song. 
One  door  alone  is  shut,  one  chamber  still. 

Mary  E.  Coleridge  [i86i-igo7] 


COMRADES 

Where  are  the  friends  that  I  knew  in  my  Maying, 

In  the  days  of  my  youth,  in  the  first  of  my  roaming? 
We  were  dear;  we  were  leal;  O,  far  we  went  straying; 

Now  never  a  heart  to  my  heart  comes  homing! — 
Where  is  he  now,  the  dark  boy  slender 

Who  taught  me  bare-back,  stirrup  and  reins? 
I  loved  him;  he  loved  me;  my  beautiful,  tender 

Tamer  of  horses  on  grass-grown  plains. 

Where  is  he  now  whose  eyes  swam  brighter, 

Softer  than  love,  in  his  turbulent  charms; 
Who  taught  me  to  strike,  and  to  fall,  dear  fighter, 

And  gathered  me  up  in  his  boyhood  arms; 
Taught  me  the  rifle,  and  with  me  went  riding, 

Suppled  my  limbs  to  the  horseman's  war; 
WTiere  is  he  now,  for  whom  my  heart's  biding, 

Biding,  biding — but  he  rides  far? 

0  love  that  passes  the  love  of  woman ! 

Who  that  hath  felt  it  shall  ever  forget, 
When  the  breath  of  life  with  a  throb  turns  human, 

And  a  lad's  heart  is  to  a  lad's  heart  set? 
Ever,  forever,  lover  and  rover — 

They  shall  cling,  nor  each  from  other  shall  part 
Till  the  reign  of  the  stars  in  the  heavens  be  over, 

And  life  is  dust  in  each  faithful  heart! — 


30o6     Foems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

They  are  dead,  the  American  grasses  under; 

There  is  no  one  now  who  presses  my  side; 
By  the  African  chotts  I  am  riding  asunder, 

And  with  great  joy  ride  I  the  last  great  ride. 
I  am  fey;  I  am  fain  of  sudden  dying; 

Thousands  of  miles  there  is  no  one  near; 
And  my  heart — all  the  night  it  is  crying,  crying 

In  the  bosoms  of  dead  lads  darling-dear. 

Hearts  of  my  music — them  dark  earth  covers; 

Comrades  to  die,  and  to  die  for,  were  they; — 
In  the  width  of  the  world  there  were  no  such  rovers — 

Back  to  back,  breast  to  breast,  it  was  ours  to  stay; 
And  the  highest  on  earth  was  the  vow  that  we  cherished, 

To  spur  forth  from  the  crowd  and  come  back  never  more, 
And  to  ride  in  the  track  of  great  souls  perished  ' ' ' 

Till  the  nests  of  the  lark  shall  roof  us  o'er. 

Yet  lingers  a  horseman  on  Altai  higlilands. 

Who  hath  joy  of  me,  riding  the  Tartar  glissade; 
And  one,  far  faring  o'er  orient  islands 

Whose  blood  yet  glints  with  my  blade's  accolade; 
North,  west,  east,  I  fling  you  my  last  hallooing. 

Last  love  to  the  breasts  where  my  own  has  bled ; 
Through  the  reach  of  the  desert  my  soul  leaps  pursuing 

My  star  where  it  rises  a  Star  of  the  Dead. 

George  Edward  Woodberry  [1855- 


COMRADES 

At  least,  it  was  a  life  of  swords, 

Our  life!  nor  lived  in  vain: 
We  fought  the  fight  with  mighty  lords, 

Nor  dastards  have  we  slain. 

We  stirred  at  morn,  and  through  bright  air 

Swept  to  the  trysting  place: 
Winds  of  the  mountains  in  our  hair, 

And  sunrise  on  each  face. 


Comrades  3007 

No  need  to  spur!  our  horses  knew 

The  joy,  to  which  we  went: 
Over  the  brightening  lands  they  flew 

Forward,  and  were  content. 

On  each  man's  Hps,  an  happy  smile; 

In  each  man's  eyes,  dehght : 
So,  fired  with  foretaste,  mile  on  mile, 

We  thundered  to  the  fight. 

Let  death  come  now,  and  from  the  sun 

Hide  me  away:  what  then? 
My  days  have  seen  more  prowess  done, 

Than  years  of  other  men. 

Oh,  warriors  of  the  rugged  heights, 

We,  where  the  eagles  nest: 
They,  courtly  soldiers,  gentle  knights, 

By  kings  and  dames  caressed. 

Not  theirs,  the  passion  of  the  sword. 

The  fire  of  Hving  blades! 
Like  men,  they  fought :  and  found  reward 

In  dance  and  feast,  like  maids. 

We,  on  the  mountain  lawns  encamped, 

Close  under  the  great  stars. 
Turned,  when  the  horses  hard  by  stamped, 

And  dreamed  again,  of  wars: 

Or,  if  one  woke,  he  saw  the  gleam 

Of  moonlight,  on  each  face, 
Touch  its  tumultuary  dream 

With  moments  of  mild  grace. 

We  hated  no  man;  but  we  fought 

With  all  men:  the  fierce  wind 
Lashes  the  wide  earth  without  thought* 

Our  tempest  scourged  miinkind. 


30o8     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

They  cursed  us,  living  without  laws! 

They,  in  their  pride  of  peace: 
Who  bared  no  blade,  but  in  just  cause: 

Nor  grieved,  that  war  should  cease. 

O  spirit  of  the  wild  hill-side! 

O  spirit  of  the  steel! 
We  answered  nothing,  when  they  cried, 

But  challenged  with  a  peal. 

And,  when  the  battle  blood  had  poured 

To  slake  our  souls'  desire: 
Oh,  brave  to  hear,  how  torrents  roared 

Beside  the  pinewood  fire ! 

My  brothers,  whom  in  warrior  wise 
The  death  of  deaths  hath  stilled! 

Ah,  you  would  understand  these  eyes, 
Although  with  strange  tears  filled! 

Lionel  Johnson  [1867-1902 


COMRADES 

I  ROSE  up  when  the  battle  was  dead, 
I,  the  most  wounded  man  of  us  all! 

From  the  slain  that  fell,  to  the  living  that  fled. 
Over  the  waste  one  name  I  call. 

Thou  whose  strength  was  an  oak  that  branched. 
Thou  whose  voice  was  a  fire  that  burned, 

Thine  the  face  that  the  fighting  blanched, 
Thine  the  heart  that  the  tumult  turned! 

Had  I,  beloved,  when  swords  swept  measure. 
Had  I  but  reached  thee,  and  slain  thee  then: 

Then  in  thy  death  had  my  soul  found  pleasure, 
Counting  thee  dead  as  a  man  with  men. 

Then  with  the  peace,  when  the  fight  was  ended. 
Men  would  have  asked,  and  I  would  have  said, 

"Yonder  he  lies  whom  once  I  befriended. 
Sharing  his  rest  in  the  ranks  of  the  dead." 


At  the   Crossroads  3009 

Ghosts  of  the  riders,  ghosts  of  the  ridden, 
Here  keep  tryst  for  the  i(,)vcs  that  chcd ; 

Thou  alone  of  all  loves  art  hidden, 
Never  again  to  be  near  my  side. 

Here,  beloved,  when  the  fight  has  slackened, 

I  rise  up,  and  a  sword  is  mine! 
Over  the  mounds  with  dead  men  blackened, 

Ever  my  soul  makes  haste  for  thine. 

Though  thou  lurk  in  the  caverns  beneath. 
Though  thou  crouch  by  the  moaning  sea, 

I  am  a  sword  that  leaps  to  its  sheath. 
Never  at  rest  till  I  Imd  out  thee! 

Oh,  poor  soul,  all  the  night  unstanched, 
Poor  heart,  couched  in  a  shameful  breast. 

Thou,  whose  face  at  the  fighting  blanched, 
Out  of  the  battle  1  bring  thee — rest. 

Laurence  Housman  [1867- 


AT  THE  CROSSROADS 

You  to  the  left  and  I  to  the  right. 

For  the  ways  of  men  must  sever— 

And  it  well  may  be  for  a  day  and  a  night, 

And  it  well  may  be  forever. 

But  whether  we  meet  or  whether  wc  part 

(For  our  ways  are  past  our  knowing), 

A  pledge  from  the  heart  to  its  fellow  heart 

On  the  ways  we  all  are  going! 

Here's  luck! 

For  w-e  know  not  where  we  are  going. 

We  have  striven  fair  in  love  and  war,  ' 

But  the  wheel  was  always  weighted! 

We  have  lost  the  prize  that  we  struggled  for. 

We  have  won  the  prize  that  was  fated, 

We  have  met  our  loss  with  a  smile  and  a  song, 


30I0      F*oems  of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

And  our  gains  with  a  wink  and  a  whistle, — ■ 

For,  whether  we're  right  or  whether  we're  wrong, 

There's  a  rose  for  every  thistle. 

Here's  luck! 

And  a  drop  to  wet  your  whistle! 

Whether  we  win  or  whether  we  lose 

With  the  hands  that  life  is  deahng, 

JXJs>  not  we  nor  the  ways  we  choose 

But  the  fall  of  the  cards  that's  sealing. 

There's  a  fate  in  love  and  a  fate  in  fight. 

And  the  best  of  us  all  go  under — 

And  whether  we're  wrong  or  whether  we're  right, 

We  win,  sometimes,  to  our  wonder. 

Here's  luck! 

That  we  may  not  yet  go  under! 

With  a  steady  swing  and  an  open  brow 

We  have  tramped  the  ways  together. 

But  we're  clasping  hands  at  the  crossroads  now 

In  the  Fiend's  own  night  for  weather; 

And  whether  we  bleed  or  whether  we  smile 

In  the  leagues  that  lie  before  us, 

Tlie  ways  of  life  are  many  a  mile 

And  the  dark  of  Fate  is  o'er  us. 

Here's  luck! 

And  a  cheer  for  the  dark  before  us! 

You  to  the  left  and  I  to  the  right. 

For  the  ways  of  men  must  sever, 

And  it  well  may  be  for  a  day  and  a  night 

And  it  well  may  be  forever! 

But  whether  we  live  or  whether  we  die 

(For  the  end  is  past  our  knowing) , 

Here's  two  frank  hearts  and  the  open  sky, 

Be  a  fair  or  an  ill  wind  blowing! 

Here's  luck! 

In  the  teeth  of  all  winds  blowing. 

Richard  Hovey  [1864- 1900] 


Twilight  Song  301 1 


TWILIGHT  SONG 

Through  the  shine,  through  the  rain 
We  have  shared  the  day's  load; 
To  the  old  march  again 
We  have  tramped  the  long  road; 
We  have  laughed,  we  have  cried. 
And  we've  tossed  the  King's  crown; 
We  have  fought,  we  have  died. 
And  we've  trod  the  day  down. 
So  it's  lift  the  old  song 
Ere  the  night  flies  again, 
Where  the  road  leads  along 
Through  the  shine,  through  the  rain. 

Long  ago,  far  away. 
Came  a  sign  from  the  skies; 
And  we  feared  then  to  pray 
For  the  new  sun  to  rise: 
With  the  King  there  at  hand. 
Not  a  child  stepped  or  stirred — 
Where  the  light  filled  the  land 
And  the  light  brought  the  word; 
For  we  knew  then  the  gleam 
Though  we  feared  then  the  day, 
And  the  dawn  smote  the  dream 
Long  ago,  far  away. 

But  the  road  leads  us  all, 
For  the  King  now  is  dead ; 
And  we  know,  stand  or  fall, 
We  have  shared  the  day's  bread. 
We  can  laugh  down  the  dream, 
For  the  dream  breaks  and  flies; 
And  we  trust  now  the  gleam. 
For  the  gleam  never  dies; — 
So  it's  off  now  tl>e  load. 
For  we  know  the  night's  call, 
And  we  know  now  the  road 
And  the  road  leads  us  all. 


30I2      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Through  the  shine,  through  the  rain, 
We  have  wrought  the  day's  quest; 
To  the  old  march  again 
We  have  earned  the  day's  rest; 
We  have  laughed,  we  have  cried, 
And  we've  heard  the  King's  groans; 
We  have  fought,  we  have  died, 
And  we've  burned  the  King's  bones, 
And  we  lift  the  old  song 
Ere  the  night  flies  again, 
Where  the  road  leads  along 
Through  the  shine,  through  the  rain. 

Edwin  Arlington  Robinson  [i86g~ 

THE  ADVENTURERS 

They  sit  at  home  and  they  dream  and  dally, 
Raking  the  embers  of  long-dead  years — • 

But  ye  go  down  to  the  haunted  Valley, 
Light-hearted  pioneers. 

They  have  forgotten  they  ever  were  young, 

They  hear  your  songs  as  an  unknown  tongue  .  .  . 

But  the  Flame  of  God  through  your  spirit  stirs, 
Adventurers — O  Adventurers!  /. 

They  weigh  and  ponder,  and  shilly-shally. 
Wielding  the  pen,  who  are  past  the  sword— 

But  ye  go  down  to  the  mystic  Valley, 
That  never  was  yet  explored. 

They  brood  over  obsolete  ways  and  means, 

Their  eyes  confusing  the  grays  and  greens,  .  .  . 

But  no  tradition  your  vision  blurs. 
Adventurers — 0  Adventurers! 

They  tithe  their  herbs  and  they  count  their  tally, 
Choosing  their  words  that  a  phrase  may  live — 
But  ye  cast  down  in  the  hungry  Valley 

All  that  a  man  can  give. 
They  prophesy  smoothly,  with  weary  smile 
Fulfilling  their  feeble  appointed  while,      ■  i 
But  Death  himself  to  your  pride  defers,   A 
Adventurers — O  Adventurers!       'b  baA 

May  Byron  [1861- 


'71  jjfi       Jaffdr  S'^^S 


"FAME  IS  A  FOOD  THAT  DEAD  MEN  EAT" 

Fame  is  a  food  that  dead  men  eat, — ■ 
I  have  no  stomach  for  such  meat. 
In  Uttle  hght  and  narrow  room, 
They  eat  it  in  the  silent  tomb, 
With  no  kind  voice  of  comrade  near 
To  bid  the  feaster  be  of  cheer. 

But  Friendship  is  a  nobler  thing, — 
Of  Friendship  it  is  good  to  sing. 
For  truly,  when  a  man  shall  end. 
He  lives  in  memory  of  his  friend. 
Who  doth  his  better  part  recall 
And  of  his  fault  make  funeral. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


JAFFAR 

Shelley,  take  this  to  thy  dear  memory; — 
To  praise  the  generous,  is  to  think  of  thee. 

Jaffar,  the  Barmecide,  the  good  Vizier, 

The  poor  man's  hope,  the  friend  without  a  peer, 

JafTar  was  dead,  slain  by  a  doom  unjust; 

And  guilty  Haroun,  sullen  with  mistrust 

Of  what  the  good,  and  e'en  the  bad,  might  say, 

Ordained  that  no  man  living  from  that  day 

Should  dare  to  speak  his  name  on  pain  of  death. 

All  Araby  and  Persia  held  their  breath; 

AU  but  the  brave  Mondeer:  he,  proud  to  show 

How  far  for  love  a  grateful  soul  could  go. 

And  facing  death  for  very  scorn  and  grief 

(For  his  great  heart  wanted  a  great  relief), 

Stood  forth  in  Bagdad  daUy,  in  the  square 

Where  once  had  stood  a  happy  house,  and  there 

Harangued  the  tremblers  at  the  scimitar 

On  all  they  owed  to  the  divine  Jaffar. 


3014      Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

"Bring  me  this  man,"  the  caliph  cried.    The  man 

Was  brought,  was  gazed  upon.    The  mutes  began 

To  bind  his  arms.     "Welcome,  brave  cords,"  cried  he; 

"From  bonds  far  worse  Jaffar  delivered  me; 

From  wants,  from  shames,  from  loveless  household  fears; 

Made  a  man's  eyes  friends  with  delicious  tears; 

Restored  me,  loved  me,  put  me  on  a  par 

With  his  great  self.    How  can  I  pay  JafTar?  " 

Haroun,  who  felt  that  on  a  soul  like  this 
The  mightiest  vengeance  could  but  fall  amiss, 
Now  deigned  to  smile,  as  one  great  lord  of  fate 
Might  smile  upon  another  half  as  great. 
He  said,  "Let  worth  grow  frenzied  if  it  will; 
The  caliph's  judgment  shall  be  master  still. 
Go:  and  since  gifts  so  move  thee,  take  this  gem, 
-The  richest  in  the  Tartar's  diadem. 
And  hold  the  giver  as  thou  deemest  fit!" 

"  Gifts! "  cried  the  friend;  he  took,  and  holding  it 
High  toward  the  heavens,  as  though  to  meet  his  star. 
Exclaimed,  "This,  too,  I  owe  to  thee,  Jaffar!" 

Leigh  Hunt  [1784-1859] 


COUNSEL 

If  thou  shouldst  bid  thy  friend  farewell, 

But  for  one  night  though  that  farewell  may  be, 
Press  thou  his  hand  in  thine;  thou  canst  not  tell 
How  far  from  thee 

Fate  or  caprice  may  lead  his  feet 

Ere  that  to-morrow  come.  Men  have  been  known 
Lightly  to  turn  the  corner  of  a  street. 

And  days  have  grown 

To  months,  and  months  to  lagging  years. 
Before  they  look  on  loving  eyes  again. 
Parting,  at  best,  is  underlaid  with  tears. 

With  tears  and  pain,  ^'^ 


ft 


1    ■'    "Farewell!  But  Whenever"        3015 

Therefore,  lesl  sudden  death  should  come  between, 

Or  time,  or  distance,  clasp  with  pressure  true 
The  palm  of  him  who  goeth  forth;  unseen, 
Fate  goeth  too! 

Yea,  find  thou  always  time  to  say 

Some  earnest  word  betwixt  the  idle  talk, 
Lest  with  thee  henceforth  ever,  night  and  day, 
Regret  should  walk. 

Mary  Evelyn  Moore  Davis  [1852-1009] 

TO  A  FRIEND 
When  we  were  idlers  with  the  loitering  rills, 

The  need  of  human  love  we  little  noted: 

Our  love  was  nature;  and  the  peace  that  floated 
On  the  white  mist,  and  dwelt  upon  the  hills. 
To  sweet  accord  subdued  our  wayward  wills: 

One  soul  was  ours,  one  mind,  one  heart  devoted, 

That,  wisely  doting,  asked  not  why  it  doted, 
And  ours  the  unknown  joy,  which  knowing  kills. 
But  now  I  find  how  dear  thou  wert  to  me; 

That  man  is  more  than  half  of  nature's  treasure,  ..ii 

Of  that  fair  beauty  which  no  eye  can  see. 

Of  that  sweet  music  which  no  ear  can  measure; 

And  now  the  streams  may  sing  for  others'  pleasure, 
The  hills  sleep  on  in  their  eternity.  i  I" 

Hartley  Coleridge  [1796-1849] 

"FAREWELL!   BUT  WHENEVER" 

Farewell! — but  whenever  you  welcome  the  hour 

That  awakens  the  night-song  of  mirth  in  your  bower. 

Then  think  of  the  friend  who  once  welcomed  it  too, 

And  forgot  his  own  griefs,  to  be  happy  with  you.  -^^ 

His  griefs  may  return, — not  a  hope  may  remain 

Of  the  few  that  have  brightened  his  pathway  of  pain, — 

But  he  ne'er  will  forget  the  short  vision  that  threw 

Its  enchantment  around  him,  while  ling'ring  with  you! 

And  still  on  that  evening,  when  Pleasure  fills  up 
To  the  highest  top  sparkle  each  heart  and  each  cup. 
Where'er  my  path  lies,  be  it  gloomy  or  bright. 
My  soul,  happy  friends,  shall  be  with  you  that  night; 


30i6    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Shall  join  in  your  revels,  your  sports,  and  your  wiles, 
And  return  to  me,  beaming  all  o'er  with  your  smiles,— 
Too  blest  if  it  tell  me  that,  'mid  the  gay  cheer, 
Some  kind  voice  had  murmured,  "I  wish  he  were  here!" 

Let  Fate  do  her  worst,  there  are  rehcs  of  joy. 
Bright  dreams  of  the  past,  which  she  cannot  destroy; 
Which  come,  in  the  night-time  of  sorrow  and  care. 
And  bring  back  the  features  that  joy  used  to  wear. 
Long,  long  be  my  heart  with  such  memories  filled ! 
Like  the  vase  in  which  roses  have  once  been  distilled, — 
You  may  break,  you  may  shatter  the  vase,  if  you  will, 
But  the  scent  of  the  roses  will  hang  round  it  still. 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 

:  iiO 

"AWAKE!  AWAKE!"  ,) 

From  "  Song  of  the  Dawn  "  '^^'''^  '^■^^'  ^ 

Awake!  awake!  the  stars  are  pale,  the  east  is  russet  gray; 
They  fade,  behold  the  phantoms  fade,  that  keep  the  gates  of 

Day; 
Throw  wide  the  burning  valves,  and  let  the  golden  streets  be 

free. 
The  morning  watch  is  past — the  watch  of  evening  shall  not 

be. 

Put  off,  put  off  your  mail,  ye  kings,  and  beat  your  brands 

to  dust; 
A  surer  grasp  your  hands  must  know,  your  hearts  a  better 

trust; 
Nay,  bend  aback  the  lance's  point,  and  break  the  helmet 

bar, —  ili 

A  noise  is  on  the  morning  winds;  but  not  the  noise  of  war!  !■  ' 

For  aye,  the  time  of  wrath  is  past,  and  near  the  time  of  rest. 
And  honor  binds  the  brow  of  man,  and  faithfulness  his 

breast, 
Behold,  the  time  of  wrath  is  past,  and  righteousness  shall  be, 
And  the  Wolf  is  dead  in  Arcady  and  the  Dragon  in  the  sea! 

John  Riiskin  [1819-1900] 


The  Voice  of  Toil  joi? 


THE  VOICE  OF  TOIL 

I  HEARD  men  saying,  Leave  hope  and  praying. 
All  days  shall  be  as  all  have  been; 
To-day  and  to-morrow  bring  fear  and  sorrow, 
The  never-ending  toil  between. 

When  Earth  was  young  'mid  toil  and  hunger, 
In  hope  we  strove,  and  our  hands  were  strong; 
Then  great  men  led  us,  with  words  they  fed  us. 
And  bade  us  right  the  earthly  wrong. 

Go  read  in  story  their  deeds  and  glory, 
Their  names  amidst  the  nameless  dead; 
Turn  then  from  lying  to  us  slow-dying 
In  that  good  world  to  which  they  led; 

Where  fast  and  faster  our  iron  master. 

The  thing  we  made,  for  ever  drives, 

Bids  us  grind  treasure  and  fashion  pleasure  , 

For  other  hopes  and  other  lives; 

Where  home  is  a  hovel  and  dull  we  grovel. 
Forgetting  that  the  world  is  fair; 
Where  no  babe  we  cherish,  lest  its  very  soul  perish; 
Where  mirth  is  crime,  and  love  a  snare. 

Who  now  shall  lead  us,  what  god  shall  heed  us 
As  we  lie  in  the  hell  our  hands  have  won? 
For  us  are  no  rulers  but  fools  and  befoolers. 
The  great  are  fallen,  the  wise  men  gone. 

I  heard  men  saying,  Leave  tears  and  praying. 
The  sharp  knife  heedeth  not  the  sheep; 
Are  we  not  stronger  than  the  rich  and  the  wronger, 
When  day  breaks  over  dreams  and  sleep? 

Come,  shoulder  to  shoulder  ere  the  world  grows  older! 
Help  lies  in  naught  but  thee  and  me; 
Hope  is  before  us,  and  the  long  years  that  bore  us 
Bore  leaders  more  than  men  may  be. 


30i8     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Let  dead  hearts  tarry  and  trade  and  marry, 
And  trembling  nurse  their  dreams  of  mirth, 
While  we  the  living  our  lives  are  giving 
To  bring  the  bright  new  world  to  birth. 

Come,  shoulder  to  shoulder  ere  earth  grows  older! 
The  Cause  spreads  over  land  and  sea; 
Now  the  world  shaketh,  and  fear  awaketh, 
And  joy  at  last  for  thee  and  me. 

William  Morris  [1834-1896] 


TOM  DUNSTAN,  OR,  THE  POLITICIAN 

Now  poor  Tom  Dunstan's  cold,  J 

Our  shop  is  duller; 
Scarce  a  story  is  told. 
And  our  chat  has  lost  the  old 

Red-republican  color! 
Though  he  was  sickly  and  thin, 

'Twas  a  sight  to  see  his  face — 
While,  sick  of  the  country's  sin, 
With  bang  of  the  fist,  and  chin 

Thrust  out,  he  argued  the  case! 
He  prophesied  folk  should  be  free, 

And  the  money-bags  be  bled — 
"She's  coming,  she's  coming!"  said  he; 
"Courage,  boys!  wait  and  see! 

Freedom's  ahead!" 

All  day  we  sat  in  the  heat, 

Like  spiders  spinning. 
Stitching  full  fine  and  fleet. 
While  the  old  Jew  on  his  seat 

Sat  greasily  grinning: 
And  there  Tom  said  his  say. 

And  prophesied  Tyranny's  death, 
And  the  tallow  burnt  all  day, 
And  we  stitched  and  stitched  away 

In  the  thick  smoke  of  our  breath, 
Wearily,  wearUy, 


Tom   Dunstan,  or,  The   Politician     3019 

With  hearts  as  heavy  as  lead — 
But  "Patience,  she's  coming!"  said  he; 
"Courage,  boys!  wait  and  see! 

Freedom 's  ahead ! " 

And  at  night,  when  we  took  here 

The  rest  allowed  to  us, 
The  paper  came  with  the  beer, 
And  Tom  read,  sharp  and  clear, 

The  news  out  loud  to  us; 
And  then,  in  his  witty  way. 

He  threw  the  jests  about — 
The  cutting  things  he'd  say 
Of  the  wealthy  and  the  gay! 

How  he  turned  them  inside  out! 
And  it  made  our  breath  more  free 

To  hearken  to  what  he  said — 
"She's  coming,  she's  coming!"  said  he; 
"Courage,  boys!  wait  and  see! 

Freedom's  ahead!" 

But  grim  Jack  Hart,  with  a  sneer, 

Would  mutter,  "Master, 
If  Freedom  means  to  appear, 
I  think  she  might  step  here 

A  httle  faster!" 
Then  it  was  fine  to  see  Tom  flame. 

And  argue  and  prove  and  preach, 
Till  Jack  was  silent  for  shame. 
Or  a  fit  of  coughing  came 

O'  sudden  to  spoil  Tom's  speech. 
Ah!  Tom  had  the  eyes  to  see. 

When  Tyranny  should  be'sped; 
"She's  coming,  she's  coming!"  said  he; 
"Courage,  boys!  wait  and  see! 

Freedom's  ahead!" 

But  Tom  was  little  and  weak ; 
The  hard  hours  shook  him ; 
HoUower  grew  his  cheek. 
And  when  he  began  to  speak 


3020    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

The  coughing  took  him. 
Ere  long  the  cheery  sound 

Of  his  chat  among  us  ceased, 
And  we  made  a  purse  all  round, 

That  he  might  not  starve,  at  least; 
His  pain  was  sorry  to  see, 

Yet  there,  on  his  poor  sick-bed, 
"She's  coming,  in  spite  of  me! 
Courage,  and  wait!"  cried  he, 

"Freedom's  ahead!" 

A  little  before  he  died. 

To  see  his  passion! 
"Bring  me  a  paper!"  he  cried, 
And  then  to  study  it  tried 

In  his  old  sharp  fashion; 
And  with  eyeballs  ghttering 

His  look  on  me  he  bent, 
And  said  that  savage  thing 

Of  the  lords  of  the  Parliament, 
Then,  darkening,  smiling  on  me, 

"What  matter  if  one  be  dead? 
She's  coming,  at  last!"  said  he; 
"Courage,  boys!  wait  and  see! 

Freedom's  ahead!" 

Ay,  now  Tom  Dunstan's  cold, 

The  shop  feels  duller; 
Scarce  a  story  is  told, 
And  our  talk  has  lost  the  old 

Red-republican  color. 
But  we  see  a  figure  gray,       ^  '.^..  , 

And  we  hear  a  voice  of  dieath, 
And  the  tallow  burns  all  day. 
And  we  stitch  and  stitch  away. 

In  the  thick  smoke  of  our  breath; 
Ay,  while  in  the  dark  sit  we, 

Tom  seems  to  call  from  the  dead — 
"She's  coming,  she's  coming!"  says  he; 
"Courage,  boys!  wait  and  see! 

"  Freedort^'s.  ahead !" 


To  a  New  York  Shop-Girl        3021 

How  long,  O  Lord,  how  long 

Doth  Thy  handmaid  linger? 
She  who  shall  right  tlie  wrong? 
Make  the  oppressed  strong? — 

Sweet  morrow,  bring  her! 
Hasten  her  over  the  sea, 

O  Lord,  ere  hope  be  fled — 
Bring  her  to  men  and  to  me! 
O  slave,  pray  still  on  thy  knee — 

"Freedom's  ahead!" 

Robert  Buchanan  [1841-1901] 


THE   COMMON   STREET 

The  common  street  climbed  up  against  the  sky, 
Gray  meeting  gray;  and  wearily  to  and  fro 
I  saw  the  patient  common  people  go, 
Each,  with  his  sordid  burden,  trudging  by. 
And  the  rain  dropped;  there  was  not  any  sigh 
Or  stir  of  a  live  wind;  dull,  dull  and  slow 
All  motion;  as  a  tale  told  long  ago 
The  faded  world ;  and  creeping  night  drew  nig^" . 

Then  burst  the  sunset,  flooding  far  and  fleet. 
Leavening  the  whole  of  hfe  with  magic  leaven. 
Suddenly  down  the  long  wet  glistening  hill 
Pure  splendor  poured — and  lo!  the  common  street, 
A  golden  highway  into  golden  heaven, 
With  the  dark  shapes  of  men  ascending  still. 

Helen  Gray  Cone  [1859- 


TO  A  NEW  YORK  SHOP-GIRL  DRESSED   FOR 
SUNDAY 

To-day  I  saw  the  shop-girl  go 

Down  gay  Broadway  to  meet  her  beau. 

Conspicuous,  splendid,  conscious,  sweet, 
She  spread  abroad  and  took  the  street. 


3022    Poems  of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

And  all  that  niceness  would  forbid, 
Superb,  she  smiled  upon  and  did. 

Let  other  girls,  whose  happier  days 
Preserve  the  perfume  of  their  ways, 

Go  modestly.     The  passing  hour 
Adds  splendor  to  their  opening  flower. 

But  from  this  child  too  swift  a  doom 
Must  steal  her  prettiness  and  bloom, 

Toil  and  weariness  hide  the  grace 
That  pleads  a  moment  from  her  face. 

So  blame  her  not  if  for  a  day 

She  flaimts  her  glories  while  she  may. 

She  half  perceives,  half  understands, 
Snatching  her  gifts  with  both  her  hands. 

The  little  strut  beneath  the  skirt 
That  lags  neglected  in  the  dirt, 

The  indolent  swagger  down  the  street— 
Who  can  condemn  such  happy  feet! 

Innocent!  vulgar — that's  the  truth! 
But  with  the  darhng  wiles  of  youth! 

The  bright,  self-conscious  eyes  that  stare 
With  such  hauteur,  beneath  such  hair! 

Perhaps  the  men  will  find  me  fair! 

y 

Chanming  and  charmed,  flippant,  arrayed, 
Fluttered  and  foolish,  proud,  displayed, 
Infinite  pathos  of  parade! 

The  bangles  and  the  narrowed  waist— 
The  tinseled  boa — forgive  the  taste! 


To  a   New  York  Shop-Girl        3023 

Oh,  the  starved  nights  she  gave  for  that, 
And  bartered  bread  to  buy  her  hat ! 

She  flows  before  the  rcproacliful  sage 
And  begs  her  woman's  heritage. 

Dear  child,  with  the  defiant  eyes, 
Insolent  with  the  half  surmise 
We  do  not  quite  admire,  I  know 
How  foresight  frowns  on  this  vain  show! 

And  judgment,  wearily  sad,  may  see 
No  grace  in  such  frivolity. 

Yet  which  of  us  was  ever  bold 

To  worship  Beauty,  hungry  and  cold ! 

Scorn  famine  down,  proudly  expressed 
Apostle  to  what  things  are  best. 

Let  him  who  starves  to  buy  the  food 
For  his  soul's  comfort  find  her  good, 

Nor  chide  the  frills  and  furbelows 
That  are  the  prettiest  things  she  knows. 

Poet  and  prophet  in  God's  eyes 
Make  no  more  perfect  sacrifice. 

Who  knows  before  what  inner  shrine 
She  eats  vvith  them  the  bread  and  wine? 

Poor  waif!  One  of  the  sacred  few 
That  madly  sought  the  best  they  knew! 

Dear — let  me  lean  my  cheek  to-night 
Close,  close  to  yours.     Ah,  that  is  right. 

How  warm  and  near!     At  last  I  see 
One  beauty  shines  for  thcc  and  me. 

So  let  us  love  and  understand — 
Whose  hearts  are  hidden  in  God's  hand. 


3024    Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

And  we  will  cherish  your  brief  Spring 
And  all  its  fragile  flowering. 

God  loves  all  prettiness,  and  on  this 
Surely  his  angels  lay  their  kiss. 

Anna  Hempstead  Branch  [18    - 


SATURDAY  NIGHT 

The  lights  of  Saturday  night  beat  golden,  golden  over  the 
pillared  street; 

The  long  plate-glass  of  a  Dream-World  olden  is  as  the  foot- 
lights shining  sweet. 

Street-lamp — flambeau — glamor  of  trolley — comet-trail  of 
the  trains  above, 

Splash  where  the  jostling  crowds  are  jolly  with  echoing 
laughter  and  human  love. 

This  is  the  City  of  the  Enchanted,  and  these  are  her  En- 
chanted People; 

Far  and  far  is  Daylight,  haunted  with  whistle  of  mill  and 
bell  of  steeple. 

The  Eastern  tenements  loose  the  women,  the  Western  flats 
release  the  wives 

To  touch,  where  all  the  ways  are  common,  a  glory  to  their 
sweated  lives. 

The  leather  of  shoes  in  the  brilliant  casement  sheds  a  luster 

over  the  heart; 
The  high-heaped  fruit  in  the  flaring  basement  glows  with 

the  tints  of  Turner's  art. 
Darwin's  dream  and  the  eye  of  Spencer  saw  not  such  a 

gloried  race 
As  here,  in  copper  Ught  in  tenser  than  desert  sun,  glides  face 

by  face. 

The  drab  washwoman  dazed  and  breathless,  ray-chiseled  in 

the  golden  stream, 
Is  a  magic  statue  standing  deathless — her  tub  and  soap-suds 

touched  with  Dream. 


The   Barrel-Organ  3^2  c 

Yea,  in  this  people,  glamor-sunnied,  democracy  wins  heaven 

again ; 
Here  the  unlearned  and  the  unmoneyed  laugh  in  the  lights 

of  Lover's  Lane! 

O  Dream-World  lights  that  hft  through  the  ether  millions 

of  miles  to  the  JNlilky  Way! 
To-night  Earth  rolls  through  a  golden  weather  that  lights 

the  Pleiades  where  they  play! 
Yet  .  .  .  God?     Does  he  lead  these  sons  and  daughters? 

Yea,  do  they  feel  with  a  passion  that  stills, 
God  on  the  face  of  the  moving  waters,  God  in  the  quiet  of 
the  hills? 

Yet  .  .  .  what  if  the  million-mantled  mountains,  and  what 
if  the  million-moving  sea 

Are  here  alone  in  facades  and  fountains — our  deep  stone- 
world  of  humanity — 

We  builders  of  cities  and  civilizations  walled  away  from  the 
sea  and  the  sod 

Must  reach,  dream-led,  for  our  revelations  through  one  an- 
other— as  far  as  God. 

Through  one  another — through  one  another — no  more  the 

gleam  on  sea  or  land 
But  so  close  that  we  see  the  Brother — and  understand — and 

understand! 
Till,  drawn  in  swept  crowd  closer,  closer,  we  see  the  gleam  in 

the   human   clod. 
And  clerk  and  foreman,  peddler  and  grocer,  are  in  our 

Family  of  God! 

James  Oppenheim  [1882- 


THE  BARREL-ORGAN 

There's  a  barrel-organ  caroling  across  a  golden  street, 

In  the  City  as  the  sun  sinks  low; 
And  the  music's  not  immortal;  but  the  world  has  made  it 
sweet 

And  fulfilled  it  with  the  sunset  glow; 


3026     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  it  pulses  through  the  pleasures  of  the  City  and  the 
pain 
That  surround   the  singing   organ  like  a  large  eternal 
light; 
And  they've  given  it  a  glory  and  a  part  to  play  again 
In  the  Symphony  that  rules  the  day  and  night. 

And  now  it's  marching  onward  through  the  realms  of  old 
romance, 

And  trolUng  out  a  fond  familiar  tune, 
And  now  it's  roaring  cannon  down  to  fight  the  King  of 
France, 

And  now  it's  prattling  softly  to  the  moon,       <i£llii-(  odj 
And  all  around  the  organ  thel^e's  a  sea  v.'ithout  a  shore 

Of  human  joys  and  wonders  and  regrets; 
To  remember  and  to  recompense  the  music  evermore 

For  what  the  cold  machinery  forgets.  .  .  . 

•..I-  .  Yes;  as  the  music  changes, 

Like  a  prismatic  glass, 
It  takes  the  light  and  ranges 

Through  all  the  moods  that  pass; 
Dissects  the  common  carnival 

Of  passions  and  regrets. 
And  gives  the  world  a  glimpse  of  all 

The  colors  it  forgets. 

And  there  La  Traviata  sighs 

Another  sadder  song; 
And  there  //  Trovatore  cries 

A  tale  of  deeper  wrong; 
And  bolder  knights  to  battle  go 

With  sword  and  shield  and  lance, 
Than  ever  here  on  earth  below 

Have  whirled  into — a  dance  ! — 

Go  down  to  Kew  in  lilac-time,  in  lilac-time,  in  hlac-time; 
Go  down  to  Kew  in  lilac-time  (it  isn't  far  from  London!) 
And  you  shall  wander  hand  in  hand  with  love  in  summer's 

wonderland ; 
Go  down  to  Kew  in  lilac-time  (it  isn't  far  from  London!) 


The   Barrel-Organ  3027 

The  cherry-trees  are  seas  of  bloom  and  soft  perfume  and 
sweet  perfume, 

The  cherry-trees  are  seas  of  bloom  (and  oh,  so  near  to  Lon- 
don!) 

And  there  they  say,  when  dawn  is  liigh  and  all  the  world's  a 
blaze  of  sky 

The  cuckoo,  though  he's  very  shy,  will  sing  a  song  for  Lon- 
don. 

The  nightingale  is  rather  rare  and  yet  they  say  you'll  hear 
liim  there 

At  Kew,  at  Kew  in  lilac-time  (and  oh,  so  ne^r  to  Lon- 
don!) ;  .  ,;.;'•)-,  jdl' 

The  linnet  and  the  throstle,  too,  and  after  dark  the  long 

halloo 
And  golden-eyed  tu-whit,  tii-whoo  of  owls  that  ogle  London. 

Nor  Noah  hardly  knew  a  bird  of  any  kind  that  isn't  heard 

At  Kew,  at  Kew  in  lilac-time  (and  oh,  so  near  to  Lon- 
don!) 

And  when  the  rose  begins  to  pout  and  all  the  chestnut  spires 
are  out 

You'll  hear  the  rest  without  a  doubt,  all  chorusing  for 
London : — 

Came  down  lo  Kew  in  lilac-time,  in  lilac-time,  in  lilac-time; 
Come  down  to  Kew  in  lilac-time  (it  isn't  far  from  London  I) 
And  you  shall  wander  hand  in  hand  with  Love  in  summer's 

wonderland; 
Come  down  to  Kew  in  lilac-time  (it  isn't  far  from  London !) 

And  then  the  troubadour  begins  to  thrill  the  golden  street, 

In  the  City  as  the  sun  sinks  low; 
And  in  all  the  gaudy  busses  there  are  scores  of  weary  feet 
Marking  time,  sweet  time,  with  a  dull  mechanic  beat. 
And  a  thousand  hearts  are  plunging  to  a  love  they'll  never 

meet. 
Through  the  meadows  of  the  sunset,  through  the  poppies 
and  the  wheat, 
In  the  land  where  the  dead  dreams  go.  ,  ,;i 


3028     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Verdi,  Verdi,  when  you  wrote  //  Trovatore  did  you  dream 

Of  the  City  when  the  sun  sinks  low 
Of  the  organ  and  the  monkey  and  the  many-colored  stream 
On  the  Piccadilly  pavement,  of  the  myriad  eyes  that  seem 
To  be  litten  for  a  moment  with  a  wild  Italian  gleam 
As  A  die  la  morte  parodies  the  world's  eternal  theme 

And  pulses  with  the  sunset-glow? 

There's  a  thief,  perhaps,  that  listens  with  a  face  of  frozen 

stone 
In  the  City  as  the  sun  sinks  low; 
There's  a  portly  man  of  business  with  a  balance  of  his  own, 
There's  a  clerk  and  there's  a  butcher  of  a  soft  reposeful  tone, 
And  they're  all  of  them  returning  to  the  heavens  they  have 

known : 
They  are  crammed  and  jammed  in  busses  and — they're  each 

of  them  alone 
In  the  land  where  the  dead  dreams  go. 

There's  a  very  modish  woman  and  her  smile  is  very  bland 

In  the  City  as  the  sun  sinks  low; 
And  her  hansom  jingles  onward,  but  her  little  jeweled  hand 
Is  clenched  a  little  tighter  and  she  cannot  understand 
What  she  wants  or  why  she  wanders  to  that  undiscovered 

land. 
For  the  parties  there  are  not  at  all  the  sort  of  thing  she 
planned, 
In  the  land  where  the  dead  dreams  go. 

There's  an  Oxford  man  that  hstens  and  his  heart  is  crying 
out 
In  the  City  as  the  sun  sinks  low; 
For  the  barge,  the  eight,  the  Isis,  and  the  coach's  whoop  and 

shout, 
For  the  minute -gun,  the  counting  and  the  long  disheveled 

rout, 
For  the  howl  along  the  tow-path  and  a  fate  that's  still  in 
-        doubt. 

For  a  roughened  oar  to  handle  and  a  race  to  think  about 
In  the  land  where  the  dead  dreams  go. 


The   Barrel-Organ  3029 

There's  a  laborer  that  Hstens  to  the  voices  of  the  dead 

In  the  City  as  the  sun  sinks  low; 
And  his  hand  begins  to  tremble  and  his  face  to  smoulder  red 
As  he  sees  a  loafer  watching  him  and — there  he  turns  his 

head 
And  stares  into  the  sunset  where  his  April  love  is  fled, 
For  he  hears  her  softly  singing  and  his  lonely  soul  is  led 

Through  the  land  where  the  dead  dreams  go. 

There's  an  old  and  hardened  demi-rep,  it's  ringing  in  her 
ears. 
In  the  City  as  the  sun  sinks  low; 
With  the  wild  and  empty  sorrow  of  the  love  that  blights  and 

sears, 
Oh,  and  if  she  hurries  onward,  then  be  sure,  be  sure  she 

hearSjOJ-";  '"i!^>  ?.i!ri'>jj.ily 
Hears  and  beiafs  the  bitter  burden  of  the  unforgotten  years. 
And  her  laugh's  a  little  harsher  and  her  eyes  are  brimmed 
with  tears 
For  the  land  where  the  dead  dreams  go. 

There's  a  barrel-organ  carolling  across  a  golden  street 

In  the  City  as  the  sun  sinks  low; 
Though  the  music's  only  Verdi  there's  a  world  to  make  it 

sweet 
Just  as  yonder  yellow  sunset  where  the  earth  and  heaven 

meet 
Mellows  all  the  soot\'  City!    Hark,  a  hundred  thousand  feet 
Are  marching  on  to  glory  through  the  poppies  and  the  wheat 
In  the  land  where  the  dead  dreams  go. 

So  it's  Jeremiah,  Jeremiah, 

What  have  you  to  say 
When  you  meet  the  garland  girls 

Tripping  on  their  way? 

All  around  my  gala  hat 

I  wear  a  wreath  of  roses 
(A  long  and  lonely  year  it  is 

I've  waited  for  the  May!) 


3030     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

If  any  one  should  ask  you, 

The  reason  why  I  wear  it  is — 
My  own  love,  my  true  love 

Is  coming  home  to-day. 

And  it's  buy  a  bunch  of  violets  for  the  lady 

{It's  lilac-time  in  London;  it's  lilac-time  in  London  I) 

Buy  a  bunch  of  violets  for  the  lady 
While  the  sky  burns  blue  above: 

On  the  other  side  the  street  you'll  iind  it  shady 
{It's  lilac-time  in  London;  it's  lilac-time  in  London  I) 

But  buy  a  bunch  of  violets  for  the  lady. 
And  tell  her  she's  your  own  true  love. 

There's  a  barrel-organ  carolling  across  a  golden  street 

In  the  City  as  the  suns  sinks  glittering  and  slow; 
And  the  music's  not  immortal;  but  the  world  has  made  it 

sweet  .■  j;  a'dsurj  tjiI  bn 

And  enriched  it  with  the  harmonies  that  make  a  song  com- 
plete 
In  the  deeper  heavens  of  music  where  the  night  and  morning 
meet. 
As  it  dies  into  the  sunset  glow; 
And  it  pulses  through  the  pleasures  of  the  City  and  the  pain 
That  surround  the  singing  organ  like  a  large  eternal  light. 
And  they've  given  it  a  glory  and  a  part  to  play  again 
In  the  Symphony  that  rules  the  day  and  night. 

And  there,  as  the  music  changes. 

The  song  runs  round  again; 
Once  more  it  turns  and  ranges 

Through  all  its  joy  and  pain: 
Dissects  the  common  carnival 

Of  passions  and  regrets; 
And  the  wheeling  world  remembers  all 

The  wheeling  song  forgets. 

Once  more  La  Traviata  sighs 

Another  sadder  song: 
Once  more  //  Trovatore  cries 

A  tale  of  deeper  wrong; 


Ff  .ST    ■    Aniftjitjum   Iraq  3031 

Once  more  the  knights  to  battle  go 

With  sword  and  shield  and  lance, 
Till  once,  once  more,  the  shattered  foe 

Has  whirled  into — a  dance  ! 

Come  down  to  Kew  in  lilac-time,  in  lilac-time,  in  lilac-time; 
Come  down  to  Kew  in  lilac-time  {it  isn't  far  from  London  !) 
And  you  shall  wander  haiid  in  hand  ivith  Love  in  summer''s 

wonderland. 
Come  down  to  Kew  in  lilac-time  {it  isn't  far  from  London  !) 

Alfred  Noyes  [1880- 


AMANTIUM  IR^ 

From  "  The  Paradise  of  Dainty  Devices  " 

In  going  to  my  naked  bed,  as  one  that  would  have  slept, 
I  heard  a  wife  sing  to  her  child,  that  long  before  had  wept. 
She  sighed  sore,  and  sang  full  sweet  to  bring  the  babe  to 

rest. 
That  would  not  cease,  but  cried  still,  in  sucking  at  her 

breast. 
.>he  was  full  weary  of  her  watch,  and  grieved  with  her  child; 
She  rocked  it,  and  rated  it,  till  that  on  her  it  smiled. 
Then  did  she  say,  "Now  have  I  found  this  proverb  true  to 

prove. 
The  falling  out  of  faithful  friends,  renewing  is  of  love." 

Then  took  I  pajjcr,  pen,  and  ink,  this  proverb  for  to  write, 
In  register  for  to  remain  of  such  a  w'orthy  wight. 
As  she  proceeded  thus  in  song  unto  her  little  brat 
Much  matter  uttered  she  of  weight,  in  place  whereas  she 

sat: 
And  proved  plain  there  was  no  beast,  nor  creature  bearing 

life 
Could  well  be  known  to  live  in  love,  without  discord  and 

strife. 
Then  kissed  she  her  little  babe,  and  swarc,  by  God  abovei 
The  falling  out  of  faithfttl  friends,  renewing  is  of  love. 


3032     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

She  said  that  neither  king,  nor  prince,  nor  lord  could  live 

aright, 
Until  their  puissance  they  did  prove,  their  manhood,  and 

their  might, 
When  manhood  shall  be  matched  so,  that  fear  can  take  no 

place, 
Then  weary  works  make  warriors  each  other  to  embrace, 
And  leave  their  force  that  failed  them;  which  did  consume 

the  rout 
That  might  before  have  lived  their  time,  their  strength  and 

nature  out. 
Then  did  she  sing,  as  one  that  thought  no  man  could  her 

reprove, 
The  Jailing  out  of  faithful  friends,  roiewing  is  of  love. 

She  said  she  saw  no  fish,  nor  fowl,  nor  beast  within  her 

haunt 
That  met  a  stranger  in  their  kind,  but  could  give  it  a  taunt. 
Since  flesh  might  not  endure,  but  rest  must  wrath  succeed, 
And  force  the  fight  to  fall  to  play,  in  pasture  where  they 

feed, 
So  noble  Nature  can  well  end  the  work  she  hath  begun; 
And  bridle  well  that  will  not  cease  her  tragedy  in  some. 
Thus  in  her  song  she  oft  rehearsed,  as  did  her  well  behove, 
The  falling  out  of  faithful  friends,  renewing  is  of  love. 

"T  m„arvel  much,  pardy,"  quoth  she,  "for  to  behold  the 

rout, 
To  see  man,  woman,  boy,  and  beast,  to  toss  the  world  about; 
Some  kneel,  some  crouch,  some  beck,  some  check,  and  some 

can  smoothly  smile. 
And  some  embrace  others  in  arms,  and  there  think  many  a 

wile. 
Some  stand  aloof  at  cap  and  knee,  some  humble,  and  some 

stout, 
Yet  are  they  never  friends  in  deed,  until  they  once  fall  out." 
Thus  ended  she  her  song,  and  said  before  she  did  remove, 
"The  falling  out  of  faithful  friends,  renewing  is  of  love." 

Richard  Edwards  [is23?-i566] 


Qua  Cursum  Ventus  3'^33 


QUA   CURSUM  VENTUS 

As  ships,  becalmed  at  eve,  that  lay 

With  canvas  drooping,  side  by  side, 
Two  towers  of  sail  at  dawn  of  day 

Are  scarce  long  leagues  apart  descried; 

When  fell  the  night,  upsprung  the  breeze, 
And  all  the  darkhng  hours  they  phed. 

Nor  dreamt  but  each  the  self-same  seas 
By  each  was  cleaving,  side  by  side: 

E'en  so — but  why  the  tale  reveal 

Of  those,  whom  year  by  year  unchanged, 

Brief  absence  joined  anew  to  feel. 

Astounded,  soul  from  soul  estranged? 

At  dead  of  night  their  sails  were  filled, 

And  onward  each  rejoicing  steered — 
Ah,  neither  blame,  for  neither  willed. 

Or  wist,  what  first  with  dawn  appeared! 

To  veer,  how  vain!     On,  onward  strain. 
Brave  barks!     In  light,  in  darkness  too, 

Through  winds  and  tides  one  compass  guides — 
To  that,  and  your  own  selves,  be  true. 

But  0  bhthe  breeze!  and  O  great  seas, 
Though  ne'er,  that  earliest  parting  past, 

On  your  wide  plain  they  join  again, 
Together  lead  them  home  at  last. 

One  port,  methought,  alike  they  sought, 
One  purpose  hold  where'er  they  fare, — 

O  bounding  breeze,  O  rushing  seas! 
At  last,  at  last,  unite  them  there! 

Arthur  Hugh  Clough  [1819-1861] 


3034     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


"FOR  A'  THAT  AND   A'  THAT'" 

Is  there,  for  honest  Poverty, 

That  hangs  his  head,  and  a'  that! 
The  coward  slave,  we  pass  him  by, 

We  dare  be  poor  for  a'  that! 
For  a'  that,  and  a'  that. 

Our  toil's  obscure,  and  a'  that; 
The  rank  is  but  the  guinea's  stamp. 

The  Man's  the  gowd  for  a'  that. 

What  though  on  hamely  fare  we  dine, 

Wear  hodcHn  gray,  and  a'  that; 
Gie  fools  their  silks,  and  knaves  their  wine, 

A  Man's  a  Man  for  a'  that. 
For  a'  that,  and  a'  that, 

Their  tinsel  show,  and  a'  that; 
The  honest  man,  though  e'er  sae  poor, 

Is  king  o'  men  for  a'  that. 

Ye  see  yon  birkie,  ca'd  a  lord, 

Wha  struts,  and  stares,  and  a'  that; 
Though  hundreds  worship  at  his  word, 

He's  but  a  coof  for  a'  that; 
For  a'  that,  and  a'  that. 

His  ribbon,  star,  and  a'  that; 
The  man  o'  independent  mind, 

He  looks  and  laughs  at  a'  that. 

A  prince  can  mak  a  belted  knight, 

A  marquis,  duke,  and  a'  that; 
But  an  honest  man's  aboon  his  might, 

Guid  faith,  he  maunna  fa'  that! 
For  a'  that,  and  a'  that, 

Their  dignities,  and  a'  that. 
The  pith  o'  sense,  and  pride  o'  worth, 

Are  higher  rank  than  a'  that. 


"We  are   Brethren  A'"  3035 

Therx  let  us  pray  that  come  it  may, — 

As  come  it  will  for  a'  that, — 
That  Sense  and  Worth,  o'er  a'  the  earth, 

May  bear  the  gree,  and  a'  that. 
For  a'  that,  and  a'  that, 

It's  coming  yet,  for  a'  that, — 
That  Man  to  Man,  the  warld  o'er. 

Shall  brothers  be  for  a'  that! 

Robert  Burns  [i 759-1 796] 


"WE  ARE   BRETHREN  A'  " 

A  HAPPY  bit  hame  this  auld  world  would  be 
If  men,  when  they're  here,  could  make  shift  to  agree, 
An'  ilk  said  to  his  neebor,  in  cottage  an'  ha', 
"Come,  gi'e  me  your  hand, — we  are  brethren  a'." 

I  ken  na  why  ane  wi'  anither  should  fight, 
When  to  'gree  would  make  a'  body  cosie  an'  right, 
When  man  meets  wi'  man,  'tis  the  best  way  ava, 
To  say,  "Gi'e  me  your  hand, — we  are  brethren  a'." 

My  coat  is  a  coarse  ane,  an'  yours  may  be  fine, 
And  I  maun  drink  water,  while  you  may  drink  wine; 
But  we  baith  ha'e  a  leal  heart,  unspotted  to  shaw: 
Sae  gi'e  me  your  hand, — we  are  brethren  a'. 

The  knave  ye  would  scorn,  the  unfaithfu'  deride; 
Ye  would  stand  like  a  rock,  wi'  the  truth  on  your  side; 
Sae  would  I,  an'  naught  else  would  I  value  a  straw: 
Then  gi'e  me  your  hand, — we  are  brethren  a'. 

Ye  would  scorn  to  do  fausely  by  woman  or  man; 
I  hand  by  the  right  aye,  as  well  as  I  can; 
We  are  ane  in  our  joys,  our  affections,  an'  a': 
Come,  gi'e  me  your  hand, — we  are  brethren  a'. 

Your  mother  has  lo'ed  you  as  mithers  can  lo'e; 
An'  mine  has  done  for  me  what  mithers  can  do; 
We  are  ane  high  an'  laigh,  an'  we  shouldna  be  twa: 
Sae  gi'e  me  your  hand, — we  are  brethren  a'. 


3036     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

We  love  the  same  simmer  day,  sunny  an'  fair; 
Hame!  oh,  how  we  love  it,  an'  a'  that  are  there! 
Frae  the  pure  air  o'  heaven  the  same  Hfe  we  draw: 
Come,  gi'e  me  your  hand, — we  are  brethren  a'. 

Frail  shakin'  auld  age  will  soon  come  o'er  us  baith, 
An'  creepin'  alang  at  his  back  will  be  death; 
Syne  into  the  same  mither-yird  we  will  fa': 
Come,  gi'e  me  your  hand, — we  are  brethren  a'. 

Robert  N icoll  [1814-1837] 


FRATERNITY 

I  KNOW  not  but  in  every  leaf 

That  sprang  to  life  along  with  me, 

Were  written  all  the  joy  and  grief 
Thenceforth  my  fate  to  be. 

The  wind  that  whispered  to  the  earth, 
The  bird  that  sang  its  earliest  lay, 

The  flower  that  blossomed  at  my  birth — 
My  kinsmen  all  were  they. 

Ay,  but  for  fellowship  with  these 
I  had  not  been — nay,  might  not  be; 

Nor  they  but  vagrant  melodies 
Till  harmonized  by  me. 

John  Banister  Tabb  [1845-1900] 


SONNET 

r,, ......  rv 

Most  men  know  love  but  as  a  part  of  life; 

They  hide  it  in  some  corner  of  the  breast, 

Even  from  themselves;  and  only  when  they  rest 

In  the  brief  pauses  of  that  daily  strife, 

Wherewith  the  world  might  else  be  not  so  rife. 

They  draw  it  forth  (as  one  draws  forth  a  toy 

To  soothe  some  ardent,  kiss-exacting  boy) 

And  hold  it  up  to  sister,  child,  or  wife. 


Sic   Itur  3037 

Ah  me!  why  may  not  love  and  life  be  one? 
Why  walk  we  thus  alone,  when  by  our  side, 
Love,  like  a  visible  God,  might  be  our  guide? 
How  would  the  marts  grow  noble!  and  the  street, 
Worn  like  a  dungeon-floor  by  weary  feet, 
Seem  then  a  golden  court- way  of  the  Sun! 

Henry  Timrod  [1820-1867] 


SIC   ITUR 

As,  at  a  railway  junction,  men 
Who  came  together,  taking  then 
One  the  train  up,  one  down,  again 

Meet  never!    Ah,  much  more  as  they 
Who  take  one  street's  two  sides,  and  say 
Hard  parting  words,  but  walk  one  way: 

Though  moving  other  mates  between, 
While  carts  and  coaches  intervene, 
Each  to  the  other  goes  unseen; 

Yet  seldom,  surely,  shall  there  lack 
Knowledge  they  walk  net  back  to  back, 
But  with  an  unity  of  track, 

Where  common  dangers  each  attend. 
And  common  hopes  their  guidance  lend 
To  light  them  to  the  self-same  end. 

Whether  he  then  shall  cross  to  thee, 

Or  thou  go  thither,  or  it  be 

Some  midway  point,  yet  ye  shall  see 

Each  other,  yet  again  shall  meet. 
Ah,  joy!  when  with  the  closing  street, 
Forgivingly  at  last  ye  greet! 

Arthur  Hugh  Clough  [1819-1S61] 


3038     Foems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


VERSES 

SUPPOSED  TO  BE  WRITTEN  BY  ALEXANDER  SELKIRK  DURING 
HIS  SOLITARY  ABODE  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  JUAN  FERNANDEZ 

I  AM  monarch  of  all  I  survey; 
My  right  there  is  none  to  dispute; 
From  the  center  all  round  to  the  sea 
I  am  lord  of  the  fowl  and  the  brute. 

0  Solitude!  where  are  the  charms 
That  sages  have  seen  in  thy  face? 
Better  dwell  in  the  midst  of  alarms, 
Than  reign  in  this  horrible  place. 

1  am  out  of  humanity's  reach, 

I  must  finish  my  journey  alone, 
Never  hear  the  sweet  music  of  speech; 
I  start  at  the  sound  of  my  own. 
The  beasts  that  roam  over  the  plain 
My  form  with  indifference  see; 
They  are  so  unacquainted  with  man, 
Their  tameness  is  shocking  to  me. 

Society,  Friendship,  and  Love, 
Divinely  bestowed  upon  man, 
O,  had  I  the  wings  of  a  dove 
How  soon  would  I  taste  you  again! 
My  sorrows  I  then  might  assuage 
In  the  ways  of  religion  and  truth. 
Might  learn  fi'om  the  wisdom  of  age. 
And  be  cheered  by  the  sallies  of  youth. 

Religion!  what  treasure  untold 
Resides  in  that  heavenly  word! 
More  precious  than  silver  and  gold, 
Or  all  that  this  earth  can  afford. 
But  the  sound  of  the  church-going  bell 
These  valleys  and  rocks  never  heard, 
Nor  sighed  at  the  sound  of  a  knell, 
Or  smiled  when  a  Sabbath  appeared. 


Blow,   Blow,  Thou  Winter  Wind"     3039 

Ye  winds,  that  have  made  me  your  sport, 

Convey  to  this  desolate  shore 

Some  cordial  endearing  report 

Of  a  land  I  shall  visit  no  more: 

My  friends, — do  they  now  and  then  send 

A  wish  or  a  thought  after  me? 

O  tell  me  I  yet  have  a  friend, 

Though  a  friend  I  am  never  to  see. 

How  fleet  is  a  glance  of  the  mind! 
Compared  with  the  speed  of  its  flight, 
The  tempest  itself  lags  behind, 
And  the  swift-winged  arrows  of  light. 
When  I  think  of  my  own  native  land, 
In  a  moment  I  seem  to  be  there; 
But  alas!  recollection  at  hand 
Soon  hurries  me  back  to  despair. 

But  the  sea-fowl  is  gone  to  her  nest, 
The  beast  is  laid  down  in  his  lair; 
Even  here  is  a  season  of  rest, 
And  I  to  my  cabin  repair. 
There's  mercy  in  every  place, 
And  mercy,  encouraging  thought! 
Gives  even  affliction  a  grace 
And  reconciles  man  to  his  lot. 

William  Cuwper  [i 731-1800] 

"BLOW,  BLOW,  THOU  WINTER  WIND" 

From  "  As  You  Like  It  " 

Blow,  blow,  thou  winter  wind, 

Thou  art  not  so  unkind 
As  man's  ingratitude; 

Thy  tooth  is  not  so  keen. 

Because  thou  art  not  seen. 

Although  th)^  breath  be  mde. 
Heigh-ho!  sing  heigh-ho!  unto  the  green  holly; 
Most  friendship  is  feigning,  most  loving  mere  folly: 

Then,  heigh-ho,  the  holly! 

This  life  is  most  jolly! 


3040    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Freeze,  freeze,  thou  bitter  sky,  T^ 

Thou  dost  not  bite  so  nigh 

As  benefits  forgot: 
Though  thou  the  waters  warp, 
Thy  sting  is  not  so  sharp 

As  friend  remembered  not. 
Heigh-ho!  sing  heigh-ho!  unto  the  green  holly; 
Most  friendship  is  feigning,  most  loving  mere  folly: 
Then,  heigh-ho,  the  holly! 
This  life  is  most  jolly! 

William  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 


THE  HOUSE  BY  THE   SIDE  OF  THE  ROAD 

There  are  hermit  souls  that  live  withdrawn 

In  the  place  of  their  self-content; 
There  are  souls  like  stars,  that  dwell  apart. 

In  a  fellowless  firmament; 
There  are  pioneer  souls  that  blaze  their  paths 

Where  highways  never  ran — 
But  let  me  live  by  the  side  of  the  road 

And  be  a  friend  to  man. 

Let  me  live  in  a  house  by  the  side  of  the  road 

Where  the  race  of  men  go  by — 
The  men  who  are  good  and  the  men  who  are  bad. 

As  good  and  as  bad  as  I. 
I  would  not  sit  in  the  scorner's  seat 

Or  hurl  the  cynic's  ban — ■ 
Let  me  live  in  a  house  by  the  side  of  the  road 

And  be  a  friend  to  man. 

I  see  from  my  house  by  the  side  of  the  road, 

By  the  side  of  the  highway  of  life, 
The  men  who  press  with  the  ardor  of  hope, 

The  men  who  are  faint  with  the  strife, 
But  I  turn  not  away  from  their  smiles  nor  their  tears, 

Both  parts  of  an  infinite  plan — 
Let  me  live  in  a  house  by  the  side  of  the  road 

And  be  a  friend  to  man. 


The   Man  With  the  Hoe  3041 

I  know  there  are  brook-gladdened  meadows  ahead, 

And  mountains  of  wearisome  height; 
That  the  road  passes  on  through  the  long  afternoon 

And  stretches  away  to  the  night. 
And  still  I  rejoice  when  the  travelers  rejoice 

And  weep  with  the  strangers  that  moan, 
Nor  live  in  my  house  by  the  side  of  the  road 

Like  a  man  who  dwells  alone. 

Let  me  live  in  my  house  by  the  side  of  the  road, 

It's  here  the  race  of  men  go  by — 
They  are  good,  they  are  bad,  they  are  weak,  they  are  strong, 

Wise,  foolish — so  am  I. 
Then  why  should  I  sit  in  the  scorner's  seat. 

Or  hurl  the  cynic's  ban? 
Let  me  live  in  my  house  by  the  side  of  the  road 

And  be  a  friend  to  man. 

Sam  Walter  Foss  [1858-1911] 


THE  MAN  WITH  THE  HOE 

WRITTEN  AFTER  SEEING  MILLEX'S  WORLD-FAMOUS  PAINTING 

God  made  man  in  His  own  image,  in  the  image  of  God  made  He  him. 

— Genesis 

Bowed  by  the  weight  of  centuries  he  leans 

Upon  his  hoe  and  gazes  on  the  ground, 

The  emptiness  of  ages  in  his  face, 

And  on  his  back  the  burden  of  the  world. 

Who  made  him  dead  to  rapture  and  despair, 

A  thing  that  grieves  not  and  that  never  hopes. 

Stolid  and  stunned,  a  brother  to  the  ox? 

Who  loosened  and  let  down  this  brutal  jaw? 

Whose  was  the  hand  that  slanted  back  this  brow? 

Whose  breath  blew  out  the  light  within  this  brain? 

Is  this  the  Thing  the  Lord  God  made  and  gave 
To  have  dominion  over  sea  and  land; 
To  trace  the  stars  and  search  the  heavens  for  power; 
To  feel  the  passion  of  Eternity? 


^ 


3042     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Is  this  the  Dream  He  dreamed  who  shaped  the  suns 
And  marked  their  ways  upon  the  ancient  deep? 
Down  all  the  stretch  of  Hell  to  its  last  gulf 
There  is  no  shape  more  terrible  than  this — 
More  tongued  with  censure  of  the  world's  blind  greed- 
More  filled  with  signs  and  portents  for  the  soul — 
More  fraught  with  menace  to  the  universe. 

What  gulfs  between  him  and  the  seraphim! 
Slave  of  the  wheel  of  labor,  what  to  him 
Are  Plato  and  the  swing  of  Pleiades? 
What  the  long  reaches  of  the  peaks  of  song, 
The  rift  of  dawn,  the  reddening  of  the  rose? 
Through  this  dread  shape  the  suffering  ages  look; 
Time's  tragedy  is  in  that  aching  stoop; 
Through  this  dread  shape  humanity  betrayed, 
Plundered,  profaned  and  disinherited, 
Cries  protest  to  the  Judges  of  the  World, 
A  protest  that  is  also  prophecy. 

O  masters,  lords  and  rulers  in  all  lands, 

Is  this  the  handiwork  you  give  to  God, 

This  monstrous  thing  distorted  and  soul-quenched? 

How  will  you  ever  straighten  up  this  shape; 

Touch  it  again  with  immortality; 

Give  back  the  upward  looking  and  the  light; 

Rebuild  in  it  the  music  and  the  dream; 

Make  right  the  immemorial  infamies. 

Perfidious  wrongs,  immedicable  woes? 

O  masters,  lords  and  rulers  in  all  lands, 
How  will  the  Future  reckon  with  this  Man? 
How  answer  his  brute  question  in  that  hour 
When  whirlwinds  of  rebellion  shake  the  world? 
How  will  it  be  with  kingdoms  and  with  kings — 
With  those  who  shaped  him  to  the  thing  he  is— 
When  this  dumb  Terror  shall  reply  to  God, 
After  the  silence  of  the  centuries?  ■ 

Edwin  Markham  [1852-1 


The   Man  With  the  Hoe  3043 


THE  JMAN   WITH  THE  HOE 

A  REPLY 

Let  us  a  little  permit  Nature  to  take  her  own  way:  she  better  understands 
tier  own  aSairs  than  we. — Montaigne 

Nature  reads  not  our  labels,  "great"  and  "small"; 
Accepts  she  one  and  all 

Who,  striving,  win  and  hold  the  vacant  place;  ^ 
All  are  of  royal  race. 

Him,  there,  rough-cast,  with  rigid  arm  and  limb, 
The  Mother  molded  him, 

Of  his  rude  realm  ruler  and  demigod, 
Lord  of  the  rock  and  clod. 

With  Nature  is  no  "better"  and  no  "worse," 
On  this  bared  head  no  curse. 

Humbled  it  is  and  bowed;  so  is  he  crowned 
Whose  kingdom  is  the  ground. 

Diverse  the  burdens  on  the  one  stern  road 
Where  bears  each  back  its  load; 

Varied  the  toU,  but  neither  high  nor  low. 
With  pen  or  sword  or  hoe, 

He  that  has  put  out  strength,  lo,  he  is  strong; 
Of  him  with  spade  or  song 

Nature  but  questions, — "This  one,  shall  he  stay?" 
She  answers  "Yea,"  or  "Nay," 

"Well,  ill,  he  digs,  he  sings";  and  he  bides  on, 
Or  shudders,  and  is  gone. 

Strength  shall  he  have,  the  toiler,  strength  and  grace, 
So  fitted  to  his  place 


3044     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

As  he  leaned,  there,  an  oak  where  sea  winds  blow, 
Our  brother  with  the  hoe. 

No  blot,  no  monster,  no  unsightly  thing, 
The  soil's  long-lineaged  king; 

His  changeless  realm,  he  knows  it  and  commands; 
Erect  enough  he  stands. 

Tall  as  his  toil.    Nor  does  he  bow  unblest: 
Labor  he  has,  and  rest. 

Need  was,  need  is,  and  need  will  ever  be 
For  him  and  such  as  he; 

Cast  for  the  gap,  with  gnarled  arm  and  limb, 
The  Mother  molded  him, — 

Long  wrought,  and  molded  him  with  mother's  care, 
Before  she  set  him  there. 

And  aye  she  gives  him,  mindful  of  her  own, 
Peace  of  the  plant,  the  stone; 

Yea,  since  above  his  work  he  may  not  rise, 
She  makes  the  field  his  skies. 

See!  she  that  bore  him,  and  metes  out  the  lot, 
He  serves  her.    Vex  him  not 

To  scorn  the  rock  whence  he  was  hewn,  the  pit 
And  what  was  digged  from  it; 

Lest  he  no  more  in  native  virtue  stand, 
The  earth-sword  in  his  hand, 

But  follow  sorry  phantoms  to  and  fro, 
And  let  a  kingdom  go. 

John  Vance  Cheney  [1848- 


The   Singing   Man  3^45 


THE  SINGING  MAN 

He  sang  above  the  vineyards  of  the  world. 

And  after  him  the  vines  with  woven  hands 
Clambered  and  clung,  and  everywhere  unfurled 

Triumphing  green  above  the  barren  lands; 
Till  high  as  gardens  grow,  he  climbed,  he  stood. 

Sun-crowned  with  life  and  strength,  and  singing  toil, 
And  looked  upon  his  work;  and  it  was  good: 
The  corn,  the  wine,  the  oil. 

He  sang  above  the  noon.    The  topmost  cleft 

That  grudged  him  footing  on  the  mountain  scars 

He  planted  and  despaired  not;  till  he  left 
His  vines  soft  breathing  to  the  host  of  stars. 

He  wrought,  he  tilled;  and  even  as  he  sang, 
The  creatures  of  his  planting  laughed  to  scorn 

Tlie  ancient  threat  of  deserts  where  there  sprang 
The  wine,  the  oil,  the  corn! 

He  sang  not  for  abundance. — Over-lords 

Took  of  his  tilth.    Yet  was  there  still  to  reap, 

The  pKjrtion  of  his  labor;  dear  rewards 

Of  sunlit  day,  and  bread,  and  human  sleep. 

He  sang  for  strength;  for  glory  of  the  light. 

He  dreamed  above  the  furrows,    '   They  are  mine!  " 

When  all  he  wrought  stood  fair  before  his  sight 
With  corn,  and  oil,  and  wine. 

Truly,  the  light  is  sweet 
Yea,  and  a  pleasant  thing 
It  is  to  see  the  Sun. 
And  that  a  man  should  eat 

His  bread  that  he  hath  won; — 
{So  is  it  sung  and  said), 

That  he  should  take  and  keep, 
After  his  laboring. 
The  portion  of  his  labor  in  his  bread, 
His  bread  that  he  hath  won; 
Yea,  and  in  quiet  sleep, 
When  all  is  done. 


3046     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

He  sang;  above  the  burden  and  the  heat, 
Above  all  seasons  with  their  fitful  grace; 

Above  the  chance  and  change  that  led  his  feet 

To  this  last  ambush  of  the  Market-place.         '"^  ^ 

"  Enough  for  him,"  they  said — and  still  they  say — 
"  A  crust,  with  air  to  breathe,  and  sun  to  shine; 

He  asks  no  more!" — Before  they  took  away 
The  corn,  the  oil,  the  wine. 

He  sang.    No  more  he  sings  nov/,  anywhere. 

Light  was  enough,  before  he  was  undone. 
They  knew  it  well,  who  took  away  the  air, 

— Who  took  away  the  sun; 
Who  took,  to  serve  their  soul-devouring  greed, 

Himself,  his  breath,  his  bread — the  goad  of  toil;— 
Who  have  and  hold,  before  the  eyes  of  Need,  j.t 

The  corn,  the  wine, — the  oil!  ,,f'T. 

Truly,  one  thing  is  sweet 
Of  things  beneath  the  Sun; 
This,  that  a  man  should  earn  his  bread  and  eat, 
Rejoicing  in  his  work  which  he  hath  done. 

What  shall  be  sung  or  said  ',_ 

Of  desolate  deceit, 
When  others  take  his  bread;  a  eg  aH 

His  and  his  children's  bread? —  '  I 

And  the  laborer  hath  none. 
This,  for  his  portion  now,  of  all  that  he  hath  done. 
He  earns;  and  others  cat. 
He  starves; — -they  sit  at  meat 
Who  have  taken  away  the  Sun. 

II 
■ — vuo 
Seek  him  now,  that  singing  Man. 

Look  for  him, 

Look  for  him 

In  the  mills, 

In  the  mines; 

Where  the  very  daylight  pines, — 

He,  who  once  did  walk  the  hills! 


The  Singing   Man  3^47 

You  shall  find  him,  if  you  scan 

Shapes  all  unbefitting  Man, 

Bodies  warped,  and  faces  dim. 

In  the  mines;  in  the  mills 

Where  the  ceaseless  thunder  fills 

Spaces  of  the  human  brain 

Till  all  thought  is  turned  to  pain. 

Where  the  skirl  of  wheel  on  wheel. 

Grinding  him  who  is  their  tool. 

Makes  the  shattered  senses  reel 

To  the  numbness  of  the  fool. 

Perished  thought,  and  halting  tongue— 

(Once  it  spoke; — once  it  sung!) 

Live  to  hunger,  dead  to  song. 

Only  heart-beats  loud  with  wrong 

Hammer  on,~ How  long? 

.  .  .  Hoiv  long? — How  long? 

Search  for  him ; 

Search  for  him ; 

Where  the  crazy  atoms  swim 

Up  the  fiery  furnace-blast. 

You  shall  find  him,  at  the  last, — 

He  whose  forehead  braved  the  sun, — 

Wrecked  and  tortured  and  undone. 

Where  no  breath  across  the  heat 

Whispers  him  that  life  was  sweet; 

But  the  sparkles  mock  and  flare, 

Scattering  up  the  crooked  air. 

(Blackened  with  that  bitter  mirk, — 

Would  God  know  His  handiwork?) 

Thought  is  not  for  such  as  he; 
Naught  but  strength,  and  misery; 
Since,  for  just  the  bite  and  sup, 
Life  must  needs  be  swallowed  up. 
Only,  reehng  up  the  sky, 
Hurtling  flames  that  hurry  by. 
Gasp  and  flare,  with  Why — Why, 
.  .  .  Why?  .  .  . 


3048      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Why  the  human  mind  of  him 
Shrinks,  and  falters  and  is  dim 
When  he  tries  to  make  it  out: 
What  the  torture  is  about. — 
Why  he  breathes,  a  fugitive 
Whom  the  World  forbids  to  live. 
Why  he  earned  for  his  abode. 
Habitation  of  the  toad! 
Why  his  fevered  day  by  day 
Will  not  serve  to  drive  away 
Horror  that  must  always  haunt: — 
.  .  .  Want  .  .  .  Want! 
Nightmare  shot  with  waking  pangs; — 
Tightening  coil,  and  certain  fangs, 
Close  and  closer,  always  nigh  .  .  . 
.  .  .  Why?  .  .  .  Why? 

Why  he  labors  under  ban 
That  denies  him  for  a  man. 
Why  his  utmost  drop  of  blood 
Buys  for  him  no  human  good; 
Why  his  utmost  urge  of  strength 
Only  lets  Them  starve  at  length;— 
Will  not  let  him  starve  alone; 
He  must  watch,  and  see  his  own 
Fade  and  fail,  and  starve,  and  die. 

.  .  .  Why?  .  .  .  Why? 

Heart-beats,  in  a  hammering  song,  ^^ 
Heavy  as  an  ox  may  plod, 
Goaded — goaded — faint  with  wrong, 
Cry  unto  some  ghost  of  God 
.  .  .  How  long?  .  .  .  How  long? 
How  long? 


Ill 


lAi 


Seek  him  yet.     Search  for  him ! 
You  shall  find  him,  spent  and  grim; 


The  Singing   Man  3^49 

In  the  prisons,  where  we  pen 
These  unsightly  shards  of  men. 
Sheltered  fast; 
Housed  at  length; 
Clothed  and  fed,  no  matter  how! — 
Where  the  householders,  aghast, 
Measure  in  his  broken  strength 
Naught  but  power  for  evil,  now. 
Beast-of-burdcn  drudgeries 
Could  not  earn  him  what  was  his: 
He  who  heard  the  world  applaud 
Glories  seized  by  force  and  fraud, 
He  must  break, — he  must  take! — 
Both  for  hate  and  hunger's  sake. 
He  must  seize  by  fraud  and  force ; 
He  must  strike,  without  remorse! 
Seize  he  might;  but  never  keep. 
Strike,  his  once! — ^Behold  him  here. 
(Human  life  we  buy  so  cheap. 
Who  should  know  we  held  it  dear?) 

No  denial, — no  defence 

From  a  brain  bereft  of  sense. 

Any  more  than  penitence. 

But  the  heart-beats  now,  that  plod 

Goaded — goaded — dumb  with  wrong, 

Ask  not  even  a  ghost  of  God 

How  long/ 

When  the  Sea  gives  up  its  dead, 
Prison  caverns,  yield  instead 
This,  rejected  and  despised; 
This,  the  Soiled  and  Sacrificed! 
Without  form  or  comeliness; 
Shamed  for  us  that  did  transgress; 
Bruised,  for  our  iniquities, 
With  the  stripes  that  are  all  hist 
Face  that  wreckage,  you  who  can. 
It  was  once  the  Singing  Man. 


3050      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

IV 

Must  it  be?— Must  we  then 
Render  back  to  God  again 
This  His  broken  work,  this  thing, 
For  His  man  that  once  did  sing? 
Will  not  all  our  wonders  do? 
Gifts  we  stored  the  ages  through, 
(Trusting  that  He  had  forgot) — 
Gifts  the  Lord  required  not? 

Would  the  all-but-human  serve! 
Monsters  made  of  stone  and  nerve; 
Towers  to  threaten  and  defy 
Curse  or  blessing  of  the  sky; 
Shafts  that  blot  the  stars  with  smoke; 
Lightnings  harnessed  under  yoke;       ; 
Sea-things,  air-things,  wrought  with  steel, 
That  may  smite,  and  fly,  and  feel! 
Oceans  calling  each  to  each; 
Hostile  hearts,  with  kindred  speech. 
Every  work  that  Titans  can ; 
Every  marvel:  save  a  man, 
Who  might  rule  without  a  sword. — 
Is  a  man  more  precious.  Lord? 

Can  it  be? — Must  we  then 
Render  back  to  Thee  again 
Million,  million  wasted  men? 
Men,  of  flickering  human  breath, 
Only  made  for  life  and  death? 

Ah,  but  see  the  sovereign  Few, 
Highly  favored,  that  remain! 
These,  the  glorious  residue, 
Of  the  cherished  race  of  Cain. 
These,  the  magnates  of  the  age, 
High  above  the  human  wage. 
Who  have  numbered  and  possessed 
All  the  portion  of  the  rest! 


The   Singing    Man  3^S^ 

What  are  all  despairs  and  shames, 
What  the  mean,  forgotten  names 
Of  the  thousand  more  or  less. 
For  one  surfeit  of  success? 

For  those  dullest  lives  we  spent. 
Take  these  Few  magnificent! 
For  that  host  of  blotted  ones. 
Take  these  glittering  central  suns. 
Few; — but  how  their  lustre  thrives 
On  the  million  broken  lives! 
Splendid,  over  dark  and  doubt. 
For  a  million  souls  gone  out! 
These,  the  holders  of  our  hoard, — 
Wilt  thou  not  accept  them,  Lord? 


Oh,  in  the  wakening  thunders  of  the  heart, 

— The  small  lost  Eden,  troubled  through  the  night. 
Sounds  there  not  now, — forboded  and  apart, 
Some  voice  and  sword  of  light? 

Some  voice  and  portent  of  a  dawn  to  break? — • 
Searching  like  God,  the  ruinous  human  shard 
Of  that  lost  Brother-man  Himself  did  make. 
And  Man  himself  hath  marred? 

It  sounds! — And  may  the  anguish  of  that  birth 
Seize  on  the  world;  and  may  all  shelters  fail. 
Till  we  behold  new  Heaven  and  new  Earth 
Through  the  rent  Temple- vail! 

When  the  high-tides  that  threaten  near  and  far 

To  sweep  away  our  guilt  before  the  sky, — 
Flooding  the  waste  of  this  dishonored  Star, 
Cleanse,  and  o'erwhelm,  and  cry! — 

Cry,  from  the  deep  of  world-accusing  waves. 

With  longing  more  than  all  since  Light  began. 
Above  the  nations, — underneath  the  graves,— 
"Give  back  the  Singing  Man!" 

Josephine  Preston  Pcahody  [1874- 


3052      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


"SCUM  O'  THE  EARTH" 

I 

At  the  gate  of  the  West  I  stand, 
On  the  isle  where  the  nations  throng. 
We  call  them  "scum  0'  the  earth"; 

Stay,  are  we  doing  you  wrong, 

Young  fellow  from  Socrates'  land? — 

You,  like  a  Hermes  so  lissome  and  strong 

Fresh  from  the  master  Praxiteles'  hand? 

So  you're  of  Spartan  birth? 

Descended,  perhaps,  from  one  of  the  band — 

Deathless  in  story  and  song — 

Who  combed  their  long  hair  at  Thermopylae's  pass?  .  .  . 

Ah,  I  forgot  the  straits,  alas! 

More  tragic  than  theirs,  more  compassion-worth. 

That  have  doomed  you  to  march  in  our  "immigrant  class" 

Where  you're  nothing  but  "scum  o'  the  earth." 


You  Pole  with  a  child  on  your  knee. 

What  dower  bring  you  to  the  land  of  the  free? 

Hark!  does  she  croon 

That  sad  little  tune 

That  Chopin  once  found  on  his  Polish  lea 

And  mounted  in  gold  for  you  and  for  me?  :b8 

Now  a  ragged  young  fiddler  answers 

In  wild  Czeck  melody 

That  Dvorak  took  whole  from  the  dancers. 

And  the  heavy  faces  bloom 

In  the  wonderful  Slavic  way; 

The  little,  dull  eyes,  the  brows  a-gloom, 

Suddenly  dawn  like  the  day. 

While,  watching  these  folks  and  their  mystery, 

I  forget  that  they're  nothing  worth; 

That  Bohemians,  Slovaks,  Croatians, 

And  men  of  all  Slavic  nations 

Are  "polacks" — and  "scum  o'  the  earth." 


li^r 


"  Scum  o'   the   Earth  "  3^53 

in 

Genoese  boy  of  the  level  brow. 

Lad  of  the  lustrous,  dreamy  eyes 

Astare  at  Manhattan's  pinnacles  now 

In  the  first,  sweet  shock  of  a  hushed  surprise; 

Within  your  far-rapt  seer's  eyes 

I  catch  the  glow  of  the  wild  surmise 

That  played  on  the  Santa  Maria's  prow 

In  that  still  gray  dawn, 

Four  centuries  gone, 

When  a  world  from  the  wave  began  to  rise. 

Oh,  it's  hard  to  foretell  what  high  emprise 

Is  the  goal  that  gleams 

When  Italy's  dreams 

Spread  wing  and  sweep  into  the  skies. 

Caesar  dreamed  him  a  world  ruled  well; 

Dante  dreamed  Heaven  out  of  Hell; 

Angelo  brought  us  there  to  dwell; 

And  you,  are  you  of  a  different  birth? — 

You're  only  a  "dago," — and  "scum  o'  the  earth"! 

IV 

Stay,  are  we  doing  you  wrong 

Calling  you  "scum  o'  the  earth," 

Man  of  the  sorrow-bowed  head. 

Of  the  features  tender  yet  strong, — • 

Man  of  the  eyes  full  of  wisdom  and  mystery 

Mingled  with  patience  and  dread? 

Have  not  I  known  you  in  history. 

Sorrow-bowed  head? 

Were  you  the  poet-king,  worth 

Treasures  of  Ophir  unpriced? 

Were  you  the  prophet,  perchance,  whose  art 

Foretold  how  the  rabble  would  mock 

That  shepherd  of  spirits,  erelong, 

Who  should  carry  the  lambs  on  his  heart 

And  tenderly  feed  his  flock? 

Man — lift  that  sorrow-bowed  head. 

Lo!  'tis  the  face  of  the  Christ  1 


3054      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

The  vision  dies  at  its  birth. 
You're  merely  a  butt  for  our  mirth. 
You're  a  "sheeny" — and  therefore  despised,   , 
And  rejected  as  "scum  o'  the  earth." 


Countrymen,  bend  and  invoke 

Mercy  for  us  blasphemers, 

For  that  we  spat  on  these  marvelous  folk, 

Nations  of  darers  and  dreamers. 

Scions  of  singers  and  seers, 

Our  peers,  and  more  than  our  peers. 

"Rabble  and  refuse,"  we  name  them 

And  "scum  o'  the  earth,"  to  shame  them. 

Mercy  for  us  of  the  few,  young  years, 

Of  the  culture  so  callow  and  crude. 

Of  the  hands  so  grasping  and  rude, 

The  lips  so  ready  for  sneers 

At  the  sons  of  our  ancient  more-than-peers. 

Mercy  for  us  who  dare  despise 

Men  in  whose  loins  our  Homer  lies; 

Mothers  of  men  who  shall  bring  to  us 

The  glory  of  Titian,  the  grandeur  of  Huss; 

Children  in  whose  frail  arms  shall  rest 

Prophets  and  singers  and  saints  of  the  West. 

Newcomers  all  from  the  eastern  seas, 
Help  us  incarnate  dreams  like  these. 
Forget,  and  forgive,  that  we  did  you  wrong. 
Help  us  to  father  a  nation,  strong 
In  the  comradeship  of  an  equal  birth. 
In  the  wealth  of  the  richest  bloods  of  earth. 

Robert  Haven  Schauffler  [1879- 

THE  SECOND  COMING 

The  Saviour  came.    With  trembling  lips 
He  counted  Europe's  battleships. 
"Yet  millions  lack  their  daily  bread. 
So  much  for  Calvary!"  He  said. 

Norman  Gale  [1862- 


The   Night  Court  ;^o^^ 


THE  NIGHT  COURT 

"Call  Rose  Costara!" 

Insolent  she  comes. 
The  watchers,  practised,  keen,  turn  down  their  thumbs. 
The  walk,  the  talk,  the  face, — that  sea-shell  tint, — 
It  is  old  stuff;  they  read  her  like  coarse  print. 
Here  is  no  hapless  innocence  waylaid. 
This  is  a  stolid  worker  at  her  trade. 
Listening,  she  yawns,  half  smiling,  undismayed, 
Shrugging  a  little  at  the  law's  delay, 
Bored  and  impatient  to  be  on  her  way. 
It  is  her  eighth  conviction.    Out  beyond  the  rail 
A  lady  novelist  in  search  of  types  turns  pale. 
She  meant  to  write  of  them  just  as  she  found  them. 
And  with  no  tears  or  maudlin  glamor  round  them. 
In  forceful,  virile  words,  harsh,  true  words,  without  shame, 
Calling  an  ugly  thing,  boldly,  an  ugly  name; 
Sympathy,  velvet  glove,  on  purpose,  iron  hand. 
But  eig/ifh  conviction!    A]l  the  phrases  she  had  planned 
Fail;  "sullen,"  "vengeful,"  no,  she  isn't  that. 
No,  the  pink  face  beneath  the  hectic  hat 
Gives  back  her  own  aghast  and  sickened  stare 
With  a  detached  and  rather  cheerful  air. 
And  then  the  little  novelist  sees  red. 
From  her  chaste  heart  all  clemency  is  fled. 
"Oh,  loathsome!  venomous!    Off  with  her  head! 
Call  Rose  Costara!"    But  before  you  stop. 
And  shelve  your  decent  rage. 

Let's  call  the  cop. 

Let's  call  the  plain-clothes  cop  who  brought  her  in. 
The  weary-eyed  night  watchman  of  the  law, 
A  shuffling  person  with  a  hanging  jaw. 
Loose-lipped  and  sallow,  rather  vague  of  chin, 
Comes  rubber-heeling  at  His  Honor's  rap. 
He  set  and  baited  and  then  sprung  the  trap — 
The  trap — by  his  unsavory  report. 
Let's  ask  him  why — but  first 

Let's  call  the  court. 


3056      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Not  only  the  grim  figure  in  the  chair, 

Sphinx-like  above  the  waste  and  wreckage  there, 

Skeptical,  tired  of  a  retold  tale. 

But  the  whole  humming  hive,  the  false,  the  frail, — 

An  old  young  woman  with  a  weasel  face, 

A  lying  witness  waiting  in  his  place, 

Two  ferret  lawyers  nosing  out  a  case. 

Reporters  questioning  a  Mexican, 

Sobbing  her  silly  heart  out  for  her  man, 

Planning  to  feature  her,  "lone,  desperate,  pretty," — 

Yes,  call  the  court.    But  wait! 

Let's  call  the  city. 

Call  the  community!    Call  up,  call  dov/n. 
Call  all  the  speeding,  mad,  unheeding  town ! 
Call  rags  and  tags  and  then  call  velvet  gown ! 
Go,  summon  them  from  tenements  and  clubs. 
On  office  floors  and  over  steaming  tubs! 
Shout  to  the  boxes  and  behind  the  scenes. 
Then  to  the  push-carts  and  the  limousines! 
Arouse  the  lecture-room,  the  cabaret! 
Confound  them  with  a  trumpet  blast  and  say, 
"Are  you  so  dull,  so  deaf  and  blind  indeed. 
That  you  mistake  the  harvest  for  the  seed?" 
Condemn  them  for — but  stay! 

Let's  call  the  code — 

That  facile  thing  they've  fashioned  to  their  mode: 
Smug  sophistries  that  smother  and  befool, 
That  numb  and  stupefy;  that  clumsy  thing 
That  measures  mountains  with  a  three-foot  rule. 
And  plumbs  the  ocean  with  a  pudding  string — - 
The  little,  brittle  code.    Here  is  the  root. 
Far  out  of  sight  and  buried  safe  and  deep. 
And  Rose  Costara  is  the  bitter  fruit. 
On  every  limb  and  leaf,  death,  ruin,  creep. 

So,  lady  novelist,  go  home  again. 

Rub  biting  acid  on  your  little  pen. 

Look  back  and  out  and  up  and  in,  and  then 


The   Factories        tnsoM    3057 

Write  that  it  is  no  job  for  pruning-shears. 
Tell  them  to  dig  for  years  and  years  and  years  ^ 

The  twined  and  twisted  roots.    Blot  out  the  page; 
Invert  the  blundering  order  of  the  age; 
Reverse  the  scheme:  the  last  shall  be  the  first. 
Summon  the  system,  starting  with  the  worst^ 
The  lying,  dying  code!    On,  down  the  line, 
The  city  and  the  court,  the  cop.    Assign 
The  guilt,  the  blame,  the  shame!    Sting,  lash,  and  spur! 
Call  each  and  all!    Call  us!    And  then  call  her! 
Ruth  Comfort  Mitchell  [iS 

THE  FACTORIES 

I  HAVE  shut  my  little  sister  in  from  life  and  light 

(For  a  rose,  for  a  ribbon,  for  a  wreath  across  my  hair), 
I  have  made  her  restless  feet  still  until  the  night, ^  :j() 

Locked  from  sweets  of  summer  and  from  wild  spring  air; 
I  who  ranged  the  meadowlands,  free  from  sun  to  sun. 

Free  to  sing  and  pull  the  buds  and  watch  the  far  wings  fly, 
I  have  bound  my  sister  till  her  playing-time  was  done — 

Oh,  my  little  sister,  was  it  I?    Was  it  I? 

I  have  robbed  my  sister  of  her  day  of  maidenhood 

(For  a  robe,  for  a  feather,  for  a  trinket's  restless  spark), 
Shut  from  Love  till  dusk  shall  fall,  how  shall  she  know  good. 

How  shall  she  go  scatheless  through  the  sin-lit  dark? 
I  who  could  be  innocent,  I  who  could  be  gay, 

I  who  could  have  love  and  mirth  before  the  light  went  by, 
I  have  put  my  sister  in  her  mating-time  away — 

Sister,  my  young  sister,  was  it  I?    Was  it  I? 

I  have  robbed  my  sister  of  the  lips  against  her  breast, 

(For  a  coin,  for  the  weaving  of  my  children's  lace  and 
lawn). 
Feet  that  pace  beside  the  loom,  hands  that  cannot  rest — 

How  can  she  know  motherhood,  whose  strength  is  gone? 
I  who  took  no  heed  of  her,  starved  and  labor-worn, 

I,  against  whose  placid  heart  my  sleepy  gold-heads  lie, 
Round  my  path  they  cry  to  me,  little  souls  unborn — 

God  of  Life!    Creator!    It  was  I!    It  was  I! 

Margaret  Widdemer  [i8 


3058      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

BLACK  SHEEP 

From  their  folded  mates  they  wander  far, 

Their  ways  seem  harsh  and  wild ; 
They  follow  the  beck  of  a  baleful  star, 

Their  paths  are  dream  beguiled. 

Yet  haply  they  sought  but  a  wider  range, 

Some  loftier  mountain-slope, 
And  little  recked  of  the  country  strange 

Beyond  the  gates  of  hope. 

And  haply  a  bell  with  a  luring  call 

Summoned  their  feet  to  tread 
Midst  the  cruel  rocks,  where  the  deep  pitfall 

And  the  lurking  snare  are  spread. 

Maybe,  in  spite  of  their  tameless  days 

Of  outcast  liberty, 
They're  sick  at  heart  for  the  homely  ways 

Where  their  gathered  brothers  be. 

And  oft  at  night,  when  the  plains  fall  dark 

And  the  hills  loom  large  and  dim. 
For  the  Shepherd's  voice  they  mutely  hark. 

And  their  souls  go  out  to  him. 

Meanwhile,  "Black  sheep!  black  sheep!"  we  cry. 

Safe  in  the  inner  fold; 
And  maybe,  they  hear,  and  wonder  why, 

And  marvel,  out  in  the  cold. 

Richard  Burton  [1S59- 

THE  DREAM-BEARER 

Where  weary  folk  toil,  black  with  smoke. 

And  hear  but  whistles  scream, 
I  went,  all  fresh  from  dawn  and  dew. 

To  carry  them  a  dream. 

I  went  to  bitter  lanes  and  dark. 

Who  once  had  known  the  sky. 
To  carry  them  a  dream — and  found 

They  had  more  dreams  than  I. 

Mary  Carolyn  Davies  [18 


Caliban  in  the  Coal    Mines         3059 


SUNDAY  EVENING  IN  THE  COMMON 

Look — on  the  topmost  branches  of  the  world 
The  blossoms  of  the  myriad  stars  are  thick; 
Over  the  huddled  rows  of  stone  and  brick 

A  few  sad  wisps  of  empty  smoke  are  curled 
Like  ghosts,  languid  and  sick. 

One  breathless  moment  now  the  city's  moaning 
Fades,  and  the  endless  streets  seem  vague  and  dim; 
There  is  no  sound  around  the  whole  world's  rim, 

Save  in  the  chstance  a  small  band  is  droning 
Some  desolate  old  hymn. 

Van  Wyck,  how  often  have  we  been  together 

When  this  same  moment  made  all  mysteries  clear — 
The  infinite  stars  that  brood  above  us  here. 

And  the  gray  city  in  the  soft  June  weather. 
So  tawdry  and  so  dear! 

John  Hall  Wheelock  [1859- 

CALIBAN  IN  THE  COAL  MINES 

God,  we  don't  like  to  complain 

We  know  that  the  mine  is  no  lark — 
But — there's  the  pools  from  the  rain; 
But — there's  the  cold  and  the  dark. 

God,  You  don't  know  what  it  is — 

You,  in  Your  well-lighted  sky, 
Watching  the  meteors  whizz; 

Warm,  with  the  sun  always  by. 

God,  if  You  had  but  the  moon 

Stuck  in  Your  cap  for  a  lamp, 
Even  You'd  tire  of  it  soon, 

Down  in  the  dark  and  the  damp. 

Nothing  but  blackness  above,  /. 

And  nothing  that  moves  but  the  cars —      :  I 
God,  if  You  wish  for  our  love,  I 

Fling  us  a  handful  of  stars! 

Louis  Unlermcycr  [1885- 


jo6o     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

LANDSCAPES 

The  rain  was  over,  and  the  brilliant  air 
Made  every  little  blade  of  grass  appear 
Vivid  and  startling — everything  was  there 
With  sharpened  outlines,  eloquently  clear, 
As  though  one  saw  it  in  a  crystal  sphere. 
The  rusty  sumac  with  its  struggling  spires; 
The  golden-rod  with  all  its  million  fires; 
(A  million  torches  swinging  in  the  wind) 
A  single  poplar,  marvellously  thinned, 
Half  like  a  naked  boy,  half  like  a  sword; 
Clouds,  like  the  haughty  banners  of  the  Lord; 
A  group  of  pansies  with  their  shrewish  faces 
Little  old  ladies  cackling  over  laces; 
The  quaint,  unhurried  road  that  curved  so  well; 
The  prim  petunias  with  their  rich,  rank  smell; 
The  lettuce-birds,  the  creepers  in  the  field — 
How  bountifully  were  they  all  revealed! 
How  arrogantly  each  one  seemed  to  thrive — 
So  frank  and  strong,  so  radiantly  alive! 

And  over  all  the  morning-minded  earth 
There  seemed  to  spread  a  sharp  and  kindling  mirth, 
Piercing  the  stubborn  stones  until  I  saw  : 

The  toad  face  heaven  without  shame  or  awe, 
The  ant  confront  the  stars,  and  every  weed 
Grow  proud  as  though  it  bore  a  royal  seed ; 
While  all  the  things  that  die  and  decompose 
Sent  forth  their  bloom  as  richly  as  the  rose  .  .  . 
Oh,  what  a  liberal  power  that  made  them  thrive 
And  keep  the  very  dirt  that  died,  alive.         ;  • 

And  now  I  saw  the  slender  willow-tree 
No  longer  calm  and  drooping  listlessly. 
Letting  its  languid  branches  sway  and  fall 
As  though  it  danced  in  some  sad  ritual; 
But  rather  like  a  young,  athletic  girl, 
Fearless  and  gay,  her  hair  all  out  of  curl. 
And  flying  in  the  wind — her  head  thrown  back. 
Her  arms  flung  up,  her  garments  flowing  slack. 


Stupidity   Street  3061 

And  all  her  rushing  spirits  running  over.  .  .  . 
What  made  a  sober  tree  seem  such  a  rover — 
Or  made  the  staid  and  stalwart  apple-trees, 
That  stood  for  years  knee-deep  in  velvet  peace, 
Turn  all  their  fruit  to  little  worlds  of  flame, 
And  burn  the  trembling  orchard  there  below. 
What  lit  the  heart  of  every  golden-glow — ■ 
Oh,  why  was  nothing  weary,  dull  or  tame?  .  .  . 
Beauty  it  was,  and  keen,  compassionate  mirth 
That  drives  the  vast  and  energetic  earth. 

And,  with  abrupt  and  visionary  eyes, 

I  saw  the  huddled  tenements  arise. 

Here  where  the  merry  clover  danced  and  shone 

Sprang  agonies  of  iron  and  of  stone; 

There,  where  green  Silence  laughed  or  stood  enthralled. 

Cheap  music  blared  and  evil  alleys  sprawled. 

The  roaring  avenues,  the  shrieking  mills; 

Brothels  and  prisons  on  those  kindly  hills — ■    ■ 

The  menace  of  these  things  swept  over  me; 

A  threatening,  unconquerable  sea.  .  .  . 

A  stirring  landscape  and  a  generous  earth! 
Freshening  courage  and  benevolent  mirth— 
And  then  the  city,  like  a  hideous  sore.  .  .  . 
Good  God,  and  what  is  all  this  beauty  for? 

Louis  Unlcrmcyer  [1SS5-    ,/ 

STUPIDITY  STREET 

I  SAW  with  open  eyes 

Singing  birds  sweet 

Sold  in  the  shops 

For  the  people  to  eat,  ,  , 

Sold  in  the  shops  of 

Stupidity  Street. 

I  saw  in  vision 

The  worm  in  the  wheat,  //■ 

And  in  the  shops  nothing  ' 

For  people  to  eat ; 

Nothing  for  sale  in 
Stupidity  Street. 

Ralph  Hodgson  [18 


3062      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


.   „  '  "i'»f{  lifi  bnA 

A  TROOP  OF  THE  GUARt);     ,    ,,,p,, 

[harvard  class  poemJ 

There's  trampling  of  hoofs  in  the  busy  street,^     w"h  A 

There's  clanking  of  sabres  on  floor  and  stair, 
There's  sound  of  restless,  hurrying  feet,  ^' 

Of  voices  that  whisper,  of  lips  that  entreat,  '  ^^ 

Will  they  live,  will  they  die,  will  they  strive,  will  they 
dare? 
The  houses  are  garlanded,  flags  flutter  gay, 
For  a  Troop  of  the  Guard  rides  forth  to-day.  i 

■    f ! 

Oh,  the  troopers  will  ride  and  their  hearts  will  leap,      ''' 

When  it's  shoulder  to  shoulder  and  friend  to  friend-— ' 

But  it's  some  to  the  pinnacle,  some  to  the  deep,  v 

And  some  in  the  glow  of  their  strength  to  sleep, 

And  for  all  it's  a  fight  to  the  tale's  far  end.  :ti 

-And  it's  each  to  his  goal,  nor  turn  nor  sway,  3'J£nam  ajrfT 
When  the  Troop  of  the  Guard  rides  forth  to-day'jOirfj  A 
The  dawn  is  upon  us,  the  pale  light  speeds  ■  ■■'n^  /, 

To  the  zenith  with  glamor  and  golden  dart. 
On,  up!    Boot  and  saddle!    Give  spurs  to  your  steeds! 
There's  a  city  beleaguered  that  cries  for  men's  deeds, 
With  the  pain  of  the  world  in  its  cavernous  heart. 
Ours  be  the  triumph!    Humanity  calls! 

Life's  not  a  dream  in  the  clover! 
On  to  the  walls,  on  to  the  walls, 
On  to  the  walls,  and  over! 

The  wine  is  spent,  the  tale  is  spun, 
The  revelry  of  youth  is  done. 
The  horses  prance,  the  bridles  clink, 
While  maidens  fair  in  bright  array 
With  us  the  last  sweet  goblet  drink. 
Then  bid  us  "Mount  and  ride  away!" 
Into  the  dawn,  we  ride,  we  ride. 
Fellow  and  fellow,  side  by  side; 
Galloping  over  the  field  and  hill, 


^■^..  ,p ,♦  A  Troop  of  the  Guard  3'^^ 3 

Over  the  marshland,  stalwart  still; 
Into  the  forest's  shadowy  hush, 
Where  spectres  walk  in  sunless  day, 
And  in  dark  pools  and  branch  and  bush 
The  treacherous  will-o'-the-wisp  lights  play. 
Out  of  the  wood  'neath  the  risen  sun, 
Weary  we  gallop,  one  and  one. 
To  a  richer  hope  and  a  stronger  foe 
And  a  hotter  fight  in  the  fields  below- 
Each  man  his  own  slave,  each  his  lord, 
For  the  golden  spurs  and  the  victor's  sword! 

Friends  of  the  gfeat,  the  high,  the  perilous  years, 

Upon  the  brink  of  mighty  things  we  stand^ 

Of  golden  harvests  and  of  silver  tears. 

And  griefs  and  pleasures  that  like  grains  of  sand 

Gleam  in  the  hour-glass,  yield  their  place,  and  die. 

Like  a  dark  sea  our  lives  before  us  lie, 

And  we,  Hke  divers  o'er  a  pearl-strewn  deep, 

Stand  yet  an  instant  in  the  warm,  young  sun. 

Plunge,  and  are  gone. 

And  over  pearl  and  diver  the  restless  breakers  sweep;  > 

On  to  the  quest!    To-day 

In  joyful  revelry  we  still  may  play. 

With  the  last  golden  phantoms  of  dead  years; 

Hearing  above  the  stir 

The  old  protecting  music  in  our  ears 

Of  fluttering  pinions  and  the  voice  of  her, 

The  Mighty  Mother,  watching  o'er  her  sons. 

To-day  we  still  may  crouch  beneath  her  wings, 

Dreaming  of  unimagined  things; 

To-morrow  we  are  part 

Of  the  world's  depthless,  palpitatmg  heart. 

One  with  the  living,  striving  millions 

Whose  lives  beat  out  the  ceaseless,  rhythmic  song 

Of  joy  and  pain  and  peace  and  love  and  wrong. 

We  may  not  dwell  on  soUtary  heights. 

There  is  a  force  that  draws  men  breast  to  breast 

In  the  hot  swirl  of  never-ending  fights, 

When  man — enriched,  despoiled,  oppressed. 


3064      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

By  the  great  titans  of  the  earth  who  hold 

The  nations  in  their  hands  as  boys  a  swallow's  nest — ■ 

Leaps  from  the  sodden  mass  through  loves  and  feuds 

And  tumult  of  hot  strife  and  tempest  blast, 

Until  he  stands,  free  of  the  depths  at  last, 

A  titan  in  his  turn,  to  mould 

The  pliable  clay  of  the  world's  multitudes. 

An  anxious  generation  sends  us  forth 

On  the  far  conquest  of  the  thrones  of  might. 

From  West  and  East,  from  South  and  North, 

Earth's  children,  weary-eyed  with  too  much  light. 

Cry  from  their  dream-forsaken  vales  of  pain, 

" Give  us  our  gods,  give  us  our  gods  again! " 

A  lofty  and  relentless  century, 

Gazing  with  Argus  eyes. 

Has  pierced  the  very  inmost  halls  of  faith. 

And  left  no  shelter  whither  man  may  flee 

From  the  cold  storms  of  night  and  lovelessness  and  death. 

Old  gods  have  fallen  and  the  new  must  rise! 

Out  of  the  dust  of  doubt  and  broken  creeds,  ■ 

The  sons  of  those  who  cast  men's  idols  low 

Must  build  up  for  a  hungry  people's  needs 

New  gods,  new  hopes,  new  strength  to  toil  and  grow; 

Knowing  that  naught  that  ever  lived  can  die, 

No  act,  no  dream  but  spreads  its  sails,  sublime,         \^ 

Sweeping  across  the  visible  seas  of  Time,  '  ^ 

Into  the  treasure-haven  of  eternity. 

The  portals  are  open,  the  white  road  leads 

Through  thicket  and  garden,  o'er  stone  and  sod. 
On,  up!    Boot  and  saddle!    Give  spurs  to  your  steeds! 
There's  a  city  beleaguered  that  cries  for  men's  deeds, 
For  the  faith  that  is  strength  and  the  love  that  is  God! 
On  through  the  dawning!    Humanity  calls! 

Life's  not  a  dream  in  the  clover! 
On  to  the  walls,  on  to  the  walls, 

On  to  the  walls,  and  over!       '  '"'--'  ^'  '^"  ^'^-^""^ 
Hermann  Eaged'orri  [1882- 


The   God-maker,    Man  3065 

THE  GOD-MAKER,  MAN 

Nevermore 

Shall  the  shepherds  of  Arcady  follow 
Pan's  moods  as  he  lolls  by  the  shore 

Of  the  mere,  or  lies  hid  in  the  hollow ; 
Nevermore 

Shall  they  start  at  the  sound  of  his  rccd-fashioned  flute; 

Fallen  mute 

Are  the  strings  of  Apollo, 
His  lyre  and  his  lute; 

And  the  lips  of  the  Mcmnons  are  mute 
Evermore; 

And  the  gods  of  the  North, — are  they  dead  or  forgetful, 
Our  Odin  and  Baldur  and  Thor? 

Are  they  drunk,  or  grown  weary  of  worship  and  fretful. 
Our  Odin  and  Baldur  and  Thor? 

And  into  what  night  have  the  Orient  deities  strayed? 

Swart  gods  of  the  Nile,  in  dusk  splendors  arrayed, 

Brooding  Isis  and  somber  Osiris,  ^ 

You  were  gone  ere  the  fragile  papyrus,  '; 

(That  bragged  you  eternal!)  decayed. 

The  avatars 

But  illumine  their  limited  evens 
And  vanish  like  plunging  stars; 

They  are  fixed  in  the  whirling  heavens 
No  firmer  than  falling  stars; 
Brief  lords  of  the  changing  soul,  they  pass 
Like  a  breath  from  the  face  of  a  glass, 

Or  a  blossom  of  summer  blown  shallop-like  over 

The  clover 
And  tossed  tides  of  grass.  /, 

Sink  to  silence  the  psalms  and  the  pa;ans. 

The  shibboleths  shift,  and  the  faiths. 
And  the  temples  that  challenged  the  ajons 

Are  tenanted  only  by  wraiths; 
Swoon  to  silence  the  cymbals  and  psalters, 
'  The  worships  grow  senseless  and  strange 


3066      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  the  mockers  ask,  "Where  be  thy  altars?" 
Crying,  "Nothing  is  changeless — but  Change!" _ 

Yes,  nothing  seems  changeless,  but  Change. 

And  yet,  through  the  creed-wrecking  years, 

One  story  for  ever  appears; 

The  tale  of  a  City  Supernal — 

The  whisper  of  Something  eternal — 

A  passion,  a  hope,  and  a  vision 

That  peoples  the  silence  with  Powers; 
A  fable  of  meadows  Elysian 

Where  Time  enters  not  with  his  Hours; — 
Manifold  are  the  tale's  variations, 

Race  and  cUme  ever  tinting  the  dreams, 
Yet  its  essence,  through  endless  mutations, 

Immutable  gleams. 

Deathless,  though  godheads  be  dying. 

Surviving  the  creeds  that  expire. 
Illogical,  reason-defying. 

Lives  that  passionate,  primal  desire; 
Insistent,  persistent,  forever 
Man  cries  to  the  silences,  "Never 

Shall  Death  reign  the  lord  of  the  soul, 
Shall  the  dust  be  the  ultimate  goal— 
I  will  storm  the  black  bastions  of  Night! 

I  will  tread  where  my  vision  has  trod, 
I  will  set  in  the  darkness  a  light, 

In  the  vastness,  a  god!" 

As  the  forehead  of  Man  grows  broader,  so  do  his  creeds; 
And  his  gods  they  are  shaped  in  his  image,  and  mirror  his 

needs; 
And  he  clothes  them  with  thunders  and  beauty,  he  clothes 

them  with  music  and  fire; 
Seeing  not,  as  he  bows  by  their  altars,  that  he  worships  his 

own  desire;  .^-^  f,^/. 

And  mixed  with  his  trust  there  is  terror,  and  mixed  with 

his  madness  is  ruth, 
And  every  man  grovels  in  error,  yet  every  man  glimpses  a 

truth. 


The   Field   of  Glory  3067 

For  all  of  the  creeds  are  false,  and  all  of  the  creeds  are  true; 
And  low  at  the  shrines  where  my  brothers  bow,  there  will  I 

bow,  too; 
For  no  form  of  a  god,  and  no  fashion 
Man  has  made  in  his  desperate  passion 
But  is  worthy  some  worship  of  mine; — 
Not  too  hot  with  a  gross  belief. 

Nor  yet  too  cold  with  pride, 
I  will  bow  me  down  where  my  brothers  bow, 

Humble^but  open-eyed! 

Don  Marquis  [187S- 


THE  FIELD  OF  GLORY 

War  shook  the  land  where  Levi  dwelt. 
And  fired  the  dismal  wrath  he  felt, 
That  such  a  doom  was  ever  wrought 
As  his,  to  toil  while  others  fought; 
To  toil,  to  dream — and  still  to  dream, 
With  one  day  barren  as  another; 
To  consummate,  as  it  would  seem. 
The  dry  despair  of  his  old  mother. 

Far  oflf  one  afternoon  began 

The  sound  of  man  destroying  man; 

And  Levi,  sick  with  nameless  rage, 

Condemned  again  his  heritage. 

And  sighed  for  scars  that  might  have  come, 

And  would,  if  once  he  could  have  sundered 

Those  harsh,  inhering  claims  of  home 

That  held  him  while  he  cursed  and  wondered. 

Another  day,  and  then  there  came, 
Rough,  bloody,  ribald,  hungr>',  lame. 
But  yet  themselves,  to  Levi's  door. 
Two  remnants  of  the  day  before. 
They  laughed  at  him  and  what  he  sought; 
They  jeered  him,  and  his  painful  acre; 
But  Levi  knew  that  they  had  fought. 
And  left  their  manners  to  their  Maker. 


3o68      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

That  night,  for  the  grim  widow's  ears, 
With  hopes  that  hid  themselves  in  fears, 
He  told  of  arms,  and  featly  deeds, 
Whereat  one  leaps  the  while  he  reads. 
And  said  he'd  be  no  more  a  clown. 
While  others  drew  the  breath  of  battle. — 
The  mother  looked  him  up  and  down. 
And  laughed — a  scant  laugh  with  a  rattle. 

She  told  him  what  she  found  to  tell. 

And  Levi  listened,  and  heard  well 

Some  admonitions  of  a  voice 

That  left  him  no  cause  to  rejoice. — 

He  sought  a  friend,  and  found  the  stars, 

And  prayed  aloud  that  they  should  aid  him; 

But  they  said  not  a  word  of  wars. 

Or  of  a  reason  why  God  made  him. 

And  who's  of  this  or  that  estate 
We  do  not  wholly  calculate. 
When  baflfling  shades  that  shift  and  cling 
Are  not  without  their  glimmering; 
When  even  Levi,  tired  of  faith, 
Beloved  of  none,  forgot  by  many, 
Dismissed  as  an  inferior  wraith. 
Reborn  may  be  as  great  as  any. 

Edwin  Arlington  Rohinson  ]i86g- 

THE  CONQUERORS 

I  SAW  the  Conquerors  riding  by 

With  trampling  feet  of  horse  and  men: 

Empire  on  empire  like  the  tide 

Flooded  the  world  and  ebbed  again; 

A  thousand  banners  caught  the  sun, 
And  cities  smoked  along  the  plain, 

And  laden  down  with  silk  and  gold 

And  heaped-up  pillage  groaned  the  wain. 

I  saw  the  Conquerors  riding  by, 

Splashing  through  loathsome  floods  of  war — 


The  Arsenal   at  Springfield      3069 

The  Crescent  leaning  o'er  its  hosts, 
And  the  barbaric  scimitar, — 

And  continents  of  moving  spears, 

And  storms  of  arrows  in  the  sky, 
And  all  the  instruments  sought  out 

By  cunning  men  that  men  may  die! 

I  saw  the  Conquerors  riding  by 

With  cruel  lips  and  faces  wan : 
Musing  on  kingdoms  sacked  and  burned 

There  rode  the  Mongol  Ghengis  Khan; 

And  Alexander,  like  a  god, 

Who  sought  to  weld  the  world  in  one; 
And  Ca;sar  with  his  laurel  wreath ; 

And  Uke  a  thing  from  Hell  the  Hun; 

And,  leading  like  a  star  the  van, 

Heedless  of  upstretched  arm  and  groan, 

Inscrutable  Napoleon  went 
Dreaming  of  empire,  and  alone.  .  .  . 

Then  all  they  perished  from  the  earth 

As  fleeting  shadows  from  a  glass, 
And,  conquering  down  the  centuries, 

Came  Christ,  the  Swordless,  on  an  ass! 

Harry  Kemp  [1883- 


THE  ARSENAL  AT  SPRINGFIELD 

This  is  the  Arsenal.    From  floor  to  ceiling. 
Like  a  huge  organ,  rise  the  burnished  arms; 

But  from  their  silent  pipes  no  anthem  pealing 
Startles  the  villages  with  strange  alarms. 

Ah!  what  a  sound  will  rise,  how  wild  and  dreary. 
When  the  death-angel  touches  those  swift  keys! 

What  loud  lament  and  dismal  Miserere 
Will  mingle  with  their  awful  syniphonies! 

I  hear  even  now  the  infinite  fierce  chorus, 
The  cries  of  agony,  the  endless  groan. 


joyo     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Which,  through  the  ages  that  have  gone  before  us, 
In  long  reverberations  reach  our  own. 

On  helm  and  harness  rings  the  Saxon  hammer. 

Through  Cimbric  forest  roars  the  Norseman's  song, 

And  loud,  amid  the  universal  clamor, 

O'er  distant  deserts  sounds  the  Tartar  gong. 

I  hear  the  Florentine,  who  from  his  palace 
Wheels  out  his  battle-bell  with  dreadful  din, 

And  Aztec  priests  upon  their  teocallis 

Beat  the  wild  war-drums  made  of  serpent's  skin; 

The  tumult  of  each  sacked  and  burning  village; 

The  shout  that  every  prayer  for  mercy  drowns; 
The  soldiers'  revels  in  the  midst  of  pillage; 

The  wail  of  famine  in  beleaguered  towns; 

The  bursting  shell,  the  gateway  wrenched  asunder, 
The  rattling  musketry,  the  clashing  blade; 

And  ever  and  anon,  in  tones  of  thunder, 
The  diapason  of  the  cannonade. 

Is  it,  O  man,  with  such  discordant  noises. 
With  such  accursed  instruments  as  these, 

Thou  drownest  Nature's  sweet  and  kindly  voices. 
And  jarrest  the  celestial  harmonies? 

Were  half  the  power  that  fills  the  world  with  terror. 
Were  half  the  wealth  bestowed  on  camps  and  courts. 

Given  to  redeem  the  human  mind  from  error. 
There  were  no  need  of  arsenals  or  forts: 

The  warrior's  name  would  be  a  name  abhorred! 

And  every  nation,  that  should  lift  again 
Its  hand  against  a  brother,  on  its  forehead     -'■  ■'^^'' 

Would  wear  forevermore  the  curse  of  CairiT^^ ''^ 

Down  the  dark  future,  through  long  generations. 
The  echoing  sounds  grow  fainter  and  then  cease; 

And  like  a  bell,  with  solemn,  sweet  vibrations, 

I  hear  once  more  the  voice  of  Christ  say,  "Peace!" 


The   Little  Sister  of  the   Prophet     3071 

Peace!  and  no  longer  from  its  brazen  portals 
The  blast  of  War's  great  organ  shakes  the  skies! 

But  beautiful  as  songs  of  the  immortals, 
The  holy  melodies  of  love  arise. 

Henry  Wadsivorlh  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 


THE  LITTLE  SISTER  OF  THE  PROPHET 

"  If  there  arise  among  you  a  prophet  or  dreamer  .  .  .  ." 

I  HAVE  left  a  basket  of  dates 

In  the  cool  dark  room  that  is  under  the  vine, 

Some  curds  set  out  in  two  little  crimson  plates 

And  a  flask  of  amber  wine, 

And  cakes  most  cunningly  beaten 

Of  savory  herbs,  and  spice,  and  the  delicate  wheaten 

Flour  that  is  best, 

And  all  to  lighten  his  spirit  and  sweeten  his  rest. 

This  morning  he  cried,  "Awake, 

And  see  what  the  wonderful  grace  of  the  Lord  hath  re- 
vealed!" 

And  we  ran  for  his  sake, 

But  'twas  only  the  dawn  outspread  o'er  our  father's  field. 

And  the  house  of  the  potter  white  in  the  valley  below. 

But  his  hands  were  upraised  to  the  east  and  he  cried  to  us, 
"So 

Ye  may  ponder  and  read 

The  strength  and  the  beauty  of  God  out-rolled  in  a  fiery 
screed!" 

Then  the  little  brown  mother  smiled. 

As  one  does  on  the  words  of  a  well-loved  child, 

And,  "Son,"  she  replied,  "have  the  oxen  been  watered  and 

fed? 
For  work  is  to  do,  though  the  skies  be  never  so  red, 
And  already  the  first  sweet  hours  of  the  day  are  spent." 
And  he  sighed,  and  went. 

Will  he  come  from  the  byre 

With  his  head  all  misty  with  dreams,  and  his  eyes  on  fire. 

Shaking  us  all  with  the  weight  of  the  words  of  his  passion? 


3072     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

I  will  give  him  raisins  instead  of  dates, 
And  wreathe  young  leaves  on  the  little  red  plates. 
I  will  put  on  my  new  head-tyre, 
And  braid  my  hair  in  a  comelier  fashion. 
Will  he  note?    Will  he  mind? 

Will  he  touch  my  cheek  as  he  used  to,  and  laugh  and  be 
kind?  Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall  [1883- 

THE  SONS  OF  MARTHA 

The  Sons  of  Mary  seldom  bother. 

For  they  have  inherited  that  good  part, 
But  the  Sons  of  Martha  favor  their  mother 

Of  the  careful  soul  and  the  troubled  heart; 
And  because  she  lost  her  temper  once, 

And  because  she  was  rude  to  the  Lord,  her  Guest, 
Her  sons  must  wait  upon  Mary's  sons — 

World  without  end,  reprieve,  or  rest. 

It  is  their  care  in  all  the  ages 

To  take  the  buffet  and  cushion  the  shock; 
It  is  their  care  that  the  gear  engages; 

It  is  their  care  that  the  switches  lock; 
It  is  their  care  that  the  wheels  run  truly; 

It  is  their  care  to  embark  and  entrain, 
Tally,  transport,  and  deliver  duly 

The  Sons  of  Mary  by  land  and  main. 

They  say  to  the  mountains,  "Be  ye  removed!" 

They  say  to  the  lesser  floods,  "Run  dry!" 
Under  their  rods  are  the  rocks  reproved — 

They  are  not  afraid  of  that  which  is  high. 
Then  do  the  hilltops  shake  to  the  summit; 

Then  is  the  bed  of  the  deep  laid  bare. 
That  the  Sons  of  Mary  may  overcome  it. 

Pleasantly  sleeping  and  unaware. 

They  finger  Death  at  their  glove's  end 

When  they  piece  and  repiece  the  living  wires. 

He  rears  against  the  gates  they  tend; 
They  feed  him  hungry  behind  their  fires. 


The   Song  of  Martha  3073 

Early  at  dawn,  crc  men  see  clear, 

They  stumble  into  his  terrible  stall. 
And  hale  him  forth  like  a  haltered  steer, 

And  goad  and  turn  him  till  evenfall. 

To  these  from  birth  is  Belief  forbidden; 

From  these  till  death  is  relief  afar; — 
They  are  concerned  with  matters  hidden — 

Under  the  earth  line  their  altars  are. 
The  secret  fountains  to  follow  up, 

Waters  withdrawn  to  restore  to  the  mouth — 
Yea,  and  gather  the  floods  as  in  a  cup. 

And  pour  them  again  at  a  city's  drouth. 

They  do  not  preach  that  their  God  will  rouse  them 

A  little  before  the  nuts  work  loose; 
They  do  not  teach  that  His  Pity  allows  them 

To  leave  their  work  whenever  they  choose. 
As  in  the  thronged  and  the  lightened  ways, 

So  in  the  dark  and  the  desert  they  stand, 
Wary  and  watchful  all  their  days. 

That  their  brethren's  days  may  be  long  in  the  land. 

Lift  ye  the  stone,  or  cleave  the  wood, 

To  make  a  path  more  fair  or  flat — 
Lo!  it  is  black  already  with  blood 

Some  Sons  of  Martha  spiHed  for  that.""  '''""'^'  '  "'" 
Not  as  a  ladder  from  Earth  to  Heaven,  , ,  r 

Not  as  an  altar  to  any  creed,  , 

But  simple  service  simply  given 

To  his  own  kind,  in  their  common  need. 

And  the  Sons  of  Mary  smile  and  are  blessed — 

They  know  the  angels  are  on  their  side. 
They  know  in  them  is  the  Grace  confessed. 

And  for  them  are  the  Mercies  multiplied. 
They  sit  at  the  Feet  and  they  hear  the  Word —       ^ 

They  know  how  truly  the  Promise  runs.  -  ' 

They  have  cast  their  burden  upon  the  Lord,  ,) 

And — the  Lord  He  lays  it  on  ]Martha's  Sons. 

Riulyard  Kipling  [1865- 


-xiT 


3074     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


THE  TUFT  OF  FLOWERS 

I  WENT  to  turn  the  grass  once  after  one 
Who  mowed  it  in  the  dew  before  the  sun. 

The  dew  was  gone  that  made  his  blade  so  keen 
Before  I  came  to  view  the  levelled  scene. 

I  looked  for  him  behind  an  isle  of  trees; 
I  listened  for  his  whetstone  on  the  breeze. 

But  he  had  gone  his  way,  the  grass  all  mown, 
And  I  must  be,  as  he  had  been, — ^alone, 

"As  all  must  be,"  I  said  within  my  heart, 
"Whether  they  work  together  or  apart."  ^"  ' 

But  as  I  said  it,  swift  there  passed  me  by 
On  noiseless  wing  a  'wildered  butterfly. 

Seeking  with  memories  grown  dim  o'er  night 
Some  resting  flower  of  yesterday's  delight. 

And  once  I  marked  his  flight  go  round  and  round. 
As  where  some  flower  lay  withering  on  the  ground.' 

And  then  he  flew  as  far  as  eye  could  see, 
And  then  on  tremulous  wing  came  back  to  me. 

I  thought  of  questions  that  have  no  reply, 

And  would  have  turned  to  toss  the  grass  to  dry; 

jijil 

But  he  turned  first,  and  led  my  eye  to  look 
At  a  tall  tuft  of  flowers  beside  a  brook, 

A  leaping  tongue  of  bloom  the  scythe  had  spared 
Beside  a  reedy  brook  the  scythe  had  bared. 

I  left  my  place  to  know  them  by  their  name, 
Finding  them  butterfly  weed  when  I  came. 

The  mower  in  the  dew  had  loved  them  thus, 
By  leaving  them  to  flourish,  not  for  us, 


Mending  Wall  3^75 

Nor  yet  to  draw  one  thought  of  ours  to  him, 
But  from  sheer  morning  gladness  at  the  brim. 

The  butterfly  and  I  had  Ht  upon, 

Nevertheless,  a  message  from  the  dawn,  > 

That  made  me  hear  the  wakening  birds  around,  - 
And  hear  his  long  scythe  whispering  to  the  ground, 

And  feel  a  spirit  kindred  to  my  own; 

So  that  henceforth  I  worked  no  more  alone; 

But  glad  with  him,  I  worked  as  with  his  aid,     ■  ;  l 
And  weary,  sought  at  noon  with  him  the  shade;'  ' 

And  dreaming,  as  it  were,  held  brotherly  speech 
With  one  whose  thought  I  had  not  hoped  to  reach. 

"Men  work  together,"  I  told  him  from  the  heaft; ' 
"Whether  they  work  together  or  apart."  '' 

Robert  Frost  [1875- 


;  MENDING  WALL 

Something  there  is  that  doesn't  love  a  wall. 
That  sends  the  frozen-ground-swell  under  it, 
And  spills  the  upper  boulders  in  the  sun;  ' 

And  makes  gaps  even  two  can  pass  abreast. 
The  work  of  hunters  is  another  thing: 
I  have  come  after  them  and  made  repair 
Where  they  have  left  not  one  stone  on  stone. 
But  they  would  have  the  rabbit  out  of  liiding. 
To  please  the  yelping  dogs.    The  gaps  I  mean. 
No  one  has  seen  them  made  or  heard  them  made, 
But  at  spring  mending-time  we  find  them  there. 
I  let  my  neighbor  know  beyond  the  hill; 
And  on  a  day  we  meet  to  walk  the  hne 
And  set  the  wall  between  us  once  again. 
We  keep  the  wall  between  us  as  we  go.  ," 

To  each  the  boulders  that  have  fallen  to  each. 
And  some  are  loaves  and  some  so  nearly  balls 
We  have  to  use  a  spell  to  make  them  balance: 


3076      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"Stay  where  you  are  until  our  backs  are  turned!" 
We  wear  our  fingers  rough  with  handling  them. 
Oh,  just  another  kind  of  out-door  game, 
One  on  a  side.    It  comes  to  little  more: 
There  where  it  is  we  do  not  need  the  wall: 
He  is  all  pine  and  I  am  apple  orchard. 
My  apple  trees  will  never  get  across 
And  eat  the  cones  under  his  pines,  I  tell  him. 
He  only  says,  "Good  fences  make  good  neighbors." 
Spring  is  the  mischief  in  me,  and  I  wonder 
If  I  could  put  a  notion  in  his  head :  • 

"Why  do  they  make  good  neighbors?    Isn't  it 
Where  there  are  cows?    But  here  there  are  no  cows. 
Before  I  built  a  wall  I'd  ask  to  know 
What  I  was  walling  in  or  walling  out. 
And  to  whom  I  was  like  to  give  offence. 
Something  there  is  that  doesn't  love  a  wall, 
That  wants  it  down."    I  could  say  "Elves"  to  him. 
But  it's  not  elves  exactly,  and  I'd  rather 
He  said  it  for  himself.    I  see  him  there 
Bringing  a  stone  grasped  firmly  by  the  top 
In  each  hand,  like  an  old-stone  savage  armed.  <!___ — - 
He  moves  in  darkness  as  it  seems  to  me, 
Not  of  woods  only  and  the  shade  of  trees. 
He  will  not  go  behind  his  father's  saying. 
And  he  likes  having  thought  of  it  so  well 
He  says  again,  "Good  fences  make  good  neighbors." 

Robert  Frost  [1S75- 

FORBEARANCE 

Hast  thou  named  all  the  birds  without  a  gun? 

Loved  the  wood-rose,  and  left  it  on  its  stalk? 

At  rich  men's  tables  eaten  bread  and  pulse? 

Unarmed,  faced  danger  with  a  heart  of  trust? 

And  loved  so  well  a  high  behavior. 

In  man  or  maid,  that  thou  from  speech  refrained. 

Nobility  more  nobly  to  repay? 

O,  be  my  friend,  and  teach  me  to  be  thine! 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  [1803-1882] 


THE  MUSIC-MAKERS 

ISRAFEL 

And  the  angel   Israfcl,  whose  hcait-strings   are   a    lute,  and  who  has  the 
sweetest  voice  of  all  God's  creatures. — Koran 

In  Heaven  a  spirit  doth  dwell 

Whose  heart-strings  are  a  lute; 
None  sing  so  wildly  well 
As  the  angel  Israfel, 
And  the  giddy  stars  (so  legends  tell), 
Ceasing  their  hymns,  attend  the  spell 

Of  his  voice,  all  mute. 

Tottering  above 

In  her  highest  noon, 

The  enamoured  moon 
Blushes  with  love. 

While,  to  listen,  the  red  levin 

(With  the  rapid  Pleiads,  even, 

Which  were  seven) 

Pauses  in  Heaven. 

And  they  say  (the  starry  choir 

And  the  other  listening  things) 
That  Israfeli's  fire 
Is  owing  to  that  lyre 

By  which  he  sits  and  sings, 
The  trembling  living  wire 

Of  those  unusual  strings. 

But  the  skies  that  angel  trod. 
Where  deep  thoughts  are  a  duty, 

Where  Love's  a  grown-up  God, 

Where  the  Houri  glances  are 
Imbued  with  all  the  beauty 

Which  we  worship  in  a  star. 
3077 


3078      Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Therefore  thou  art  not  wrong, 

Israfeh,  who  despisest 
An  unimpassioned  song; 
To  thee,  the  laurels  belong, 

Best  bard,  because  the  wisest: 
Merrily  live,  and  long! 

The  ecstasies  above 

With  thy  burning  measures  suit: 
Thy  grief,  thy  joy,  th}'  hate,  thy  love, 

With  the  fervor  of  thy  lute : 

Well  may  the  stars  be  mute! 

Yes,  Heaven  is  thine;  but  this 
Is  a  world  of  sweets  and  sours; 
Our  flowers  are  merely — flowers. 

And  the  shadow  of  thy  perfect  bhss 
Is  the  sunshine  of  ours. 

If  I  could  dwell 
Where  Israfel 

Hath  dwelt,  and  he  where  I, 
He  might  not  sing  so  wildly  weU 

A  mortal  melody, 
While  a  bolder  note  than  this  might  swell 

From  my  lyre  within  the  sky. 

Edgar  Allan  Poe  [1809-1849] 


PROEM 

(written  to  introduce  the  first  general  collection 

OF   HIS   poems) 

I  LOVE  the  old  melodious  lays 
Which  softly  melt  the  ages  through, 

The  songs  of  Spenser's  golden  days, 

Arcadian  Sidney's  silvery  phrase, 
Sprinkling  our  noon  of  time  with  freshest  morning  dew. 


Embryo  3^79 

Yet,  vainl}^  in  my  quiet  hours 
To  breathe  their  marvellous  notes  I  try; 

I  feel  them,  as  the  leaves  and  flowers 

In  silence  feel  the  dewy  showers. 
And  drink  with  glad,  still  lips  the  blessing  of  the  sky. 

The  rigor  of  a  frozen  clime, 
The  harshness  of  an  untaught  ear, 

The  jarring  words  of  one  whose  rhyme 

Beat  often  Labor's  hurried  time. 
Or  Duty's  rugged  march  through  storm  and  strife,  are  here. 

Of  mystic  beauty,  dreamy  grace, 
No  rounded  art  the  lack  supplies; 

Unskilled  the  subtle  lines  to  trace. 

Or  softer  shades  of  Nature's  face, 
I  view  her  common  forms  with  unanointed  eyes. 

Nor  mine  the  seer-like  power  to  show 
The  secrets  of  the  heart  and  mind ; 

To  drop  the  plummet-line  below 

Our  common  world  of  joy  and  woe, 
A  more  intense  despair  or  brighter  hope  to  find. 

Yet  here  at  least  an  earnest  sense 
Of  human  right  and  weal  is  shown; 

A  hate  of  tyranny  intense, 

And  hearty  in  its  vehemence. 
As  if  my  brother's  pain  and  sorrow  were  my  own. 

0  Freedom!  if  to  me  belong 
Nor  mighty  INIilton's  gift  divine. 

Nor  Marvell's  wit  and  graceful  song, 

Still  with  a  love  as  deep  and  strong 
As  theirs,  I  lay,  like  them,  m.y  best  gifts  on  thy  shrine! 

John  Greenleaf  Whittier  [1807-1892/ 

EMBRYO 

I  FEEL  a  poem  in  my  heart  to-night, 

A  still  thing  growing, — 
As  if  the  darkness  to  the  outer  Hght 

A  song  were  owing: 


3o8o      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

A  something  strangely  vague,  and  sweet,  and  sad, 

Fair,  fragile,  slender; 
Not  tearful,  yet  not  daring  to  be  glad. 

And  oh,  so  tender! 

It  may  not  reach  the  outer  world  at  all, 

Despite  its  growing; 
Upon  a  poem-bud  such  cold  winds  fall 

To  blight  its  blowing. 
But,  oh,  whatever  may  the  thing  betide. 

Free  life  or  fetter. 
My  heart,  just  to  have  held  it' till  it  died. 

Will  be  the  better! 

Mary  Aslilcy  Townscnd  [1832-1901] 


THE  SINGER'S   PRELUDE 

From  "  The  Earthly  Paradise  " 

Of  Heaven  or  Hell  I  have  no  power  to  sing, 
I  cannot  ease  the  burden  of  your  fears, 
Or  make  quick-coming  death  a  little  thing. 
Or  bring  again  the  pleasure  of  past  years. 
Nor  for  my  words  shall  ye  forget  your  tears, 
Or  hope  again  for  aught  that  I  can  say, 
The  idle  singer  of  an  empty  day. 

But  rather,  when  aweary  of  your  mirth, 
From  full  hearts  still  unsatisfied  ye  sigh. 
And,  feeling  kindly  unto  all  the  earth. 
Grudge  every  minute  as  it  passes  by. 
Made  the  more  mindful  that  the  sweet  days  die, — 
Remember  me  a  little  then,  I  pray. 
The  idle  singer  of  an  empty  day. 

The  heavy  trouble,  the  bewildering  care 
That  weighs  us  down  who  live  and  earn  our  bread, 
These  idle  verses  have  no  power  to  bear; 
So  let  me  sing  of  names  remembered. 
Because  they,  living  not,  can  ne'er  be  dead, 
Or  long  time  take  their  memory  quite  away 
From  us  poor  singers  of  an  empty  day. 


A   Prelude  308 

Dreamer  of  dreams,  born  out  of  my  due  time, 
Why  should  I  strive  to  set  the  crooked  straight? 
Let  it  sufTice  mc  that  m}'  murmuring  rhyme 
Beats  with  Hght  wing  against  the  ivory  gate, 
Telling  a  tale  not  too  importunate 
To  those  who  in  the  sleepy  region  stay, 
Lulled  by  the  singer  of  an  empty  day. 

Folk  say,  a  wizard  to  a  northern  king 
At  Christmas-tide  such  wondrous  things  did  show, 
That  through  one  window  men  beheld  the  spring, 
And  through  another  saw  the  summer  glow, 
And  through  a  third  the  fruited  vines  a-row, 
While  still,  unheard,  but  in  its  wonted  way. 
Piped  the  drear  wind  of  that  December  day. 

So  with  this  Earthly  Paradise  it  is, 
If  ye  will  read  aright,  and  pardon  me, 
Who  strive  to  build  a  shadowy  isle  of  bliss 
Midmost  the  beating  of  the  steely  sea. 
Where  tossed  about  all  hearts  of  men  must  be; 
Whose  ravening  monsters  mighty  men  shall  slay, 
Not  the  poor  singer  of  an  empty  day. 

William  Morris  [i 834-1 890] 

A  PRELUDE 

Spirit  that  moves  the  sap  in  spring. 
When  lusty  male  birds  fight  and  sing, 
Inform  my  words,  and  make  my  lines 
As  sweet  as  flowers,  as  strong  as  vines. 

Let  mine  be  the  freshening  power 
Of  rain  on  grass,  of  dew  on  flower; 
The  fertilizing  song  be  mine, 
Nut-flavored,  racy,  keen  as  wine. 

Let  some  procreant  truth  exhale 
From  me,  before  my  forces  fail; 
Or  ere  the  ecstatic  impulse  go, 
Let  all  my  buds  to  blossoms  blow. 


3082      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

If  quick,  sound  seed  be  wanting  where 
The  virgin  soil  feels  sun  and  air, 
And  longs  to  fill  a  higher  state, 
There  let  my  meanings  germinate. 

Let  not  my  strength  be  spilled  for  naught, 

But,  in  some  fresher  vessel  caught. 

Be  blended  into  sweeter  forms. 

And  fraught  with  purer  aims  and  charms. 

Let  bloom-dust  of  my  life  be  blown 
To  quicken  hearts  that  flower  alone; 
Around  my  knees  let  scions  rise 
With  heavenward-pointed  destinies. 

And  when  I  fall,  like  some  old  tree, 
And  subtile  change  makes  mould  of  me, 
There  let  earth  show  a  fertile  line 
Whence  perfect  wild-flowers  leap  and  shine! 

Maurice  Thompson  [1844-1901] 


ON  FIRST  LOOKING   INTO   CHAPMAN'S  HOMER 

Much  have  I  travelled  in  the  realms  of  gold. 

And  many  goodly  states  and  kingdoms  seen; 

Round  many  western  islands  have  I  been 
Which  bards  in  fealty  to  Apollo  hold. 
Oft  of  one  wide  expanse  had  I  been  told 

That  deep-browed  Homer  ruled  as  his  demesne: 

Yet  did  I  never  breathe  its  pure  serene 
Till  I  heard  Chapman  speak  out  loud  and  bold: 
Then  felt  I  like  some  watcher  of  the  skies 

When  a  new  planet  swims  into  his  ken; 
Or  like  stout  Cortez,  when  with  eagle  eyes 

He  stared  at  the  Pacific — and  all  his  men 
Looked  at  each  other  with  a  wild  surmise — 

Silent,  upon  a  peak  in  Darien. 

John  Keats  [1795-18213 


Enamored  Architect  of  Airy  Rhyme"  3083 


THE  ODYSSEY  ^ 

As  one  that  for  a  weary  space  has  lain  -' ' 

Lulled  by  the  song  of  Circe  and  her  wine        '  ' 
In  gardens  near  the  pale  of  Proserpine, 
Where  that  JLaean  isle  forgets  the  main, 
And  only  the  low  lutes  of  love  complain, 
And  only  shadows  of  wan  lovers  pine. 
As  such  an  one  were  glad  to  know  the  brine 
Salt  on  his  lips,  and  the  large  air  again, — 
So  gladly,  from  the  songs  of  modern  speech 
Men  turn,  and  see  the  stars,  and  feel  the  free 
Shrill  wind  beyond  the  close  of  heavy  flowers, 
And  through  the  music  of  the  languid  hours, 
They  hear  like  ocean  on  a  western  beach 
The  surge  and  thunder  of  the  Odyssey. 

Andrew  Lang  [1844-1912] 

HOMERIC  UNITY 

The  sacred  keep  of  Ilion  is  rent 

With  trench  and  shaft;  foiled  waters  wander  slow 

Through  plains  where  Simois  and  Scamander  went 

To  war  with  Gods  and  heroes  long  ago. 

Not  yet  to  tired  Cassandra,  lying  low 

In  rich  Mycenae,  do  the  Fates  relent: 

The  bones  of  Agamemnon  are  a  show. 

And  ruined  is  his  royal  monument. 

The  dust  and  awful  treasures  of  the  Dead, 

Hath  Learning  scattered  wide,  but  vainly  thee, 

Homer,  she  meteth  with  her  tool  of  lead. 

And  strives  to  rend  thy  songs;  too  blind  to  see 

The  crown  that  burns  on  thine  immortal  head 

Of  indivisible  supremacy! 

Andrew  Lang  [1S44-1912] 

'ENAMORED   ARCHITECT   OF   AIRY   RHYME" 

Enamored  architect  of  airy  rhyme, 
Build  as  thou  wilt,  heed  not  what  each  man  says: 
Good  souls,  but  innocent  of  dreamers'  ways. 
Will  come,  and  marvel  why  thou  wastest  time; 


3084     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Others,  beholding  how  thy  turrets  climb 

'Twixt  theirs  and  heaven,  will  hate  thee  all  thy  days; 

But  most  beware  of  those  who  come  to  praise. 

O  Wondersmith,  O  worker  in  sublime 

And  heaven-sent  dreams,  let  art  be  all  in  all; 

Build  as  thou  wilt,  unspoiled  by  praise  or  blame. 

Build  as  thou  wilt,  and  as  thy  light  is  given ; 

Then,  if  at  last  the  airy  structure  fall. 

Dissolve,  and  vanish — take  thyself  no  shame. 

They  fail,  and  they  alone,  who  have  not  striven. 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [1839-1907] 

DIVINA  COMMEDIA 

Oft  have  I  seen  at  some  cathedral  door 

A  laborer,  pausing  in  the  dust  and  heat. 

Lay  down  his  burden,  and  with  reverent  feet 
Enter,  and  cross  himself,  and  on  the  floor 
Kneel  to  repeat  his  paternoster  o'er; 

Far  off  the  noises  of  the  world  retreat; 

The  loud  vociferations  of  the  street 
Become  an  indistinguishable  roar. 
So,  as  I  enter  here  from  day  to  day. 

And  leave  my  burden  at  this  minster  gate, 
Kneeling  in  prayer,  and  not  ashamed  to  pray, 

The  tumult  of  the  time  disconsolate 
To  inarticulate  murmurs  dies  away, 

While  the  eternal  ages  watch  and  wait. 

Henry  Wadsworih  Longfelloiv  [1807-1882] 

"A  MAN  CALLED  DANTE,  I  HAVE  HEARD" 

A  MAN  called  Dante,  I  have  heard, 

Once  ranged  the  country-side. 
He  knew  to  dawn's  mysterious  word 

What  drowsy  birds  replied; 

He  knew  the  deep  sea's  voice,  its  gleams 

And  tremulous  lights  afar. 
When  he  lay  down  at  night,  in  dreams 

He  tramped  from  star  to  star. 

Gcorgiana  Goddard  King  [1871- 


False    Poets  and   True  3085 

THE  SONGS  I  SING  •-  1  'v> 

The  songs  I  sing  at  morning 

I  never  sing  at  eve; 
Oh,  not  through  any  scorning, 

For  tears  regret  may  leave; 
But  that  our  radiant  pleasures 

Suit  not  the  shadowed  hour, 
For  which  I  have  such  measures 

As  mourn  the  withered  flower. 

The  songs  I  sing  at  twilight 

I  never  sing  at  morn ; 
I  would  not  mar  the  highlight 

With  any  note  forlorn; 
My  path  made  gay  and  sunny, 

With  joy  I  fill  my  heart; 
The  hyssop  from  the  honey — 

I  keep  them  wide  apart. 

Charles  G.  Blandai  [1857- 

THE  DEAREST   POETS  /v 

Were  I  to  name,  out  of  the  times  gone  by, 
The  poets  dearest  to  me,  I  should  say, 
Pulci  for  spirits,  and  a  fine,  free  way; 
Chaucer  for  manners,  and  close,  silent  eye; 
Milton  for  classic  taste,  and  harp  strung  high; 
Spenser  for  luxury,  and  sweet,  sylvan  play; 
Horace  for  chatting  with,  from  day  to  day; 
Shakespeare  for  aU,  but  most,  society. 
But  which  take  with  me,  could  I  take  but  one? 
Shakespeare, — as  long  as  I  was  unoppresscd 
With  the  world's  weight,  making  sad  thoughts  intenser; 
But  did  I  wish,  out  of  the  common  sun 
To  lay  a  wounded  heart  in  leafy  rest, 
And  dream  of  things  far  off  and  healing, — Spenser. 

Leigh  Hunt  [i 784-1859] 

FALSE  POETS  AND   TRUE 
Look  how  the  lark  soars  upward  and  is  gone, 
Turning  a  spirit  as  he  nears  the  sky! 
His  voice  is  heard,  but  body  there  is  none 
To  fix  the  vague  excursions  of  the  eye. 


3086      Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

So,  poets'  songs  are  with  us,  though  they  die 

Obscured,  and  hid  by  death's  obhvious  shroud, 

And  Earth  inherits  the  rich  melody 

Like  raining  music  fi'om  the  morning  cloud. 

Yet  few  there  be  who  pipe  so  sweet  and  loud 

Their  voices  reach  us  through  the  lapse  of  space: 

The  noisy  day  is  deafened  by  a  crowd 

Of  undistinguished  birds,  a  twittering  race; 

But  only  lark  and  nightingale  forlorn 

Fill  up  the  silences  of  night  and  morn. 

Thomas  Hood  [1709-1845] 


A  SINGING  LESSON 

Far-fetched  and  dear  bought,  as  the  proverb  rehearses, 
Is  good,  or  was  held  so,  for  ladies:  but  naught 
In  a  song  can  be  good  if  the  turn  of  the  verse  is 
Far-fetched  and  dear  bought. 

As  the  turn  of  a  wave  should  it  soiuid,  and  the  thought 

Ring  smooth,  and  as  light  as  the  .spray,  that  disperses 

Be  the  gleam  of  the  words  for  the  garb  thereof  wrought.  • 

Let  the  soul  in  it  shine  through  the  sound  as  it  pierces 
Men's  hearts  with  possession  of  music  unsought; 
For  the  bounties  of  song  are  no  jealous  god's  mercies, 
Far-fetched  and  dear  bought. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-igog] 


POETRY 

1  AM  the  reality  of  thmgs  that  seem;  t   t  ff 

The  great  transmuter,  melting  loss  to  gain,       r    r^ 

Languor  to  love,  and  fining  joy  from  pain.      ('  ,.  . , 

I  am  the  waking,  who  am  called  the  dream; 

I  am  the  sun,  all  light  reflects  my  gleam; 

I  am  the  altar-fire  within  the  fane; 

I  am  the  force  of  the  refreshing  rain; 

I  am  the  sea  to  which  flows  every  stream; 

I  am  the  utmost  height  there  is  to  climb; 

3U§£V  ddJ  xrt  oT 


,h.c,f^^^  KOn  an   Old   Song  3087 

I  am  the  truth,  mirrored  in  fancy's  glass; 
I  am  stabihty,  all  else  will  pass;  '  ' 

I  am  eternity,  encircling  time; 
Kill  me,  none  may;  concjuer  me,  nothing  can — 
I  am  God's  soul,  fused  in  the  soul  of  man. 

Ella  Heath  [1.8    - 

THE  INNER   VISION 

Most  sweet  it  is  with  unuplifted  eyes 
To  pace  the  ground,  if  path  be  there  or  none, , 
While  a  fair  region  round  the  traveller  lies 
Which  he  forbears  again  to  look  upon ; 
Pleased  rather  with  some  soft  ideal  scene,      ' 
The  work  of  Fancy,  or  some  happy  tone         ^ 
Of  meditation,  slipping  in  between  .  ! 

The  beauty  coming  and  the  beauty  gone. 
— If  Thought  and  Love  desert  us,  from  that  day 
Let  us  break  off  all  commerce  with  the  Muse : 
With  Thought  and  Love  companions  of  our  way — 
Whate'cr  the  senses  take  or  may  refuse, — 
The  Mind's  internal  heaven  shall  shed  her  dews 
Of  inspiration  on  the  humblest  lay. 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 

ON  AN  OLD   SONG 
Little  snatch  of  ancient  song, 
What  has  made  thee  live  so  long?  j^uom  oT 
Flying  on  thy  wings  of  rhyme  ■         1 1 

Lightly  down  the  depths  of  time, 
Telling  nothing  strange  or  rare, 
Scarce  a  thought  or  image  there, 
Nothing  but  the  old,  old  tale 
Of  a  hapless  lover's  wail; 
Offspring  of  an  idle  hour, 
■  .^[,      Whence  has  come  thy  lasting  power?  , A 
^.     By  what  turn  of  rhythm  or  phrase,     it  oioH 
J      By  what  subtle  careless  grace,  1nH^ 

Can  thy  music  charm  our  ears  i  1" 

After  fuU  three  hundred  years? 


3088      Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Landmarks  of  the  human  mind 

One  by  one  are  left  behind, 

And  a  subtle  change  is  wrought 

In  the  mould  and  cast  of  thought; 

Modes  of  reasoning  pass  away, 

Types  of  beauty  lose  their  sway; 

Creeds  and  causes  that  have  made 

Many  noble  hves  must  fade, 

And  the  words  that  thrilled  of  old 

Now  seem  hueless,  dead,  and  cold; 

Fancy's  rainbow  tints  are  flying. 

Thoughts,  like  men,  are  slowly  dying; 

All  things  perish,  and  the  strongest 

Often  do  not  last  the  longest; 

The  stately  ship  is  seen  no  more. 

The  fragile  skiff  attains  the  shore; 

And  while  the  great  and  wise  decay. 

And  all  their  trophies  pass  away, 

Some  sudden  thought,  some  careless  rhyme, 

Still  floats  above  the  wrecks  of  Time. 

William  Edward  Ilartpole  Lccky  [1838-1903] 


TO  SONG 

Here  shall  remain  all  tears  for  lovely  things 
And  here  enshrined  the  longing  of  great  hearts, 
Caught  on  a  lyre  whence  waking  wonder  starts, 

To  mount  afar  upon  immortal  wings; 

Here  shall  be  treasured  tender  wonderings, 
The  faintest  whisper  that  the  soul  imparts, 
All  silent  secrets  and  all  gracious  arts, 

Where  nature  murmurs  of  her  hidden  springs. 

O  magic  of  a  song!  here  loveliness 

May  sleep  unhindered  of  life's  mortal  toll, 

And  noble  things  stand  towering  o'er  the  tide; 
Here  mid  the  years,  untouched  by  time  or  stress, 
Shall  sweep  on  every  wind  that  stirs  the  soul 
The  music  of  a  voice  that  never  died ! 

Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr.  [1882- 


Poet  and   Lark  3089 

VERSE 

Past  ruined  Ilion  Helen  lives, 

Alcestis  rises  from  the  shades; 
Verse  calls  them  forth;  'tis  verse  that  gives 

Immortal  youth  to  mortal  maids. 

Soon  shall  Oblivion's  deepening  veil 

Plide  all  the  peopled  hills  you  see, 
The  gay,  the  proud,  while  lovers  hail 

These  many  summers  you  and  me. 

WaltenSavage  Landor  [1775-1864] 

AN  OLD-FASHIONED   POET 

In  simpler  verse  than  triolets. 

Rondeau,  or  deft  quatrain, 
With  breath  of  morning  violets 

In  every  dewy  strain, 
He  sang  from  overflowing  heart 
His  sweet  old  songs  unspoiled  by  art. 

Progressive  years  have  passed  since  then — 

The  Muse  has  changed  her  ways; 
No  more  through  flowery  mead  and  glen 

A  rustic  maid  she  strays; 
Amid  the  trafiic  of  the  town 
We  catch  the  flutter  of  her  gown. 

But  one  who  knows  her  virgin  grace 

Gives  back  the  songs  she  sung 
And  brings  with  glimpses  of  her  face 

The  days  when  love  was  young. 
O  Muse  immortal,  singer  true. 
What  harmonies  unite  the  two ! 

Ada  Foster  Miirray  [18    - 

POET  AND  LARK 

When  leaves  turn  outward  to  the  light, 
And  all  the  roads  are  fringed  with  green, 

When  larks  are  pouring,  high,  unseen, 
The  joy  they  find  in  song  and  flight, 


3090     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Then  I,  too,  with  the  lark  would  wing 
My  little  flight,  and,  soaring,  sing 

When  larks  drop  downward  to  the  nest, 
And  day  drops  downward  to  the  sea, 

And  song  and  wing  are  fain  to  rest. 
The  lark's  dear  wisdom  guideth  me, 

And  I  too  turn  within  my  door, 

Content  to  dream,  and  sing  no  more. 

Mary  Ainge  de  Vere  [1844- 

[^,  A  HINT  FROM  HERRICK 

No  slightest  golden  rhyme  he  wrote 
That  held  not  something  men  must  quote; 
Thus  by  design  or  chance  did  he 
Drop  anchors  to  posterity. 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [1836-1907] 

TO  THE  POETS 

Bards  of  Passion  and  of  Mirth, 
Ye  have  left  your  souls  on  earth! 
Have  ye  souls  in  heaven  too. 
Double-lived  in  regions  new? 
Yes,  and  those  of  heaven  commune 
With  the  spheres  of  sun  and  moon ; 
With  the  noise  of  fountains  wondrous 
And  the  parle  of  voices  thund'rous; 
With  the  whisper  of  heaven's  trees 
And  one  another,  in  soft  ease 
Seated  on  Elysian  lawns, 
Browsed  by  none  but  Dian's  fawns; 
Underneath  large  blue-bells  tented, 
Where  the  daisies  are  rose-scented, 
And  the  rose  herself  has  got 
Perfume  which  on  earth  is  not, 
Where  the  nightingale  doth  sing, 
Not  a  senseless,  tranced  thing, 
But  divine,  melodious  truth, 
Philosophic  numbers  smooth; 
Tales  and  golden  histories 
Of  heaven  and  its  mysteries. 


rtoi'J:)?^    The  Progress  of  Poesy  3091 

Thus  ye  live  on  high,  and  then 
On  the  earth  ye  hve  again; 
And  the  souls  ye  left  behind  you 
Teach  us,  here,  the  way  to  tind  you, 
Where  your  other  souls  are  joying, 
Never  slumbered,  never  cloying. 
Here,  your  earth-born  souls  still  speak 
To  mortals,  of  their  little  week; 
Of  their  sorrows  and  delights; 
Of  their  passions  and  their  spites; 
Of  their  glory  and  their  shame; 
What  doth  strengthen  and  what  maim. 
Thus  ye  teach  us,  every  day, 
Wisdom,  though  fled  far  away. 

Bards  of  Passion  and  of  Mirth, 
Ye  have  left  your  souls  on  earth! 
Ye  have  souls  in  heaven  too, 
Double-lived  in  regions  new! 

John  Keats  [1705-1821] 

THE  PROGRESS  OF  POESY 

A   PINDARIC   ODE 

Awake,  /Eolian  lyre,  awake, 

And  give  to  rapture  all  thy  trembling  strings. 

Froih  Helicon's  harmonious  springs 

A  thousand  riUs  their  mazy  progress  take: 

The  laughing  flowers,  that  round  them  blow, 

Drink  life  and  fragrance  as  they  flow. 

Now  the  rich  stream  of  music  winds  along 

Deep,  majestic,  smooth  and  strong. 

Through  verdant  vales,  and  Ceres'  golden  reign: 

Now  rolling  down  the  steep  amain, 

Headlong,  impetuous,  see  it  pour; 

The  rocks  and  nodding  groves  rebellow  to  the  roar. 

O  Sovereign  of  the  wflling  soul,  . .  t 

Parent  of  sweet  and  solemn-breathing  airs. 
Enchanting  shell!  the  sullen  Cares 

And  frantic  Passions  hear  thy  soft  control. 


3092    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

On  Thracia's  hills  the  Lord  of  War 

Has  curbed  the  fury  of  his  car, 

And  dropped  his  thirsty  lance  at  thy  command. 

Perching  on  the  sceptered  hand 

Of  Jove,  thy  magic  lulls  the  feathered  king 

With  ruffled  plumes  and  flagging  wing: 

Quenched  in  dark  clouds  of  skmiber  lie 

The  terror  of  his  beak,  and  lightnings  of  his  eye. 

Thee  the  voice,  the  dance,  obey, 
Tempered  to  thy  warbled  lay. 

O'er  Idalia's  velvet-green 

The  rosy-crowned  Loves  are  seen 
On  Cytherea's  day. 

With  antic  Sports,  and  blue-eyed  Pleasures, 

Frisking  light  in  frolic  measures; 
Now  pursuing,  now  retreating. 

Now  in  circling  troops  they  meet: 
To  brisk  notes  in  cadence  beating, 

Glance  their  many-twinkling  feet. 
Slow  melting  strains  their  Queen's  approach  declare: 

Where'er  she  turns,  the  Graces  homage  pay. 
With  arms  sublime,  that  float  upon  the  air. 

In  ghding  state  she  wins  her  easy  way: 
O'er  her  warm  cheek  and  rising  bosom  move 
The  bloom  of  young  Desire  and  purple  light  of  Love. 

Man's  feeble  race  what  ills  await! 
Labor,  and  Penury,  the  racks  of  Pain, 
Disease,  and  Sorrow's  weeping  train. 

And  Death,  sad  refuge  from  the  storms  of  fate! 
The  fond  complaint,  my  song,  disprove, 
And  justify  the  laws  of  Jove. 

Say,  has  he  given  in  vain  the  heavenly  Muse?  .       , , 
JNight,  and  all  her  sickly  dews,  .p 

Her  specters  wan,  and  birds  of  boding  cry, 
He  gives  to  range  the  dreary  sky: 
Till  down  the  eastern  cliffs  afar 
H)^erion's   march    they  spy,   and    glittering   shafts   of 

war. 


The   Progress  of  Poesy  3^93 

In  climes  beyond  tlie  solar  road, 

Where  shaggy  forms  o'er  ice-built  mountains  roam, 

The  Muse  has  broke  the  twilight  gloom 

To  cheer  the  shivering  native's  dull  abode.  .  .  ■- 
And  oft,  beneath  the  odorous  shade  '\i  noqU 

Of  Chili's  boundless  forests  laid, 
She  deigns  to  hear  the  savage  youth  repeat 
In  loose  numbers  wildly  sweet  1.  -^nivil  ■'■-',  i' 

Their  feather-cinctured  chiefs,  and  dusky  loVes.  ■    ' 
Her  track,  where'er  the  Goddess  roves, 
Glory  pursue  and  generous  Shame, 
The  unconquerable  Mind,  and  Freedom's  holy  flame. 

Woods,  that  wave  o'er  Delphi's  steep, 
Isles,  that  crown  the  ^gean  deep, 

Fields,  that  cool  Ilissus  laves. 

Or  where  Maeander's  amber  waves  , , 

In  lingering  labyrinths  creep, 

How  do  your  tuneful  echoes  languish, 

Mute,  but  to  the  voice  of  anguish?  ,, 

Where  each  old  poetic  mountain 

Inspiration  breathed  around: 
Every  shade  and  hallowed  fountain 

Murmured  deep  a  solemn  sound: 
Till  the  sad  Nine,  in  Greece's  evil  hour. 

Left  their  Parnassus  for  the  Latian  plains. 
Alike  they  scorn  the  pomp  of  tyrant  Power, 

And  coward  Vice,  that  revels  in  her  chains,  ^,    ,  ,, 
When  Latium  had  her  lofty  spirit  lost, 
They  sought,  O  Albion!  next  thy  sea-encircled  coast. 

Far  from  the  sun  and  summer  gale. 
In  thy  green  lap  was  Nature's  darling  laid, 
What  time,  where  lucid  Avon  strayed. 

To  him  the  mighty  mother  did  unveil 
Her  awful  face:  the  dauntless  child 
Stretched  forth  his  Kttle  arms,  and  smiled. 
This  pencil  take  (she  said),  whose  colors  clear 
Richly  paint  the  vernal  year: 
Thine  too  these  golden  keys,  immortal  boy! 
This  can  unlock  the  gates  of  joy; 


3094    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Of  horror  that,  and  thrilHng  fears, 

Or  ope  the  sacred  source  of  sympathetic  tears. 

Nor  second  he,  that  rode  subhme 
Upon  the  seraph-wings  of  Ecstasy, 
The  secrets  of  the  abyss  to  spy. 

He  passed  the  flaming  bounds  of  place  and  time: 
The  living  Throne,  the  sapphire-blaze,  i  n  [ 

Where  Angels  tremble  while  they  gaze,  '  ' 

He  saw;  but,  blasted  with  excess  of  light, 
Closed  his  eyes  in  endless  night. 
Behold,  where  Dryden's  less  presumptuous  car, 
Wide  o'er  the  fields  of  glory  bear  ,j. 

Two  coursers  of  ethereal  race, 
With  necks  in  thunder  clothed,  and  long-resounding  pace, 

Hark,  his  hands  the  lyre  explore! 
Bright-eyed  Fancy,  hovering  o'er, 

Scatters  from  her  pictured  urn 

Thoughts  that  breathe,  and  words  that  burn. 
But  ah,  'tis  heard  no  more! 

O  Lyre  divine!  what  daring  Spirit 

Wakes  thee  now?    Though  he  inherit 
Nor  the  pride,  nor  ample  pinion, 

That  the  Theban  Eagle  bear, 
Sailing  with  supreme  dominion 

Through  the  azure  deep  of  air: 
Yet  oft  before  his  infant  eyes  would  run 

Such  forms  as  glitter  in  the  Muse's  ray. 
With  orient  hues,  unborrowed  of  the  Sun: 

Yet  shall  he  mount,  and  keep  his  distant  way     1 
Beyond  the  limits  of  a  vulgar  fate. 
Beneath  the  Good  how  far — but  far  above  the  Great. 

Thomas  Gray  [17 16-17  71] 

SEAWEED  ''T!'"^!^. 

When  descends  on  the  Atlantic 

The  gigantic 
Storm-wind  of  the  equinox, 


>)fto5T  bffn    Seaweed  3095 

Landward  in  his  wrath  he  scourges 

The  toiling  surges, 
Laden  with  seaweed  from  the  rocks: 

From  Bermuda's  reefs;  from  edges 

Of  sunken  ledges, 
In  some  far-off,  bright  Azore; 
From  Bahama,  and  the  dashing, 

Silver-flashing 
Surges  of  San  Salvador; 

From  the  tumbling  surf,  that  buries 

The  Orkneyan  skerries, 
Answering  the  hoarse  Hebrides; 
And  from  wrecks  of  ships,  and  drifting 

Spars,  uplifting 
On  the  desolate,  rainy  seas,-— 

Ever  drifting,  drifting,  drifting 

On  the  shifting 
Currents  of  the  restless  main; 
Till  in  sheltered  coves,  and  reaches     >_) 

Of  sandy  beaches, 
All  have  found  repose  again. 

So  when  storms  of  wild  emotion 

Strike  the  ocean 
Of  the  poet's  soul,  ere  long. 
From  each  cave  and  rocky  fastness     .  ^ 

In  its  vastness. 
Floats  some  fragment  of  a  song: 

Frorri  the  far-off  isles  enchanted 

Heaven  has  planted 
With  the  golden  fruit  of  Truth; 
From  the  flashing  surf,  whose  vision  ,  llTIHW^* 

Gleams  Elysian 
In  the  tropic  clime  of  Youth; 

From  the  strong  Will,  and  the  Endeavor 

That  for  ever 
Wrestles  with  the  tides  of  Fate; 


3096     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

From  the  wreck  of  Hopes  far-scattered, 

Tempest-shattered, 
Floating  waste  and  desolate; — 

Ever  drifting,  drifting,  drifting       ,,j 

On  the  shifting 
Currents  of  the  restless  heart; 
Till  at  length  in  books  recorded, 

They,  like  hoarded 
Household  words,  no  more  depart. 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfcllo'cv  [1807-1882] 


TO  THE  MUSES 

Whether  on  Ida's  shady  brow, 

Or  in  the  chambers  of  the  East, 
The  chambers  of  the  Sun,  that  now 

From  ancient  melody  have  ceased; 

Whether  in  heaven  ye  wander  fair. 
Or  the  green  corners  of  the  earth, 

Or  the  blue  regions  of  the  air 

Where  the  melodious  winds  have  birth; 

Whether  on  crystal  rocks  ye  rove. 

Beneath  the  bosom  of  the  sea, 
Wandering  in  many  a  coral  grove; 

Fair  Nine,  forsaking  Poetry; 

How  have  you  left  the  ancient  love 
That  bards  of  old  enjoyed  in  you! 

The  languid  strings  do  scarcely  move, 
The  sound  is  forced,  the  notes  are  few. 

William  Blake  [1757-1827] 

"WHITHER   IS    GONE    THE   WISDOM   AND    THE 
POWER" 

Whither  is  gone  the  wisdom  and  the  power 
That  ancient  sages  scattered  with  the  notes 
Of  thought-suggesting  lyres?     The  music  floats 
In  the  void  air;  e'en  at  this  breathing  hour. 


oboaHs  The   Muses  '■  ^^^f'        3097 

In  every  cell  and  every  blooming  bower 
The  sweetness  of  old  lays  is  hovering  still: 
But  the  strong  soul,  the  self-constraining  will, 
The  rugged  root  which  bare  the  winsome  flower 
Is  weak  and  withered.     Were  we  like  the  fays 
That  sweetly  nestle  in  the  fox-glove  bells, 
Or  lurk  and  murmur  in  the  rose-lipped  shells 
Which  Neptune  to  the  earth  for  quit-rent  pays, 
Then  might  our  pretty  modern  Philomels 
Sustain  our  spirits  with  their  roundelays. 

Hartley  Coleridge  [1706-1849] 


THE  MUSES 

Of  old  the  Muses  sat  on  high. 

And  heard  and  judged  the  songs  of  men; 
On  one  they  smiled,  who  loitered  by; 

Of  toiling  ten,  they  slighted  ten. 

"They  lightly  serve  who  serve  us  best, 
Nor  know  they  how  the  task  was  done; 

We  Muses  love  a  soul  at  rest, 
But  violence  and  toil  we  shun." 

If  men  say  true,  the  Muses  now 

Have  changed  their  ancient  habitude, 

And  would  be  served  with  knitted  brow, 
And  stress  and  toil  each  day  renewed. 

So  each  one  with  the  other  vies. 

Of  those  who  weave  romance  or  song: 

"On  us,  O  Muse,  bestow  thy  prize. 
For  we  have  striven  well  and  long!" 

And  yet  methinks  I  hear  the  best 

Come  murmuring  dowii  from  Helicon: 

"They  lightly  serve  who  serve  us  best, 
Nor  know  they  how  the  task  was  done!" 
Edith  M.  Thomas  [1854- 


3098      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 
EVOE!  „ I 

"  Many  are  the  wand-bearers,  few  are  the  true  bacchanals;'*'' ' 

Many  are  the  wand-bearers; 

Their  windy  shouts  I  hear 
Along  the  hillside  vineyard,  , 

^  .^.        And  where  the  wine  runs  clear; 
They  show  the  vine-leaf  chaplet, 

The  ivy-wreathen  spear, 
But  the  god,  the  true  lacchus, 

He  does  not  hold  them  dear. 

Many  are  the  wand-bearers, 

And  bravely  are  they  clad ; 
Yes,  they  have  all  the  tokens 
;n  ■      His  early  lovers  had. 

They  sing  the  master  passions, 

Themselves  unsad,  unglad; 
And  the  god,  the  true  lacchus— 
,.>^e  knows  they  are  not  mad! 

Many  are  the  wand-bearers; 

The  fawn-skin  bright  they  wear; 
There  are  among  them  maenads 

That  rave  with  unbound  hair.       '  "- 
They  toss  the  harmless  firebrand —  ' 

It  spends  itself  in  air: 
And  the  god,  the  true  lacchus, 

He  smiles — and  does  not  care. 

Many  are  the  wand-bearers,  j  ^ ,-. 

And  who  (ye  ask)  am  I? 
One  who  was  born  in  madness, 

"Evoe!"  my  first  cry — 
Who  dares,  before  your  spear-points, 

To  challenge  and  defy; 
And  the  god,  the  true  lacchus, 

So  keep  me  till  I  die! 


An   Invocation  3^99 

Many  are  the  waad-bearers. 

I  bear  with  me  no  sign; 
Yet,  I  was  mad,  was  drunken, 

Ere  yet  I  tasted  wine; 
Nor  bleeding  grape  can  slacken 

The  thirst  wherewith  I  pine; 
And  the  god,  the  true  lacchus, 

Hears  now  this  song  of  mine. 

Edith  M.  Thomas  [1854- 

AN  INVOCATION 

I  NEVER  prayed  for  Dryads,  to  haunt  the  woods  again; 
More  welcome  were  the  presence  of  hungering,  thirsting 

men, 
Whose  doubts  we  could  unravel,  whose  hopes  we  could 

fulfil. 
Our  wisdom  tracing  backward,  the  river  to  the  rill; 
Were  such  beloved  forerunners  one  summer  day  restored, 
Then,  then  we  might  discover  the  Muse's  mystic  hoard. 

Oh,  dear  divine  Comatas,  I  would  that  thou  and  I 
Beneath  this  broken  sunlight  this  leisure  day  might  lie; 
Where  trees  from  distant  forests,  whose  names  were  strange 

to  thee. 
Should  bend  their  amorous  branches  within  thy  reach  to  be, 
And  flowers  thine  Hellas  knew  not,  which  art  hath  made 

more  fair. 
Should  shed  their  shining  petals  upon  thy  fragrant  hair. 

Then  thou  shouldst  calmly  listen  with  ever-changing  looks 
To  songs  of  younger  minstrels  and  plots  of  modern  books. 
And  wonder  at  the  daring  of  poets  later  born, 
Whose  thoughts  are  unto  thy  thoughts  as  noon-tide  is  to 

morn ; 
And  little  shouldst  thou  grudge  them  their  greater  strength 

of  soul, 
Thy  partners  in  the  torch-race,  though  nearer  to  the  goal. 

As  when  ancestral  portraits  look  gravely  from  the  walls 
Upon  the  youthful  baron  who  treads  their  echoing  halls; 


3 TOO     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

And  whilst  he  builds  new  turrets,  the  thrice  ennobled  heir 
Would  gladly  wake  his  grandsire  his  home  andieast  to  share; 
So  from  ^gcan  laurels  that  hide  thine  ancient  urn 
I  fain  would  call  thee  hither,  my  sweeter  lore  to  learn. 

Or  in  thy  cedarn  prison  thou  waitest  for  the  bee: 
Ah,  leave  that  simple  honey,  and  take  thy  food  from  me! 
My  sun  is  stooping  westward.    Entranced  dreamer,  haste: 
There's  fruitage  in  my  garden,  that  I  would  have  thee  taste. 
Now  lift  the  lid  a  moment:  now,  Dorian  shepherd,  speak: 
Two  minds  shall  flow  together,  the  English  and  the  Greek. 
WilHam  Johusou-Cory  [i 823-1 892] 

INVENTION 

I  ENVY  not  the  Lark  his  song  divine. 

Nor  thee,  O  Maid,  thy  beauty's  faultless  mould. 
Perhaps  the  chief  felicity  is  mine, 

Who  hearken  and  behold.  '     \,, 

The  joy  of  the  Artificer  Unknown 

Whose  genius  could  devise  the  Lark  and  thee — 
This,  or  a  kindred  rapture,  let  me  own,      .'''!',  "^^^    ' 
'"'  "•'*'T  covet  ceaselessly! 
.Hnsiiaa-iav/*.  William  Wal son  [.^s^- 

'.bnrn  AUz         J^^  OF  THE  MORNING 
I  HEAR  you,  little  bird, 
■i!    Shouting  aswing  above  the  broken  wall.  "-'" 

Shout  louder  yet:  no  song  can  tell  it  all. 
'  ''"      Sing  to  my  soul  in  the  deep  still  wood:         '   ■  ^^ 


.<A'     jrpjg  wonderful  beyond  the  wildest  word: 
I'd  tell  it,  too,  if  I  could. 


II   920dV/ 


Oft  when  the  white,  still  dawn 
rijgfi      Lifted  the  skies  and  pushed  the  hills  apart, 
I've  felt  it  like  a  glory  in  my  heart — 
.\\.'   ■  (The  world's  mysterious  stir)  ^  -^ri T 

But  had  no  throat  like  yours,  my  bird, 
'  Nbr  such  a  listener.  '""■  ■■''''■''  '^' 

Ji-i'  Edivin  Markham  [1852- 


To  a  Poet  a  Thousand  Years  Hence    3101 


CRICKET 

Cricket,  chirring  in  the  autumn  twilight, 

Little  kinsman, 

I,  like  you,  the  unknown  path  must  follow 

Into  darkness, — 

One  day  into  darkness. 

Would  I  might,  with  your  ecstatic  buoyance. 

Fare  forth  singing! 

Clinton  ScoUard  [iS6o- 


TO  A  POET  A  THOUSAND  YEARS  HENCE 

I  \VRO  am  dead  a  thousand  years. 
And  wrote  this  sweet  archaic  song, 

Send  you  my  words  for  messengers 
The  way  I  shall  not  pass  along. 

I  care  not  if  you  bridge  the  seas, 

Or  ride  secure  the  cruel  sky. 
Or  build  consummate  palaces 

Of  metal  or  of  masonry. 

But  have  you  wine  and  music  still, 
And  statues  and  a  bright-eyed  love, 

And  foolish  thoughts  of  good  and  ill, 
And  prayers  to  them  that  sit  above? 

How  shall  we  conquer?    Like  a  wind 
That  falls  at  eve  our  fancies  blow. 

And  old  Maionides  the  blind 

Said  it  three  thousand  years  ago. 

0  friend  unseen,  imborn,  unknown. 
Student  of  our  sweet  English  tongue, 

Read  out  my  words  at  night,  alone: 
I  was  a  poet,  I  was  young. 

Since  I  can  never  see  your  face, 
And  never  shake  you  by  the  hand, 

1  send  my  soul  through  time  and  space 
To  greet  you.    You  will  understand. 

James  Elroy  Flecker  [i884-iyi5] 


3I02     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

THE  MOODS 

(after  reading  certain  of  the  IRISH  poets) 

The  Moods  have  laid  their  hands  across  my  hair: 
The  Moods  have  drawn  their  fingers  through  my  heart; 
My  hair  shall  nevermore  lie  smooth  and  bright, 
But  stir  like  tide-worn  sea-weed,  and  my  heart 
Shall  nevermore  be  glad  of  small,  sweet  things, — 
A  wild  rose,  or  a  crescent  moon, — a  book 
Of  little  verses,  or  a  dancing  child. 
My  heart  turns  crying  from  the  rose  and  brook,       - 
My  heart  turns  crying  from  the  thin  bright  moon, 
And  weeps  with  useless  sorrow  for  the  child. 
The  Moods  have  loosed  a  wind  to  vex  my  hair, 
And  made  my  heart  too  wise,  that  was  a  child. 

Now  I  shall  blow  like  smitten  candle-flame;  ■  1 
I  shall  desire  all  things  that  may  not  be: 
The  years,  the  stars,  the  souls  of  ancient  men. 
All  tears  that  must,  and  smiles  that  may  not  be, — 
Yes,  glimmering  lights  across  a  windy  ford. 
And  vagrant  voices  on  a  darkened  plain. 
And  holy  things,  and  outcast  things,  and-  things 
Far  too  remote,  frail-bodied,  to  be  plain. 

My  pity  and  my  joy  are  grown  alike; 
I  cannot  sweep  the  strangeness  from  my  heart. 
The  Moods  have  laid  swift  hands  across  my  hair: 
The  Moods  have  drawn  swift  fingers  through  my  heart. 
Fannie  Stearns  DatAs  [1S84- 


THE  PASSIONATE  READER  TO  HIS   POET 

Doth  it  not  thrill  thee.  Poet, 

Dead  and  dust  though  thou  art. 

To  feel  how  I  press  thy  singing 
Close  to  my  heart? 


The  Flight  of  the  Goddess        3^03 

Take  it  at  night  to  my  pillow, 

Kiss  it  before  I  sleep, 
And  again  when  the  delicate  morning 

Beginneth  to  peep? 

See  how  I  bathe  thy  pages 

Here  in  the  light  of  the  sun ; 
Through  thy  leaves,  as  a  wind  among  roses, 

The  breezes  shall  run. 

Feel  how  I  take  thy  poem 

And  bury  within  it  my  face. 
As  I  pressed  it  last  night  in  the  heart  of  a  flower, 

Or  deep  in  a  dearer  place. 

Think,  as  I  love  thee.  Poet, 

A  thousand  love  beside, 
Dear  women  love  to  press  thee  too 

Against  a  sweeter  side. 

Art  thou  not  happy,  Poet? 

I  sometimes  dream  that  I 
For  such  a  fragrant  fame  as  thine 

Would  gladly  sing  and  die. 

Say,  wilt  thou  change  thy  glory 

For  this  same  youth  of  mine? 
And  I  will  give  my  days  i'  the  sun 

For  that  great  song  of  thine. 

Richard  Le  Gallienne  [i366- 

THE  FLIGHT  OF  THE   GODDESS 

A  MAN  should  live  in  a  garret  aloof, 
And  have  few  friends,  and  go  poorly  clad, 
With  an  old  hat  stopping  the  chink  in  the  roof. 
To  keep  the  Goddess  constant  and  glad. 

Of  old,  when  I  walked  on  a  rugged  way. 
And  gave  much  work  for  but  little  bread. 
The  Goddess  dwelt  with  me  night  and  day, 
Sat  at  m.y  table,  haunted  my  bed. 


3104     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

The  narrow,  mean  attic,  I  see  it  now! —   ,,1,.  ( 
Its  window  o'erlooking  the  city's  tiles, 
The  sunset's  fires,  and  the  clouds  of  snow, 
And  the  river  wandering  miles  and  miles. 

Just  one  picture  hung  in  the  room. 
The  saddest  story  that  Art  can  tell — 
Dante  and  Virgil  in  lurid  gloom 
Watching  the  Lovers  float  through  Hell. 

Wretched  enough  was  I  sometimes, 
Pinched,  and  harassed  with  vain  desires; 
But  thicker  than  clover  sprung  the  rhymes 
As  I  dwelt  like  a  sparrow  among  the  spires. 

Midnight  filled  my  slumbers  with  song; 
Music  haunted  my  dreams  by  day. 
Now  I  listen  and  wait  and  long, 
But  the  Delphian  airs  have  died  away. 

I  wonder  and  wonder  how  it  befell: 
Suddenly  I  had  friends  in  crowds; 
I  bade  the  house-tops  a  long  farewell; 
"Good-by,"  I  cried,  "to  the  stars  and  clouds! 

"But  thou,  rare  soul,  thou  hast  dwelt  with  me, 
Spirit  of  Poesy!  thou  divine 
Breath  of  the  morning,  thou  shalt  be. 
Goddess!  for  ever  and  ever  mine."  - 

And  the  woman  I  loved  was  now  my  bride, 
And  the  house  I  wanted  was  my  own; 
I  turned  to  the  Goddess  satisfied — ■ 
But  the  Goddess  had  somehow  flown. 

Flown,  and  I  fear  she  will  never  return; 
I  am  much  too  sleek  and  happy  for  her. 
Whose  lovers  must  hunger  and  waste  and  burn, 
Ere  the  beautiful  heathen  heart  will  stir. 

I  call — but  she  does  not  stoop  to  my  cry;>  !(> 

I  wait — but  she  lingers,  and  ah!  so  long! 

It  was  not  so  in  the  years  gone  by. 

When  she  touched  my  lips  with  chrism  of  song. 


The  Argument  of  His   Book      3105 

I  swear  I  will  get  me  a  garret  again, 
And  adore,  like  a  Parsee,  the  sunset's  fires, 
And  lure  the  Goddess,  by  vigil  and  pain, 
Up  with  the  sparrows  among  the  spires. 

For  a  man  should  live  in  a  garret  aloof. 
And  have  few  friends,  and  go  poorly  clad. 
With  an  old  hat  stopping  the  chink  in  the  roof, 
To  keep  the  Goddess  constant  and  glad. 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrkh  [1837-1Q07I 


THE  SOVEREIGNS 

They  who  create  rob  death  of  half  its  stings ; 
Their  life  is  given  for  the  Muse's  sake; 
Of  thought  they  build  their  palaces,  and  make 
Enduring  entities  and  beauteous  things; 
They  are  the  Poets — they  give  airy  wings 
To  shapes  marmorean;  or  they  overtake 
The  Ideal  with  the  brush,  or,  soaring,  wake 
Far  in  the  rolling  clouds  their  glorious  strings. 
The  Poet  is  the  only  potentate; 
His  sceptre  reaches  o'er  remotest  zones;  ,  , 

His  thought  remembered  and  his  golden  tones  > 
Shall,  in  the  ears  of  nations  uncr^ate, 
Roll  on  for  ages  and  reverberate 
When  Kings  are  dust  beside  forgotten  thrones. 
Lloyd  Mifflin  [1846- 

THE  ARGUMENT  OF  HIS   BOOK       ';' ' 

I  SING  of  brooks,  of  blossoms,  birds,  and  bowers. 

Of  April,  May,  of  June,  and  July  flowers; 

I  sing  of  May-poles,  hock-carts,  wassails,  wakes, 

Of  bridegrooms,  brides,  and  of  their  bridal  cakes. 

I  write  of  Youth,  of  Love,  and  have  access 

By  these,  to, sing  of  cleanly  wantonness; 

I  sing  of  dews,  of  rains,  and,  piece  by  piece,      T 

Of  balm,  of  oil,  of  spice,  and  ambergris. 

I  sing  of  times  trans-shifting;  and  I  write 

How  roses  first  came  red,  and  lihes  white; 


3106    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

I  write  of  groves,  of  twilights,  and  I  sing      I 
The  court  of  Mab,  and  of  the  P'airy  King. 
I  write  of  Hell;  I  sing,  and  ever  shall. 
Of  Heaven,  and  hope  to  have  it  after  all. 

Robert  Hcrrick  [1591-1674] 

ENVOY  [j 

Go,  little  book,  and  wish  to  all  dj  fja.jjj  qT 
Flowers  in  the  garden,  meat  in  the  hall, 
A  bit  of  wine,  a  spice  of  wit, 
A  house  with  lawns  enclosing  it, 
A  living  river  by  the  door, 
A  nightingale  in  the  sycamore! 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1894] 

ENVOY  ] 

Go,  songs,  for  ended  is  our  brief,  sweet  play;  ,- 
Go,  children  of  swift  joy  and  tardy  sorro,v\{:,^|||' 

And  some  are  sung,  and  that  was  yesterday^j-^^g; 
And  some  unsung,  and  that  may  be  to-morrow. 

Go  forth;  and  if  it  be  o'er  stony  way. 

Old  joy  can  lend  what  newer  grief  must  borrow: 

And  it  was  sweet,  and  that  was  yesterday. 

And  sweet  is  sweet,  though  purchased  with  sorrow. 

Go,  songs,  and  come  not  back  from  your  far  way: 
And  if  men  ask  you  why  ye  smile  and  sorrow, 

Tell  them  ye  grieve,  for  your  hearts  know  To-day, 
Tell  them  ye  smile,  for  your  eyes  know  To-morrow. 
Francis  Thompson  [i8s9?-i907] 

THE   SONNET'S  VOICE 

A  METRICAL   LESSON   BY   THE    SEASHORE 

Yon  silvery  billows  breaking  on  the  beach 
FaU  back  in  foam  beneath  the  star-shine  clear,  '^ 
The  while  my  rhymes  are  murmuring  in  your  ear 
A  restless  lore  like  that  the  billows  teach ; 
For  on  these  sonnet-waves  my  soul  would  reach 


i(oil:>: 


The  Sonnet  3107 


From  its  own  depths,  and  rest  within  you,  dear,. 
As,  through  the  billowy  voices  yearning  here,     / 
Great  nature  strives  to  find  a  human  speech.      ,"{ 
A  sonnet  is  a  wave  of  melody:  ;/ 

From  heaving  waters  of  the  impassioned  soul 
A  billow  of  tidal  music  one  and  whole 
Flows,  in  the  "octave";  then,  returning  free, 
Its  ebbing  surges  in  the  "sestet"  roll 
Back  to  the  deeps  of  Life's  tumultuous  sea. 

Theodore  Walts-Dunton  [1836-1014] 


THE   SONNET 


!lA 


A  SONNET  is  a  moment's  monument, — 

Memorial  from  the  Soul's  eternity 

To  one  dead  deathless  hour.     Look  that  it  bfj, 

Whether  for  lustral  rite  or  dire  portent, 

Of  its  own  arduous  fulness  reverent:  ;,  - 

Carve  it  in  ivory  or  in  ebony, 

As  Dciy  or  Night  may  rule;  and  let  Time  see 

Its  flowering  crest  impearied  and  orient. 

A  Sonnet  is  a  coin:  its  face  reveals 

The  soul, — its  converse,  to  what  Power  'tis  due:— 

Whether  for  tribute  to  the  august  appeals 

Of  Life,  or  dower  in  Love's  high  retinue. 

It  serve;  or,  'mid  the  dark  wharf's  cavernous  breath, 

In  Charon's  palm  it  pay  the  toll  to  Death. 

Dank  Gabriel  Rossctti  [i 828-1 882] 

THE  SONNET 

What  is  a  sonnet?     'Tis  the  pearly  shell  ;  /\ 

That  murmurs  of  the  far-off  murmuring  sea;         ;  ■ 

A  precious  jewel  carved  most  curiously; 

It  is  a  little  picture  painted  well. 

What  is  a  sonnet?     'Tis  the  tear  that  fell 

From  a  great  poet's  hidden  ecstasy;  // 

A  two-edged  sword,  a  star,  a  song, — ah  me!         ,;ij 

Sometimes  a  heavy-tolling  funeral  beU.  .  1  / 

This  was  the  flame  that  shook  with  Dante's  breath, 

The  solemn  organ  whereon  Milton  played. 


3io8     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  the  clear  glass  where  Shakespeare's  shadow  falls; 
A  sea  this  is, — beware  who  ventureth! 
For  like  a  fiord  the  narrow  floor  is  laid 
Mid-ocean  deep  sheer  to  the  mountain  walls. 

lijoa  b:)noi,ir:v.qmlRichard  Watson  Gilder  [1844-1009] 


THE  SONNET 


The  Sonnet  is  a  fruit  which  long  hath  slept 

And  ripened  on  life's  sun- warmed  orchard- wall; 

A  gem  which,  hardening  in  the  mystical 

ISIine  of  man's  heart,  to  quenchless  flame  hath  leapt; 

A  medal  of  pure  gold  art's  nympholcpt 

Stamps  with  love's  lips  and  brows  imperial; 

A  branch  from  memory's  briar,  whereon  the  fall 

Of  thought-eternalizing  tears  hath  wept: 

A  star  that  shoots  athwart  star-steadfast  heaven; 

A  fluttering  aigrette  of  tossed  passion's  brine;       '" 

A  leaf  from  youth's  immortal  missal  torn; 

A  bark  across  dark  seas  of  anguish  driven; 

A  feather  dropped  from  breast-wings  aquiline; 

A  silvery  dream  shunning  red  lips  of  morn. 


There  is  no  mood,  no  heart-throb  fugitive, 

No  spark  from  man's  imperishable  mind. 

No  moment  of  man's  will,  that  may  not  find 

Form  in  the  Sonnet ;  and  thenceforward  live 

A  potent  elf,  by  art's  imperative 

Magic  to  crystal  spheres  of  song  confined: 

As  in  the  moonstone's  orb  pent  spirits  wind         ;  ^'' 

'Mid  dungeon  depths  day-beams  they  take  and  give. 

Spare  thou  no  pains;  carve  thought's  pure  diamond 

With  fourteen  facets,  scattering  fire  and  light: — -  ^ 

Uncut,  what  jewel  burns  but  darkly  bright?  ■' 

And  Prospcro  vainly  waves  his  runic  wand, 

If,  spurning  art's  inexorable  law,  ' 

In  Ariel's  prison-sphere  he  leave  one  flaw.  '  ^ 


Vendor's  Song  3109 

The  Sonnet  is  a  world,  where  feelings  caught 

In  webs  of  phantasy,  combine  and  fuse 

Their  kindred  elements  'neath  mystic  dews 

Shed  from  the  ether  round  man's  dwelling  wrought; 

Distilling  heart's  content,  star-fragrance  fraught 

With  influences  from  the  breathing  fires 

Of  heaven  in  everlasting  endless  gyres 

Enfolding  and  encircling  orbs  of  thought. 

Our  Sonnet's  world  hath  two  fixed  hemispheres: 

This,  where  the  sun  with  fierce  strength  masculine 

Pours  his  keen  rays  and  bids  the  noonday  shine; 

That,  where  the  moon  and  the  stars,  concordant  powers. 

Shed  milder  rays,  and  daylight  disappears 

In  low  melodious  music  of  still  hours. 

John  Addhigton  Symonds  [1840-1893] 

"SCORN  NOT  THE  SONNET" 

Scorn  not  the  Sonnet;  Critic,  you  have  frowned. 

Mindless  of  its  just  honors;  with  this  key 

Shakespeare  unlocked  his  heart;  the  melody 

Of  this  small  lute  gave  ease  to  Petrarch's  wound; 

A  thousand  times  this  pipe  did  Tasso  sound; 

With  it  Camoens  soothed  an  exile's  grief; 

The  Sonnet  glittered  a  gay  myrtle  leaf 

Amid  the  cypress  with  which  Dante  crowned 

His  visionary  brow;  a  glow-worm  lamp, 

It  cheered  mild  Spenser,  called  from  Faery-land 

To  struggle  through  dark  ways;  and,  when  a  damp 

Fell  round  the  path  of  Milton,  in  his  hand 

The  Thing  became  a  trumpet,  whence  he  blew 

Soul-animating  strains — alas,  too  few! 

William  Wordsii'orth  [1770-1850] 

VENDOR'S  SONG 

My  songs  to  sell,  good  sir!  ^*1 

I  pray  you  buy. 
Here's  one  will  win  a  lady's  tears. 

Here's  one  will  make  her  gay, 


31  lO      Poems   of  Sentiment  and    Retlection 

Here's  one  will  charm  your  true  love  true 

Forever  and  a  day; 
Good  sir,  I  pray  you  buy! 

Oh,  no,  he  will  not  buy. 

My. songs  to  sell,  sweet  maid! 

I  pray  you  buy. 
This  one  will  teach  you  Lilith's  lore. 

And  this  what  Helen  knew,  . 

And  this  will  keep  your  gold  hair  gold. 

And  this  your  blue  eyes  blue ; 
Sweet  maid,  I  pray  you  buy! 

Oh,  no,  she  will  not  buy. 

//  I'd  as  much  money  as  I  could  tell,  ,       ■    j 

/  never  would  cry  my  songs  to  sell, 
I  never  would  cry  my  songs  to  sell. 

Adelaide  Crapscy  [1S78-1914] 

THUNDERSTORMS ..^ail/I 

My  mind  has  thunderstorms,  '    '  -W'i^^^^'^- 
That  brood  for  heavy  hours:  '       '  '''  ^ 

Until  they  rain  me  words ;  .    '  ./ 

My  thoughts  are  drooping  flowers       ^ 

And  sulking,  silent  birds. 

Yet  come,  dark  thunderstorms,  <:iil 

'■        And  brood  your  heavy  hours;  .  ; ;  tl 

For  when  you  rain  me  words,       :  .jiinJa  ol' 

My  thoughts  are  dancing  flowers  ■    ■  '■    ' 

And  joyful  singing  birds. 

William  H.  Davies  [1870- 


GENIUS  LOCI 

Peace,  Shepherd,  peace!    What  boots  it  singing  on? 
Since  long  ago  grace-giving  Plucbus  died, 
And  all  the  train  that  loved  the  stream-bright  side 

Of  the  poetic  mount  with  him  are  gone 


Metrical   Feet  31  il 

Beyond  the  shores  of  Styx  and  Acheron, 

In  unexplored  realms  of  night  to  hide. 

The  clouds  that  strew  their  shadows  far  and  wide 
Are  all  of  Heaven  that  visits  Helicon. 
Yet  here,  where  never  muse  or  god  did  haunt, 

Still  may  some  nameless  power  of  Nature  stray, 
Pleased  with  the  reedy  stream's  continual  chant 

And  purple  pomp  of  these  broad  fields  in  May. 
The  shepherds  meet  him  where  he  herds  the  kine. 
And  careless  pass  him  by  whose  is  the  gift  divine. 

Margaret  Woods  [1856- 


THE  RONDEAU 

You  bid  me  try,  Blue  Eyes,  to  write 

A  Rondeau.    What!    Forthwith?— To-night? 

Reflect.    Some  skill  I  have,  'tis  true; 

But  thirteen  lines! — and  rhymed  on  two! — 
"Refrain,"  as  well.    Ah,  hapless  plight! 

Still,  there  are  five  lines — ranged  aright. 
These  Gallic  bonds,  I  feared,  woidd  fright 
My  easy  Muse.    They  did,  till  you — 
You  bid  me  try! 

That  makes  them  eight. — The  port's  in  sight: 
'Tis  all  because  your  eyes  are  bright! 
Now  just  a  pair  to  end  in  "00," — 
When  maids  command,  what  can't  we  do! 
Behold! — the  Rondeau,  tasteful,  light. 
You  bid  me  try! 
After  the  French  of  Voiturc  by  Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


METRICAL  FEET 

LESSON   FOR   A    BOY  ■  '■ 

bloo  a-)iIT 
Trochee  trips  from  long  to  short; 
From  long  to  long  in  solemn  sort 


3 1 12     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Slow  Spondee  stalks;  strong  foot!  yet  ill  able    ' '  '>-"■— ^^^ 
Ever  to  come  up  with  dactyl  trisyllable. 
Iambics  march  from  short  to  long; — 
With  a  leap  and  a  bound  the  swift  Anapaests  throng; 
One  syllable  long,  with  one  short  at  each  side, 
Amphibrachys  hastes  with  a  stately  stride;— 
First  and  last  being  long,  middle  short,  Amphimacer 
Strikes  his  thundering  hoofs  like  a  proud  highbred  racer. 
Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [1772-1S34] 

ACCIDENT  IN  ART 

What  painter  has  not  with  a  careless  smutch 
Accomplished  his  despair? — one  touch  reveahng 
All  he  had  put  of  life,  thought,  vigor,  feeling, 
Into  the  canvas  that  without  that  touch 
Showed  of  his  love  and  labor  just  so  much 
Raw  pigment,  scarce  a  scrap  of  soul  concealing! 
What  poet  has  not  found  his  spirit  kneeling 
A-sudden  at  the  sound  of  such  or  such 
Strange  verses  staring  from  his  manuscript. 
Written  he  knows  not  how,  but  which  will  sound 
Like  trumpets  down  the  years?     So  Accident 
Itself  unmasks  the  likeness  of  Intent, 
And  even  in  blind  Chance's  darkest  crypt 
The  shrine-lamp  of  God's  purposing  is  found. 

Richard  Hovey  [1864-1900] 

A   SONG  FOR   ST.   CECILIA'S  DAY,   1687 

From  harmony,  from  heavenly  harmony, 
This  universal  frame  began: 
When  nature  underneath  a  heap 
Of  jarring  atoms  lay. 
And  could  not  heave  her  head, 
The  tuneful  voice  was  heard  from  high, 

"Arise,  ye  more  than  dead!" 
Then  cold,  and  hot,  and  moist,  and  dry, 
In  order  to  their  stations  leap. 
And  Music's  power  obey. 


A  Song  for  Sl    Cecilia's   Day,    1687     31 13 

From  harmony,  from  heavenly  harmony, 

This  universal  frame  began: 

From  harmony  to  harmony 
Through  all  the  compass  of  the  notes  it  ran, 
The  diapason  closing  full  in  Man. 

What  passion  cannot  Music  raise  and  quell? 
When  Jubal  struck  the  chorded  shell, 
His  listening  brethren  stood  around. 
And,  wondering,  on  their  faces  fell 
To  worship  that  celestial  sound: 
Less  than  a  God  they  thought  there  could  not  dwell 
Within  the  hollow  of  that  shell 
That  spoke  so  sweetly  and  so  well. 
What  passion  cannot  Music  raise  and  quell? 

The  trumpet's  loud  clangor 

Excites  us  to  arms, 
With  shrill  notes  of  anger. 
And  mortal  alarms. 
The  double  double  double  beat 
Of  the  thundering  drum 
Cries  Hark!  the  foes  come; 
Charge,  charge,  'tis  too  late  to  retreat! 

The  soft  complaining  flute, 
In  dying  notes,  discovers 
The  woes  of  hopeless  lovers. 
Whose  dirge  is  whispered  by  the  warbling  lute. 

Sharp  violins  proclaim 
Their  jealous  pangs  and  desperation, 
Fury,  frantic  indignation, 
Depth  of  pains,  and  height  of  passion, 
:    For  the  fair,  disdainful  dame. 

But  O,  what  art  can  teach. 
What  human  voice  can  reach. 
The  sacred  organ's  praise? 


3 1 14    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Notes  inspiring  holy  love,  '!  Ktirfl 

Notes  that  wing  their  heavenly  ways 
To  mend  the  choirs  above. 

Orpheus  could  lead  the  savage  race; 
And  trees  uprooted  left  their  place, 

Sequacious  of  the  lyre;  .  // 

But  bright  Cecilia  raised  the  wonder  higher: 
When  to  her  organ  vocal  breath  was  given, 
An  angel  heard,  and  straight  appeared 
Mistaking  Earth  for  Heaven. 

GRAND   CHORUS 

As  from  the  power  of  sacred  lays 

The  spheres  began  to  move,  ,,  // 

And  sung  the  great  Creator's  praise 

To  aU  the  Blest  above; 
So  when  the  last  and  dreadful  hour 
This  crumbling  pageant  shall  devour, 
The  trumpet  shall  be  heard  on  high, 
The  dead  shall  live,  the  living  die. 
And  Music  shall  untune  the  sky! 

John  Drydcn  [1O31-1700] 

ALEXANDER'S  FEAST,  OR,  THE  POWER  OF  MUSIC; 
AN  ODE  IN  HONOR  OF  ST.  CECILIA'S  DAY,  1697 


'TwAS  at  the  royal  feast  for  Persia  won  '  '• 

By  Philip's  warlike  son — 
Aloft  in  awful  state 

The  godlike  hero  sate  1.  u^jAT 

On  his  imperial  throne;  '  ,VTu'i 

His  valiant  peers  were  placed  around,      !Jq'jC[ 
Their  brows  with  roses  and  with" myrtles  bdund, 
(So  should  desert  in  arms  be  crowned) ; 
The  lovely  Thais  b)''  his  side 
Sate  like  a  blooming  Eastern  bride 
In  flower  of  youth  and  beauty's  pride :-r^' 


Alexander's   Feast  3^^ 5 

Happy,  happy,  happy  pair! 

None  but  the  brave  f  y. 

None  but  the  brave 


None  but  the  brave  deserves  the  fair!  .. 

Chorus — Happy,  happy,  happy  pair!  '  "■ 

None  but  the  brave  -^ 

None  hilt  the  brave 
None  but  the  brave  deserves  the  fair! 


II 

Timotheus,  placed  on  high 
Amid  the  tuneful  choir, 
With  flying  fingers  touched  the  lyre: 
The  trembling  notes  ascend  the  sky 
And  heavenly  joys  inspire. 

The  song  began  from  Jove  i  J 

Who  left  his  blissful  seats  above — 
Such  is  the  power  of  mighty  love! 
A  dragon's  fiery  form  belied  the  god; 
Sublime  on  radiant  spires  he  rode 
When  he  to  fair  01>Tnpia  pressed. 
And  while  he  sought  her  snowy  breast, 
Then  round  her  slender  waist  he  curled, 
And   stamped   an   image   of   himself,   a   sovereign   of   the 

world. 
— The  listening  crowd  admire  the  lofty  somid !  , , 

A  present  deity!  they  shout  around: 
A  present  deity!  the  vaulted  roofs  rebound: 
With  ravished  ears 
The  monarch  hears. 
Assumes  the  god, 
Affects  to  nod 
And  seems  to  shake  the  spheres. 


ill 

I A 

) 

\{ 

y. 

M 
W 
Chorus — With  ravished  ears  'I 

The  monarch  hears,  T 

Assumes  the  god. 

Affects  to  nod  >  f 

And  seems  to  shake  the  spheres.  /I 


3ii6     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

III 

The  praise  of  Bacchus  then  the  sweet  musician  sung, 
Of  Bacchus  ever  fair  and  ever  young: 
The  jolly  god  in  triumph  comes! 

Sound  the  trumpets,  beat  the  drums!  -guaoH^ 

Flushed  with  a  purple  grace 
He  shows  his  honest  face: 

Now  give  the  hautboys  breath;  he  comes,  he  comes! 
Bacchus,  ever  fair  and  young, 
Drinking  joys  did  first  ordain; 
Bacchus'  blessings  are  a  treasure, 
Drinking  is  the  soldier's  pleasure: 
Rich  the  treasure, 
Sweet  the  pleasure. 
Sweet  is  pleasure  after  pain. 

Chorus — Bacchus^  blessings  are  a  treasure, 
Drinking  is  the  soldier's  pleasure: 
Rich  the  treasure, 
Sweet  the  pleasure, 
Sweet  is  pleasure  after  pain. 

IV 

Soothed  with  the  sound,  the  king  grew  vain; 
Fought  all  his  battles  o'er  again, 

And  thrice  he  routed  all  his  foes,  and  thrice  he  slew  the  slain! 
The  master  saw  the  madness  rise,  , 

His  glowing  cheeks,  his  ardent  eyes;  _  / 

And,  while  he  Heaven  and  Earth  defied,  ' , 

Changed  his  hand  and  chec 
He  chose  a  mournful  Muse 


Changed  his  hand  and  checked  his  pride.  ,.,,. 

lorn  ori  J 


„    .       .  .    .  23mU22/. 

Soft  pity  to  mf use:  ^    ^    r./ 

He  sung  Darms  great  and  good,  ,     . 

^  ?  &       J  'n398  hat 

By  too  severe  a  fate 

Fallen,  fallen,  fallen,  fallen,  -gijJIOHD 

Fallen  from  his  high  estate, 

And  weltering  in  his  blood; 

Deserted  at  his  utmost  need 

By  those  his  former  bounty  fed; 


Alexander's   Feast  3  ^  1 7 

On  the  bare  earth  exposed  he  Hes 

With  not  a  friend  to  close  his  eyes. 

— With  downcast  looks  the  joyless  victor  sate, 

Revolving,  in  his  altered  soul. 

The  various  turns  of  Chance  below; 

And,  now  and  then,  a  sigh  he  stole. 

And  tears  began  to  flow. 

Chorus — Revolving,  in  his  altered  soul. 

The  various  lurns  of  Chance  below; 
And,  now  and  then,  a  sigh  he  stole. 
And  tears  began  to  flow. 


The  mighty  master  smiled  to  see 
That  love  was  in  the  next  degree; 
'Twas  but  a  kindred-sound  to  move, 
For  pity  melts  the  mind  to  love. 
Softly  sweet,  in  Lydian  measures 
Soon  he  soothed  his  soul  to  pleasures. 
War,  he  sung,  is  toil  and  trouble, 
Honor  but  an  empty  bubble; 
Never  ending,  still  beginning. 
Fighting  still,  and  still  destroying; 
If  the  world  be  worth  thy  winning. 
Think,  O  think  it  worth  enjoying: 
Lovely  Thais  sits  beside  thee. 
Take  the  good  the  gods  provide  thee! 
— The  many  rend  the  skies  with  loud  applause; 
So  Love  was  crowned,  but  Music  won  the  cause. 
The  prince,  unable  to  conceal  his  pain, 
Gazed  on  the  fair 
Who  caused  his  care. 

And  sighed  and  looked,  sighed  and  looked. 
Sighed  and  looked,  and  sighed  again : 
At  length,  with  love  and  wine  at  once  oppressed, 
The  vanquished  victor  sunk  upon  her  breast. 

Chorus — The  prince,  unable  to  conceal  his  pain, 
Gazed  on  the  fair 
Who  caused  his  care, 


jiiS     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  sighed  and  looked,  sighed  and  looked, 
Sighed  and  looked,  and  sighed  again: 
At  length,  with  love  and  wine  at  once  oppressed, 
The  vanquished  victor  sunk  upon  her  breast. 

VI 

Now  strike  the  golden  lyre  again: 
A  louder  yet,  and  yet  a  louder  strain! 
Break  his  bands  of  sleep  asunder 
And  rouse  him,  hke  a  rattling  peal  of  thunder. 
Hark,  hark!  the  horrid  sound 
Has  raised  up  his  head: 
As  awaked  from  the  dead, 
And  amazed  he  stares  around. 
Revenge,  revenge,  Timotheus  cries, 
See  the  Furies  arise! 
See  the  snakes  that  they  rear 
How  they  hiss  in  their  hair, 
And  the  sparkles  that  flash  from  their  eyes! 
Behold  a  ghastly  band. 
Each  a  torch  in  his  hand ! 

Those  are  Grecian  ghosts,  that  in  battle  were  slain 
And  unburied  remain 
Inglorious  on  the  plain: 
Give  the  vengeance  due 
To  the  valiant  crew! 

Behold  how  they  toss  their  torches  on  high. 
How  they  point  to  the  Persian  abodes 
And  glittering  temples  of  their  hostile  gods. 
— The  princes  applaud  with  a  furious  joy: 
And  the  King  seized  a  flambeau  with  zeal  to  destroy; 
Thais  led  the  way 
To  light  him  to  his  prey, 
And,  like  another  Helen,  fired  another  Troy! 

Chorus — And  the  King  seized  a  flambeau  with  zeal  to  de- 
stroy; 
Thais  led  the  way  '  ' 

To  light  him  to  his  prey, 
And,  like  another  Helen,  fired  another  Troy! 


The  Passions  31^9 

VII 

— Thus,  long  ago, 
Ere  heaving  bellows  learned  to  blow, 
While  organs  yet  were  mute, 
Timotheus,  to  his  breathing  flute 
And  sounding  lyre, 

Could  swell  the  soul  to  rage,  or  kindle  soft  desire. 
At  last  divine  Ceciha  came, 
Inventress  of  the  vocal  frame ; 
The  sweet  enthusiast  from  her  sacred  store 
Enlarged  the  former  narrow  bounds, 
And  added  length  to  solemn  sounds, 
With  Nature's  mother-wit,  and  arts  unknown  before. 
— Let  old  Timotheus  yield  the  prize 
Or  both  divide  the  crown; 
He  raised  a  mortal  to  the  skies; 
She  drew  an  angel  down! 

Grand  Chorus — A  t  last  divine  Cecilia  came, 
Inventress  of  the  vocal  frame; 
The  sweet  enthusiast  from  her  sacred  store 
Enlarged  the  former  narrow  bounds, 
And  added  length  to  solemn  sounds, 
With   Nature's  mother-wit,   and  arts   un- 
known before. 
— Let  old  Timotheus  yield  the  prize 
Or  both  divide  the  crown; 
He  raised  a  mortal  to  the  skies; 
She  drew  an  angel  doivn! 

John  Dryden  [1631-1700] 


THE   PASSIONS 

AN   ODE    FOR   MUSIC 

When  Music,  heavenly  maid,  was  young, 
While  yet  in  early  Greece  she  sung, 
The  Passions  oft,  to  hear  her  shell. 
Thronged  around  her  magic  cell, 


3  1 20     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Exulting,  trembling,  raging,  fainting, 
Possessed  beyond  the  Muse's  painting; 
By  turns  they  felt  the  glowing  mind 
Disturbed,  delighted,  raised,  refined: 
Till  once,  'tis  said,  when  all  were  fired. 
Filled  with  fury,  rapt,  inspired. 
From  the  supporting  myrtles  round 
They  snatched  her  instruments  of  sound; 
And,  as  they  oft  had  heard  apart 
Sweet  lessons  of  her  forceful  art, 
Each  (for  madness  ruled  the  hour). 
Would  prove  his  own  expressive  power.. 

First  Fear  his  hand,  its  skill  to  try. 

Amid  the  chords  bewildered  laid. 
And  back  recoiled,  he  knew  not  why, 

Even  at  the  sound  himself  had  made. 

Next  Anger  rushed;  his  eyes,  on  fire, 

In  lightnings  owned  his  secret  stings; 
In  one  rude  clash  he  struck  the  lyre. 

And  swept  with  hurried  hand  the  strings. 

With  woful  measures  wan  Despair 

Low,  sullen  sounds  his  grief  beguiled; 
A  solemn,  strange,  and  mingled  air; 

'Twas  sad  by  fits,  by  starts  'twas  wild. 

But  thou,  O  Hope,  with  eyes  so  fair. 

What  was  thy  delightful  measure? 
Still  it  whispered  promised  pleasure. 

And  bade  the  lovely  scenes  at  distance  hail! 
Still  would  her  touch  the  strain  prolong, 

And  from  the  rocks,  the  woods,  the  vale, 
She  called  on  Echo  still,  through  all  the  song; 

And,  where  her  sweetest  theme  she  chose, 
A  soft  responsive  voice  was  heard  at  every  close. 
And  Hope  enchanted  smiled,  and  waved  her  golden  hair. 


The   Passions  3  1 2 1 

And  longer  had  she  sung, — but,  with  a  frown,  Ti 

Revenge  impatient  rose; 
He  threw  his  blood-stained  sword  in  thunder  down 
And,  with  a  withering  look, 
The  war-denouncing  trumpet  took, 
And  blew  a  blast  so  loud  and  dread, 
Were  ne'er  prophetic  sounds  so  full  of  w^oe. 
And  ever  and  anon  he  beat 
The  doubhng  drum  with  furious  heat ; 
And  though  sometimes,  each  dreary  pause  between, 
Dejected  Pity,  at  his  side. 
Her  soul-subduing  voice  applied, 
Yet  still  he  kept  his  wild  unaltered  mien. 
While  each  strained  ball  of  sight  seemed  bursting  from  his 
head. 

Thy  numbers.  Jealousy,  to  naught  were  fixed, 

Sad  proof  of  thy  distressful  state; 
Of  differing  themes  the  veering  song  was  mixed. 

And  now  it  courted  Love,  now  raving  called  on  Hate. 

With  eyes  upraised,  as  one  inspired. 

Pale  Melancholy  sate  retired. 

And  from  her  wild  sequestered  seat, 

In  notes  by  distance  made  more  sweet. 

Poured  through  the  mellow'  horn  her  pensive  soul : 

And,  dashing  soft  from  rocks  around, 

Bubbling  runnels  joined  the  sound; 
Through  glades  and  glooms  the  mingled  measure  stole; 

Or,  o'er  some  haunted  stream,  with  fond  delay, 
Round  an  holy  calm  diffusing. 
Love  of  Peace  and  lonely  musing, 

In  hollow  murmurs  died  away. 

But  oh,  how  altered  was  its  sprightlier  tone. 
When  Cheerfulness,  a  nymph  of  healthiest  hue, 

Her  bow  across  her  shoulder  flung, 

Her  buskins  gemmed  with  morning  dew. 
Blew  an  inspiring  air,  that  dale  and  thicket  rung, 

The  hunter's  call  to  faun  and  dryad  known! 


3122    Poems  of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

The  oak-crowned  sisters,  and  their  chaste-eyed  queen, 
Satyrs,  and  sylvan  boys,  were  seen, 
Peeping  from  forth  their  alleys  green; 
Brown  Exercise  rejoiced  to  hear, 

And  Sport  leapt  up,  and  seized  his  beechen  spear. 

Last  came  Joy's  ecstatic  trial. 
He,  with  viny  crown  advancing. 

First  to  the  lively  pipe  his  hand  addressed; 
But  soon  he  saw  the  brisk  awakening  viol, 

Whose  sweet  entrancing  voice  he  loved  the  best. 
They  would  have  thought,  who  heard  the  strain, 
They  saw  in  Tempe's  vale  her  native  maids 
Amidst  the  vestal  sounding  shades, 
To  some  unwearied  minstrel  dancing, 
While,  as  his  flying  fingers  kissed  the  strings, 

Love  framed  with  Mirth  a  gay  fantastic  round; 

Loose  were  her  tresses  seen,  her  zone  unbound. 

And  he,  amidst  his  frolic  play, 

As  if  he  would  the  charming  air  repay, 
Shook  thousand  odors  from  his  dewy  wings. 

O  IVIusic!  sphere-descended  maid. 
Friend  of  Pleasure,  Wisdom's  aid! 
Why,  goddess,  why,  to  us  denied, 
Lay'st  thou  thy  ancient  lyre  aside? 
As,  in  that  loved  Athenian  bower, 
You  learned  an  all-commanding  power, 
Thy  mimic  soul,  O  Nymph  endeared. 
Can  well  recall  what  then  it  heard. 
Where  is  thy  native  simple  heart, 
Devote  to  Virtue,  Fancy,  Art? 
Arise,  as  in  that  elder  time, 
Warm,  energic,  chaste,  sublime! 
Thy  wonders,  in  that  godlike  age. 
Fill  thy  recording  sister's  page. — 
'Tis  said,  and  I  believe  the  tale, 
Thy  humblest  reed  could  more  prevail, 
■    Had  more  of  strength,  diviner  rage, 
Than  all  which  charms  this  laggard  age; 


To   Music,  To   Becalm   His   Fever    3123 

Even  all  at  once  together  found, 
Cecilia's  mingled  world  of  sound. 
O  bid  our  vain  endeavors  cease, 
Revive  the  just  designs  of  Greece: 
Return  in  all  thy  simple  state! 
Confirm  the  tales  her  sons  relate! 

William  Collins  [1721-1759] 


TO  MUSIC,  TO  BECALM  HIS   FEVER 

C1LA.RM  me  asleep,  and  melt  me  so 

With  thy  delicious  numbers, 
That,  being  ravished,  hence  I  go 
Away  in  easy  slumbers. 
Ease  my  sick  head. 
And  make  my  bed. 
Thou  power  that  canst  sever 
From  me  this  ill. 
And  quickly  still, 
Though  thou  not  kiU 
My  fever. 

Thou  sweetly  canst  convert  the  same 

From  a  consuming  fire 
Into  a  gentle-licking  flame, 
And  make  it  thus  expire. 
Then  make  me  weep 
My  pains  asleep; 
And  give  me  such  reposes 
That  I,  poor  I, 
May  think  thereby 
I  live  and  die 

'Mongst  roses.  W  (' 

Fall  on  me  like  a  silent  dew, 

Or  like  those  maiden  showers 
Which,  by  the  peep  of  day,  do  strew 
A  baptism  o'er  the  flowers. 
Melt,  melt  my  pains 
With  thy  soft  strains; 


3124     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

That,  having  ease  me  given, 
With  full  delight 
I  leave  this  hght, 
And  take  my  flight 
For  Heaven. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


A   MUSICAL  INSTRUMENT 

What  was  he  doing,  the  great  god  Pan, 

Down  in  the  reeds  by  the  river? 
Spreading  ruin  and  scattering  ban, 
Splashing  and  paddling  with  hoofs  of  a  goat, 
And  breaking  the  golden  lilies  afloat 

With  the  dragon-fly  on  the  river. 

He  tore  out  a  reed,  the  great  god  Pan, 
From  the  deep  cool  bed  of  the  river: 

The  limpid  water  turbidly  ran. 

And  the  broken  lilies  a-dying  lay. 

And  the  dragon-fly  had  fled  away. 
Ere  he  brought  it  out  of  the  river. 

High  on  the  shore  sat  the  great  god  Pan, 

While  turbidly  flowed  the  river; 
And  hacked  and  hewed  as  a  great  god  can. 
With  his  hard  bleak  steel  at  the  patient  reed. 
Till  there  was  not  a  sign  of  a  leaf  indeed 

To  prove  it  fresh  from  the  river. 

He  cut  it  short,  did  the  great  god  Pan, 

(How  tall  it  stood  in  the  river!) 
Then  drew  the  pith,  like  the  heart  of  a  man, 
Steadily  from  the  outside  ring. 
And  notched  the  poor  dry  empty  thing 

In  holes,  as  he  sat  by  the  river. 

"This  is  the  way,"  laughed  the  great  god  Pan, 

(Laughed  while  he  sat  by  the  river,) 
"The  only  way,  since  gods  began 


At  a  Solemn   Music'^'^'"^*^     3125 

To  make  sweet  music,  they  could  succeed." 
Then,  dropping  his  mouth  to  a  hole  in  the  reed, 
He  blew  in  power  by  the  river. 

Sweet,  sweet,  sweet,  O  Pan! 

Piercing  sweet  by  the  river! 
Blinding  sweet,  O  great  god  Pan! 
The  sun  on  the  hill  forgot  to  die,  . . 

And  the  lilies  revived,  and  the  dragon-fly 

Came  back  to  dream  on  the  river. 

Yet  half  a  beast  is  the  great  god  Pan, 

To  laugh  as  he  sits  by  the  river, 
Making  a  poet  out  of  a  man: 
The  true  gods  sigh  for  the  cost  and  pain, — 
For  the  reed  which  grows  nevermore  again 

As  a  reed  with  the  reeds  in  the  river. 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [i 806-1861] 

AT  A  SOLEMN   MUSIC, (,,, 

Blest  pair  of  Sirens,  pledges  of  Heaven's  joy. 
Sphere-born  harmonious  Sisters,  Voice  and  Verse! 
Wed  3'our  divine  sounds,  and  mixed  power  employ, 
Dead  things  with  inbreathed  sense  able  to  pierce. 
And  to  our  high-raised  phantasy  present 
That  undisturbed  Song  of  pure  consent 
Aye  sung  before  the  sapphire-colored  throne 

To  Hun  that  sits  thereon. 
With  saintly  shout  and  solemn  jubilee; 
Where  the  bright  Seraphim  in  burning  row 
Their  loud  uplifted  angel- trumpets  blow; 
And  the  Cherubic  host  in  thousand  choirs 
Touch  their  immortal  harps  of  golden  wires. 
With  those  just  Spirits  that  wear  victorious  palms, 

Hymns  devout  and  holy  psalms 

Singing  everlastingly: 
That  we  on  earth,  with  undiscording  voice 
May  rightly  answer  that  melodious  noise; 
As  once  we  did,  till  disproportioncd  sin 
Jarred  against  nature's  chime,  and  with  harsh  din 


;i26     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Broke  the  fair  music  that  all  creatures  made 
To  their  great  Lord,  whose  love  their  motion  swayed 
In  perfect  diapason,  whilst  they  stood 
In  first  obedience,  and  their  state  of  good. 
O  may  we  soon  again  renew  that  Song, 
And  keep  in  tune  with  Heaven,  tUl  God  ere  long 
To  his  celestial  concert  us  unite, 
To  Hve  with  him,  and  sing  in  endless  morn  of  light! 

John  Milton  [1608-1674] 

WITH  A   GUITAR,  TO  JANE 

Ariel  to  Miranda: — Take  -jr 

This  slave  of  Music,  for  the  sake  .. 

Of  him  who  is  the  slave  of  thee. 
And  teach  it  all  the  harmony 
'^-  In  which  thou  can'st,  and  only  thou, 

Make  the  delighted  spirit  glow, 
Till  joy  denies  itself  again, 
And,  too  intense,  is  turned  to  pain; 
For  by  commission  and  command 
Of  thine  own  Prince  Ferdinand, 
Poor  Ariel  sends  this  silent  token 
Of  more  than  ever  can  be  spoken; 
Your  guardian  spirit,  Ariel,  who,  \^.,j, 

From  Hfe  to  life,  must  still  pursue 
Your  happiness; — for  thus  alone 
Can  Ariel  ever  find  his  own. 
From  Prospero's  enchanted  cell,      .   .  ,{jj'// 
As  the  mighty  verses  tell,  .fj  ^losPff 

To  the  throne  of  Naples,  he  ,jf^[  -jiafjci' 

Lit  you  o'er  the  trackless  sea,  ,rf|  f-.^j/^ 

Flitting  on,  your  prow  before,  ,|,,,'p 

Like  a  living  meteor.  yf/ 

When  you  die,  the  silent  Moon, 
In  her  intcrlunar  swoon. 
Is  not  sadder  in  her  cell  .,;  r> 

Than  deserted  Ariel. 

When  you  live  again  on  earth,  ,    - 

Like  an  unseen  star  of  birth,  , , .  1 


With  a  Guitar,  to  Jane  3127 

Arid  guides  you  o'er  the  sea 

Of  life  from  your  nativity. 

Many  changes  have  been  run 

Since  Ferdinand  and  you  begun 

Your  course  of  love,  and  Ariel  still 

Has  tracked  your  steps  and  served  your  will. 

Now,  in  humbler,  happier  lot, 

This  is  all  remembered  not; 

And  now.  alas!  the  poor  sprite  is 

Imprisoned,  for  some  fault  of  his. 

In  a  body  like  a  grave; — 

From  you  he  only  dares  to  crave, 

For  his  service  and  his  sorrow, 

A  smile  to-day,  a  song  to-morrow. 

The  artist  who  this  idol  wrought 

To  echo  all  harmonious  thought. 

Felled  a  tree,  while  on  the  steep 

The  woods  were  in  their  winter  sleep, 

Rocked  in  that  repose  divine 

On  the  wind-swept  Apennine; 

And  dreaming,  some  of  Autumn  past, 

And  some  of  Spring  approaching  fast. 

And  some  of  April  buds  and  showers, 

And  some  of  songs  in  July  bowers, 

And  all  of  love;  and  so  this  tree^ 

Oh,  that  such  our  death  may  be! — 

Died  in  sleep,  and  felt  no  pain. 

To  live  in  happier  form  again: 

From  which,  beneath  Heaven's  fairest  star, 

The  artist  wrought  this  loved  Guitar; 

And  taught  it  justly  to  reply 

To  all  who  question  skilfully, 

In  language  gentle  as  thine  own ; 

Whispering  in  enamoured  tone        ,     , 

Sweet  oracles  of  woods  and  dells,  ,^ 

And  summer  winds  in  sylvan  cells. 

For  it  had  learnt  all  harmonies 

Of  the  plains  and  of  the  skies. 


3128     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Of  the  forests  and  the  mountains, 
And  the  many- voiced  fountains; 
The  clearest  echoes  of  the  hills, 
The  softest  notes  of  falling  rills, 
The  melodies  of  birds  and  bees, 
The  murmuring  of  summer  seas, 
And  pattering  rain,  and  breathing  dew, 
And  airs  of  evening;  and  it  knew 
That  seldom-heard,  mysterious  sound 
Which,  driven  on  its  diurnal  round, 
As  it  floats  through  boundless  day, 
Our  world  enkindles  on  its  way. — 
All  this  it  knows;  but  will  not  tell 
To  those  who  cannot  question  well 
The  Spirit  that  inhabits  it. 
It  talks  according  to  the  wit 
Of  its  companions;  and  no  more 
Is  heard  than  has  been  felt  before, 
By  those  who  tempt  it  to  betray 
These  secrets  of  an  elder  day: 
But  sweetly  as  its  answers  will 
Flatter  hands  of  perfect  skill. 
It  keeps  its  highest,  holiest  tone 
For  our  beloved  Jane  alone. 

Percy  Bysshc  Shelley  [1702-1822] 


ODE 

We  are  the  music-makers, 

And  we  are  the  dreamers  of  dreams, 
Wandering  by  lone  sea-breakers. 

And  sitting  by  desolate  streams; 
World-losers  and  world-forsakers. 

On  whom  the  pale  moon  gleams: 
Yet  we  are  the  movers  and  shakers 

Of  the  world  for  ever,  it  seems. 

With  wonderful  deathless  ditties 
We  build  up  the  world's  great  cities, 


Ode  3129 

And  out  of  a  fabulous  story  -,.:;  ,!  ;/. 

We  fashion  an  empire's  glory: 
One  man  with  a  dream,  at  pleasure, 

Shall  go  forth  and  conquer  a  crown ; 
And  three  with  a  new  song's  measure 

Can  trample  an  empire  down. 

We,  in  the  ages  lying 

In  the  buried  past  of  the  earth, 
Built  Nineveh  with  our  sighing, 

And  Babel  itself  with  our  mirth; 
And  o'erthrew  them  with  prophesying 

To  the  old  of  the  new  world's  worth; 
For  each  age  is  a  dream  that  is  dying. 

Or  one  that  is  coming  to  birth. 

A  breath  of  our  inspiration 
Is  the  life  of  each  generation; 

A  wondrous  thing  of  our  dreaming 

Unearthly,  impossible  seeming — 
The  soldier,  the  king,  and  the  peasant 

Are  working  together  in  one. 
Till  our  dream  shall  become  their  present, 

And  their  work  in  the  world  be  done. 

They  had  no  vision  amazing 

Of  the  goodly  house  they  are  raising; 

They  had  no  divine  foreshowing 

Of  the  land  to  which  they  are  going: 
But  on  one  man's  soul  it  hath  broken, 

A  light  that  doth  not  depart; 
And  his  look,  or  a  word  he  hath  spoken, 

Wrought  flame  in  another  man's  heart. 

And'therefore  to-day  is  thrilling 

With  a  past  day's  late  fulfilling; 
And  the  multitudes  are  cnhsted 
In  the  faith  that  their  fathers  resisted. 


3130     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

And,  scorning  the  dream  of  tomorrow, 
And  bringing  to  pass,  as  they  may. 

In  the  world,  for  its  joy  or  its  sorrow. 
The  dream  that  was  scorned  yesterday. 

But  we,  with  our  dreaming  and  singing, 

Ceaseless  and  sorrowless  we! 
The  glory  about  us  chnging 

Of  the  glorious  futures  we  see. 
Our  souls  with  high  music  ringing: 

O  men !  it  must  ever  be 
That  we  dwell,  in  our  dreaming  and  singing, 

A  little  apart  from  ye. 

For  we  are  afar  with  the  dawning 

And  the  suns  that  are  not  yet  high, 
And  out  of  the  infinite  morning 

Intrepid  you  hear  us  cry — 
How,  spite  of  your  human  scorning, 

Once  more  God's  future  draws  nigh, 
And  already  goes  forth  the  warning 

That  ye  of  the  past  must  die. 

Great  hail!  we  cry  to  the  comers 

From  the  dazzling  unknown  shore; 
Bring  us  hither  your  sun  and  your  summers, 

And  renew  our  world  as  of  yore; 
You  shall  teach  us  your  song's  new  numbers, 

And  things  that  we  dreamed  not  before:    ' 
Yea,  in  spite  of  a  dreamer  who  slumbers. 

And  a  singer  who  sings  no  more. 

Arthur  O'Shaughnessy  [1844-1881] 


MUSIC 

The  God  of  Music  dwelleth  out  of  doors. 
All  seasons  through  his  minstrelsy  we  meet, 
Breathing  by  field  and  covert  haunting-sweet: 
From  organ-lofts  in  forests  old  he  pours 
A  solemn  harmony:  on  leafy  floors 


Music  at  Twilight  3  131 

To  smooth  Autumnal  pipes  he  moves  his  feet, 
Or  with  the  tinghng  plectrum  of  the  sleet 
In  Winter  keen  beats  out  his  thrilling  scores. 
Leave  me  the  reed  unpiucked  beside  the  stream, 
And  he  will  stoop  and  fill  it  with  the  breeze; 
Leave  me  the  viol's  frame  in  secret  trees, 
Un wrought,  and  it  shall  make  a  druid  theme; 
Leave  me  the  whispering  shell  on  Nereid  shores: 
The  God  of  Music  dwelleth  out  of  doors. 

Edith  M.  Thomas  [1854- 

ON  MUSIC 

Many  love  music  but  for  music's  sake, 
Many  because  her  touches  can  awake 
Thoughts  that  repose  within  the  breast  half-dead, 
And  rise  to  follow  where  she  loves  to  lead. 
What  various  feelings  come  from  days  gone  by! 
What  tears  from  far-off  sources  dim  the  eye! 
Few,  when  light  fingers  with  sweet  voices  play 
And  melodies  swell,  pause,  and  melt  away, 
^Mind  how  at  every  touch,  at  every  tone, 
A  spark  of  life  hath  glistened  and  hath  gone. 

Waller  Savage  Land  or  [i  775-1 864] 

MUSIC   AT  TWILIGHT 

O  Twilight,  Twilight !  evermore  to  hear 
The  wounded  viols  pleading  to  thy  heart! 
To  dream  we  watch  thy  purple  wings  depart; 

To  wake,  and  know  thy  presence  always  near! 

What  dost  thou  on  the  pathway  of  the  sun? 
Abide  thy  sister  Night,  while  grief  so  pure 
Makes  heaven  and  all  its  beauty  seem  too  sure, 

And  all  too  certain  her  oblivion. 

One  star  awakes  to  turn  thee  from  the  South. 
Oh,  linger  in  the  shadows  thou  hast  drawn, 
Ere  Night  cast  dew  before  the  feet  of  Dawn, 

Or  Silence  lay  her  kiss  on  Music's  mouth! 

George  Sterling  [1869- 


3^3^ 


Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 


THE  KEY-BOARD 

FiVE-AND -THIRTY  black  slaves, 

Half-a-hundred  white, 
All  their  duty  but  to  sing 

For  their  Queen's  delight, 
Now  with  throats  of  thunder, 

Now  with  dulcet  lips, 
While  she  rules  them  royally 

With  her  finger-tips! 

When  she  quits  her  palace, 

All  the  slaves  are  dumb — 
Dumb  with  dolor  till  the  Queen 

Back  to  Court  is  come: 
Dumb  the  throats  of  thunder, 

Dumb  the  dulcet  lips, 
Lacking  all  the  sovereignty 

Of  her  finger-tips. 

Dusky  slaves  and  pallid. 

Ebon  slaves  and  white. 
When  the  Queen  was  on  her  throne 

How  you  sang  to-night! 
Ah,  the  throats  of  thunder! 

Ah,  the  dulcet  lips! 
Ah,  the  gracious  tyrannies 

Of  her  finger-tips! 

Silent,  silent,  silent, 

All  your  voices  now;  '"^ 

Was  it  then  her  life  alone  '^ 

Did  your  life  endow? 
Waken,  throats  of  thunder!  ,n-  > 

Waken,  dulcet  lips! 
Touched  to  immortality 

By  her  finger-tips. 

William  Walson  [1858- 


A  Toccata  of  Galuppi's  3^33 


A  TOCCATA  OF  GALUPPI'S 

Oh  Galuppi,  Baldassare,  this  is  very  sad  to  find! 

I  can  hardly  misconceive  you;  it  would  prove  me  deaf  and 

blind; 
But  although  I  take  your  meaning,  'tis  with  such  a  heavy 

mind! 

Here  you  come  with  your  old  music,  and  here's  all  the  good 

it  brings. 
What,  they  lived  once  thus  at  Venice  where  the  merchants 

were  the  kings, 
Where  St.  Mark's  is,  where  the  Doges  used  to  wed  the  sea 

with  rings? 

Ay,  because  the  sea's  the  street  there;  and  'tis  arched  b}' 

....  what  you  call 
.  .  .  Shylock's  bridge  with  houses  on.it,  where  they  kept 

the  carnival: 
I  was  never  out  of  England — it's  as  if  I  saw  it  all. 

Did  young  people  take  their  pleasure  when  the  sea  was 
warm  in  May? 

Balls  and  masks  begun  at  midnight,  burning  ever  to  mid- 
day, i 

When  they  made  up  fresh  adventures  for  the  morrow,  do 
you  say? 

Was  a  lady  such  a  lady,  cheeks  so  round  and  lips  so  red, — 
On  her  neck  the  small  face  buoyant,  like  a  bell-flower  on  its 

bed, 
O'er  the  breast's  superb  abundance  where  a  man  might  base 

his  head? 

Well,  and  it  was  graceful  of  them — they'd  break  talk  off 
and  afford 

— She,  to  bite  her  mask's  black  velvet — he,  to  finger  on  his 
sword, 

While  you  sat  and  played  Toccatas,  stately  at  the  clavi- 
chord? 


3134     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

What?     Those  lesser  thirds  so  plaintive,  sixths  diminished, 

sigh  on  sigh,  vJJui 

Told  them  something?     Those  suspensions,  those  solutions 

— "Must  we  die?" 
Those  commiserating  sevenths — "Life  might  last!  we  can 

but  try!" 

"Were  you  happy?"— "Yes" — "And  are  you  still  as  happy?" 

• — "Yes.     And  you?" 
— "Then,  more  kisses!" — "Did  /  stop  them,  when  a  million 

seemed  so  few?" 
Hark!  the  dominant's  persistence,  till  it  must  be  answered 

to! 

So,  an  octave  struck  the  answer.     Oh,  they  praised  you,  I 

dare  say! 
"Brave  Galuppi!  that  was  music!  good  alike  at  grave  and 

gay! 
I  can  always  leave  off  talking,  when  I  hear  a  master  play." 

jif  zr.'ff  I 
Then  they  left  you  for  their  pleasure:  till  in  due  time,  one  by 

one. 
Some  with  lives  that  came  to  nothing,  some  with  deeds  as 

well  undone. 
Death  came  tacitly  and  took  them  where  they  never  see 

the  sun.  ,a  <_u;i,  .uiiV/ 

But  when  I  sit  down  to  reason,  think  to  take  my  stand  nor 

swerve. 
While  I  triumph  o'er  a  secret  wrung  from  nature's  close 

reserve, 
In  you  come  with  your  cold  music,  till  I  creep  through  every 

nerve.  ibiaii  ziii 

Yes,  you,  like  a  ghostly  cricket,  creaking  where  a  house  was 
burned : 

"Dust  and  ashes,  dead  and  done  with,  Venice  spent  what 
Venice  earned! 

The  soul,  doubtless,  is  immortal — where  a  soul  can  be  dis- 
cerned. 


nom:,iiy>{         Abt  Vogler  3135 

"Yours  for  instance:  you  know  physics,  something  of  ge- 
ology, 

JMathematics  are  your  pastime;  souls  shall  rise  in  their  de- 
gree; 

Butterflies  may  dread  extinction, — you'll  not  die,  it  cannot 
be! 

"As  for  Venice  and  her  people,  merely  born  to  bloom  and 

drop, 
Here  on  earth  they  bore  their  fruitage,  mirth  and  folly  were 

the  crop: 
What  of  soul  was  left,  I  wonder,  when  the  kissing  had  to 

stop? 

"Dust  and  ashes!"     So  you  creak  it,  and  I  want  the  heart 

to  scold. 
Dear  dead  women,  with  such  hair,  too — what's  become  of 

all  the  gold 
Used  to  hang  and  brush  their  bosoms?     I  feel  chilly  and 

grown  old. 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1889] 


ABT  VOGLER 

(after  he  has  been  extemporizing  upon  the  musical 
j^.j,  instrument  of  his  invention) 

Would   that  the  structure  brave,   the  manifold  music  I 
build, 
Bidding  my  organ  obey,  calling  its  keys  to  their  work,  A 
Claiming  each  slave  of  the  sound,  at  a  touch,  as  when  Solo- 
mon willed 
Armies  of  angels  that  soar,  legions  of  demons  that  lurk, 
Man,  brute,  reptile,  fly,^ — alien  of  end  and  of  aim, 

Adverse,  each  from  the  other  heaven-high,  hell-deep  re- 
moved,— 
Should  rush  into  sight  at  once  as  he  named  the  ineffable 
'•'-' '    Name, 

'^And  pile  him  a  palace  straight,  to  pleasure  the  princess 
he  loved! 


3136     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Would  it  might  tarry  like  his,  the  beautiful  building  of  mine, 
This  which  my  keys  in  a  crowd  pressed  and  importuned 
to  raise! 
Ah,  one  and  all,  how  they  helped,  would  dispart  now  and 
now  combine. 
Zealous  to  hasten  the  work,  heighten  their  master  his 
praise ! 
And  one  would  bury  his  brow  with  a  blind  plunge  down  to 
hell, 
Burrow  awhile  and  build,  broad  on  the  roots  of  things. 
Then  up  again  swim  into  sight,  having  based  me  my  palace 
well. 
Founded  it,  fearless  of  flame,  flat  on  the  nether  springs. 

And  another  would  mount  and  march,  hke  the  excellent 
minion  he  was. 
Ay,  another  and  yet  another,  one  crowd  but  with  many 
a  crest. 
Raising  my  rampired  walls  of  gold  as  transparent  as  glass. 

Eager  to  do  and  die,  yield  each  his  place  to  the  rest: 
For  higher  still  and  higher  (as  a  runner  tips  with  fire. 

When  a  great  illumination  surprises  a  festal  night — 
Outlining  round  and  round  Rome's  dome  from  space  to 
spire) 
Up,  the  pinnacled  glory  reached,  and  the  pride  of  my  soul 
was  in  sight. 

In  sight?    Not  half!    for  it  seemed,  it  was  certain,  to  match 
man's  birth. 
Nature  in  turn  conceived,  obeying  an  impulse  as  I; 
And  the  emulous  heaven  yearned  down,  made  effort  to  reach 
the  earth, 
As  the  earth  had  done  her  best,  in  my  passion,  to  scale 
the  sky: 
Novel  splendors  burst  forth,  grew  familiar  and  dwelt  with 
mine. 
Not  a  point  nor  peak  but  found  and  fixed  its  wandering 
star; 
Meteor-moons,  balls  of  blaze:  and  they  did  not  pale  nor  pine. 
For  earth  had  attained  to  heaven,  there  was  no  more  near 
nor  far. 


Abt  Vogler  3137 

Nay  more;  for  there  wanted  not  who  walked  in  the  glare 
and  glow,  '''J  ti^'''>Ti  i^iJ  ;  hc  1  ■ 

Presences  plain  in  the  place;  or,  fresh  from  the  Protoplast, 
Furnished  for  ages  to  come,  when  a  kindlier  wind  should 
blow, 
Lured  now  to  begin  and  live,  in  a  house  to  their  liking  at 
last; 
Or  else  the  wonderful  Dead  who  have  passed  through  the 
body  and  gone. 
But  were  back  once  more  to  breathe  in  an  old  world  worth 
their  new: 
What  never  had  been,  was  now;  what  was,  as  it  shall  be 
anon; 
And  what  is, — shall  I  say,  matched  both?  for  I  was  made 
perfect  too. 

AU  through  m}^  keys  that  gave  their  sounds  to  a  wish  of  my 
soul, 
All  through  my  soul  that  praised  as  its  wish  flowed  visibly 
forth, 
All  through  music  and  me!     For  think,  had  I  painted  the 
joo;  whole,  in  noMo; 

Why,  there  it  had  stood,  to  see,  nor  the  process  so  wonder- 
worth. 
Had  I  written  the  same,  made  verse — still,  effect  proceeds 
from  cause. 
Ye  know  why  the  forms  are  fair,  ye  hear  how  the  tale  is 
^^"    told; 
It  is  all  triumphant  art,  but  art  in  obedience  to  laws, 

Painter  and  poet  are  proud,  in  the  artist-Hst  enrolled:— 

But  here  is  the  finger  of  God,  a  Hash  of  the  will  that  can. 

Existent  behind  all  laws,  that  made  them,  and,  lo,  they  arc! 
And  I  know  not  if,  save  in  this,  such  gift  be  allowed  to  man. 

That  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame   not  a  fourth  sound 
-fi'    but  a  star.  .jnliu't  o- 

Consider  it  well:  each  tone  of  our  scale  in  itself  is  naught: 

It  is  everywhere  in  the  world — loud,  soft,  and  all  is  said: 
Give  it  to  me  to  use!     I  mix  it  with  two  in  my  thought: 

And  there!     Ye  have  heard  and  seen:  consider  and  bow 
the  head! 


3138     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Well,  it  is  gone  at  last,  the  palace  of  music  I  reared; 

Gone!  and  the  good  tears  start,  the  praises  that  come  too 
slow ; 
For  one  is  assured  at  first,  one  scarce  can  say  that  he  feared. 

That  he  even  gave  it  a  thought,  the  gone  thing  was  to  go. 
Never  to  be  again!     But  jnany  more  of  the  kind 

As  good,  nay,  better  perchance:  is  this  your  comfort  to  me? 
To  me,  who  must  be  saved  because  I  cling  with  my  mind 

To  the  same,  same  self,  same  love,  same  God:  ay,  what 
was,  shall  be. 

Therefore  to  whom  turn  I  but  to  thee,  the  ineffable  Name? 
Builder  and  maker,  thou,  of  houses  not  made  with  hands! 
What,  have  fear  of  change  from  thee  who  art  ever  the  same? 
Doubt  that  thy  power  can  fill  the  heart  that  thy  power 
expands? 
There  shall  never  be  one  lost  good!     What  was,  shall  live 
as  before; 
The  evil  is  null,  is  naught,  is  silence  implying  sound; 
What  was  good  shall  be  good,  with,  for  evil,  so  much  good 
more; 
On  the  earth  the  broken  arcs;  in  the  heaven  a  perfect 
round. 

All  we  have  willed  or  hoped  or  dreamed  of  good  shall  exist; 

Not  its  semblance,  but  itself;  no  beauty,  nor  good,  nor 
power 
Whose  voice  has  gone  forth,  but  each  survives  for  the  melodist 

When  eternity  affirms  the  conception  of  an  hour. 
The  high  that  proved  too  high,  the  heroic  for  earth  too  hard. 

The  passion  that  left  the  ground  to  lose  itself  in  the  sky. 
Are  music  sent  up  to  God  by  the  lover  and  the  bard; 

Enough  that  he  heard  it  once:  we  shall  hear  it  by  and  by. 

And  what  is  our  failure  here  but  a  triumph's  evidence 
For  the  fullness  of  the  days?     Have  we  withered  or  agon- 
ized? 
Why  else  was  the  pause  prolonged  but  that  singing  might 
issue  thence? 
Why  rushed  the  discords  in,  but  that  harmony  should  be 
prized? 


'      loaftoH      Hack  and  Hew  3^39 

Sorrow  is  hard  to  bear,  and  doubt  is  slow  to  clear, 
Each  sufferer  says  his  say,  his  scheme  of  the  weal  and  woe: 

But  God  has  a  few  of  us  whom  he  whispers  in  the  ear; 
The  rest  may  reason  and  welcome:  'tis  we  musicians  know. 

Well,  it  is  earth  with  me;  silence  resumes  her  reign: 

I  will  be  patient  and  proud,  and  soberly  acquiesce. 
Give  me  the  keys.     I  feel  for  the  common  chord  again, 

Sliding  by  semitones  till  I  sink  to  the  minor, — yes. 
And  I  blunt  it  into  a  ninth,  and  I  stand  on  alien  ground. 

Surveying  awhile  the  heights  I  rolled  from  into  the  deep; 
Which,  hark,  I  have  dared  and  done,  for  my  resting-place 
is  found, 

The  C  Major  of  this  life:  so,  now  I  will  try  to  sleep. 

Robert  Broivning  [i8i2-i88g] 


HACK  AND   HEW 

Hack  and  Hew  were  the  sons  of  God 

In  the  earlier  earth  than  now: 
One  at  his  right  hand,  one  at  his  left, 

To  obey  as  he  taught  them  how. 

And  Hack  was  blind,  and  Hew  was  dumb, 
But  both  had  the  wild,  wild  heart; 

And  God's  calm  will  was  their  burning  will, 
And  the  gist  of  their  toil  was  art. 

They  made  the  moon  and  the  belted  stars, 

They  set  the  sun  to  ride; 
They  loosed  the  girdle  and  veil  of  the  sea, 

The  wind  and  the  purple  tide. 

Both  flower  and  beast  beneath  their  hands 
To  beauty  and  speed  outgrew, — 

The  furious,  fumbling  hand  of  Hack, 
And  the  glorjang  hand  of  Hew. 

Then,  fire  and  clay,  they  fashioned  a  man. 

And  painted  him  rosy  brown ; 
And  God  himself  blew  hard  in  his  eyes: 

"Let  them  burn  till  they  smoulder  down!' 


3140     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  "There!"  said  Hack,  and  "There!"  thought  Hew, 

"We'll  rest,  for  our  toil  is  done." 
But  "Nay,"  the  Master  Workman  said, 

"For  your  toil  is  just  begun. 

"And  ye  who  served  me  of  old  as  God 

Shall  serve  me  anew  as  man. 
Till  I  compass  the  dream  that  is  in  my  heart, 

And  perfect  the  vaster  plan." 

And  still  the  craftsman  over  his  craft. 

In  the  vague  white  light  of  dawn. 
With  God's  calm  will  for  his  burning  will, 

While  the  mounting  day  comes  on, 

Yearning,  wind-swift,  indolent,  wild, 

Toils  with  those  shadowy  two, — 
The  faltering,  restless  hand  of  Hack, 

And  the  tireless  hand  of  Hew. 

Bliss  Carman  [1861- 


ARS  VICTRIX* 

IMITATED   FROM   THEOPHILE   GAUTIER 

Yes;  when  the  ways  oppose — 
When  the  hard  means  rebel. 

Fairer  the  work  out-grows, — 
More  potent  far  the  spell. 

O  Poet,  then,  forbear 

The  loosely-sandalled  verse, 

Choose  rather  thou  to  wear 
The  buskin — strait  and  terse; 

Leave  to  the  tyro's  hand 

The  limp  and  shapeless  style; 

See  that  thy  form  demand 
The  labor  of  the  file. 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3842. 


Ars  Victrix  3 141 

Sculptor,  do  thou  discard 

The  yielding  clay, — consign 
To  Paros  marble  hard 

The  beauty  of  thy  Une; — 

Model  thy  Satyr's  face 

For  bronze  of  Syracuse; 
In  the  veined  agate  trace 

The  profile  of  thy  Muse. 

Painter,  that  still  must  mix 

But  transient  tints  anew, 
Thou  in  the  furnace  fix 

The  firm  enamel's  hue; 

Let  the  smooth  tile  receive 

Thy  dove-drawn  Erycine; 
Thy  Sirens  blue  at  eve 

Coiled  in  a  wash  of  wine. 

All  passes.    Art  alone 

Enduring  stays  to  us: 
The  Bust  out-lasts  the  throne,— 

The  Coin,  Tiberius; 

Even  the  gods  must  go; 

Only  the  lofty  Rh>Tne 
Not  countless  years  o'erthrow, — 

Not  long  array  of  time. 

Paint,  chisel,  then,  or  write; 

But,  that  the  work  surpass. 
With  the  hard  fashion  fight, — 

With  the  resisting  mass. 

A  list  hi  Dobson  [1840- 


FLOWER  O'  THE  MIND 

FANCIES 

Fancies  are  but  streams 

Of  vain  pleasure; 
They  who  by  their  dreams 
True  joys  measure, 
Feasting,  starve,  laughing,  weep, 
Playing,  smart;  whilst  in  sleep 
Fools,  with  shadows  smiling, 
Wake  and  find 
Hopes  like  wind, 
Idle  hopes,  beguiling. 
Thoughts  fly  away;  Time  hath  passed  them; 
Wake  now,  awake!  see  and  taste  them! 

John  Ford  (?)  {fl.  1639] 


TOM   0'  BEDLAM 

The  morn's  my  constant  mistress, 
And  the  lovely  owl  my  marrow; 
The  flaming  drake. 
And  the  night-crow,  make 
Me  music  to  my  sorrow. 

I  know  more  than  Apollo; 

For  oft,  when  he  lies  sleeping,:  i 

I  behold  the  stars 

At  mortal  wars. 
And  the  rounded  welkin  weeping. 

The  moon  embraces  her  shepherd, 
And  the  Queen  of  Love  her  warrior; 
While  the  first  does  horn 
The  stars  of  the  morn. 
And  the  next  the  heavenly  farrier. 
3142 


L' Allegro  3143 

With  a  heart  of  furious  fancies, 

Whereof  I  am  commander: 

With  a  burning  spear, 

And  a  horse  of  air, 

To  the  Wilderness  I  wander; 

With  a  Knight  of  ghosts  and  shadows, 
I  summoned  am  to  Tourney: 
Ten  leagues  beyond 
The  wild  world's  end ; 
Methinks  it  is  no  journey. 

Unknown 

L'ALLEGRO 

Hence  loathed  Melancholy 

Of  Cerberus  and  blackest  Midnight  bom. 

In  Stygian  Cave  forlorn 

'Mongst  horrid  shapes,  and  shrieks,  and  sights  unholy! 
Find  out  some  uncouth  cell, 

Where  brooding  Darkness  spreads  his  jealous  wings. 
And  the  night-Raven  sings; 

There,  under  Ebon  shades,  and  low-browed  Rocks, 
As  ragged  as  thy  Locks, 

In  dark  Cimmerian  desert  ever  dwell. 
But  come,  thou  Goddess  fair  and  free, 
In  Heaven  yclept  Euphrosyiie, 
And  by  men,  heart-easing  Mirth, 
Whom  lovely  Venus,  at  a  birth. 
With  two  sister  Graces  more, 
To  Ivy-crowned  Bacchus  bore; 
Or  whether  (as  some  Sager  sing) 
The  frolic  Wind  that  breathes  the  Spring, 
Zcphir  with  Aurora  playing. 
As  he  met  her  once  a-Maying, 
There,  on  Beds  of  Violets  blue, 
And  fresh-blown  Roses  washed  in  dew, 
Filled  her  with  thee,  a  daughter  fair. 
So  buxom,  blithe,  and  debonair. 

Haste  thee,  Nymph,  and  bring  with  thee  - 
Jest  and  youthful  JoUity, 


3144     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Quips  and  Cranks,  and  wanton  Wiles, 
Nods,  and  Becks,  and  Wreathed  Smiles, 
Such  as  hang  on  Hebe's  cheek, 
And  love  to  live  in  dimple  sleek; 
Sport  that  wrinkled  Care  derides, 
And  Laughter  holding  both  his  sides. 
Come,  and  trip  it  as  ye  go 
On  the  light  fantastic  toe. 
And  in  thy  right  hand  lead  with  thee, 
The  Mountain  Nymph,  sweet  Liberty; 
„.^,,,     And  if  I  give  thee  honor  due. 
Mirth,  admit  me  of  thy  crew 
To  live  with  her,  and  live  with  thee, 
In  unrep roved  pleasures  free; 
To  hear  the  Lark  begin  his  flight, 
And,  singing,  startle  the  duU  night, 
From  his  watch-tower  in  the  skies, 
Till  the  dappled  dawn  doth  rise; 
Then  to  come  in  spite  of  sorrow. 
And  at  my  window  bid  good-morrow. 
Through  the  Swcet-Briar,  or  the  Vine, 
Or  the  twisted  Eglantine. 
While  the  Cock,  with  lively  din. 
Scatters  the  rear  of  darkness  thm, 
And  to  the  stack,  or  the  Barn-door, 
Stoutly  struts  his  Dames  before. 
Oft  listening  how  the  Hounds  and  horn 
Clearly  rouse  the  slumbering  morn. 
From  the  side  of  some  Hoar  Hill, 
Through  the  high  wood  echoing  shrill. 
SomiC  time  walking  not  unseen 
By  Hedge-row  Elms,  on  Hillocks  green, 
Right  against  the  Eastern  gate. 
Where  the  great  Sun  begins  his  state, 
Robed  in  flames,  and  Amber  light, 
The  clouds  in  thousand  Liveries  dightc 
Whfle  the  Plowman,  near  at  hand, 
Whistles  o'er  the  Furrowed  Land, 
And  the  Milkmaid  singeth  blithe, 
And  the  Mower  whets  his  scythe, 


L' Allegro  3145 

And  every  Shepherd  tells  his  tale^ 

Under  the  Hawthorn  in  the  dale. 

Straight  mine  eye  hath  caught  new  pleasures 

Whilst  the  Landscape  round  it  measures, 

Russet  Lawns,  and  Fallows  Gray, 

Where  the  nibbling  flocks  do  stray, 

Mountains  on  whose  barren  breast 

The  laboring  clouds  do  often  rest: 

Meadows  trim  with  Daisies  pied, 

Shallow  Brooks,  and  Rivers  wide. 

Towers,  and  Battlements  it  sees 

Bosomed  high  in  tufted  Trees, 

Where  perhaps  some  beauty  lies, 

The  Cynosure  of  neighboring  eyes. 

Hard  by  a  Cottage  chimney  smokes, 

From  betwixt  two  aged  Oaks, 

Where  Corydon  and  Thyrsis  met. 

Are  at  their  savory  dinner  set 

Of  Herbs,  and  other  Country  Messes, 

Which  the  neat-handed  Phillis  dresses; 

And  then  in  haste  her  Bower  she  leaves, 

With  Thestylis  to  bind  the  Sheaves; 

Or,  if  the  earlier  season  lead. 

To  the  tanned  Haycock  in  the  Mead. 

Sometimes  with  secure  delight 

The  up-land  Hamlets  will  invite, 

When  the  merry  Bells  ring  round. 

And  the  jocund  rebecks  sound 

To  many  a  youth,  and  many  a  maid. 

Dancing  in  the  Chequered  shade; 

And  young  and  old  come  forth  to  play 

On  a  Sunshine  Holyday, 

Till  the  hve-long  day-light  fail; 

Then  to  the  Spicy  Nut-brown  Ale, 

With  stories  told  of  many  a  feat, 

How-  Faery  Mab  the  junkets  eat. 

She  was  pinched,  and  puUed  she  said; 

And  he,  by  Friar's  Lantern  led, 

TeUs  how  the  drudging  Goblin  sweat, 

To  earn  his  Cream-bowl  duly  set, 


3146     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

When  in  one  night)  eVe  'gliiiipse  of  ihorn, 
His  shadowy  Flail  hath  threshed  the  Com 
That  ten  day-laborers  could  not  end, 
Then  lies  him  down,  the  Lubbar  Fiend',' 
And  stretched  out  all  the  Chimney's  length, 
Basks  at  the  fire  his  hairy  strength; 
And  Crop-full  out  of  doors  he  flings, 
Ere  the  first  Cock  his  Matin  rings.         ' 
Thus  done  the  Tales,  to  bed  they  creep, 
By  whispering  Winds  soon  lulled  asleep. 

Towered  Cities  please  us  then. 
And  the  busy  hum  of  men. 
Where  throngs  of  Knights  and  Barons  bold. 
In  weeds  of  Peace  high  triumphs  hold. 
With  store  of  Ladles,  whose  bright  eyes 
Rain  influence,  and  judge  the  prize 
Of  Wit,  or  Arms,  while  both  contend 
To  win  her  Grace,  whom  all  commend. 
There  let  Hymen  oft  appear 
In  Saffron  robe,  with  Taper  clear. 
And  pomp,  and  feast,  and  revelry. 
With  mask,  and  antique  Pageantry, 
Such  sights  as  youthful  Poets  dream 
On  Summer  eves  by  haunted  stream. 
Then  to  the  well-trod  stage  anon. 
If  Jonson's  learned  Sock  be  on, 
Or  sweetest  Shakespeare,  Fancy's  child,' 
Warble  his  native  Wood-notes  wild;      '■ 
And  ever,  against  eating  Cares, 
Lap  me  in  soft  Lydian  Airs, 
Married  to  immortal  verse 
Such  as  the  meeting  soul  may  pierce 
In  notes,  with  many  a  winding  bout 
Of  linked  sweetness  long  drawn  out, 
With  wanton  heed,  and  giddy  cunning, 
The  melting  voice  through  mazes  running; 
Untwisting  all  the  chains  that  tie 
The  hidden  soul  of  harmony; 
That  Orpheus'  self  may  heave  his  head 
From  golden  slumber  on  a  bed 


11   Penseroso  3^47 

Of  heaped  Elysian  flowers,  and  hear 
Such  strains  as  would  have  won  the  ear 
Of  Pluto,  to  have  quite  set  free 
His  half-regained  Eurydice.  '• 

These  delights,  if  thou  canst  give,        '^" 
Mirth,  with  thee  I  mean  to  live. 

John  Mill  on  [1608-167  4] 


IL  PENSEROSO 

Hence  vain  deluding  Joys, 
The  brood  of  Folly  without  father  bred! 
How  little  you  bestead. 

Or  fill  the  fixed  mind  with  all  your  toys; 
Dwell  in  some  idle  brain, 

And  fancies  fond  with  gaudy  shapes  possess, 
As  thick  and  numberless 

As  the  gay  motes  that  people  the  sun-beams. 
Or  likest  hovering  dreams 

The  fickle  Pensioners  of  Morpheus'  train. 
But  hail,  thou  Goddess,  sage  and  holy. 
Hail,  divinest  Melancholy! 
Whose  Saintly  visage  is  too  bright 
To  hit  the  Sense  of  human  sight; 
And  therefore  to  our  weaker  view, 
O'er-laid  with  black,  staid  Wisdom's  hue. 
Black,  but  such  as  in  esteem,  ' 

Prince  Memnon's  sister  might  beseem, 
Or  that  Starred  Ethiope  Queen  that  strove 
To  set  her  beauty's  praise  above 
The  Sea  Nymphs,  and  their  powers  offended. 
Yet  thou  art  higher  far  descended: 
Thee  bright-haired  Vesta  long  of  yore, 
To  solitary  Saturn  bore; 
His  daughter  she  (in  Saturn's  reign, 
Such  mixture  was  not  held  a  stain). 
Oft  in  gUmmering  Bowers,  and  glades 
He  met  her,  and  in  secret  shades 
Of  woody  Ida's  inmost  grove. 
Whilst  yet  there  was  no  fear  of  Jove. 


3148     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Come,  pensive  Nun,  devout  and  pure, 

Sober,  steadfast,  and  demure. 

All  in  a  robe  of  darkest  grain. 

Flowing  with  majestic  train, 

And  sable  stole  of  Cypress  Lawn, 

Over  thy  decent  shoulders  drawn. 

Come,  but  keep  thy  wonted  state, 

With  even  step,  and  musing  gait, 

And  looks  commercing  with  the  skies, 

Thy  rapt  soul  sitting  in  thine  eyes: 

There,  held  in  holy  passion  still. 

Forget  thy  self  to  Marble,  till 

With  a  sad  Leaden  downward  cast. 

Thou  fix  them  on  the  earth  as  fast. 

And  join  with  thee  calm  Peace,  and  Quiet, 

Spare  Fast,  that  oft  with  gods  doth  diet, 

And  hears  the  Muses  in  a  ring, 

Aye  round  about  Jove's  Altar  sing. 

And  add  to  these  retired  Leisure, 

That  in  trim  Gardens  takes  his  pleasure; 

But  first,  and  chiefest,  with  thee  bring. 

Him  that  yon  soars  on  golden  wing, 

Guiding  the  fiery-wheeled  throne. 

The  Cherub  Contemplation, 

And  the  mute  Silence  hist  along, 

'Less  Philomel  will  deign  a  Song, 

In  her  sweetest,  saddest  plight. 

Smoothing  the  rugged  brow  of  Night, 

While  Cynthia  checks  her  Dragon  yoke, 

Gently  o'er  th'  accustomed  Oak; 

Sweet  Bird,  that  shunn'st  the  noise  of  foUy, 

Most  musical,  most  melancholy! 

Thee,  Chauntress,  oft  the  Woods  among, 

I  woo  to  hear  thy  even-song; 

And  missing  thee,  I  w-alk  unseen 

On  the  dry  smooth-shaven  Green, 

To  behold  the  wandering  Moon, 

Riding  near  her  highest  noon, 

Like  one  that  had  been  led  astray 

Through  the  Heaven's  wide  pathless  way;, 


II   Penseroso 

And  oft,  as  if  her  head  she  bowed, 

Stooping  through  a  fleecy  cloud. 

Oft  on  a  Plat  of  rising  ground, 

I  hear  the  far-ofi  Curfew  sound, 

Over  some  wide- watered  shore. 

Swinging  slow  with  sullen  roar; 

Or  if  the  Air  will  not  permit, 

Some  still  removed  place  will  fit. 

Where  glowing  Embers  through  the  room 

Teach  light  to  counterfeit  a  gloom, 

Far  from  all  resort  of  mirth, 

Save  the  Cricket  on  the  hearth. 

Or  the  Bellman's  drowsy  charm. 

To  bless  the  doors  from  nightly  harm: 

Or  let  my  Lamp,  at  midnight  hour, 

Be  seen  in  some  high  lonely  Tower, 

Where  I  may  oft  out-watch  the  Bear, 

With  thrice  great  Hermes,  or  unsphere 

The  spirit  of  Plato  to  unfold 

What  Worlds,  or  what  vast  Regions  hold 

The  immortal  mind  that  hath  forsook 

Iler  mansion  in  this  fleshly  nook: 

And  of  those  Daemons  that  are  found 

In  Are,  air,  flood,  or  under  ground. 

Whose  power  hath  a  true  consent 

With  Planet,  or  with  Element. 

Some  time  let  Gorgeous  Tragedy 

In  Sceptered  Pall  come  sweeping  by, 

Presenting  Thebes,  or  Pelops'  line. 

Or  the  tale  of  Troy  divine, 

Or  what  (though  rare)  of  later  age. 

Ennobled  hath  the  Buskined  stage. 

But,  O  sad  Virgin,  that  thy  power 
Might  raise  Musaeus  from  his  bower, 
Or  bid  the  soul  of  Orpheus  sing 
Such  notes  as,  warbled  to  the  string. 
Drew  Iron  tears  down  Pluto's  cheek. 
And  made  Hell  grant  what  Love  did  seek. 
Or  call  up  him  that  left  half  told 
The  story  of  Cambuscan  bold, 


3149 


3150    Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Of  Camball,  and  of  Algarsife, 

And  who  had  Canace  to  wife,  •  ■ 

That  owned  the  virtuous  Ring  and  Glass, 

And  of  the  wondrous  Horse  of  Brass, 

On  which  the  Tartar  King  did  ride; 

And  if  aught  else  great  Bards  beside, 

In  sage  and  solemn  tunes  have  sung, 

Of  Tourneys  and  of  Trophies  hung; 

Of  Forests,  and  enchantments  drear, 

Where  more  is  meant  than  meets  the  ear. 

Thus,  Night,  oft  see  me  in  thy  pale  career. 

Till  civil-suited  Morn  appear, 

Not  tricked  and  frounced  as  she  was  wont. 

With  the  Attic  Boy  to  hunt. 

But  Kerchiefed  in  a  comely  Cloud, 

While  rocking  Winds  are  Piping  loud. 

Or  ushered  with  a  shower  still, 

When  the  gust  hath  blown  his  fill. 

Ending  on  the  rustling  Leaves, 

With  minute-drops  from  off  the  Eaves. 

And  when  the  Sun  begins  to  fling 

His  flaring  beams,  me.  Goddess,  bring 

To  arched  walks  of  twilight  groves. 

And  shadows  brown,  that  Sylvan  loves, 

Of  Pine,  or  monumental  Oak, 

Where  the  rude  Ax  with  heaved  stroke, 

Was  never  heard  the  Nymphs  to  daunt, 

Or  fright  them  from  their  hallowed  haunt. 

There  in  close  covert  by  some  Brook, 

Where  no  profaner  eye  may  look. 

Hide  me  from  Day's  garish  eye. 

While  the  Bee  with  Honied  thigh. 

That  at  her  flowery  work  doth  sing, 

And  the  Waters  murmuring 

With  such  consort  as  they  keep. 

Entice  the  dewy -feathered  Sleep; 

And  let  some  strange  mysterious  dream, 

Wave  at  his  Wings,  in  Airy  stream 

Of  lively  portraiture  displayed, 

Softly  on  my  eye-lids  laid. 


Kilmeny  ^  ■      '3151 


And  as  I  wake,  sweet  music  breathe 
Above,  about,  or  underneath. 
Sent  by  some  Spirit  to  mortals  good. 
Or  th'  unseen  Genius  of  the  Wood. 

But  let  my  due  feet  never  fail. 
To  walk  the  studious  Cloister's  pale. 
And  love  the  high  cmbowed  Roof, 
With  antique  Pillars  massy  proof, 
And  storied  Windows  richly  dight. 
Casting  a  dim  religious  light. 
There  let  the  pealing  Organ  blow. 
To  the  full  voiced  choir  below, 
In  Service  high,  and  Anthems  clear, 
As  may  with  sweetness,  through  mine  ear, 
Dissolve  me  into  ecstasies, 
And  bring  all  Heaven  before  mine  eyes. 
And  may  at  last  my  weary  age 
Find  out  the  peaceful  hermitage, 
The  Hairy  Gown  and  Mossy  Cell, 
Where  I  may  sit  and  rightly  spell 
Of  every  Star  that  Heaven  doth  shew, 
And  every  Herb  that  sips  the  dew; 
TiU  old  experience  do  attain 
To  something  like  Proplietic  strain. 
These  pleasures,  Melancholy,  give. 
And  I  with  thee  will  choose  to  live. 

John  Millon  [1608- 16 74] 

KILMENY 

From  "  The  Queen's  Wake  " 

Bonny  Kilmeny  gaed  up  the  glen; 
But  it  wasna  to  meet  Duneira's  men. 
Nor  the  rosy  monk  of  the  isle  to  see. 
For  Kilmeny  was  pure  as  pure  could  be. 
It  was  only  to  hear  the  yorlin  sing, 
And  pu'  the  cress-flower  round  the  spring; — 
The  scarlet  hypp,  and  the  hind-bcrrye. 
And  the  nut  that  hung  frae  the  hazel-tree; 
For  Kilmeny  was  pure  as  pure  could  be. 


3152     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

But  lang  may  her  minny  look  o'er  the  wa', 
And  lang  may  she  seek  i'  the  green- wood  shaw; 
Lang  the  laird  o'  Duneira  blame, 
And  lang,  lang  greet  or  Kilmeny  come  hame! 

When  many  a  day  had  come  and  fled, 
When  grief  grew  calm,  and  hope  was  dead, 
When  mass  for  Kilmeny's  soul  had  been  sung. 
When  the  bedesman  had  prayed,  and  the  dead-bell  rung; 
Late,  late  in  a  gloamin',  when  all  was  still. 
When  the  fringe  was  red  on  the  westlin  hill, 
The  wood  was  sere,  the  moon  i'  the  wane, 
The  reek  o'  the  cot  hung  over  the  plain, 
Like  a  little  wee  cloud  in  the  world  its  lane; 
When  the  ingle  lowed  wi'  an  eiry  leme, 
Late,  late  in  the  gloamin'  Kilmeny  came  hame! 

"Kilmeny,  Kilmeny,  where  have  you  been? 
Lang  hae  we  sought  baith  holt  and  den; 
By  Ijurn,  by  ford,  by  green- wood  tree, 
Yet  you  are  halesome  and  fair  to  see. 
Where  gat  ye  that  joup  o'  the  lily  sheen? 
That  bonny  snood  o'  the  birk  sae  green? 
And  those  roses,  the  fairest  that  ever  Avas  seen? 
Kilmeny,  Kilmeny,  where  have  you  been?" 

Kilmeny  looked  up  wi'  a  lovely  grace, 
But  nae  smile  was  seen  on  Kilmeny's  face; 
As  still  was  her  look,  and  as  still  was  her  e'e, 
As  the  stillness  that  lay  on  the  emerant  lea, 
Or  the  mist  that  sleeps  on  a  waveiess  sea. 
For  Kilmen)^  had  been  she  knew  not  where. 
And  Kilmeny  had  seen  what  she  could  not  declare; 
Kilmeny  had  been  where  the  cock  never  crew, 
Where  the  rain  never  fell,  and  the  wind  never  blew; 
But  it  seemed  as  the  harp  of  the  sky  had  rung. 
And  the  airs  of  heaven  played  round  her  tongue, 
When  she  spake  of  the  lovely  forms  she  had  seen. 
And  a  land  where  sin  had  never  been; 
A  land  of  love,  and  a  land  of  light, 
Withouten  sun,  or  moon,  or  night; 


Kilmeny  3^53 

Where  the  river  swa'd  a  living  stream, 
And  the  Hght  a  pure  celestial  beam; 
The  land  of  vision,  it  would  seem, 
A  still,  an  everlasting  dream. 

In  yon  green-wood  there  is  a  walk, 
And  in  that  walk  there  is  a  wene, 
And  in  that  wene  there  is  a  maike, 
That  neither  has  llesh,  nor  blood,  nor  bane; 
And  down  in  yon  green-wood  he  walks  his  lane 

In  that  green  wene  Kilmeny  lay, 
Her  bosom  happed  wi'  the  flowerets  gay; 
But  the  air  was  soft,  and  the  silence  deep. 
And  bonny  Kilmeny  fell  sound  asleep; 
She  kenned  nac  mair,  nor  opened  her  e'e, 
Till  waked  by  the  hymns  of  a  far  countrye. 

She  woke  on  a  couch  of  silk  sae  slim, 
All  striped  wi'  the  bars  of  the  rainbow's  rim; 
And  lovely  beings  around  were  rife. 
Who  erst  had  travelled  mortal  life; 
And  aye  they  smiled,  and  'gan  to  spier: 
"What  spirit  has  brought  this  mortal  here?" 

"Lang  have  I  ranged  the  world  wide," 
A  meek  and  reverend  fere  replied; 
"Baith  night  and  day  I  have  watched  the  fair 
Eident  a  thousand  years  and  mair. 
Yes,  I  have  watched  o'er  ilk  degree, 
Wherever  blooms  femenitye; 
But  sinless  virgin,  free  of  stain. 
In  mind  and  body,  fand  I  nane. 
Never,  since  the  banquet  of  time. 
Found  I  a  virgin  in  her  prime. 
Till  late  this  bonny  maiden  I  saw. 
As  spotless  as  the  morning  snaw: 
Full  twenty  years  she  has  lived  as  free 
As  the  spirits  that  sojourn  in  this  countrye. 
I  have  brought  her  away  frae  the  snares  of  men. 
That  sin  or  death  she  never  may  ken." 


3154     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

They  clasped  her  waist,'  and  her  hands  sae  fair; 
They  kissed  her  cheeks,  and  they  kemmed  her  hair; 
And  round  came  many  a  blooming  fere,  ni  I' 

Saying,  "Bonny  Kilmeny,  ye're  welcome  here!.    / 
Women  are  freed  of  the  httand  scorn ; 
O,  blest  be  the  day  Kilmeny  was  born! 
Now  shall  the  land  of  the  spirits  see. 
Now  shall  it  ken,  what  a  woman  may  be! 
Many  a  lang  year,  in  sorrow  and  pain. 
Many  a  lang  year  through  the  world  we've  gane. 
Commissioned  to  watch  fair  woman-kind, 
For  it's  they  who  nurse  the  immortal  mind. 
We  have  watched  their  steps  as  the  dawning  shone, 
And  deep  in  the  green-wood  walks  alone; 
By  lily  bower  and  silken  bed, 
The  viewless  tears  have  been  o'er  them  shed; 
Have  soothed  their  ardent  minds  to  sleep, 
Or  left  the  couch  of  love  to  weep. 
We  have  seen!  we  have  seen!  but  the  time  maun  come. 
And  the  angels  will  weep  at  the  day  of  doom! 

"O,  v/ould  the  fairest  of  mortal  kind 
Aye  keep  these  holy  truths  in  mind, 
That  kindred  spirits  their  motions  see, 
Who  watch  their  ways  with  anxious  e'e,  .  , 

And  grieve  for  the  guilt  of  humanitye!  ,,  ,, 

0,  sweet  to  Heaven  the  maiden's  prayer, 
And  the  sigh  that  heaves  a  bosom  sae  fair! 
And  dear  to  Heaven  the  words  of  truth, 
And  the  praise  of  virtue  frae  beauty's  mouth! 
And  dear  to  the  viewless  forms  of  air 
The  minds  that  kythes  as  the  body  fair! 

"O  bonny  Kilmeny!  free  frae  stain, 
If  ever  you  seek  the  world  again. 
That  world  of  sin,  of  sorrow  and  fear, 
O,  tell  of  the  joys  that  are  waiting  here; 
And  tell  of  the  signs  you  shall  shortly  see ; 
Of  the  times  that  are  now,  and  the  times  that  shall  be." 


Kilmeny  3  "^5^ 

They  lifted  Kilmeny,  they  led  her  away, 
And  she  walked  in  the  light  of  a  sunless  day; 
The  sky  was  a  dome  of  crystal  bright, 
The  fountain  of  vision,  and  fountain  of  light; 
The  emerald  fields  were  of  dazzHng  glow, 
And  the  flowers  of  everlasting  blow. 
Then  deep  in  the  stream  her  body  they  laid, 
That  her  youth  and  beauty  never  might  fade; 
And  they  smiled  on  Heaven,  when  they  saw  her  lie 
In  the  stream  of  life  that  wandered  by. 
And  she  heard  a  song, — she  heard  it  sung. 
She  kenned  not  where;  but  sae  sweetly  it  rung. 
It  fell  on  her  ear  like  a  dream  of  the  morn, — 
"O,  blest  be  the  day  Kilmeny  was  born! 
Now  shall  the  land  of  the  spirits  see, 
Now  shall  it  ken,  v/hat  a  woman  may  be! 
The  sun  that  shines  on  the  world  sae  bright, 
A  borrowed  gleid  frae  the  fountain  of  hght; 
And  the  moon  that  sleeks  the  sky  sae  dun, 
Like  a  gouden  bow,  or  a  beamless  sun, 
Shall  wear  away,  and  be  seen  nae  mair; 
And  the  angels  shall  miss  them,  travelling  the  air. 
But  lang,  lang  after,  baith  night  and  day, 
When  the  sun  and  the  world  have  fled  away, 
When  the  sinner  has  gane  to  his  waesome  doom, 
Kilmeny  shall  smile  in  eternal  bloom!" 

They  bore  her  away,  she  wist  not  how, 
For  she  felt  not  arm  nor  rest  below; 
But  so  swift  they  wained  her  through  the  light, 
'Twas  like  the  motion  of  sound  or  sight; 
They  seemed  to  split  the  gales  of  air, 
And  yet  nor  gale  nor  breeze  was  there. 
Unnumbered  groves  below  them  grew; 
They  came,  they  passed,  and  backward  flew. 
Like  floods  of  blossoms  gliding  on, 
A  moment  seen,  in  a  moment  gone. 
Ah,  never  vales  to  mortal  view 
Appeared  like  those  o'er  which  they  flew. 


3156     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

That  land  to  human  spirits  given, 
The  lowermost  vales  of  the  storied  heaven; 
From  thence  they  can  view  the  world  below, 
And  heaven's  blue  gates  with  sapphires  glow, — 
More  glory  yet  unmeet  to  know. 

They  bore  her  far  to  a  mountain  green, 
To  see  what  mortal  never  had  seen ; 
And  they  seated  her  high  on  a  purple  sward, 
And  bade  her  heed  what  she  saw  and  heard. 
And  note  the  changes  the  spirits  wrought; 
For  now  she  lived  in  the  land  of  thought. — 
She  looked,  and  she  saw  nor  sun  nor  skies, 
But  a  crystal  dome  of  a  thousand  dyes; 
She  looked,  and  she  saw  nae  land  aright. 
But  an  endless  whirl  of  glory  and  light; 
And  radiant  beings  went  and  came, 
Far  swifter  than  wind  or  the  linked  flame; 
She  hid  her  e'en  frae  the  clazzhng  view; 
She  looked  again,  and  the  scene  was  new. 

She  saw  a  sun  in  a  summer  sky. 
And  clouds  of  amber  sailing  by; 
A  lovely  land  beneath  her  lay, 
And  that  land  had  lakes  and  mountains  gray: 
And  that  land  had  valleys  and  hoary  piles. 
And  marled  seas,  and  a  thousand  isles; 
Its  fields  were  speckled,  its  forests  green. 
And  its  lakes  were  all  of  the  dazzling  sheen, 
Ijike  magic  mirrors,  where  slumbering  lay 
The  sun  and  the  sky  and  the  cloudlet  gray. 
Which  heaved  and  trembled,  and  gently  swung; 
On  every  shore  they  seemed  to  be  hung; 
For  there  they  were  seen  on  their  downward  plain 
A  thousand  times  and  a  thousand  again ; 
In  winding  lake  and  placid  firth. 
Little  peaceful  heavens  in  the  bosom  of  earth. 

Kilmeny  sighed  and  seemed  to  grieve. 
For  she  found  her  heart  to  that  land  did  cleave' 


Kilmeny  3^57 

She  saw  the  corn  wave  on  the  vale; 

She  saw  the  deer  run  down  the  dale ; 

She  saw  the  plaid  and  the  broad  claymore, 

And  the  brows  that  the  badge  of  freedom  bore; 

And  she  thought  she  had  seen  the  land  before. 

She  saw  a  lady  sit  on  a  throne, 
The  fairest  that  ever  the  sun  shone  on: 
A  lion  hcked  her  hand  of  milk, 
And  she  held  him  in  a  leish  of  silk, 
And  a  leifu'  maiden  stood  at  her  knee, 
With  a  silver  wand  and  melting  e'e; 
Her  sovereign  shield,  till  love  stole  in. 
And  poisoned  all  the  fount  within. 

Then  a  gruff,  untoward  bedesman  came, 
And  hundit  the  lion  on  his  dame; 
And  the  guardian  maid  wi'  the  dauntless  e'e, 
She  dropped  a  tear,  and  left  her  knee; 
And  she  saw  till  the  queen  frae  the  lion  fled. 
Till  the  bonniest  flower  o'  the  world  lay  dead; 
A  cofhn  was  set  on  a  distant  plain, 
And  she  saw  the  red  blood  fall  like  rain. 
Then  bonny  Kilmeny's  heart  grew  sair. 
And  she  turned  away,  and  could  look  nae  mair. 

Then  the  gruff,  grim  carle  girned  amain, 
And  they  trampled  him  down,  but  he  rose  again; 
And  he  baited  the  lion  to  deeds  of  weir. 
Till  he  lapped  the  blood  to  the  kingdom  dear; 
And  weening  his  head  was  danger-proof 
When  crowned  with  the  rose  and  clover  leaf, 
He  gowled  at  the  carle,  and  chased  him  away 
To  feed  wi'  the  deer  on  the  mountain  gray. 
He  gowled  at  the  carle,  and  he  gecked  at  heaven; 
But  his  mark  was  set,  and  his  arlcs  given. 
Kilmeny  a  while  her  e'en  withdrew; 
She  looked  again,  and  the  scene  was  new. 

She  saw  below  her,  fair  unfurled, 
One  half  of  all  the  glowing  world, 


3158     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Where  oceans  rolled  and  rivers  ran, 

To  bound  the  aims  of  sinful  man. 

She  saw  a  people  fierce  and  fell, 

Burst  frae  their  bounds  like  fiends  of  hell; 

There  lilies  grew,  and  the  eagle  flew; 

And  she  herked  on  her  ravening  crew. 

Till  the  cities  and  towers  were  wrapped  in  a  blaze, 

And  the  thunder  it  roared  o'er  the  lands  and  the  seas. 

The  widows  they  wailed,  and  the  red  blood  ran. 

And  she  threatened  an  end  to  the  race  of  man. 

She  never  lened,  nor  stood  in  awe. 

Till  caught  by  the  lion's  deadly  paw. 

O,  then  the  eagle  swinked  for  life. 

And  brainzelled  up  a  mortal  strife; 

But  flew  she  north,  or  flew  she  south, 

She  met  wi'  the  gowl  of  the  lion's  mouth. 

With  a  mooted  wing  and  waefu'  maen. 
The  eagle  sought  her  eiry  again; 
But  lang  may  she  cower  in  her  bloody  nest. 
And  lang,  lang  sleek  her  wounded  breast. 
Before  she  sey  another  flight. 
To  play  wi'  the  norland  lion's  might. 

But  to  sing  the  sights  Kilmcny  saw, 
So  far  surpassing  nature's  law, 
The  singer's  voice  wad  sink  away. 
And  the  string  of  his  harp  wad  cease  to  play. 
But  she  saw  till  the  sorrows  of  man  were  by 
And  all  was  love  and  harmony; 
Till  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  calmly  away. 
Like  the  flakes  of  snaw  on  a  winter's  day. 

Then  Kilmeny  begged  again  to  see 
The  friends  she  had  left  in  her  ain  countrie, 
To  tell  of  the  place  where  she  had  been, 
And  the  glories  that  lay  in  the  land  unseen; 
To  warn  the  living  maidens  fair. 
The  loved  of  heaven,  the  spirits'  care. 
That  all  whose  minds  unmeled  remain 
Shall  bloom  in  beauty  when  time  is  gane. 


Kilmeny  3^59 


With  distant  music,  soft  and  deep, 
They  lulled  Kilmeny  sound  asleep; 
And  when  she  awakened,  she  lay  her  lane, 
All  happed  wi'  flowers  in  the  green-wood  wene.. 
When  seven  long  years  had  come  and  fledji  octT 
When  grief  was  calm,  and  hope  was  dead,  ■  '     ' 
When  scarce  was  remembered  Kilmeny's  name, 
Late,  late  in  a  gloamin',  Kilmeny  came  hame!   .. 
And  O,  her  beauty  was  fair  to  see, 
But  still  and  steadfast  was  her  e'e! 
Such  beauty  bard  may  never  declare, 
For  there  was  no  pride  nor  passion  there; 
And  the  soft  desire  of  maidens'  e'en, 
In  that  mild  face  could  never  be  seen. 
Her  seymar  was  the  lily  flower, 
And  her  cheek  the  moss-rose  in  the  shower; 

r 

And  her  voice  like  the  distant  melody  ' 

That  floats  along  the  twilight  sea. 

But  she  loved  to  railce  the  lanely  glen. 

And  keep  afar  frae  the  haunts  of  men; 

Her  holy  hymns  unheard  to  sing, 

To  suck  the  flowers  and  drink  the  spring. 

But  wherever  her  peaceful  form  appeared, 

The  wild  beasts  of  the  hiJls  Avere  cheered; 

The  wolf  played  blithely  round  the  field; 

The  lordly  b}'son  lowed  and  kneeled ; 

The  dun  deer  wooed  with  manner  bland. 

And  cowered  aneath  her  lily  hand. 

And  when  at  eve  the  woodlands  rung. 

When  hymns  of  other  worlds  she  sung 

In  ecstasy  of  sweet  devotion, 

O,  then  the  glen  was  all  in  motion! 

The  wild  beasts  of  the  forest  came, 

Broke  from  their  bughts  and  faulds  the  tame. 

And  goved  around,  charmed  and  amazed; 

Even  the  dull  cattle  crooned,  and  gazed. 

And  muHnured,  and  looked  with  anxious  pain 

For  something  the  mystery  to  explain. 

The  buzzard  came  with  the  throstle-cock. 

The  corby  left  her  houf  in  the  rock; 


3160     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

The  blackbird  alang  wi'  the  eagle  flew; 

The  hind  came  tripping  o'er  the  dew; 

The  wolf  and  the  kid  their  raike  began ; 

And  the  kid,  and  the  lamb,  and  the  leveret  ran; 

The  hawk  and  the  hern  attour  them  hung, 

And  the  merle  and  the  mavis  forhooyed  their  young; 

And  all  in  a  peaceful  ring  were  hurled: 

It  was  like  an  eve  in  a  sinless  world ! 

When  a  month  and  day  had  come  and  gane, 
Kilmeny  sought  the  green -wood  wene; 
There  laid  her  down  on  the  leaves  sac  green, 
And  Kilmeny  on  earth  was  never  mair  seen. 
But  O  the  words  that  fell  frae  her  mouth 
Were  words  of  wonder,  and  words  of  truth! 
But  all  the  land  were  in  fear  and  dread, 
For  they  kendna  whether  she  was  living  or  dead. 
It  wasna  her  hame,  and  she  couldna  remain; 
She  left  this  world  of  sorrow  and  pain, 
And  returned  to  the  land  of  thought  again. 

James  Hogg  [1770-1835] 

KUBLA  KHAN 

In  Xanadu  did  Kubla  Khan 

A  stately  pleasure-dome  decree: 
Where  Alph,  the  sacred  river,  ran 
Through  caverns  measureless  to  man 

Down  to  a  sunless  sea. 
So  twice  five  miles  of  fertile  ground 
With  walls  and  towers  were  girdled  round: 
And  there  were  gardens  bright  with  sinuous  rills, 
Where  blossomed  many  an  incense-bearing  tree; 
And  here  were  forests  ancient  as  the  hills. 
Enfolding  sunny  spots  of  greenery. 

But  O!  that  deep  romantic  chasm  which  slanted 
Down  the  green  hill  athwart  a  cedarn  cover! 
A  savage  place!  as  holy  and  enchanted         ;i 
As  e'er  beneath  a  waning  moon  was  haunted '" 
By  woman  wailing  for  her  demon-lover!  ' 


Kubla   Khan  3161 

And  from  this  chasm,  with  ceaseless  turmoil  seething, 
As  if  this  Earth  in  fast  thick  pants  were  breathing, 
A  mighty  fountain  momently  was  forced, 
Amid  whose  swift  half-intermitted  burst 
Huge  fragments  vaulted  like  rebounding  hail. 
Or  chaffy  grain  beneath  the  thresher's  flail: 
And  'mid  these  dancing  rocks  at  once  and  ever 
It  flung  up  momently  the  sacred  river. 
Five  miles  meandering  with  a  mazy  motion 
Through  wood  and  dale  the  sacred  river  rah, 
Then  reached  the  caverns  measureless  to  man, 
And  sank  in  tumult  to  a  lifeless  ocean: 
And  'mid  this  tumult  Kubla  heard  from  far 
Ancestral  voices  prophesying  war! 

The  shadow  of  the  dome  of  pleasure 

Floated  midway  on  the  waves; 

Where  was  heard  the  mingled  measure 

From  the  fountain  and  the  caves. 
It  was  a  miracle  of  rare  device, 
A  sunny  pleasure-dome  with  caves  of  ice! 

A  damsel  with  a  dulcimer 

In  a  vision  once  I  saw: 

It  was  an  Abyssinian  maid, 

And  on  her  dulcimer  she  played, 

Singing  of  Mount  Abora. 

Could  I  revive  within  me 

Her  symphony  and  song, 

To  such  a  deep  dehght  'twould  win  me 
That  with  music  loud  and  long, 
I  would  build  that  dome  in  air, 
That  sunny  dome!  those  caves  of  ice! 
And  all  who  heard  should  sec  them  there, 
And  all  should  cry.  Beware!  Beware! 
His  flashing  eyes,  his  floating  hair! 
•Weave  a  circle  round  him  thrice. 
And  close  your  eyes  with  holy  dread, 
For  he  on  honey -dew  hath  fed. 
And  drunk  the  milk  of  Paradise. 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [17  7  2-1834] 


3162     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

HYMN  OF  PAN 

From  the  forests  and  highlands 

We  come,  we  come; 
From  the  river-girt  islands, 

Where  loud  waves  are  dumb. 
Listening  my  sweet  pipings. 

The  wind  in  the  reeds  and  the  rushes, 

The  bees  on  the  beUs  of  thyme. 
The  birds  on  the  myrtle  bushes, 
The  cicale  above  in  the  lime. 
And  the  lizards  below  in  the  grass, 
Were  as  silent  as  ever  old  Tmolus  was, 
Listening  my  sweet  pipings. 

Liquid  Peneus  was  flowing, 
And  all  dark  Tempe  lay 
In  Pelion's  shadow,  outgrowing 

The  light  of  the  dying  day. 
Speeded  by  my  sweet  pipings. 
The  Sileni,  and  Sylvans,  and  Fauns, 

And  the  Nymphs  of  the  woods  and  waves, 
To  the  edge  of  the  moist  river-lawns. 
And  the  brink  of  the  dewy  caves, 
And  all  that  did  then  attend  and  follow, 
Were  silent  with  love,  as  you  now,  Apollo, 
With  envy  of  my  sweet  pipings. 

I  sang  of  the  dancing  Stars, 
I  sang  of  the  daedal  Earth, 
And  of  Heaven,  and  the  giant  wars, 
And  Love,  and  Death,  and  Birth. 
And  then  I  changed  my  pipings — 

Singing  how  down  the  vale  of  Maenalus 

I  pursued  a  maiden,  and  clasped  a  reed:   / 
Gods  and  men,  we  are  aU  deluded  thus;        i : 
It  breaks  in  our  bosom,  and  then  we  bleed. 
All  wept — as  I  think  both  ye  now  would. 
If  envy  or  age  had  not  frozen  your  blood,  - 
At  the  sorrow  of  my  sweet  pipings. 
'  ,  .    :^,  Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [1702-1822] 


iioho'iii    Ode  on  a  Grecian   Urn  3^63 


ODE  ON  A   GRECIAN  URN 

Thou  still  unravished  bride  of  quietness, 

Thou  foster-child  of  Silence  and  slow  Time,  ,■; 
Sylvan  historian,  who  canst  thus  express         ' 

A  flowery  tale  more  sweetly  than  our  rhyme: 
What  leaf-fringed  legend  haunts  about  thy  shape  • 

Of  deities  or  mortals,  or  of  both. 
In  Tempe  or  the  dales  of  Arcady? 

What  men  or  gods  are  these?     What  maidens  loth? 
What  mad  pursuit?     What  struggle  to  escape? 

What  pipes  and  timbrels?     What  wild  ecstasy? 

Heard  melodies  are  sweet,  but  those  unheard 

Are  sweeter;  therefore,  ye  soft  pipes,  play  on; 
Not  to  the  sensual  ear,  but,  more  endeared, 

Pipe  to  the  spirit  ditties  of  no  tone: 
Fair  youth,  beneath  the  trees,  thou  canst  not  leave 

Thy  song,  nor  ever  can  those  trees  be  bare; 
Bold  Lover,  never,  never  canst  thou  kiss. 
Though  winning  near  the  goal — yet,  do  not  grieve; 
She  cannot  fade,  though  thou  hast  not  thy  bliss, 

For  ever  wilt  thou  love,  and  she  be  fair! 

Ah,  happy,  happy  boughs!  that  cannot  shed 

Your  leaves,  nor  ever  bid  the  Spring  adieu; 
And,  happy  melodist,  unwearied, 

For  ever  piping  songs  for  ever  new; 
More  happy  love!  more  happy,  happy  love! 

For  ever  warm  and  still  to  be  enjoyed, 
For  ever  panting  and  for  ever  young; 
All  breathing  human  passion  far  above. 

That  leaves  a  heart  high-sorrowful  and  cloj^ed, 
A  Inirning  forehead,  and  a  parching  tongue. 

Who  are  these  coming  to  the  sacrifice? 

To  what  green  altar,  O  mysterious  priest, 
Lead'st  thou  that  heifer  lowing  at  the  skies, 

And  all  her  silken  flanks  with  garlands  dressed? 


3164     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

What  little  town  by  river  or  sea-shore, 
Or  mountain-built  with  peaceful  citadel, 
Is  emptied  of  its  folk,  this  pious  morn? 
And,  little  town,  thy  streets  for  evermore 
Will  silent  be;  and  not  a  soul,  to  tell 
Wliy  thou  art  desolate,  can  e'er  return. 

O  Attic  shape!  fair  attitude!  with  brede 

Of  marble  men  and  maidens  overwrought, 
With  forest  branches  and  the  trodden  weed; 

Thou,  silent  form!  dost  tease  us  out  of  thought 
As  doth  eternity.     Cold  Pastoral! 

When  old  age  shall  this  generation  waste. 

Thou  shalt  remain,  in  midst  of  other  woe 
Than  ours,  a  friend  to  man,  to  whom  thou  say'st, 
"  Beauty  is  truth,  truth  beauty," — that  is  all 
Ye  know  on  earth,  and  all  ye  need  to  know. 

John  Reals  [1795-1821] 

ODE  TO  PSYCHE 

0  goddess!  hear  these  tuneless  numbers,  wrung 
By  sweet  enforcement  and  remembrance  dear, 

And  pardon  that  thy  secrets  should  be  sung 
Even  into  thine  own  soft-conched  ear: 

Surely  I  dreamed  to-day,  or  did  I  see 
The  winged  Psyche  with  awakened  eyes? 

1  wandered  in  a  forest  thoughtlessly, 

And,  on  the  sudden,  fainting  with  surprise, 
Saw  two  fair  creatures,  couched  side  by  side 

In  deepest  grass,  beneath  the  whispering  roof 

Of  leaves  and  trembled  blossoms,  where  there  ran 
A  brooklet,  scarce  espied: 
'Mid  hushed,  cool-rooted  flowers  fragrant-eyed. 

Blue,  silver-white,  and  budded  Tyrian, 
They  lay  calm-breathing  on  the  bedded  grass; 

Their  arms  embraced,  and  their  pinions  too; 

Their  lips  touched  not,  but  had  not  bade  adieu, 
As  if  disjoined  by  soft-handed  slumber. 
And  ready  still  past  kisses  to  outnumber 


Ode  to  Psyche  3165 

At  tender  eye-dawn  of  aurorean  love: 

The  winged  boy  I  knew; 
But  who  wast  thou,  O  happy,  happy  dove? 

His  Psyche  true! 

0  latest-born  and  loveliest  vision  far 

Of  all  Olympus'  faded  hierarchy! 
Fairer  than  Phoebe's  sapphire-regioned  star, 

Or  Vesper,  amorous  glow-worm  of  the  sky; 
Fairer  than  these,  though  temple  thou  hast  none, 

Nor  altar  heaped  with  flowers; 
Nor  Virgin-choir  to  make  delicious  moan 

Upon  the  midnight  hours; 
No  voice,  no  lute,  no  pipe,  no  incense  sweet 

From  chain-swung  censer  teeming; 
No  shrine,  no  grove,  no  oracle,  no  heat 

Of  pale-mouthed  prophet  dreaming. 

0  brightest!  though  too  late  for  antique  vows, 
Too,  too  late  for  the  fond  believing  lyre. 

When  holy  were  the  haunted  forest  boughs. 

Holy  the  air,  the  water,  and  the  fire; 
Yet  even  in  these  clays  so  far  retired 

From  happy  pieties,  thy  lucent  fans. 

Fluttering  among  the  faint  Olympians, 

1  see,  and  sing,  by  my  own  eyes  inspired. 
So  let  me  be  thy  choir,  and  make  a  moan 

Upon  the  midnight  hours! 
Thy  voice,  thy  lute,  thy  pipe,  thy  incense  sweet 

From  swinged  censer  teeming: 
Thy  shrine,  thy. grove,  thy  oracle,  thy  heat 

Of  pale-mouthed  prophet  dreaming. 

Yes,  I  will  be  thy  priest,  and  build  a  fanenin  // 

In  some  untrodden  region  of  my  mind,  :  ' 
Where  branched  thoughts,  new-grown  with  pleasant  pain, 

Instead  of  pines  shall  murmur  in  the  wind: 
Far,  far  around  shall  those  dark-clustered  trees 

Fledge  the  wild-ridged  mountains  steep  by  steep; 
And  there  by  zephyrs,  streams,  and  birds,  and  bees, 

The  moss-Iain  Dryads  shall  be  lulled  to  sleep; 


3 1 66     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  in  the  midst  of  this  wide  quietness 

A  rosy  sanctuary  will  I  dress 

With  the  wreathed  trellis  of  a  working  brain, 

With  buds,  and  bells,  and  stars  without  a  name, 
With  all  the  gardener  Fancy  e'er  could  feign, 

Who,  breeding  flowers,  will  never  breed  the  same; 

And  there  shall  be  for  thee  all  soft  delight 
That  shadowy  thought  can  win, 

A  bright  torch,  and  a  casement  ope  at  night. 
To  let  the  warm  Love  in! 

John  Keats  [1795-1821] 

'■uti'i-ru;;  I 

TO  FANCY 

Ever  let  the  Fancy  roam. 

Pleasure  never  is  at  home: 

At  a  touch  sweet  Pleasure  melteth. 

Like  to  bubbles  when  rain  pelteth; 

Then  let  winged  Fancy  wander 

Through  the  thought  still  spread  beyond  her: 

Open  wide  the  mind's  cage-door, 

She'll  dart  forth,  and  cloudward  soar. 

O  sweet  Fancy!  let  her  loose; 

Summer's  joys  are  spoilt  by  use, 

And  the  enjoying  of  the  Spring 

Fades  as  does  its  blossoming; 

Autumn's  red-lipped  fruitage  too, 

Blushing  through  the  mist  and  dew, 

Cloys  with  tasting:  What  do  then? 

Sit  thee  by  the  ingle,  when 

The  sear  faggot  blazes  bright. 

Spirit  of  a  winter's  night; 

When  the  soundless  earth  is  muffled, 

And  the  caked  snow  is  shuffled 

From  the  ploughboy's  heavy  shoon; 

When  the  Night  doth  meet  the  Noon 

In  a  dark  conspiracy 

To  banish  Even  from  her  sky. 

Sit  thee  there,  and  send  abroad, 

With  a  mind  self -overawed, 


nofr!-B  To  Fancy  3167 

Fancy,  high-commissioned: — send  her! 

She  has  vassals  to  attend  her: 

She  will  bring,  in  spite  of  frost, 

Beauties  that  the  earth  hath  lost; 

She  will  bring  thee,  all  together. 

All  delights  of  summer  weather; 

AU  the  buds  and  bells  of  May, 

From  dewy  sward  or  thorny  spray; 

All  the  heaped  Autumn's  wealth, 

With  a  stiU,  mysterious  stealth: 

She  will  mix  these  pleasures  up 

Like  three  fit  wines  in  a  cup, 

And  thou  shalt  quaff  it: — thou  shalt  hear 

Distant  harvest-carols  clear; 

Rustle  of  the  reaped  corn ; 

Sweet  birds  antheming  the  morn: 

And,  in  the  same  moment— hark! 

'Tis  the  early  April  lark, 

Or  the  rooks,  with  busy  caw. 

Foraging  for  sticks  and  straw. 

Thou  shalt,  at  one  glance,  behold 

The  daisy  and  the  marigold ; 

White-plumed  lilies,  and  the  first 

Hedge-grown  primrose  that  hath  burst; 

Shaded  hyacinth,  alway 

Sapphire  queen  of  the  mid-May; 

And  every  leaf,  and  every  flower 

Pearled  with  the  self-same  shower. 

Thou  shalt  see  the  field-mouse  peep 

Meagre  from  its  celled  sleep; 

And  the  snake  all  winter-thin 

Cast  on  sunny  bank  its  skin; 

Freckled  nest-eggs  thou  shalt  see 

Hatching  in  the  hawthorn-tree. 

When  the  hen-bird's  wing  doth  rest 

Quiet  on  her  mossy  nest; 

Then  the  hurry  and  alann 

When  the  bee-hive  casts  its  swarm; 

Acorns  ripe  down-pattering. 

While  the  autumn  breezes  sing. 


3 1 68     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Oh,  sweet  Fancy!  let  her  loose; 
Every  thing  is  spoilt  by  use: 
Where's  the  cheek  that  doth  not  fade, 
Too  much  gazed  at?     Where's  the  maid 
Whose  lip  mature  is  ever  new? 
Where's  the  eye,  however  blue. 
Doth  not  weary?     Where's  the  face 
One  would  meet  in  every  place? 
Where's  the  voice,  however  soft, 
One  would  hear  so  very  oft? 
At  a  touch  sweet  Pleasure  melteth 
Like  to  bubbles  when  rain  pelteth. 
Let,  then,  winged  Fancy  find 
Thee  a  mistress  to  thy  mind : 
Dulcet-eyed  as  Ceres'  daughter. 
Ere  the  God  of  Torment  taught  her 
How  to  frown  and  how  to  chide; 
With  a  waist  and  with  a  side 
White  as  Hebe's,  when  her  zone 
Slipped  its  golden  clasp,  and  down 
Fell  her  kirtle  to  her  feet. 
While  she  held  the  goblet  sweet, 
And  Jove  grew  languid. — Break  the  mesh 
Of  the  Fancy's  silken  leash; 
Quickly  break  her  prison-string, 
And  such  joys  as  these  she'll  bring. — 
Let  the  winged  Fancy  roam. 
Pleasure  never  is  at  home. 

John  Keats  [1705-1821] 

THE  HAUNTED   PALACE 

In  the  greenest  of  our  valleys 

By  good  angels  tenanted, 
Once  a  fair  and  stately  palace — ■ 

Radiant  palace — reared  its  head. 
In  the  monarch  Thought's  doininion, 

It  stood  there;  •,  n-jd'// 

Never  seraph  spread  a  pinion 

Over  fabric  half  so  fair. 


The  Haunted   Palace  3169 

Banners  yellow,  glorious,  golden, 

On  its  roof  did  float  and  flow 
(This — aU  this — was  in  the  olden 

Time  long  ago), 
And  every  gentle  air  that  dallied, 

In  that  sweet  day, 
Along  the  ramparts  plumed  and  pallid, 

A  winged  odor  went  away. 

Wanderers  in  that  happy  valley 

Through  two  luminous  windows  saw 
Spirits  moving  musically. 

To  a  lute's  well-tuned  law, 
Round  about  a  throne  where,  sitting 

(Porphyrogene) , 
In  state  his  glory  well  befitting, 

The  ruler  of  the  realm  was  seen. 

And  all  with  pearl  and  ruby  glowing 

Was  the  fair  palace  door. 
Through  which  came  flowing,  flowing,  flowing, 

And  sparkhng  evermore, 
A  troop  of  Echoes,  whose  sweet  duty 

Was  but  to  sing. 
In  voices  of  surpassing  beauty, 

The  wit  and  wisdom  of  their  king. 

But  evil  things,  in  robes  of  sorrow, 

Assaikd  the  monarch's  high  estate; 
(Ah,  let  us  mourn,  for  never  morrow 

Shall  dawn  upon  him  desolate!) 
And  round  about  his  home,  the  glory 

That  blushed  and  bloomed. 
Is  but  a  dim -remembered  story 

Of  the  old  time  entombed. 

And  travelers  now,  within  that  valley, 

Through  the  red-litten  windows  see 
Vast  forms  that  move  fantastically 

To  a  discordant  melody; 


3170     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

While,  like  a  ghastly  rapid  river,*  ■■""^'T 

Through  the  pale  door 
A  hideous  throng  rush  out  forever, 

And  laugh — but  smile  no  more. 

Edgar  Allan  Poe  [1809-1849] 


THE   RAVEN 

Once  upon  a  midnight  dreary,  while  I  pondered,  weak  and 
weary. 

Over  many  a  quaint  and  curious  volume  of  forgotten  lore,^ 

While  I  nodded,  nearly  napping,  suddenly  there  came  a  tap- 
ping, 

As  of  some  one  gently  rapping,  rapping  at  my  chamber 
door. 

"'Tis  some  visitor,"  I  muttered,  "tapping  at  my  chamber 
door: 
Only  this  and  nothing  more." 

Ah,  distinctly  I  remember  it  was  in  the  bleak  December, 

And  each  separate  dying  ember  wrought  its  ghost  upon  the 
floor. 

Eagerly  I  wished  the  morrow; — vainly  I  had  sought  to  bor- 
row 

From  my  books  surcease  of  sorrow — sorrow  for  the  lost 
Lenore, 

For  the  rare  and  radiant  maiden  whom  the  angels  name 
Lenore : 
Nameless  here  for  evermore. 

And  the  silken  sad  uncertain  rustling  of  each  purple  curtain 
Thrilled  me — filled  me  with  fantastic  terrors  never  felt  be- 
fore; ,-,pt)  bio  arfj  1; 
So  that  now,  to  still  the  beating  of  my  heart,  I  stood  repeat- 
ing, 
"  'Tis  some  visitor  entreating  entrance  at  my  chamber  door, 
Some  late  visitor  entreating  entrance  at  my  chamber  door: 
This  it  is  and  nothing  more." 


The   Raven  I171 

Presently  my  soul  grew  stronger;  hesitating  then  no  longer, 

"Sir,"  said  I,  "or  Madam,  truly  your  forgiveness  I  implore; 

But  the  fact  is  I  was  napping,  and  so  gently  you  came  rap- 
ping. 

And  so  faintly  you  came  tapping,  tapping  at  my  chamber 
door, 

That  I  scarce  was  sure  I  heard  you"— here  I  opened  wide 
the  door: — 
Darkness  there  and  nothing  more. 

Deep  into  that  darkness  peering,  long  I  stood  there  wonder- 
ing, fearing. 

Doubting,  dreaming  dreams  no  mortals  ever  dared  to  dream 
before; 

But  the  silence  was  unbroken,  and  the  stillness  gave  no 
token, 

And  the  only  word  there  spoken  was  the  whispered  word, 
"Lenore!" 

This  I  whispered,  and  an  echo  murmured  back  the  word, 
"Lenore!" 
Merely  this  and  nothing  more. 

Back  into  the  chamber  turning,  all  my  soul  within  me  burn- 
ing, 
Soon  again  I  heard  a  tapping  somewhat  louder  than  before. 
"Surely,"  said  I,  "surely  that  is  something  at  my  window 

lattice; 
Let  me  see,  then,  what  thereat  is,  and  this  mystery  explore; 
Let  my  heart  be  still  a  moment  and  this  mystery  explore; 
'Tis  the  wind  and  nothing  more." 

Open  here  I  flung  the  shutter,  when,  with  many  a  flirt  and 

flutter. 
In  there  stepped  a  stately  Raven  of  the  saintly  days  of  yore. 
Not  the  least  obeisance  made  he;  not  a  minute  stopped  or 

stayed  he; 
But,  with  mien  of  lord  or  lady,  perched  above  my  chamber 

door, 
Perched  upon  a  bust  of  Pallas  just  above  my  chamber  door: 
Perched,  and  sat,  and  nothing  more. 


jiy2     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Then  this  ebony  bird  beguihng  my  sad  fancy  into  smihng 
By  the  grave  and  stern  decorum  of  the  countenance  it 

wore, — 
"Though  thy  crest  be  shorn  and  shaven,  thou,"  I  said,  "art 

sure  no  craven, 
Ghastly  grim  and    ancient    Raven  wandering    from   the 

Nightly  shore:  '^ 

Tell  me  what  thy  lordly  name  is  on  the  Night's  Plutonian 

shore!" 
Quoth  the  Raven,  "Nevermore." 

Much  I  marvelled  this  ungainly  fowl  to  hear  discourse  so 
plainly,  ; 

Though  its  answer  little  meaning — little  relevancy  bore; 

For  we  cannot  help  agreeing  that  no  living  human  being 

Ever  yet  was  blessed  with  seeing  bird  above  his  chamber 
door, 

Bird  or  beast  upon  the  sculptured  bust  above  his  chamber 
door. 
With  such  name  as  "Nevermore." 

But  the  Raven,  sitting  lonely  on  the  placid  bust,  spoke  only 

That  one  word,  as  if  his  soul  in  that  one  word  he  did  out- 
pour. 

Nothing  further  then  he  uttered,  not  a  feather  then  he 
fluttered, 

Till  I  scarcely  more  than  muttered, — "Other  friends  have 
flown  before; 

On  the  morrow  he  will  leave  me,  as  my  Hopes  have  flown 
before." 
Then  the  bird  said,  "Nevermore." 

Startled  at  the  stillness  broken  by  reply  so  aptly  spoken/  ■' 

"Doubtless,"  said  I,  "what  it  utters  is  its  only  stock  and 
store. 

Caught  from  some  unhappy  master  whom  unmerciful  Dis- 
aster 

Followed  fast  and  followed  faster  till  his  songs  one  burden 
bore: 

Till  the  dirges  of  his  Hope  that  melancholy  burden  bore 


Of  'Never — ^nevermore. 


4 


The  Raven 


3173 


But  the  Raven  still  beguiling  all  my  sad  soul  into  smiling, 
Straight  I  wheeled  a  cushioned  seat  in  front  of  bird  and  bust 

and  door; 
Then,  upon  the  velvet  sinking,  I  betook  myself  to  linking 
Fancy  unto  fancy,  thinking  what  this  ominous  bird  of  yore, 
What  this  grim,  ungainly,  ghastly,  gaunt,  and  ominous  bird 
of  yore 
Meant  in  croaking  "Nevermore." 

This  I  sat  engaged  in  guessing,  but  no  syllable  expressing 

To  the  fowl  whose  fiery  eyes  now  burned  into  my  bosom's 
core; 

This  and  more  I  sat  divining,  witli  my  head  at  ease  reclin- 
ing 

On  the  cushion's  velvet  lining  that  the  lamplight  gloated 
o'er. 

But  whose  velvet  violet  lining  with  the  lamp-light  gloating 
o'er 
She  shall  press,  ah,  nevermore! 

Then,  methought,  the  air  grew  denser,  perfumed  from  an  un- 
seen censer 

Swung  by  seraphim  whose  foot-falls  tinkled  on  the  tufted 
floor. 

"Wretch,"  I  cried,   "thy  God  hath  lent  thee— by  these 
angels  he  hath  sent  thee 

Respite — respite  and  nepenthe  from  thy  memories  of  Lenore! 

Quaff,  oh  quaff  this  kind  nepenthe,  and  forget  this  lost 
Lenore!" 
Quoth  the  Raven,  "Nevermore." 

"Prophet!"  said  I,  "thing  of  evil!  prophet  still,  if  bird  or 

devil! 
W'hether  Tempter  sent,  or  whether  tempest  tossed  thee  here 

ashore, 
Desolate,  yet  all  undaunted,  on  this  desert  land  enchanted — 
On  this  home  by  Horror  haunted — tell  me  truly,  I  implore: 
Is  there — is  there  balm  in  Gilead? — tell  me — tell  me,  I  im- 
plore!" 
Quoth  the  Raven,  "Nevermore." 


3  1 74     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"Prophet!"  said  I,  "thing  of  evil!  prophet  still,  if  bird  or 

devil! 
By  that  Heaven  that  bends  above  us,  by  that  God  we  both 

adore,  ;  noqy  .nsriT 

Tell  this  soul  with  sorrow  laden  if,  within  the  distant  Aidenn, 
It  shall  clasp  a  sainted  maiden  whom   the  angels  name 

Lenore : 
Clasp  a  rare  and  radiant  maiden  whom  the  angels  name 

Lenore!" 
Quoth  the  Raven,  "Nevermore." 

"Be  that  word  our  sign  of  parting,  bird  or  fiend! "  I  shrieked, 

upstarting' 
"Get  thee  back  into  the  tempest  and  the  Night's  Plutonian 

shore ! 
Leave  no  black  plume  as  a  token  of  that  lie  thy  soul  hath 
'         spoken! 

Leave  my  loneliness  unbroken!  quit  the  bust  above  my  door! 
Take  thy  beak  from  out  my  heart,  and  take  thy  form  from 

off  my  door!" 
Quoth  the  Raven,  "Nevermore." 

And  the  Raven,  never  flitting,  still  is  sitting,  still  is  sitting 
On  the  pallid  bust  of  Pallas  just  above  my  chamber  door; 
And  his  eyes  have  all  the  seeming  of  a  demon's  that  is 

dreaming. 
And  the  lamp-light  o'er  him  streaming  throws  his  shadow 

on  the  floor; 
And  my  soul  from  out  that  shadow  that  lies  floating  on  the 

floor 
Shall  be  lifted — nevermore! 

Edgar  Allan  Poe  [1809-1849] 


THE   BELLS 


Hear  the  sledges  with  the  bells, 
Silver  bells! 
What  a  world  of  merriment  their  melody  foretells! 


.:,  The  Bells 

How  they  tinkle,  tinkle,  tinkle, 

In  the  icy  air  of  night! 
While  the  stars  that  oversprinkle 
AU  the  heavens  seem  to  twinkle 
With  a  crystalline  delight; 
Keeping  time,  time,  time, 
In  a  sort  of  Runic  rhyme, 
To  the  tintinabulation  that  so  musically  wells 
From  the  bells,  bells,  bells,  bells, 

Bells,  bells,  bells— 
From  the  jingling  and  the  tinkling  of  the  bells. 


Hear  the  mellow  wedding  bells. 
Golden  beUs! 
Wliat  a  world  of  happiness  their  harmony  foretells! 
Through  the  balmy  air  of  night 
How  they  ring  out  their  delight! 
From  the  molten-golden  notes. 

And  all  in  tune. 
What  a  liquid  ditty  floats 
To  the  turtle-dove  that  listens,  while  she  gloats 
On  the  moon ! 
Oh,  from  out  the  sounding  cells, 
What  a  gush  of  euphony  voluminously  wells! 
How  it  swells! 
How  it  dwells 
On  the  future;  how  it  tells 
Of  the  rapture  that  impels 
To  the  swinging  and  the  ringing 
Of  the  bells,  bells,  bells, 
Of  the  bells,  bells,  bells,  bells. 
Bells,  bells,  bells— 
To  the  rhyming  and  the  chiming  of  the  bells! 

Ill 

Hear  the  loud  alarum  bells — 
Brazen  bells! 
What  a  tale  of  terror,  now,  their  turbulency  tells 


3175 


3  1 76     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

In  the  startled  ear  of  night 
How  they  scream  out  their  affright ! 
Too  much  horrified  to  speak, 
They  can  only  shriek,  shriek. 
Out  of  tune, 
In  a  clamorous  appealing  to  the  mercy  of  the  fire. 
In  a  mad  expostulation  with  the  deaf  and  frantic  fire. 
Leaping  higher,  higher,  higher. 
With  a  desperate  desire, 
And  a  resolute  endeavor 
Now,  now  to  sit,  or  never, 
By  the  side  of  the  pale-faced  moon. 
Oh,  the  bells,  bells,  bells! 
What  a  tale  their  terror  tells 
Of  despair! 
How  they  clang,  and  clash,  and  roar! 
What  a  horror  they  outpour 
On  the  bosom  of  the  palpitating  air! 
Yet  the  ear  it  fully  knows. 
By  the  twanging. 
And  the  clanging, 
How  the  danger  ebbs  and  flows; 
Yet  the  ear  distinctly  tells, 
In  the  jangling. 
And  the  wrangling, 
How  the  danger  sinks  and  swells. 
By  the  sinking  or  the  swelling  in  the  anger  of  the  bells; 

Of  the  bells— 
Of  the  bells,  bells,  bells,  bells, 
Bells,  bells,  bells — 
In  the  clamor  and  the  clangor  of  the  bells! 

IV 

Hear  the  tolling  of  the  bells, 
Iron  bells! 
What  a  world  of  solemn  thought  their  melody  compels! 
In  the  silence  of  the  night. 
How  we  shiver  with  affright 
At  the  melancholy  menace  of  their  tone! 


The  Bells  3177 

For  every  sound  that  floats 
From  the  rust  within  their  throats, 
Is  a  groan. 
And  the  people — ah,  the  people, 
They  that  dwell  up  in  the  steeple, 

x\ll  alone. 
And  who  tolling,  tolling,  tolling, 
In  that  muffled  monotone, 
Feel  a  glory  in  so  rolling 

On  the  human  heart  a  stone — 

They  are  neither  man  nor  woman, 

The}^  are  neither  brute  nor  human, 

They  are  ghouls: 

And  their  king  it  is  who  tolls; 

And  he  rolls,  rolls,  rolls, 

Rolls 
A  paean  from  the  bells! 
And  his  merry  bosom  swells 
With  the  pgean  of  the  bells! 
And  he  dances,  and  he  yells; 
Keeping  time,  time,  time, 
In  a  sort  of  Runic  rhyme. 
To  the  paean  of  the  bells, 
Of  the  bells; 
Keeping  time,  time,  time. 
In  a  sort  of  Runic  rh}TTie, 
To  the  throbbing  of  the  bells; 
Of  the  bells,  bells,  bells— 
To  the  sobbing  of  the  bells; 
Keeping  time,  time,  time, 
As  he  knells,  knells,  knells. 
In  a  happy  Runic  rhyme. 
To  the  rolling  of  the  bells; 
Of  the  bells,  bells,  bells— 
To  the  tolling  of  the  bells. 
Of  the  beUs,  bells,  bells,  beUs, 
Bells,  bells,  bells— 
To  the  moaning  and  the  groaning  of  the  bells. 

Edgar  Allan  Poc  [1809-1849] 


3178     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


THE  LOTOS-EATERS 

"Courage!"  he  said,  and  pointed  toward  the  land, 
"This  mounting  wave  will  roll  us  shoreward  soon." 
In  the  afternoon  they  came  unto  a  land 
In  which  it  seemed  always  afternoon. 
All  round  the  coast  the  languid  air  did  swoon. 
Breathing  like  one  that  hath  a  weary  dream. 
Full-faced  above  the  valley  stood  the  moon ; 
And,  like  a  downward  smoke,  the  slender  stream 
Along  the  cliff  to  fall  and  pause  and  fall  did  seem. 

A  land  of  streams!  some,  like  a  downward  smoke, 

Slow-dropping  veils  of  thinnest  lawn,  did  go; 

And  some  through  wavering  lights  and  shadows  broke, 

Rolling  a  slumberous  sheet  of  foam  below. 

They  saw  the  gleaming  river  seaward  flow 

From  the  inner  land:  far  off,  three  mountain-tops, 

Three  silent  pinnacles  of  aged  snow. 

Stood  sunset-flushed;  and,  dewed  with  showery  drops, 

Up-clomb  the  shadowy  pine  above  the  woven  copse. 

The  charmed  sunset  lingered  low  adoviai 

In  the  red  West:  through  mountain  clefts  the  dale 

Was  seen  far  inland,  and  the  yellow  down 

Bordered  with  palm,  and  many  a  winding  vale 

And  meadow,  set  with  slender  galingale; 

A  land  where  all  things  always  seemed  the  same! 

And  round  about  the  keel  with  faces  pale, 

Dark  faces  pale  against  that  rosy  flame. 

The  mild-eyed  melancholy  Lotos-eaters  came. 

Branches  they  bore  of  that  enchanted  stem. 
Laden  with  flower  and  fruit,  whereof  they  gave 
To  each,  but  whoso  did  receive  of  them 
And  taste,  to  him  the  gushing  of  the  wave 
Far,  far  away  did  seem  to  mourn  and  rave 
On  alien  shores;  and  if  his  fellow  spake. 
His  voice  was  thin,  as  voices  from  the  grave; 
And  deep-asleep  he  seemed,  yet  all  awake. 
And  music  in  his  ears  his  beating  heart  did  make. 


Ulysses  3^79 

They  sat  them  down  upon  the  yellow  sand, 
Between  the  sun  and  moon  upon  the  shore; 
And  sweet  it  was  to  dream  of  Fatherland, 
Of  child,  and  wife,  and  slave;  but  evermore 
Most  weary  seemed  the  sea,  weary  the  oar. 
Weary  the  wandering  fields  of  barren  foam. 
Then  some  one  said,  "We  will  return  no  more;" 
And  all  at  once  they  sang,  "Our  island  home 
Is  far  beyond  the  wave;  wc  will  no  longer  roam." 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809- 189 2] 


ULYSSES 

It  little  profits  that  an  idle  king, 

By  this  still  hearth,  among  these  barren  crags, 

Matched  with  an  aged  wife,  I  mete  and  dole 

Unequal  laws  unto  a  savage  race. 

That  hoard,  and  sleep,  and  feed,  and  know  not  me. 

I  cannot  rest  from  travel:  I  will  drink 

Life  to  the  lees.     All  times  I  have  enjoyed 

Greatly,  have  suffered  greatly,  both  with  those 

That  loved  me,  and  alone;  on  shore,  and  when 

Through  scudding  drifts  the  rainy  Hyades 

Vexed  the  dim  sea.     I  am  become  a  name; 

For  always  roaming  with  a  hungry  heart 

Much  have  I  seen  and  known, — cities  of  men 

And  manners,  climates,  councils,  governments, 

Myself  not  least,  but  honored  of  them  all; 

And  drunk  delight  of  battle  with  my  peers, 

Far  on  the  ringing  plains  of  windy  Troy. 

I  am  part  of  all  that  I  have  met; 

Yet  all  experience  is  an  arch  wherethrough 

Gleams  that  untravelled  world,  whose  margin  fades 

For  ever  and  for  ever  when  I  move. 

How  dull  it  is  to  pause,  to  make  an  end. 

To  rust  unburnished,  not  to  shine  in  use! 

As  though  to  breathe  were  life.     Life  piled  on  life 

Were  all  too  little,  and  of  one  to  me 

Little  remains:  but  every  hour  is  saved 


3i8o     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

From  that  eternal  silence,  something  more, 
A  bringer  of  new  things;  and  vile  it  were 
For  some  three  suns  to  store  and  hoard  myself, 
And  this  gray  spirit  yearning  in  desire 
To  follow  knowledge  like  a  sinking  star, 
Beyond  the  utmost  bound  of  human  thought. 

This  is  my  son,  mine  own  Telemachus, 
To  whom  I  leave  the  sceptre  and  the  isle — 
Well-loved  of  me,  discerning  to  fulfil 
This  labor,  by  slow  prudence  to  make  mild 
A  rugged  people,  and  through  soft  degrees 
Subdue  them  to  the  useful  and  the  good. 
JNIost  blameless  is  he,  centred  in  the  sphere 
Of  common  duties,  decent  not  to  fail 
In  offices  of  tenderness,  and  pay 
Meet  adoration  to  my  household  gods, 
When  I  am  gone.     He  works  his  work,  I  mine. 

There  lies  the  port;  the  vessel  puffs  her  sail: 
There  gloom  the  dark,  broad  seas.  ■  My  mariners. 
Souls  that  have  toiled,  and  wrought,  and  thought  with  me- 
That  ever  with  a  frolic  welcome  took 
The  thunder  and  the  sunshine,  and  opposed 
Free  hearts,  free  foreheads — you  and  I  are  old; 
Old  age  hath  yet  his  honor  and  his  toil; 
Death  closes  all:  but  something  ere  the  end, 
Some  work  of  noble  note,  may  yet  be  done, 
Not  unbecoming  men  that  strove  with  gods. 
The  lights  begin  to  twinkle  from  the  rocks: 
The  long  day  wanes:  the  slow  moon  climbs:  the  deep 
IVIoans  round  with  many  voices.     Come,  my  friends, 
'Tis  not  too  late  to  seek  a  newer  world. 
Push  off,  and  sitting  well  in  order  smite 
The  sounding  furrows;  for  my  purpose  holds 
To  sail  beyond  the  sunset,  and  the  baths 
Of  all  the  western  stars,  until  I  die. 
It  may  be  that  the  gulfs  will  wash  us  down: 
It  may  be  we  shall  touch  the  Happy  Isles, 
And  see  the  great  Achilles,  whom  we  knew. 
Though  much  is  taken,  much  abides;  and  though 
We  are  not  now  that  strength  which  in  old  days 


Morte  d' Arthur  3181 

Moved  earth  and  heaven;  that  which  we  are,  we  are; — 

One  equal  temper  of  heroic  hearts, 

Made  weak  by  time  and  fate,  but  strong  in  will 

To  strive,  to  seek,  to  find,  and  not  to  yield. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1S09-1S92] 

MORTE  D 'ARTHUR 

So  all  day  long  the  noise  of  battle  rolled 
Among  the  mountains  by  the  winter  sea; 
Until  King  Arthur's  table,  man  by  man, 
Had  fallen  in  Lyonesse  about  their  Lord, 
King  Arthur:  then,  because  his  wound  was  deep, 
The  bold  Sir  Bedivere  uplifted  him, 
Sir  Bedivere,  the  last  of  all  his  knights, 
And  bore  him  to  a  chapel  nigh  the  field, 
A  broken  chancel  with  a  broken  cross, 
That  stood  on  a  dark  strait  of  barren  land. 
On  one  side  lay  the  ocean,  and  on  one 
Lay  a  great  water,  and  the  moon  was  full. 

Then  spake  King  i\rthur  to  Sir  Bedivere: 
"The  sequel  of  to-day  unsolders  all 
The  goodliest  fellowship  of  famous  knights 
Whereof  this  world  holds  record.     Such  a  sleep 
They  sleep — the  men  I  loved.     I  think  that  we 
Shall  never  more,  at  any  future  time, 
Delight  our  souls  with  talk  of  knightly  deeds. 
Walking  about  the  gardens  and  the  halls 
Of  Camelot,  as  in  the  days  that  were. 
I  perish  by  this  people  which  I  made, — 
Though  Merlin  sware  that  I  should  come  again 
To  rule  once  more — but  let  what  will  be,  be, 
I  am  so  deeply  smitten  through  the  helm. 
That  without  help  I  cannot  last  till  morn. 
Thou  therefore  take  my  brand  Excalibur,  i 

Which  was  my  pride:  for  thou  rememberest  how  ' ' 
In  those  old  days,  one  summer  noon,  an  arm 
Rose  up  from  out  the  bosom  of  the  lake, 
Clothed  in  white  samite,  mystic,  wonderful, 
Holding  the  sword — and  how  I  rowed  across 
And  took  it,  and  have  worn  it,  Uke  a  king: 


3182     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And,  wheresoever  I  am  sung  or  told  -  ■ 

In  after  time,  this  also  shall  be  known:  "-' ' 

But  now  delay  not:  take  Excalibur, 

And  fling  him  far  into  the  middle  mere: 

Watch  what  thou  seest,  and  lightly  bring  me  word." 

To  him  replied  the  bold  Sir  Bedivere: 
"  It  is  not  meet,  Sir  King,  to  leave  thee  thus, 
Aidless,  alone,  and  smitten  through  the  helm. 
A  little  thing  may  harm  a  wounded  man. 
Yet  I  thy  hest  will  all  perform  at  full, 
Watch  what  I  see,  and  hghtly  bring  thee  word." 

So  saying,  from  the  ruined  shrine  he  stepped 
And  in  the  moon  athwart  the  place  of  tombs. 
Where  lay  the  mighty  bones  of  ancient  men, 
Old  knights,  and  over  them  the  sea-wind  sang 
Shrill,  chill,  with  flakes  of  foam.     He,  stepping  down 
By  zigzag  paths,  and  juts  of  pointed  rock. 
Came  on  the  shining  levels  of  the  lake. 

There  drew  he  forth  the  brand  Excalibur, 
And  o'er  him,  drawing  it,  the  winter  moon, 
Brightening  the  skirts  of  a  long  cloud,  ran  fortW  " 
And  sparkled  keen  with  frost  against  the  hilt: 
For  aU  the  haft  twinkled  with  diamond  sparks, 
Myriads  of  topaz-lights,  and  jacinth-work 
Of  subtlest  jewelery.     He  gazed  so  long 
That  both  his  eyes  were  dazzled,  as  he  stood. 
This  way  and  that  dividing  the  swift  mind. 
In  act  to  throw:  but  at  the  last  it  seemed 
Better  to  leave  Excalibur  concealed 
There  in  the  many-knotted  water-flags. 
That  whistled  stiff  and  dry  about  the  marge. ^hJi  oT 

So  strode  he  back  slow  to  the  wounded  king. ' 

Then  spake  King  Arthur  to  Sir  Bedivere: 
Hast  thou  performed  my  mission  which  I  gave? 
What  is  it  thou  hast  seen?  or  what  hast  heard?  " 
And  answer  made  the  bold  Sir  Bedivere:      '       ! 
I  heard  the  ripple  washing  in  the  reeds,   ■  qu  oaoA 
And  the  wild  water  lapping  on  the  crag."     borftoO 
To  whom  replied  King  Arthur,  faint  and  paleK'H 
"  Thou  hast  betrayed  thy  nature  and  thy  name,'-'" 


Morte  d'Arthur  3183 

Not  rendering  true  answer,  as  beseemed 

Thy  fealty,  nor  like  a  noble  knight: 

For  surer  sign  had  followed,  either  hand, 

Or  voice,  or  else  a  motion  of  the  mere. 

This  is  a  shameful  thing  for  men  to  lie. 

Yet  now,  I  charge  thee,  quickly  go  again 

As  thou  art  lief  and  dear,  and  do  the  thing 

I  bade  thee,  watch,  and  lightly  bring  me  word." 

Then  went  Sir  Bedivere  the  second  time 
Across  the  ridge,  and  paced  beside  the  mere. 
Counting  the  dewy  pebbles,  lixed  in  thought; 
But  when  he  saw  the  wonder  of  the  hilt, 
How  curiously  and  strangely  chased,  he  smote 
His  palms  together,  and  he  cried  aloud, 
"  And  if  indeed  I  cast  the  brand  away, 
Surely  a  precious  thing,  one  worthy  note. 
Should  thus  be  lost  forever  from  the  earth. 
Which  might  have  pleased  the  eyes  of  many  men.    j 
What  good  should  follow  this,  if  this  were  done? 
W'hat  harm,  undone?  deep  harm  to  disobey, 
Seeing  obedience  is  the  bond  of  rule. 
Were  it  well  to  obey  then,  if  a  king  demand 
An  act  unprofitable,  against  himself?  ■.  r 

The  king  is  sick,  and  knows  not  what  he  does. 
What  record,  or  what  relic  of  my  lord 
Should  be  to  aftcrtime,  but  empty  breath  ,p 

And  rumors  of  a  doubt?  but  were  this  kept,  ....  ,jj 
Stored  in  some  treasure-house  of  mighty  kings,  ,.rj  ,>j 
Some  one  might  show  it  at  a  joust  of  arms,  [ 

Saying,  'King  Arthur's  sword,  Excalibur,  •  ) 

Wrought  by  the  lonely  maiden  of  the  lake ;  ,  ,- 

Nine  years  she  wrought  it,  sitting  in  the  deeps         j  [- 
Upon  the  hidden  bases  of  the  hills.' 
So  might  some  old  man  speak  in  the  aftertime 
To  all  the  people,  winning  reverence;  .  ,,  . 

But  now  much  honor  and  much  fame  were  lost."j ,..,,, ;^ 

So  Spake  he,  clouded  with  his  own  conceit. 
And  hid  Excalibur,  the  second  time, 
And  so  strode  back  slow  to  the  wounded  king. 

Then  spoke  King  Arthur,  breathing  heavily: 


3184    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"  What  is  it  thou  hast  seen?  or  what  hast  heard?" 

And  answer  made  the  bold  Sir  Bedivere: 
"  I  heard  the  water  lapping  on  the  crag 
And  the  long  ripple  washing  in  the  reeds."  ' 

To  whom  repHed  King  Arthur,  much  in  wrath: 
"  Ah,  miserable  and  unkind,  untrue, 
Unknightly,  traitor-hearted!     Woo  is  me! 
Authority  forgets  a  dying  king, 
Laid  widowed  of  the  power  in  his  eye 
That  bowed  the  will.     I  see  thee  what  thou  art. 
For  thou,  the  latest-left  of  all  my  knights, 
In  whom  should  meet  the  offices  of  all, 
Thou  would'st  betray  me  for  the  precious  hilt; 
Either  from  lust  of  gold,  or  like  a  girl 
Valuing  the  giddy  pleasure  of  the  eyes. 
Yet,  for  a  man  may  fail  in  duty  twice. 
And  the  third  time  may  prosper,  get  thee  hence: 
But,  if  thou  spare  to  fling  Excalibur, 
I  will  arise  and  slay  thee  with  my  hands." 

Then  quickly  rose  Sir  Bedivere,  and  ran. 
And,  leaping  down  the  ridges  hghtly,  plunged 
Among  the  bulrush-beds,  and  clutched  the  sword,  "' 
And  strongly  wheeled  and  threw  it.    The  great  bra!nd 
Made  lightnings  in  the  splendor  of  the  moon. 
And  flashing  round  and  round,  and  whirled  in  an  arch, 
Shot  like  a  streamer  of  the  northern  morn. 
Seen  where  the  moving  isles  of  winter  shock 
By  night,  with  noises  of  the  northern  sea. 
So  flashed  and  fell  the  brand  Excalibur: 
But  ere  he  dipped  the  surface,  rose  an  arm, 
Clothed  in  white  samite,  mystic,  wonderful. 
And  caught  him  by  the  hilt,  and  brandished  him      ^' 
Three  times,  and  drew  him  under  in  the  mere. 
And  hghtly  went  the  other  to  the  king. 

Then  spoke  King  Arthur,  drawing  thicker  breathi 
"  Now  see  I  by  thine  eyes  that  this  is  done.  ^ 

Speak  out:  what  is  it  thou  hast  heard,  or  seen?"    ''^ 

And  answer  made  the  bold  Sir  Bedivere:       '  '^''' 
"  Sir  King,  I  closed  mine  eyelids,  lest  the  gems   ^   '^"^ 
Should  blind  my  purpose,  for  I  never  saw,  ' '  '* 


Morte  d'Arthur  3185 

Nor  shall  see,  here  or  elsewhere,  till  I  die,  ,..| 

Not  though  I  live  three  lives  of  mortal  men,  :-p 

So  great  a  miracle  as  yonder  hilt.  cj 

Then  with  both  hands  I  flung  him,  wheehng  him;  .^-j- 
But  when  I  looked  again,  behold  an  arm. 
Clothed  in  white  samite,  mystic,  wonderful, 
That  caught  him  by  the  hilt,  and  brandished  him 
Three  times,  and  drew  him  under  in  the  mere."         ■/, 

And  answer  made  King  Arthur,  breathing  hard: 
■'.'  My  end  draws  nigh;  'tis  time  that  I  were  gone. 
Make  broad  thy  shoulders  to  receive  my  weight, 
And  bear  me  to  the  margin;  yet  I  fear 
My  wound  hath  taken  cold,  and  I  shall  die." 

So  saying,  from  the  pavement  he  half  rose, 
Slowly,  with  pain,  reclining  on  his  arm, 
And  looking  wistfully  with  wide  blue  eyes  y. 

As  in  a  picture.     Him  Sir  Bedivere  a 

Remorsefully  regarded  through  his  tears, 
And  would  have  spoken,  but  he  found  not  words, 
Then  took  with  care,  and  kneeling  on  one  knee, 
O'er  both  his  shoulders  drew  the  languid  hands, 
And  rising  bore  him  through  the  place  of  tombs.        .  , 

But,  as  he  walked,  King  Arthur  panted  hard, 
Like  one  that  feels  a  nightmare  on  his  bed 
When  all  the  house  is  mute.     So  sighed  the  king, 
Muttering  and  murmuring  at  his  ear,  "Quick,  quick! 
I  fear  it  is  too  late,  and  I  shall  die." 
But  the  other  swiftly  strode  from  ridge  to  ridge, 
Clothed  with  his  breath,  and  looking,  as  he  walked,.. ,[ 
Larger  than  human  on  the  frozen  hills. 
He  heard  the  deep  behind  liim,  and  a  cry 
Before.     His  own  thought  drove  him  like  a  goad. 
Dry  clashed  his  harness  in  the  icy  caves 
And  barren  chasms,  and  all  to  left  and  right      ^,^,1  jf 
The  bare  black  cliff  clanged  round  him,  as  he  based-.) 
His  feet  on  juts  of  slippery  crag  that  rang  fj 

Sharp-smitten  with  the  dint  of  armed  heels —  ,  ^, 

And  on  a  sudden,  lo!  the  level  lake. 
And  the  long  glories  of  the  winter  moon. 

Then  saw  they  how  there  hove  a  dusky  barge, 


3 1 86     Poems  of  Sentiment- and   Reflection 

Dark  as  a  funeral  scarf  from  stem  to  stern, 
Beneath  them;  and  descending  they  were  ware 
That  all  the  decks  were  dense  with  stately  forms 
Black-stoled,  black-hooded,  like  a  dream — by  these 
Three  queens  with  crowns  of  gold--and  from  them  rose 
A  cry  that  shivered  to  the  tingling  stars, 
And,  as  it  were  one  voice,  an  agony  '' 

Of  lamentation,  like  a  wind,  that  shrills  * 

All  night  in  a  waste  land,  where  no  one  comes. 
Or  hath  come,  since  the  making  of  the  world. 

Then  murmured  Arthur,  "  Place  me  in  the  barge," 
And  to  the  barge  they  came.     There  those  three  queens 
Put  forth  their  hands,  and  took  the  king,  and  wept. 
But  she  that  rose  the  tallest  of  them  all  '^ 

And  fairest,  laid  his  head  upon  her  lap. 
And  loosed  the  shattered  casque,  and  chafed  his  hands, 
And  called  him  by  his  name,  complaining  loud. 
And  dropping  bitter  tears  against  his  brow 
Striped  with  dark  blood:  for  all  his  face  was  white      '^ 
And  colorless,  and  like  the  withered  moon 
Smote  by  the  fresh  beam  of  the  springing  east; 
And  all  his  greaves  and  cuisses  dashed  with  drops 
Of  onset ;  and  the  light  and  lustrous  curls — 
That  made  his  forehead  like  a  rising  sun 
High  from  the  dais-throne — were  parched  with  dust;^ 
Or,  clotted  into  points  and  hanging  loose, 
Mixed  with  the  knightly  growth  that  fringed  his  lips. 
So  like  a  shattered  column  lay  the  king; 
Not  like  that  Arthur  who,  with  lance  in  rest. 
From  spur  to  plume  a  star  of  tournament,  ' 

Shot  through  the  lists  at  Camelot,  and  charged  ■ 

Before  the  eyes  of  ladies  and  of  kings. 

Then  loudly  cried  the  bold  Sir  Bedivere:  "^ 

"  Ah!  my  Lord  Arthur,  whither  shall  I  go?  ' 

Where  shall  I  hide  my  forehead  and  my  eyes? 
For  now  I  see  the  true  old  times  are  dead, 
When  every  morning  brought  a  noble  chance,  '^ 

And  every  chance  brought  out  a  noble  knight,  iij-i'tc^ 
Such  times  have  been  not  since  the  light  that  led'  '^"-''^ 
The  holy  Elders  with  the  gift  of  myrrh. 


noIn^B         Morte  d'Arthur  3187 

But  now  the  whole  round  table  is  dissolved 
Which  was  an  image  of  the  mighty  world; 
And  I,  the  last,  go  forth  companionless, 
And  the  days  darken  round  me,  and  the  years, 
Among  new  men,  strange  faces,  other  minds." 

And  slowly  answered  Arthur  from  the  barge: 
"  The  old  order  changeth,  yielding  place  to  new, 
And  God  fulfils  Himself  in  many  ways. 
Lest  one  good  custom  should  corrupt  the  world. 
Comfort  thyself:  what  comfort  is  in  me? 
I  have  lived  my  life,  and  that  which  I  have  done 
May  He  within  Himself  make  pure!  but  thou, 
If  thou  shouldst  never  see  my  face  again. 
Pray  for  my  soul.     More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer 
Than  this  world  dreams  of.     Wherefore,  let  thy  voice 
Rise  like  a  fountain  for  me  night  and  day. 
For  what  are  men  better  than  sheep  or  goats 
That  nourish  a  blind  life  within  the  brain, 
If,  knowing  God,  they  lift  not  hands  of  prayer 
Both  for  themselves  and  those  who  call  them  friend? 
For  so  the  whole  round  earth  is  every  way 
Bound  by  gold  chains  about  the  feet  of  God. 
But  now  farewell.     I  am  going  a  long  w^ay 
With  these  thou  seest — :if  indeed  I  go — 
For  all  my  mind  is  clouded  with  a  doubt — 
To  the  island-valley  of  Avilion; 
Where  falls  not  hail,  or  rain,  or  any  snow. 
Nor  ever  wind  blows  loudly;  but  it  Ues 
Deep-meadowed,  happy,  fair  with  orchard-lawns 
And  bowery  hollows  crowned  with  summer  sea, 
Where  I  will  heal  me  of  my  grievous  wound." 

So  said  he,  and  the  barge  with  oar  and  sail 
Moved  from  the  brink,  like  some  full-breasted  swan 
That,  fluting  a  wild  carol  ere  her  death, 
Ruffles  her  pure  cold  plume,  and  takes  the  flood 
With  swarthy  webs.     Long  stood  Sir  Bedivere 
Revolving  many  memories,  till  the  hull 
Looked  one  black  dot  against  the  verge  of  dawn, 
And  on  the  mere  the  wailing  died  away. 

Alfred  Teiuiysun  [i8og-i892] 


3 1 88     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


THE  LADY  OF  SHALOTT 


On  either  side  the  river  He 
Long  fields  of  barley  and  of  rye, 
That  clothe  the  wold  and  meet  the  sky; 
And  through  the  field  the  road  runs  by 

To  many- towered  Camelot; 
And  up  and  down  the  people  go, 
Gazing  where  the  lilies  blow 
Round  an  island  there  below. 

The  island  of  Shalott. 

Willows  whiten,  aspens  quiver. 
Little  breezes  dusk  and  shiver 
Through  the  wave  that  runs  for  ever 
By  the  island  in  the  river 

Flowing  down  to  Camelot. 
Four  gray  walls,  and  four  gray  towers, 
Overlook  a  space  of  flowers, 
And  the  silent  isle  embowers 

The  Lady  of  Shalott. 

By  the  margin,  willow- veiled, 
Slide  the  heavy  barges  trailed 
By  slow  horses;  and  unhailed 
The  shallop  flitteth  silken-sailed 

Skimming  down  to  Camelot : 
But  who  hath  seen  her  wave  her  hand? 
Or  at  the  casement  seen  her  stand? 
Or  is  she  known  in  all  the  land, 

The  Lady  of  Shalott? 

Only  reapers,  reaping  early 
In  among  the  bearded  barley. 
Hear  a  song  that  echoes  cheerly 
From  the  river  winding  clearly, 

Down  to  towered  Camelot: 


The   Lady  of  Shalott  3189 

And  by  the  moon  the  reaper  weary, 
Piling  sheaves  in  uplands  airy, 
Listening,  whispers  "'Tis  the  fairy 
Lady  of  Shalott." 

PART   II 

There  she  weaves  by  night  and  day 
A  magic  web  with  colors  gay. 
She  has  heard  a  whisper  say, 
A  curse  is  on  her  if  she  stay 

To  look  down  to  Camelot. 
She  knows  not  what  the  curse  may  be, 
And  so  she  weaveth  steadily,  ,' 

And  little  other  care  hath  she, 

The  Lady  of  Shalott. 

And  moving  through  a  mirror  clear 
That  hangs  before  her  all  the  year, 
Shadows  of  the  world  appear. 
There  she  sees  the  highway  near     ., \  -jai 

Winding  down  to  Camelot: 
There  the  river  eddy  whirls, 
And  there  the  surly  village-churls. 
And  the  red  cloaks  of  market  girls, 

Pass  onward  from  Shalott, 

Sometimes  a  troop  of  damsels  glad. 
An  abbot  on  an  ambling  pad, 
Sometimes  a  curly  shepherd -lad. 
Or  long-haired  page  in  crimson  clad,        ; 

Goes  by  to  towered  Camelot; 
And  sometimes  through  the  mirror  blue 
The  knights  come  riding  two  and  two:  ., 
She  hath  no  loyal  knight  and  true, 

The  Lady  of  Shalott. 

But  in  her  web  slie  still  delights  '  r 

To  weave  the  mirror's  magic  sights. 
For  often  through  the  silent  nights 
A  funeral,  with  plumes  and  lights 

And  music,  went  to  Camelot: 


3190    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Or  when  the  moon  was  overhead, 
Came  two  young  lovers  lately  wed; 
"I  am  half  sick  of  shadows,"  said 
The  Lady  of  Shalott. 


A  bow-shot  from  her  bower-eaves, 
He  rode  between  the  barley-sheaves, 
The  sun  came  dazzling  through  the  leaves, 
And  flamed  upon  the  brazen  greaves 

Of  bold  Sir  Lancelot. 
A  red-cross  knight  for  ever  kneeled 
To  a  lady  in  his  shield, 
That  sparkled  on  the  yellow  field, 

Beside  remote  Shalott. 

The  gemmy  bridle  glittered  free. 
Like  to  some  branch  of  stars  we  see 
Hung  in  the  golden  Galaxy. 
The  bridle  bells  rang  merrily 

As  he  rode  down  to  Camelot; 
And  from  his  blazoned  baldric  slung 
A  mighty  silver  bugle  hung, 
And  as  he  rode  his  armor  rung, 

Beside  remote  Shalott. 

All  in  the  blue  unclouded  weather 
Thick-jeweled  shone  the  saddle-leather. 
The  helmet  and  the  helmet-feather 
Burned  like  one  burning  flame  together. 

As  he  rode  down  to  Camelot; 
As  often  through  the  purple  night, 
Below  the  starry  clusters  bright, 
Some  bearded  meteor,  trailing  light, 

Moves  over  still  Shalott. 

His  broad  clear  brow  in  sunlight  glowed; 
On  burnished  hooves  his  war-horse  trode; 
From  underneath  his  helmet  flowed 
His  coal-black  curls  as  on  he  rode, 

As  he  rode  down  to  Camelot. 


The   Lady  of  Shalott  3^91 

From  the  bank  and  from  the  river 
He  flashed  into  the  crystal  mirror, 
"Tirra  lirra,"  by  the  river 
Sang  Sir  Lancelot. 

She  left  the  web,  she  left  the  loom, 
She  made  three  paces  through  the  room, 
She  saw  the  water-lily  bloom, 
She  saw  the  helmet  and  the  plume, 

She  looked  down  to  Camelot. 
Out  flew  the  web  and  floated  wide; 
The  mirror  cracked  from  side  to  side; 
"The  curse  is  come  upon  me!"  cried 

The  Lady  of  Shalott. 

PART   IV 

In  the  stormy  east-wind  straining. 
The  pale  yellow  woods  were  waning, 
The  broad  stream  in  his  banks  complaining, 
Heavily  the  low  sky  raining 

Over  towered  Camelot; 
Down  she  came  and  found  a  boat 
Beneath  a  willow  left  afloat. 
And  round  about  the  prow  she  wrote 

The  Lady  of  Shalott. 

And  down  the  river's  dim  expanse — 
Like  some  bold  seer  in  a  trance, 
Seeing  all  his  own  mischance — 
With  a  glassy  coimtenance 

Did  she  look  to  Camelot. 
And  at  the  closing  of  the  day 
She  loosed  the  chain,  and  down  she  lay; 
The  broad  stream  bore  her  far  away, 

The  Lady  of  Shalott. 

Lying,  robed  in  snowy  white 
That  loosely  flew  to  left  and  right — 
The  leaves  upon  her  faUing  light — 
Through  the  noises  of  the  night 

She  floated  down  to  Camelot: 


31512     Poems  of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

And  as  the  boat-head  wound  along 
The  willowy  hills  and  fields  among, 
They  heard  her  singing  her  last  song, 
The  Lady  of  Shalott. 

Heard  a  carol,  mournful,  holy, 

Chanted  loudly,  chanted  lowly,      '  '     ,^ 

Till  her  blood  was  frozen  slowly. 

And  her  eyes  were  darkened  wholly, 

Turned  to  tov/ered  Cam  clot; 

For  ere  she  reached  upon  the  tide 

The  first  house  by  the  water-side,  '     ""^ 

rrt  Onl 
Singing  in  her  song  she  died, 

""'  The  Lady  of  Shalott. 

Under  tower  and  balcony. 
By  garden-wall  and  gallery, 
A  gleaming  shape  she  floated  by, 
Dead-pale  between  the  houses  high,       1 
Silent  into  Camelot.  ! 

Out  upon  the  wharfs  they  came,  I 

Knight  and  burgher,  lord  and  dame. 
And  round  the  prow  they  read  her  name, 
The  Lady  of  Shalott. 

Who  is  this?  and  what  is  here? 
And  in  the  lighted  palace  near 
Died  the  sound  of  royal  cheer;  / 

And  they  crossed  themselves  for  lear,     y 
Ail  the  knights  at  Camelot:  -; 
But  Lancelot  mused  a  Httle  space; 
He  said,  "She  has  a  lovely  face; 
God  in  His  merc)^  lend  her  grace,  l\ 

The  Lady  of  Shalott." 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 

SONG 

From  "  Paracelsus  " 

Over  the  sea  our  galleys  went, 

With  cleaving  prows  in  order  brave   !T 

To  a  speeding  wnd  and  a  bounding  waVe — 
A  gallant  armament: 


oiJDaht;,  Son( 


3193 


Each  bark  built  out  of  a  forest-tree    f  n  '  ' 

Left  leafy  and  rough  as  first  it  grew, 
And  nailed  all  over  the  gaping  sides, 
Within  and  without,  with  black  bull-hides, 
Seethed  in  fat  and  suppled  in  flame, 
To  bear  the  playful  billows'  game; 
So,  each  good  ship  was  rude  to  see, 
Rude  and  bare  to  the  outward  view. 

But  each  upbore  a  stately  tent 
Where  cedar  pales  in  scented  row 
Kept  out  the  flakes  of  the  dancing  brine, 
And  an  awning  drooped  the  mast  below, 
In  fold  on  fold  of  the  purple  fine. 
That  neither  noontide  nor  star-shine 
Nor  moonlight  cold  wTiich  maketh  mad,  •' 

Might  pierce  the  regal  tenement. 
When  the  sun  dawned,  oh,  gay  and  glad 
We  set  the  sail  and  plied  the  oar; 
But  when  the  night-wind  blew  like  breath. 
For  joy  of  one  day's  voyage  more, 
We  sang  together  on  the  wide  sea, 
Like  men  at  peace  on  a  peaceful  shore; 
Each  sail  was  loosed  to  the  wind  so  free. 
Each  helm  made  sure  by  the  twilight  star, 
And  in  a  sleep  as  calm  as  death. 
We,  the  voyagers  from  afar. 

Lay  stretched  along,  each  weary  crew 
Li  a  circle  round  its  wondrous  tent 
Whence  gleamed  soft  light  and  curled  rich  scent. 

And  with  light  and  perfume,  music  too: 
So  the  stars  wheeled  round,  and  the  darkness  passed, 
'^And  at  morn  we  started  beside  the  mast, 
And  still  each  ship  was  sailing  fast! 

Now,  one  morn,  land  appeared — a  speck 

Dim  trembling  betwixt  sea  and  sky: 

"Avoid  it,"  cried  our  pilot,  "check  '  '  '"i''''.'  :■•■  /V 

The  shout,  restrain  the  eager  eye!" 
"But  the  heaving  sea  was  black  behind 
For  many  a  night  and  many  a  day. 


3194     I'^oems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  land,  though  but  a  rock,  drew  nigh;  ;  ,,  'f 
So  we  broke  the  cedar  pales  away, 
Let  the  purple  awning  flap  in  the  wind. 

And  a  statue  bright  was  on  every  deck! 
We  shouted,  every  man  of  us, 
And  steered  right  into  the  harbor  thus, 
With  pomp  and  paean  glorious. 

A  hundred  shapes  of  lucid  stone! 

All  day  we  built  its  shrine  for  each, 
A  shrine  of  rock  for  every  one. 
Nor  paused  till  in  the  westering  sun 

We  sat  together  on  the  beach 
To  sing  because  our  task  was  done; 
When  lo!  what  shouts  aftd  merry  songs! 
What  laughter  all  the  distance  stirs! 
A  loaded  raft  with  happy  throngs 
Of  gentle  islanders! 
"Our  isles  are  just  at  hand,"  they  cried, 

"Like  cloudlets  faint  in  even  sleeping; 
Our  temple-gates  are  opened  wide, 

Our  olive-groves  thick  shade  are  keeping 
For  these  majestic  forms" — they  cried. 
Oh,  then  we  awoke  with  sudden  start 
From  our  deep  dream,  and  knew,  too  late, 
How  bare  the  rock,  how  desolate, 
Which  had  received  our  precious  freight: 

Yet  we  called  out — "Depart! 
Our  gifts,  once  given,  must  here  abide: 

Our  work  is  done;  we  have  no  heart 
;  ,    ;  ;To  mar  our  work," — we  cried. 

Robert  Browning  [1812-1889] 


THE   SWIMMERS 

We  were  eight  fishers  of  the  western  sea, 
Who  sailed  our  craft  beside  a  barren  land. 
Where  harsh  with  pines  the  herdless  mountains  stand 
And  lonely  beaches  be. 


toilo^l^'  The  Swimmers  3195 

There  no  man  dwells,  and  ships  go  seldom  past; 
Yet  sometimes  there  we  lift  our  keels  ashore, 
To  rest  in  safety  'mid  the  broken  roar 
And  mist  of  surges  vast. 

One  strand  we  know,  remote  from  all  the  rest, 
For  north  and  south  the  cliffs  are  high  and  steep, 
Whose  naked  leagues  of  rock  repel  the  deep. 
Insurgent  from  the  west. 

Tawny  it  lies,  untrodden  o'er  by  man, 

Save  when  from  storm  we  sought  its  narrow  rift 
To  beach  our  craft  and  hght  a  fire  of  drift 
And  sleep  till  day  began. 

Along  its  sands  no  flower  nor  bird  has  home. 
Abrupt  its  breast,  girt  by  no  splendor  save 
The  whorled  and  poising  emerald  of  the  wave 
And  scarves  of  rustling  foam — . 

A  place  of  solemn  beauty;  yet  we  swore, 
By  all  the  ocean  stars'  unhasting  flight, 
To  seek  no  refuge  for  another  night 
Upon  that  haunted  shore. 

That  year  a  sombre  autumn  held  the  earth. 
At  dawn  we  sailed  from  out  our  village  bay; 
We  sang;  a  taut  wind  leapt  along  the  day; 
The  sea-birds  mocked  our  mirth. 

Southwest  we  drave,  like  arrows  to  a  mark; 
Ere  set  of  sun  the  coast  was  far  to  lee, 
Where  thundered  over  by  the  white-hooved  sea   • 
The  reefs  lie  gaunt  and  dark. 

But  when  we  would  have  cast  our  hooks,  the  main 
Grew  wroth  a-sudden,  and  our  captain  said: 
"Seek  we  a  shelter."     And  the  west  was  red 
God  gave  his  winds  the  rein. 


3196     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  eastward  lay  the  sands  of  which  I  told; 
Thithsr  we  fled,  and  on  the  narrow  beach 
Drew  up  our  keels  beyond  the  lessening  reach 
Of  waters  green  and  cold. 

Then  set  the  wounded  sun.    The  wind  blew  clean 
The  skies.     A  wincing  star  came  forth  at  last. 
We  heard  like  mighty  tollings  in  the  blast 
The  shock  of  waves  unseen. 

The  wide-winged  Eagle  hovered  overhead; 
The  Scorpion  crept  slowly  in  the  south 
To  pits  below  the  horizon;  in  its  mouth 
Lay  a  young  moon  that  bled, 

And  from  our  fire  the  ravished  flame  swept  back, 
Like  yellow  hair  of  one  who  flies  apace. 
Compelled  in  lands  barbarian  to  race 
With  lions  on  her  track. 

Then  from  the  maelstroms  of  the  surf  arose 
Wild  laughter,  mystical,  and  up  the  sands 
Came  Two  that  walked  with  intertwining  hands 
Amid  those  ocean  snows. 

Ghostly  they  gleamed  before  the  lofty  spray-^-i  ■ 
Fairer  than  gods  and  naked  as  the  moon. 
The  foamy  fillets  at  their  ankles  strewn 
Less  marble-white  than  they. 

Laughing  they  stood,  then  to  our  beacon's  flare 
Drew  nearer,  as  we  watched  in  mad  surprise 
The  scarlet-flashing  lips,  the  sea-green  eyes, 
The  red  and  tangled  hair. 

Then  spoke  the  god  (goddess  and  god  they  seemed). 
In  harp-like  accents  of  a  tongue  unknown — 
About  his  brows  the  dripping  locks  were  blown; 
Like  wannest  gold  he  gleamed. 


The  Swimmers  3^97 

Staring  we  sat;  again  the  Vision  spoke.   '  ""  "'0"^ 
Beyond  his  form  we  saw  the  billows  rave,^ 
The  leap  of  those  white  leopards  in  the  wave, — 
The  spume  of  seas  that  broke. 

Yet  sat  we  mute,  for  then  a  human  word 

Seemed  folly's  worst.     And  scorn  began  to  trace 
Its  presence  on  the  wild,  imperious  face; 
Again  the  red  lips  stirred, 

But  spoke  not.     In  an  instant  we  were  free 

From  that  enchantment:  fleet  as  deer  they  turned 
And  sudden  amber  leapt  the  sands  they  spurned ; 
We  saw  them  meet  the  sea. 

We  heard  the  seven-chorded  surf,  unquelled, 
Call  in  one  thunder  to  the  granite  walls; 
But  over  all,  like  broken  clarion-calls, 
Disdainful  laughter  w-elled. 

Then  silence,  save  for  cloven  wave  and  wind, 
Our  fire  had  faltered  on  its  little  dune. 
Far  out  a  fog-wall  reared,  and  hid  the  moon. 
The  night  lay  vast  and  blind. 

Silent,  we  waited  the  assuring  morn, 

Which  rose  on  angered  waters.    But  we  set 
Our  hooded  prows  to  sea,  and,  tempest-wet, 
Beat  up  the  coast  forlorn. 

And  no  man  scorned  our  talc,  for  well  they  knew 
Had  mystery  befallen:  in  our  eyes 
Were  alien  terrors  and  unknown  surmise. 
Men  saw  the  tale  was  true. 

And  no  man  seeks  a  refuge  on  that  shore. 
Though  tempests  gather  in  impelling  skies; 
Unseen,  unsolved,  unhazardcd  it  hes. 
Forsaken  evermore. 


3198     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

For  on  those  sands  immaculate  and  lone 

Perchance  They  Hst  the  sea's  immeasured  lyre. 
When  sunset  casts  an  evanescent  fire  i 

Through  biUows  thunder-sown. 

George  Sterling  [1869- 


THE  BLESSED   DAMOZEL 

The  blessed  damozel  leaned  out 
From  the  gold  bar  of  Heaven; 

Her  eyes  were  deeper  than  the  depth 
Of  waters  stilled  at  even; 

She  had  three  lilies  in  her  hand,  , 

And  the  stars  in  her  hair  were  seven. 


;  beirfi  J 


Her  robe,  ungirt  from  clasp  to  hem, 
No  wrought  flowers  did  adorn, 

But  a  white  rose  of  Mary's  gift, 
For  service  sweetly  worn; 

Her  hair  that  lay  along  her  back 
Was  yellow  like  ripe  corn. 

Herseemed  she  scarce  had  been  a  day 

One  of  God's  choristers; 
The  wonder  was  not  yet  quite  gone 

From  that  still  look  of  hers; 
Albeit,  to  them  she  left,  her  day 

Had  counted  as  ten  years. 

(To  one,  it  is  ten  years  of  years. 

.  .  .  Yet  now,  and  in  this  place, 
Surely  she  leaned  o'er  me — her  hair 

Fell  all  about  my  face.  .  .  . 
Nothing:  the  autumn  fall  of  leaves. 

The  whole  year  sets  apace.) 

It  was  the  rampart  of  God's  house 

That  she  was  standing  on; 
By  God  built  over  the  sheer  depth 

The  which  is  Space  begun; 
So  high,  that  looking  downward  thence 

She  scarce  could  see  the  sun. 


The   Blessed   Damozel  3^99 

It  lies  in  Heaven,  across  the  flood 

Of  ether,  as  a  bridge. 
Beneath,  the  tides  of  day  and  night 

With  flame  and  darkness  ridge 
The  void,  as  low  as  where  this  earth 

Spins  like  a  fretful  midge. 

Around  her,  lovers,  newly  met 

'Mid  deathless  love's  acclaims, 
Spoke  evermore  among  themselves 

Their  heart-remembered  names; 
And  the  souls  mounting  up  to  God 

Went  by  her  like  thin  flames. 

And  stUl  she  bowed  herself  and  stooped 

Out  of  the  circling  charm; 
Untfl  her  bosom  must  have  made         f  // 

The  bar  she  leaned  on  warm, 
And  the  Hlies  lay  as  if  asleep 

Along  her  bended  arm. 

From  the  fixed  place  of  Heaven  she  saw 

Time  like  a  pulse  shake  fierce 
Through  all  the  worlds.     Her  gaze  still  strove 

Within  the  gulf  to  pierce 
Its  path;  and  now  she  spoke  as  when 

The  stars  sang  in  their  spheres. 

The  sun  was  gone  now;  the  curled  moon 

Was  like  a  little  feather 
Fluttering  far  down  the  gulf;  and  now  i  i' 

She  spoke  through  the  still,  weather. 
Her  voice  was  like  the  voice  the  stars 

Had  when  they  sang  together. 

(Ah  sweet!  Even  now,  in  that  bird's  song, 

Strove  not  her  accents  there. 
Fain  to  be  hearkened?     When  those  bells 

Possessed  the  mid-day  air. 
Strove  not  her  steps  to  reach  my  side 

Down  aU  the  echoing  stair?) 


3200    Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

"I  wish  that  he  were  come  to  me,         i  , ; 

For  he  will  come,"  she  said. 
"Have  not  1  prayed  in  Heaven? — on  earth, 

Lord,  Lord,  has  he  not  prayed? 
Are  not  two  prayers  a  perfect  strength? 

And  shall  I  feel  afraid? 

"When  round  his  head  the  aureole  clings, 

And  he  is  clothed  in  white, 
I'll  take  his  hand  and  go  with  him 

To  the  deep  wells  of  light; 
As  unto  a  stream  we  will  step  down, 

And  bathe  there  in  God's  sight. 

"We  two  will  stand  beside  that  shrine, 

Occult,  withheld,  untrod. 
Whose  lamps  are  stirred  continually 

With  prayer  sent  up  to  God; 
And  see  our  old  prayers,  granted,  melt 

Each  hke  a  Httle  cloud. 

"We  two  will  lie  i'  the  shadow  of 

That  living  mystic  tree 
Within  whose  secret  growth  the  Dove,!  r 

Is  sometimes  felt  to  be, 
While  every  leaf  that  His  plumes  touch 

Saith  His  Name  audibly. 

"And  I  myself  will  teach  to  him, 

I  myself,  lying  so. 
The  songs  I  sing  here ;  which  his  voice 

Shall  pause  in,  hushed  and  slow, 
And  find  some  knowledge  at  each  pause, 

Or  some  new  thing  to  know." 

(Alas!  we  two,  we  two,  thou  say'st! 

Yea,  one  wast  thou  with  me 
That  once  of  old.     But  shall  God  lift 

To  endless  unity 
The  soul  whose  likeness  with  thy  soul 

Was  but  its  love  for  thee?) 


The   Blessed   Damozel  3201 

"We  two,"  she  said,  "will  seek  the  groves 

Where  the  lady  Mary  is. 
With  her  five  handmaidens,  whose  names 

Are  five  sweet  s^'mphouics, 
Cecily,  Gertrude,  Magdalen, 

IMargaret  and  Rosalys. 

"Circlewise  sit  they,  with  bound  locks 

And  foreheads  garlanded; 
Into  the  fine  cloth  white  like  flame 

W^eaving  the  golden  thread, 
Tq  fashion  the  birth-robes  for  them      ii; 

Who  arc  just  born,  being  dead.  f 

"He  shall  fear,  haply,  and  be  dumb: 

Then  will  I  lay  my  cheek 
To  his,  and  tell  about  our  love, 

Not  once  abashed  or  weak:  ;  j 

And  the  dear  Mother  will  approve      .  • 

My  pride,  and  let  me  speak. 

"Herself  shall  bring  us,  hand  in  hand. 

To  Him  round  whom  all  souls 
Kneel,  the  clear-ranged  unnumbered  heads 

Bowed  with  their  aureoles: 
And  angels  meeting  us  shall  sing  '  '^' 

To  their  citherns  and  citoles. 


"There  will  I  ask  of  Christ  the  Lord 
Thus  much  for  him  and  me: — 

Only  to  live  as  once  on  earth 
With  Love,  only  to  be. 

As  then  awhile,  for  ever  now 
Together,  I  and  he." 


ivT 


She  gazed  and  listened  and  then  said,  IT 
Less  sad  of  speech  than  mild, — 

"All  this  is  when  he  comes."     She  ceased. 
The  light  thrilled  towards  her,  filled,; "J 

With  angels  in  strong  level  flight. 
Her  eyes  prayed,  and  she  smiled. 


3202     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

(I  saw  her  smile.)     But  soon  their  path 
Was  vague  in  distant  spheres: 

And  then  she  cast  her  arms  along 
The  golden  barriers, 

And  laid  her  face  between  her  hands, 
And  wept.     (I  heard  her  tears.) 

Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti  [1828-188-2] 


A  SONG   OF  ANGIOLA  IN  HEAVEN 

Flowers, — that  have  died  upon  my  Sweet, 
Lulled  by  the  rhj'thmic  dancing  beat 

Of  her  young  bosom  under  you, — 
Now  will  I  show  you  such  a  thing 
As  never,  through  thick  buds  of  Spring, 

Betwixt  the  daylight  and  the  dew, 
The  Bird  whose  being  no  man  knows — 

The  voice  that  waketh  all  night  through, 
Tells  to  the  Rose. 

For  lo, — a  garden-place  I  found. 

Well  filled  of  leaves,  and  stilled  of  sound. 

Well  flowered,  with  red  fruit  marvelous; 
And  'twixt  the  shining  trunks  would  flit.. 
Tall  knights  and  silken  maids,  or  sit 

With  faces  bent  and  amorous; — • 
There,  in  the  heart  thereof,  and  crowned 

With  woodbine  and  amaracus, 
My  Love  I  found. 

Alone  she  walked, — ah,  well  I  wis. 
My  heart  leapt  up  for  joy  of  this! — 

Then  when  I  called  to  her  her  name,— 
The  name,  that  like  a  pleasant  thing 
Men's  lips  remember,  murmuring, — 

At  once  across  the  sward  she  came, — 
FuU  fain  she  seemed,  my  own  dear  maid, 

And  asked  ever  as  she  came, 

"Where  hast  thou  stayed?"  v 


A  Song  of  Angiola  in   Heaven     3203 

"^Vhere  hast  thou  stayed?"  she  asked,  as  though 
The  long  years  were  an  hour  ago; 

But  I  spake  not,  nor  answered. 
For,  looking  in  her  eyes,  I  saw 
A  Hght  not  ht  of  mortal  law; 

And  in  her  clear  cheek's  changeless  red, 
And  sweet,  unshaken  speaking  found 

That  in  this  place  the  Hours  were  dead, 
And  Time  was  bound. 

"This  is  well  done,"  she  said,  "in  thee, 
O  Love,  that  thou  art  come  to  me, 

To  this  green  garden  glorious; 
Now  truly  shall  our  life  be  sped 
In  joyance  and  all  goodlihed, 

For  here  aU  things  are  fair  to  us. 
And  none  with  burden  is  oppressed. 

And  none  is  poor  or  piteous,— 
For  here  is  R-est. 

"No  formless  Future  blurs  the  sky; 
Men  mourn  not  here,  with  dull  dead  eye, 

By  shrouded  shapes  of  Yesterday; 
Betwixt  the  Coming  and  the  Past 
The  flawless  life  hangs  fixen  fast 

In  one  unwearying  To-Day, 
That  darkens  not;  for  Sin  is  shriven, 

Death  from  the  doors  is  thrust  away, 
And  here  is  Heaven." 

At  "Heaven"  she  ceased; — and  lifted  up 
Her  fair  head  like  a  flower-cup. 

With  rounded  mouth,  and  eyes  aglow; 
Then  set  I  lips  to  hers,  and  felt, — 
Ah,  God, — the  hard  pain  fade  and  melt. 

And  past  things  change  to  painted  show; 
The  song  of  quiring  birds  outbroke; 

The  lit  leaves  laughed — sky  shook,  and  lo, 
I  swooned, — and  woke. 

And  now,  O  Flowers, 

— Ye  that  indeed  are  dead, — 


3204     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

x[-_,,,    Now  for  all  waiting  hours,,,,;  .  t;,,,-  .,,.,,1"//" 
Well  am  I  comforted; 
For  of  a  surety,  now,  I  see, 

That,  without  dim  distress 
Of  tears,  or  weariness, 
My  Lady,  verily,  awaiteth  me; 
So  that  until  with  Her  I  be, 

For  my  dear  Lady's  sake 
I  am  right  fain  to  make 
Out  from  my  pain  a  pillow,  and  to  take 
Grief  for  a  golden  garment  unto  me; 

Knowing  that  I,  at  last,  shall  stand 
In  that  green  garden-land. 
And,  in  the  holding  of  my  dear  Love's  hand, 
Forget  the  grieving  and  the  misery. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


THE  HOUND   OF  HEAVEN 

I  FLED  Him,  down  the  nights  and  down  the  days; 

I  fled  Him,  down  the  arches  of  the  years; 
I  fled  Him,  down  the  labyrinthine  ways 

Of  my  own  mind;  and  in  the  midst  of  tears  ■; 
I  hid  from  Him,  and  under  running  laughter. 
Up  vistaed  hopes  I  sped ; 
And  shot,  precipitated 
Adown  Titanic  glooms  of  chasmed  fears. 
From  those  strong  Feet  that  followed,  followed  after. 
But  with  unhurrying  chase, 
And  unperturbed  pace. 
Deliberate  speed,  majestic  instancy, 
They  beat — and  a  Voice  beat 
More  instant  than  the  Feet — 
"All  things  betray  thee,  who  betrayest  Me. 

I  pleaded,  outlaw- wise,  "'^  ''^'"f" 

By  many  a  hearted  casement,  curtained  red, 

Trellised  with  intertwining  charities; 
(For,  though  I  knew  His  love  Who  followed,    /_ 

Yet  was  I  sore  adread 


aodD3ft'Tphe   Hound  of  Heaven  3205 

Lest,  having  Him,  I  must  have  naught  beside); 
But,  if  one  httle  casement  parted  wide, 

The  gust  of  His  approach  would  clash  it  to. 
Fear  wist  not  to  evade,  as  Love  wist  to  pursue. 
Across  the  margent  of  the  world  I  fled, 

And  troubled  the  gold  gateways  of  the  stars, 
Smiting  for  shelter  on  their  clanged  bars;      '•' 
Fretted  to  dulcet  jars 
And  silvern  chatter  the  pale  ports  0'  the  moon. 
I  said  to  dawn,  Be  sudden;  to  eve,  Be  soon; 
With  thy  young  skiey  blossoms  heap  me  over 
From  this  tremendous  Lover! 
Float  thy  vague  veil  about  me,  lest  He  see! 

I  tempted  all  His  servitors,  but  to  find 
My  own  betrayal  in  their  constancy, 
In  faith  to  Him  their  fickleness  to  me, 

Their  traitorous  truencss,  and  their  loyal  deceit. 
To  all  swift  things  for  swiftness  did  I  sue ; 
Clung  to  the  whistling  mane  of  every  wind. 
But  whether  they  swept,  smoothly  fleet, 
The  long  savannahs  of  the  blue; 
Or  whether,  Thunder-driven, 
They  clanged  his  chariot  'thwart  a  heaven 
Flashy  with  flying  lightnings  round  the  spurn  o'  their  feet: — 
Fear  wist  not  to  evade,  as  Love  wist  to  pursue. 
Still  with  unhurrying  chase, 
And  unperturbed  pace, 
Deliberate  speed,  majestic  instancy. 
Came  on  the  following  Feet, 
And  a  Voice  above  their  beat— 
"Naught  shelters  thee,  who  wilt  not  shelter  Me." 

I  sought  no  more  that  after  wliirh  I  strayed 

In  face  of  man  or  maid; 
But  still  within  the  little  children's  eyes 

Seems  something,  something  that  replies; 
Thex  at  least  are  for  me,  surely  for  me! 
I  turned  me  to  them  very  wistfully; 
But,  just  as  their  young  eyes  grew  sudden  fair 

With  dawning  answers  there, 


3206     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Their  angel  plucked  them  from  me  by  the  hair,  .^   ^^  .^^ , 
"  Come  then,  ye  other  children,  Nature's — share 
With  me"  (said  I)  "your  delicate  felloyv^^hijp^ .^j^„  ,^^- 

Let  me  greet  you  lip  to  lip,     ,^.^  ^^  ^^^  ^g].^^  ^^^^ 

Let  me  twine  you  with  caresses,  ..j^  22013/ 

Wantoning  ,^^  |,^yi 

With  our  Lady-Mother's  vagrant  tresse^,- j  j^^ 
Banqueting  ._.^ , ,  .^^-^ 

With  her  in  her  wind-walled  palacQ,,  raovlie  bn/ 

Underneath  her  azure  dais,  ^  ^j  ^^^g  ; 

Quaffing,  as  your  taintless  way  is,  ri  ,fi;-// 

From  a  chalice 
Lucent-weeping  out  of  the  dayspring." 

So  it  was  done :  I 

I  in  their  delicate  fellov/ship  was  one—  j  ^^^q  yjy 

Drew  the  bolt  of  Nature's  secrecies.  .  .,  .■.  ...t.  .  ; 

I  knew  all  the  swift  importings  ; 

On  the  wilful  face  of  skies,  ^  ii^. ,,' 

I  knew  how  the  clouds  arise  >ntjn 

Spumed  of  the  wild  sea-snortings; 
All  that's  born  or  dies 

Rose  and  drooped  with — made  them  shapers 
Of  mine  own  moods,  or  wailful  or  divine — 

With  them  joyed  and  was  bereaven. 

I  was  heavy  with  the  even,  . 

When  she  lit  her  glimmering  tapers       :   , 

Round  the  day's  dead  sanctities.  ,.  / 

I  laughed  in  the  morning's  eyes. 
I  triumphed  and  I  saddened  with  all  weather, 

Heaven  and  I  wept  together. 
And  its  sweet  tears  were  salt  with  mortal  mine; 
Against  the  red  throb  of  its  sunset-heart 

I  laid  my  own  to  beat,  ,  ^^^g  j 

And  share  commingling  heat;  „t 

But  not  by  that,  by  that,  was  eased  my  human  smart.j^ 
In  vain  my  tears  were  wet  on  Heaven's  gray  cheek.^- 
For  ah!  we  know  not  what  each  other  says,      f    ,,  ,^^^y. 

These  things  and  I;  in  sound  /  speak —  .^^^  j 
Their  sound  is  but  their  stir,  they  speak  by  silences.^ ,^g- 
Nature,  poor  stepdame,  cannot  slake  my  drouth;,- y^ 


,  The   Hound  of  Heaven  3207 

Let  her,  if  she  would  owe  me,    .     ,  , 
Drop  yon  blue  bosom-veil  of  sky,  and  show  me 

The  breasts  o'  her  tenderness: 
Never  did  any  milk  of  hers  once  bless 
My  thirsting  mouth. 
Nigh  and  dry  draws  the  chase, 
With  unperturbed  pace, 
Dehberate  speed,  majestic  instancy; 
And  past  those  noised  Feet 
A  voice  comes  yet  more  fleet — 
"Lo!  naught  contents  thee,  who  content'st  not  Me." 

Naked  I  wait  I'hy  love's  uplifted  stroke! 
IVIy  harness  piece  by  piece  Thou  hast  hewn  from  me, 
And  smitten  me  to  my  knee; 

I  am  defenseless  utterly. 

I  slept,  methinks,  and  woke. 
And,  slowly  gazing,  find  me  stripped  in  sleep. 
In  the  rash  lustihood  of  my  young  powers, 

I  shook  the  pillaring  hours 
And  pulled  my  life  upon  me;  grimed  with  smears 
I  stand  amid  the  dust  o'  the  mounded  years — 
My  mangled  youth  lies  dead  beneath  the  heap. 
My  days  have  crackled  and  gone  up  in  smoke, 
Have  puffed  and  burst  as  sun-starts  on  a  stream. 

Yea,  faileth  now  even  dream 
The  dreamer,  and  the  lute  the  lutanist; 
Even  the  linked  fantasies,  in  whose  blossomy  twist 
I  swung  the  earth  a  trinket  at  my  wrist, 
Are  yielding;  cords  of  all  too  weak  account 
For  earth  with  hea\'y  griefs  so  overplussed. 

Ah!  is  Thy  love  indeed 
A  weed,  albeit  an  amaranthine  weed. 
Suffering  no  flowers  except  its  own  to  mount? 

Ah!  must — 

Designer  infinite!^ 
Ah!  must  Thou  char  the  wood  ere  Thou  canst  limn  with 

it? 
My  freshness  spent  its  wavering  shower  i'  the  dust: 
And  now  my  heart  is  as  a  broken  fount, 


32o8     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

Wherein  tear-dnppmgs  stagnate,  spilt  down  ever 

From  the  dank  thoughts  that  shiver 
Upon  the  sighful  branches  of  my  mind. 

Such  is;  what  is  to  be? 
The  pulp  so  bitter,  how  shall  taste  the  rind? 
I  dimly  guess  what  Time  in  mists  confounds: 
Yet  ever  and  anon  a  trumpet  sounds 
From  the  hid  battlements  of  Eternity; 
Those  shaken  mists  a  space  unsettle,  then 
Round  the  half -glimpsed  turrets  slowly  wash  again. 

But  not  ere  him  who  summoneth 

I  first  have  seen,  enwound 
With  glooming  robes  purpureal,  cypress-crowned; 
His  name  I  know,  and  what  his  trumpet  saith. 
Whether  man's  heart  or  life  it  be  which  yields 

Thee  harvest,  must  Thy  harvest  fields 

Be  dunged  with  rotten  death? 

Now  of  that  long  pursuit 
Comes  on  at  hand  the  bruit; 
That  Voice  is  round  me  like  a  bursting  sea: 
"And  is  thy  earth  so  marred, 
Shattered  in  shard  on  shard? 
Lo,  all  things  fly  thee,  for  thou  fly  est  Me!  , 

Strange,  piteous,  futile  thing, 
Wherefore  should  any  set  thee  love  apart? 
Seeing  none  but  I  makes  much  of  naught"  (He  said), 
"And  human  love  needs  human  meriting: 

How  hast  thou  merited — ■  ; 

Of  all  man's  clotted  clay  the  dingiest  clot? 

Alack,  thou  knowcst  not 
How  little  worthy  of  any  love  thou  art!  .  , 

Whom  wilt  thou  find  to  love  ignoble  thee  .^^.^ 

Save  Me,  save  only  Me? 
All  which  I  took  from  thee,  I  did  but  take, 
fj  Not  for  thy  harms,  j/^ 

But  just  that  thou  might'st  seek  it  in  My  arms. 

All  which  thy  child's  mistake 
Fancies  as  lost,  I  have  stored  for  thee  at  home: 
Rise,  clasp  My  hand,  and  come!" 


Wild  Eden  3 -09 

Halts  by  me  that  footfall: 
Is  my  gloom,  after  all,  ,  , 

Shade  of  His  hand,  outstretched  caressingly? 
"Ah,  fondest,  blindest,  weakest, 
I  am  He  WTiom  thou  scekest! 
Thou  dravest  love  from  thee,  who  dravest  Me." 

Francis  Thompson  [iSsgP-igo;] 


WILD  EDEN 

There  is  a  garden  enclosed 

In  the  high  places, 
But  never  hath  love  reposed 

In  its  bowery  spaces; 
And  the  cedars  there  like  shadows  .I)  bnA 

O'er  the  moonlit  champaign  stand:-  ''■' 

Till  light  like  an  angel's  hand 
Touches  Wild  Eden. 

Who  told  me  the  name  of  the  garden 

That  lieth  remote,  apart, 
I  know  not,  nor  whence  was  the  music 

That  sang  it  into  my  heart; 
But  just  as  the  loud  robin  tosses 

His  notes  from  the  elm  tops  high, 
As  the  violets  come  in  the  mosses 

When  south  winds  wake  and  sigh, 
So  on  my  lips  I  found  it, 

This  name  that  is  made  my  cry. 

There,  under  the  stars  and  the  dawns 

Of  the  virginal  valleys, 
White  lilies  flood  the  low  lawns 

And  the  rose  lights  the  alleys; 
But  never  are  heard  there  the  voices 

That  sweeten  on  lovers'  lips, 

And  the  wild  bee  never  sips 
Sweets  of  Wild  Eden. 


32 lo     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

But  who  hath  shown  me  the  vision 

Of  the  roses  and  lilies  in  ranks 
I  would  that  I  knew,  that  forever 

To  him  I  might  render  thanks; 
For  a  maiden  grows  there  in  her  blossom, 

In  the  place  of  her  maidenhood, 
Nor  knows  how  her  virgin  bosom 

Is  stored  with  the  giving  of  good, 
For  the  truth  is  hidden  from  her 

That  of  love  is  understood. 

No  bird  with  his  mate  there  hovers, 

Nor  beside  her  has  trilled  or  sung; 
No  bird  in  the  dewy  covers 

Has  buUt  a  nest  for  his  young; 
And  over  the  dark-leaved  mountains 

The  voice  in  the  laurel  sleeps; 

And  the  moon  broods  on  the  deeps 
Shut  in  Wild  Eden. 

O  Love,  if  thou  in  thy  hiding 

Art  he  who  above  me  stands, 
If  thou  givest  wings  to  my  spirit, 

If  thou  art  my  heart  and  my  hands, — 
Through  the  morn,  through  the  noon,  through  the  even 

That  burns  with  thy  planet  of  light. 
Through  the  moonlit  space  of  heaven, 

Guide  thou  my  flight 
Till,  star-like  on  the  dark  garden, 

I  fall  in  the  night! 

Fly,  song  of  my  bosom,  unto  it 

Wherever  the  earth  breathes  spring; 
Though  a  thousand  years  wefe  to  rue  it. 

Such  a  heart  beats  under  thy  wing, 
Thou  shalt  dive,  thou  shalt  soar,  thou  shalt  find  it. 
And  forever  my  life  be  blest, 
Such  a  heart  beats  in  my  breast, — 
Fly  to  Wild  Eden! 

George  Edward  Woodberry  [1855- 


The   Aztec   City  321  i 

THE  AZTEC  CITY 

There  is  a  clouded  city,  gone  to  rest 

Beyond  the  crest 
Where  cordilleras  mar  the  mystic  west. 

There  suns  unheeded  rise  and  re-arise; 

And  in  the  skies 
The  harvest  moon  unnoticed  Uves  and  dies. 

And  yet  this  clouded  city  has  no  night- 
Volcanic  light 
Compels  eternal  noontide,  redly  bright. 

A  thousand  wells,  w^hencc  cooling  waters  came, 

No  more  the  same, 
Now  send  aloft  a  thousand  jets  of  flame. 

This  clouded  city  is  enchanting  fair, 

-,:■        For  rich  and  rare  iil;jirn  odW 

From  sculptured  frieze  the  gilded  griffins  stare.  /. 

With  level  look — with  loving,  hopeful  face, 

Fixed  upon  space. 
Stand  caryatides  of  unknown  race, 

And  colonnades  of  dark  green  serpentine,  [ 

Of  strange  design,  \ 

Carved  on  whose  shafts  queer  alphabets  combine. 

And  there  are  lofty  temples,  rich  and  great, 

And  at  the  gate, 
Carved  in  obsidian,  the  lions  wait. 

And  from  triumphant  arches,  looking  down        ' ' 

Upon  the  town, 
In  porphyry,  sad,  unknown  statesmen  frown. 

And  there  are  palace  homes,  and  stately  walls, 

And  open  halls 
Where  fountains  are,  with  voiceless  waterfalls. 

The  ruddy  fire  incessantly  illumes 

Temples  and  tombs, 
And  in  its  blaze  the  stone-wrought  cactus  blooms. 


32  12      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

From  clouds  congealed  the  mercury  distils, 

And,  forming  rills, 
Adown  the  streets  in  double  streamlet  trills. 

As  rains  from  clouds,  that  summer  skies  eclipse, 

From  turret-tips 
And  spire  and  porch  the  mobile  metal  drips. 

No  one  that  visited  this  fiery  hive 

Ever  alive 
Came  out  but  me — I,  I  alone,  survive. 

Eugene  Filch  Ware  [1841-1911] 

BEFORE  A  STATUE  OF  ACHILLES 

Behold  Pelides  with  his  yellow  hair. 
Proud  child  of  Thetis,  hero  loved  of  Jove; 
Above  the  frowning  of  his  brows  it  wove 
A  crown  of  gold,  well  combed,  with  Spartan  care. 
Who  might  have  seen  him,  sullen,  great,  and  fair, 
As  with  the  wrongful  world  he  proudly  strove, 
And  by  high  deeds  his  wilder  passion  shrove, 
Mastering  love,  resentment,  and  despair. 
He  knew  his  end,  and  Phoebus'  arrow  sure 
He  braved  for  fame  immortal  and  a  friend. 
Despising  life;  and  we,  who  know  our  end, 
Know  that  in  our  decay  he  shall  endure 
And  all  our  children's  hearts  to  grief  inure, 
With  whose  first  bitter  battles  his  shall  blend. 

Who  brought  thee  forth,  immortal  vision,  who 

In  Pythia  or  in  Tempe  brought  thee  forth? 

Out  of  the  sunlight  and  the  sapful  earth 

What  god  the  simples  of  thy  spirit  drew? 

A  goddess  rose  from  the  green  waves,  and  threw 

Her  arms  about  a  king,  to  give  thee  birth;  . 

A  centaur,  patron  of  thy  boyish  mirtH^^ '"'^" 

Over  the  meadows  in  thy  footsteps  flew'."'"        .  , 

Now  Thessaly  forgets  thee,  and  the  deep 

Thy  keeled  bark  furrowed  answers  not  thy  prayer; 

But  far  away  new  generations  keep 

Thy  laurels  fresh,  where  branching  Isis  hems     :/ 


"I    Flung   Me   Round   Him"      3213 

The  lawns  of  Oxford  round  about,  or  where 
Enchanted  Eton  sits  by  pleasant  Thames. 
I  gaze  on  thee  as  Phidias  of  old 
Or  Polyclitus  gazed,  when  hrst  he  saw 
These  hard  and  shining  limbs,  without  a  flaw, 
And  cast  his  wonder  in  heroic  mould. 
Unhappy  me  who  only  may  behold, 
Nor  make  immutable  and  fix  in  awe 
A  fair  immortal  form  no  worm  shall  gnaw, 
A  tempered  mind  whose  faith  was  never  told! 
The  godlike  mien,  the  lion's  lock  and  eye, 
The  well-knit  sinew,  utter  a  brave  heart 
Better  than  many  words  that  part  by  part 
Spell  in  strange  symbols  what  serene  and  whole 
In  nature  lives,  nor  can  in  marble  dJe. 
The  perfect  body  is  itself  the  soul. 

George  Sanlayana  [1863- 


"I  FLUNG  ME  ROUND  HIM" 

From  "The  Water-nymph  and  the  Boy" 

I  FLUNG  me  round  him, 
I  drew  him  under; 
I  clung,  I  drowned  him, 
My  own  white  wonder!  .  .  . 

Father  and  mother. 
Weeping  and  wild, 
Came  to  the  forest, 
Calling  the  child, 
Came  from  the  palace, 
Down  to  the  pool, 
Calling  my  darling, 
My  beautiful! 
Under  the  water, 
Cold  and  so  pale! 
Could  it  be  love  made 
Beauty  to  fail? 

Ah  me!  for  mortals: 
In  a  few  moons, 


3214      Poems  of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

If  I  had  left  him, 

After  some  Junes 

He  would  have  faded, 

Faded  away, 

He,  the  young  monarch,  whom 

All  would  obey, 

Fairer  than  day; 

Alien  to  springtime. 

Joyless  and  gray, 

He  would  have  faded, 

Faded  away. 

Moving  a  mockery. 

Scorned  of  the  day! 

Now  I  have  taken  him 

All  in  his  prime. 

Saved  from  slow  poisoning 

Pitiless  Time, 

FUled  with  his  happiness, 

One  with  the  prime. 

Saved  from  the  cruel 

Dishonor  of  Time. 

Laid  him,  my  beautiful, 

Laid  him  to  rest. 

Loving,  adorable, 

Softly  to  rest, 

Here  in  my  crystalline, 

Here  in  my  breast!       Rodcn  Nod  [i<S34-i894] 

THE  QUEEN'S  SONG 

Had  I  the  power 

To  Midas  given  of 'old 
To  touch  a  flower 

And  leave  the  petals  gold, 
I  then  might  touch  thy  face-'  -' 

Delightful  boy,  i""' 

And  leave  a  metal  grace, 

A  graven  joy. 

Thus  would  I  slay, — 
Ah,  desperate  device! 


Balkis  3215 

The  vital  clay 

That  trembles  in  thine  eyes, 
And  let  the  red  lips  close 

Which  sang  so  well, 
And  drive  away  the  rose 

To  leave  a  shell. 

Then  I  myself, 

Rising  austere  and  dumb, 
On  the  high  shelf 

Of  my  half-lighted  room 
Would  place  the  shining  bust 

And  wait  alone, 
Until  I  was  but  dust, 

Buried  unknown. 

Thus  in  my  love 

For  nations  yet  unborn, 
I  would  remove 

From  our  two  lives  the  morn, 
And  muse  on  loveliness 

In  mine  arm-chair, 
Conl^ent  should  Time  confess 

How  sweet  you  were. 

James  Elroy  Flecker  [1884-1915] 

BALKIS 

From  "  Emblems  of  Love  " 

Balkis  was  in  her  marble  town. 

And  shadow  over  the  world  came  down. 

Whiteness  of  walls,  towers  and  piers, 

That  all  day  dazzled  eyes  to  tears, 

Turned  from  being  white-golden  flame, 

And  like  the  deep-sea  blue  became. 

Balkis  into  her  garden  went ; 

Her  spirit  was  in  discontent 

Like  a  torch  in  restless  air. 

Joylessly  she  wandered  there. 

And  saw  her  city's  azure  white 

Lying  under  the  great  night. 

Beautiful  as  the  memory 

Of  a  worshipping  world  would  be 


32  1 6      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

In  the  mind  of  a  god,  in  the  hour 

When  he  must  kill  his  outward  power; 

And,  coming  to  a  pool  where  trees 

Grew  in  double  greeneries, 

Saw  herself,  as  she  went  by 

The  water,  walking  beautifully, 

And  saw  the  stars  shine  in  the  glance 

Of  her  eyes,  and  her  own  fair  countenance 

Passing,  pale  and  wonderful. 

Across  the  night  that  filled  the  pool. 

And  cruel  was  the  grief  that  played 

With  the  queen's  spirit;  and  she  said: 

"What  do  I  hear,  reigning  alone? 

For  to  be  unloved  is  to  be  alone. 

There  is  no  man  in  all  my  land 

Dare  my  longing  understand ; 

The  whole  folk  like  a  peasant  bows 

Lest  its  look  should  meet  my  brows 

And  be  harmed  by  this  beauty  of  mine. 

I  burn  their  brains  as  I  were  sign 

Of  God's  beautiful  anger  sent 

To  master  them  with  punishment 

Of  beauty  that  must  pour  distress 

On  hearts  grown  dark  with  ugliness. 

But  it  is  I  am  the  punished  one. 

Is  there  no  man,  is  there  none. 

In  whom  my  beauty  will  but  move 

The  lust  of  a  delighted  love; 

In  whom  some  spirit  of  God  so  thrives 

That  we  may  wed  our  lonely  lives? 

Is  there  no  man,  is  there  none?" — • 

She  said,  "I  will  go  to  Solomon." 

Lascelles  Abcrcrombie  [1884- 

THE  GATES  OF  DREAMLAND 

It's  a  lonely  road  through  bogland  to  the  lake  at  Carrow- 
more,  'i  -vl 

And  a  sleeper  there  lies  dreaming  where  the  water  laps  the 
shore; 


Edith  3217- 

Though  the  molh-wings  of  the  twilight  in  their  purples  are 

unfurled, 
Yet  his  sleep  is  filled  with  music  by  the  masters  of  the  world. 

There's  a  hand  is  white  as  silver  that  is  fondling  with  his 

hair: 
There  are  glimmering  feet  of  sunshine  that  are  dancing  by 

him  there: 
And  half-open  lips  of  faery  that  were  dyed  a  faery  red 
In  their  revels  where  the  Hazel  Tree  its  holy  clusters  shed. 

"Come  away,"  the  red  lips  whisper,  "all  the  world  is  weary 

now; 
'Tis  the  twilight  of  the  ages  and  it's  time  to  quit  the  plough. 
Oh,  the  very  sunlight's  weary  ere  it  lightens  up  the  dew, 
And  its  gold  is  changed  and  faded  before  it  falls  to  you. 

''Though  your  colleen's  heart  be  tender,  a  tenderer  heart  is 
near.  , 

What's  the  starlight  in  her  glances  when  the  stars  are  shining 
clear? 

Who  would  kiss  the  fading  shadow  when  the  flower-face 
glows  above? 

'Tis  the  Beauty  of  all  Beauty  that  is  calling  for  your  love." 

Dh,  the  great  gates  of  the  mountain  have  opened  once  again, 
And  the  sound  of  song  and  dancing  falls  upon  the  ears  of 

men, 
And  the  Land  of  Youth  lies  gleaming,  flushed  with  rainbow 

hght  and  mirth. 
And  the  old  enchantment  lingers  in  the  honey-heart  of 

earth. 

A.  E.  (George  William  Russell)  [1867- 


EDITH 

Edith,  the  silent  stars  are  coldly  glcammg, 

The  night  wind  moans,  the  leafless  trees  arc  still. 

Edith,  there  is  a  life  beyond  this  .seeming, 
So  sleeps  the  ice-clad  lake  beneath  thy  hill. 


3218      Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

So  silent  beats  the  pulse  of  thy  pure  heart, 

So  shines  the  thought  of  thy  unquestioned  eyes. 
•  O  life!  why  wert  thou  helpless  in  thy  art? 
0  loveliness!  why  seem'st  thou  but  surprise? 

Edith,  the  streamlets  laugh  to  leap  again; 

There  is  a  spring  to  which  life's  pulses  fly; 
And  hopes  that  are  not  a.ll  the  sport  of  pain, 

Like  lustres  in  the  veil  of  that  gray  eye. 

They  say  the  thankless  stars  have  answering  vision, 
That  courage  sings  from  out  the  frost-bound  ways; 

Edith,  I  grant  that  olden  time's  decision— 
Thy  beauty  paints  with  gold  the  icy  rays. 

As  in  the  summer's  heat  her  promise  lies, 
As  in  the  autumn's  seed  his  vintage  hides, 

Thus  might  I  shape  my  moral  from  those  eyes. 
Glass  of  thy  soul,  where  innocence  abides. 

Edith,  thy  nature  breathes  of  answered  praying; 

If  thou  dost  live,  then  not  my  grief  is  vain; 
Beyond  the  nerves  of  woe,  beyond  delaying, 

Thy  sweetness  stills  to  rest  the  winter's  paini"*^'"^  ^'^ 

Williain  Ellcry  Cliaiuiing  [1780-1842] 

TENANTS 

Suddenly,  out  of  dark  and  leafy  ways, 
We  came  upon  the  little  house  asleep 
In  cold  blind  stillness,  shadowless  and  deep, 
In  the  white  magic  of  the  full  moon-blaze: 
Strangers  without  the  gate,  we  stood  agaze. 
Fearful  to  break  that  quiet,  and  to  creep 
Into  the  house  that  had  been  ours  to  keep 
Through  a  long  year  of  happy  nights  and  days. 
So  unfamiliar  in  the  white  moon-gleam. 
So  old  and  ghostly  like  a  house  of  dream 
It  seemed,  that  over  us  there  stole  the  dread 
That  even  as  we  watched  it,  side  by  side. 
The  ghosts  of  lovers,  who  had  lived  and  died 
Within  its  walls,  were  sleeping  in  our  bed. 

Wilfrid  Wilson  Gibson  [1878- 


The   Listeners  3'^'^ 9 


THE  LISTENERS 

"Is  there  anybody  there?"  said  the  Traveller, 

Knocking  on  the  moonht  door; 
And  his  horse  in  the  silence  champed  the  grasses 

Of  the  forest's  ferny  floor: 
And  a  bird  Hew  up  out  of  the  turret, 

Above  the  Traveller's  head: 
And  he  smote  upon  the  door  again  a  second  time; 

"Is  there  anybody  there?"  he  said. 
But  no  one  descended  to  the  Traveller; 

No  head  from  the  leaf-fringed  sill 
Leaned  over  and  looked  into  his  gray  eyes, 

Where  he  stood  perplexed  and  still. 
But  only  a  host  of  phantom  listeners 

That  dwelt  in  the  lone  house  then 
Stood  listening  in  the  quiet  of  the  moonlight 

To  that  voice  from  the  world  of  men : 
Stood  thronging  the  faint  moonbeams  on  the  dark  stair, 

That  goes  down  to  the  empty  hall, 
Hearkening  in  an  air  stirred  and  shaken 

By  the  lonely  Traveller's  call. 
And  he  felt  in  his  heart  their  strangeness, 

Their  stillness  answering  his  cry. 
While  his  horse  moved,  cropping  the  dark  turf, 

'Neath  the  starred  and  leafy  sky; 
For  he  suddenly  smote  on  the  door,  even 

Louder,  and  lifted  his  head: — 
"Tell  them  I  came,  and  no  one  answered, 

That  I  kept  my  word,"  he  said. 
Never  the  least  stir  made  the  listeners, 

Though  every  word  he  spake 
Fell  echoing  through  the  shadowiness  of  the  still  house 

From  the  one  man  left  awake: 
Ay,  they  heard  his  foot  upon  the  stirrup. 

And  the  sound  of  iron  on  stone, 
And  how  the  silence  surged  softly  backward. 

When  the  plunging  hoofs  were  gone. 

Walter  de  la  Mare  [1873- 


"CARE-CHARMER   SLEEP' 

SLEEP 

From  "  The  VVoman-Hater  " 

Come,  Sleep,  and  with  thy  sweet  deceiving 

Lock  me  in  dehght  awhile; 

Let  some  pleasing  dreams  beguile 

All  my  fancies;  that  from  thence 

I  may  feel  an  influence 
All  my  powers  of  care  bereaving! 

Though  but  a  shadow,  but  a  sliding. 

Let  me  know  some  little  joy! 

We  that  suffer  long  annoy 

Are  contented  with  a  thought 

Through  an  idle  fancy  wrought: 
O  let  my  joys  have  some  abiding! 

Johi  Fletcher  [1570-1625] 


"SLEEP,   SILENCE'   CHILD" 

Sleep,  Silence'  child,  sweet  father  of  soft  rest. 
Prince,  whose  approach  peace  to  all  mortals  brings, 
Indifferent  host  to  shepherds  and  to  kings. 
Sole  comforter  of  minds  with  grief  oppressed; 
Lo,  by  thy  charming  rod  all  breathing  things 
Lie  slumbering,  with  forgetfulness  possessed. 
And  yet  o'er  me  to  spread  thy  drowsy  wings 
Thou  sparest,  alas!  who  cannot  be  thy  guest. 
Since  I  am  thine,  O  come,  but  with  that  face 
To  inward  light  which  thou  art  wont  to  show; 
With  feigned  solace  ease  a  true-felt  woe; 
Or  if,  deaf  god,  thou  do  deny  that  grace, 
3220 


Vixi  3221 

Come  as  thou  wilt,  and  what  thou  wilt  bequeath: 
I  long  to  kiss  the  image  of  my  death. 

William  Druinmond  [1585-1649] 


TO   SLEEP 

A  FLOCK  of  sheep  that  leisurely  pass  by, 
One  after  one;  the  sound  of  rain,  and  bees 
Murmuring;  the  fall  of  rivers,  winds  and  seas. 
Smooth  fields,  white  sheets  of  water,  and  pure  sky; 
I've  thought  of  all  by  turns,  and  yet  do  lie 
Sleepless;  and  soon  the  small  birds'  melodies 
Must  hear,  first  uttered  from  my  orchard  trees; 
And  the  first  cuckoo's  melancholy  cry. 
Even  thus  last  night,  and  two  nights  more,  I  lay, 
And  could  not  win  thee,  Sleep!  by  any  stealth: 
So  do  not  let  me  wear  to-night  away: 
Without  Thee  what  is  aU  the  morning's  wealth? 
Come,  blessed  barrier  between  day  and  day, 
Dear  mother  of  fresh  thoughts  and  joyous  health! 

William  Wordsworth  [i 770-1850] 


VIXI 

I  HAVE  lived  and  I  have  loved; 

I  have  waked  and  I  have  slept; 

I  have  sung  and  I  have  danced; 

I  have  smiled  and  I  have  wept; 

I  have  won  and  wasted  treasure; 

I  have  had  my  fill  of  pleasure ; 

And  all  these  things  were  weariness, 

And  some  of  them  were  dreariness. 

And  all  these  things — but  two  things 

Were  emptiness  and  pain: 

And  Love — it  was  the  best  of  them;         ,j 

And  Sleep — worth  all  the  rest  of  them.      . 

Unknown 


3222     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 


SLEEP 

O  HAPPY  Sleep!  thou  bear'st  upon  thy  breast 
The  blood-red  poppy  of  enchanting  rest, 
Draw  near  me  through  the  stillness  of  this  place 
And  let  thy  low  breath  move  across  my  face, 
As  faint  wind  moves  above  a  poplar's  crest. 

The  broad  seas  darken  slowly  in  the  west; 
The  wheeling  sea-birds  call  from  nest  to  nest; 
Draw  near  and  touch  me,  leaning  out  of  space, 
O  happy  Sleep! 

There  is  no  sorrow  hidden  or  confessed, 
There  is  no  passion  uttered  or  suppressed. 
Thou  canst  not  for  a  little  while  efface; 
Enfold  me  in  thy  mystical  embrace, 
Thou  sovereign  gift  of  God  most  sweet,  most  blest, 
■  O  happy  Sleep!  ">y  ,orfiiV  ; 

Ada  Louise  Martin  [i8    - 


THE   QUIET  NIGHTS 

Unmindful  of  my  low  desert 
Who  turn  e'en  blessings  to  my  hurt, 
God  sends  me  graces  o'er  and  o'er. 
More  than  the  sands  on  the  seashore. 

Among  the  blessings  He  doth  give 
My  starveling  soul  that  she  may  live, 
I  praise  Him  for  my  nights  He  kept 
And  all  the  quiet  sleep  I  slept. 

Since  I  was  young,  who  now  grow  old, 
For  all  those  nights  of  heat,  of  cold, 
I  slept  the  sweet  hours  through,  nor  heard 
Even  the  call  of  the  first  bird. 


The   Night  3^'^3 

Nights  when  the  darkness  covered  me 
In  a  great  peace  like  a  great  sea, 
With  waves  of  sweetness,  who  should  lie 
Wakeful  for  mine  iniquity. 

Cool  nights  of  fragrance  dripping  sweet 
After  the  sultriness  of  heat. 
Amid  gray  meadows  drenched  with  dew; 
Sweet  was  the  sleep  my  eyeUds  knew. 

Surely  some  angel  kept  my  bed 
After  I  had  knelt  down  and  prayed ; 
Like  a  young  child  I  slept  until 
The  day  stood  at  the  window-sill. 

I  thank  Him  for  the  nights  of  stars. 
Bright  Satuni,  with  his  rings,  and  Mars. 
And  overhead  the  Milky  Way; 
Nights  when  the  Summer  lightnings  play. 

How  many  a  Milky  Way  I  trod, 
And  through  the  mercy  of  my  God 
Drank  milk  and  honey,  wrapped  in  ease 
Of  darkness  and  sweet  heaviness! 

I  thank  Him  for  the  wakening  bird 
And  the  struck  hours  I  have  not  heard, 
And  for  the  moms  so  cool,  so  kind. 
That  found  me  fresh  in  heart  and  mind. 

Among  the  gifts  of  His  mercy, 
More  than  the  leaves  upon  the  tree. 
The  sands  upon  the  shore,  I  keep 
And  name  my  lovely  nights  of  sleep. 

Kalharinc  Tynan  [1861- 

THE  NIGHT 

Most  Holy  Night,  that  still  dost  keep 
The  keys  of  all  the  doors  of  sleep, 
To  me  when  my  tired  eyelids  close 
Give  thou  repose. 


3224      Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  let  the  far  lament  of  them 
That  chaunt  the  dead  day's  requiem 
Make  in  my  ears,  who  wakeful  lie, 
Soft  lullaby. 

Let  them  that  guard  the  horned  Moon 
By  my  bedside  their  memories  croon. 
So  shall  I  have  new  dreams  and  blest 
In  my  brief  rest. 

Fold  thy  great  wings  about  my  face, 
Hide  day-dawn  from  my  resting-place. 
And  cheat  me  with  thy  false  delight, 
Most  Holy  Night. 

Hilairc  Bclloc  [1870- 


O  SLEEP 

Take  me  upon  thy  breast, 

O  river  of  rest. 
Draw  me  down  to  thy  side, 

Slow-moving  tide. 
Carry  out  beyond  reach 

Of  song  or  of  speech 
This  body  and  soul  forespent. 

To  thy  still  continent, 
Where  silence  hath  his  home. 

Where  I  would  come. 
Bear  me  now  in  thy  deep 

Bosom,  Sleep, 
O  Sleep. 

Grace  Fallow  Norton  [18 


THE  WHARF  OF  DREAMS 

Strange  wares  are  handled  on  the  wharves  of  sleep: 
Shadows  of  shadows  pass,  and  many  a  light 
Flashes  a  signal  fire  across  the  night; 

Barges  depart  whose  voiceless  steersmen  keep 


The  Wharf  of  Dreams  3-^5 

Their  way  without  a  star  upon  the  deep; 

And  from  lost  ships,  homing  with  ghostly  crews, 

Come  cries  of  incommunicable  news, 
While  cargoes  pile  the  piers,  a  moon-white  heap — 
Budgets  of  dream-dust,  merchandise  of  song, 
Wreckage  of  hope  and  packs  of  ancient  wrong, 

Nepenthes  gathered  from  a  secret  strand. 
Fardels  of  heartache,  burdens  of  old  sins. 
Luggage  sent  down  from  dim  ancestral  inns. 

And  bales  of  fantasy  from  No-Man's  Land. 

Edwin  Mark  ham  [1852- 


HOME  AND  FATHERLAND 

HAME,  HAME,  HAME 

Hame,  hame,  hame,  O  hame  fain  wad  I  be — 
O  hame,  hame,  hame,  to  my  ain  countree! 

When  the  flower  is  i'  the  bud  and  the  leaf  is  on  the  tree, 
The  lark  shall  sing  me  hame  in  my  ain  countree; 
Hame,  hame,  hame,  O  hame  fain  wad  I  be — 
O  hame,  hame,  hame,  to  my  ain  countree! 

The  green  leaf  o'  loyaltie's  beginning  for  to  fa'. 
The  bonnie  White  Rose  it  is  withering  an'  a' ; 
But  I'll  water  't  wi'  the  blude  of  usurping  tyrannic, 
An'  green  it  will  graw  in  my  ain  countree. 

O,  there's  nocht  now  frae  ruin  my  country  can  save. 
But  the  keys  o'  kind  heaven,  to  open  the  grave; 
That  a'  the  noble  martyrs  wha  died  for  loyaltie 
May  rise  again  an'  fight  for  their  ain  countree. 

The  great  now  are  gane,  a'  wha  ventured  to  save, 
The  new  grass  is  springing  on  the  tap  o'  their  grave; 
But  the  sun  through  the  mirk  blinks  blithe  in  my  e'e, 
"I'll  shine  on  ye  yet  in  your  ain  countree." 

Hame,  hame,  hame,  O  hame  fain  wad  I  be — 
O  hame,  hame,  hame,  to  my  ain  countree! 

Allan  Cunningham  [i 784-1 842] 

HOME,   SWEET   HOME! 

From  "  Clari,  the  Maid  of  Milan  " 

'Mid  pleasures  and  palaces  though  we  may  roam. 

Be  it  ever  so  humble,  there's  no  place  like  home; 

A  charm  from  the  sky  seems  to  hallow  us  there. 

Which,  seek  through  the  world,  is  ne'er  met  with  elsewhere. 

Home,  Home,  sweet,  sweet  Home! 
There's  no  place  like  Home!  there's  no  place  like  Home! 
1^226 


My  Old   Kentucky   Home         3227 

An  exile  from  home,  splendor  dazzles  in  vain; 

O,  give  me  my  lowly  thatched  cottage  again! 

The  birds  singing  gayly,  that  came  at  my  call, — 

Give  me  them, — and  the  peace  of  mind,  dearer  than  all! 

Home,  Home,  sweet,  sweet  Home! 
There's  no  place  like  Home!  there's  no  place  like  Home! 

How  sweet  'tis  to  sit  'neath  a  fond  father's  smile, 
And  the  cares  of  a  mother  to  soothe  and  beguile ! 
Let  others  delight  mid  new  pleasures  to  roam, 
But  give  me,  oh,  give  me,  the  pleasures  of  home! 

Home!  Home!  sweet,  sweet  Home! 
There's  no  place  like  Home!  there's  no  place  like  Home! 

To  thee  I'll  return,  overburdened  with  care; 
The  heart's  dearest  solace  will  smile  on  me  there; 
No  more  from  that  cottage  again  will  I  roam; 
Be  it  ever  so  humble,  there's  no  place  like  home. 

Home!  Home!  sweet,  sweet  Home! 
There's  no  place  like  Home!  there's  no  place  like  Home! 
John  Howard  Payne  [1702-1852] 

MY  OLD   KENTUCKY  HOME 

The  sun  shines  bright  in  the  old  Kentucky  home; 

'Tis  summer,  the  darkeys  are  gay; 
The  corn-top's  ripe,  and  the  meadow's  in  the  bloom, 

While  the  birds  make  music  all  the  day. 
The  young  folks  roll  on  the  little  cabin  floor, 

All  merry,  all  happy  and  bright; 
By-'n'-by  hard  times  comes  a-knocking  at  the  door: — 

Then  my  old  Kentucky  home,  good-night! 

Weep  no  more,  my  lady, 
O,  weep  no  more  to-day! 
We  will  sing  one  song  for  the  old  Kentucky  home, 
For  the  old  Kentucky  home,  far  away. 

They  hunt  no  more  for  the  possum  and  the  coon, 
On  the  meadow,  the  hill,  and  the  shore; 

They  sing  no  more  by  the  glinnner  of  the  moon, 
On  the  bench  by  the  old  cabin  door. 


3228     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

The  day  goes  by  like  a  shadow  o'er  the  heart, 

With  sorrow,  where  all  was  delight; 
The  time  has  come  when  the  darkeys  have  to  part : — 

Then  my  old  Kentucky  home,  good-night! 

The  head  must  bow,  and  the  back  will  have  to  bend, 

Wherever  the  darkey  may  go; 
A  few  more  days  and  the  troubles  all  will  end, 

In  the  lield  where  the  sugar-canes  grow. 
A  few  more  days  for  to  tote  the  weary  load, — 

No  matter,  'twill  never  be  light; 
A  few  more  days  till  we  totter  on  the  road: — 

Then  my  old  Kentucky  home,  good-night! 

Weep  no  more,  my  lady, 
O,  weep  no  more  to-day! 
We  will  sing  one  song  for  the  old  Kentucky  home, 
For  the  old  Kentucky  home,  far  away. 

Stephen  Collins  Foster  [i 826-1 864 


THE  OLD   FOLKS  AT  HOME 

Way  down  upon  de  Suwanee  Ribber, 

Far,  far  away, 
Dere's  wha  my  heart  is  turning  ebber, 

Dere's  wha  de  old  folks  stay. 
All  up  and  down  de  whole  creation 

Sadly  I  roam. 
Still  longing  for  de  old  plantation, 

And  for  de  old  folks  at  home. 

All  de  world  am  sad  and  dreary, 

Eb'rywhere  I  roam; 
Oh,  darkeys,  how  my  heart  grows  weary. 

Far  from  de  old  folks  at  home! 

All  round  de  little  farm  I  wandered 

When  I  was  young. 
Den  many  happy  days  I  squandered 

Many  de  songs  I  sung. 


Home  3229 

When  I  was  playing  wid  my  brudder 

Happy  was  I; 
Oh,  take  me  to  my  kind  old  mudder! 

Dere  let  me  live  and  die. 

One  little  hut  among  de  bushes, 

One  dat  I  love, 
Still  sadly  to  my  memory  rushes. 

No  matter  where  I  rove. 
When  will  I  see  de  bees  a-humming 

All  around  de  comb? 
When  will  I  hear  de  banjo  tumming, 

Down  in  my  good  old  home? 

Slcphen  Collins  Foster  [1826-1864] 


HOME 

0,  FALMOUTH  IS  a  fine  town  with  ships  in  the  bay, 
And  I  wish  from  my  heart  it's  there  I  was  to-day; 
I  wish  from  my  heart  I  was  far  away  from  here, 
Sitting  in  my  parlor  and  talking  to  my  dear. 
For  it's  home,  dearie,  home — it's  home  I  want  to  be. 
Our  topsails  are  hoisted,  and  we'll  away  to  sea. 
0,  the  oak  and  the  ash  and  the  bonnie  birken  tree 
They're  all  growing  green  in  the  old  countrie. 

In  Baltimore  a-walking  a  lady  I  did  meet 
With  her  babe  on  her  arm  as  she  came  down  the  street ; 
And  I  thought  how  I  sailed,  and  the  cradle  standing  ready 
For  the  pretty  little  babe  that  has  never  seen  its  daddie. 
^.^  And  it's  home,  dearie,  home,— 

O,  if  it  be  a  lass,  she  shall  wear  a  golden  ring; 
And  if  it  be  a  lad,  he  shall  fight  for  his  king; 
With  his  dirk  and  his  hat  and  his  little  jacket  blue 
He  shall  walk  the  quarter-deck  as  his  daddie  used  to  do. 
And  it's  home,  dearie,  home, — 

O,  there's  a  wind  a-blowing,  a-blowing  from  the  west. 
And  that  of  all  the  winds  is  the  one  I  like  the  best. 


3230     Poems  of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 

For  it  blows  at  our  backs,  and  it  shakes  our  pennon  free, 
And  it  soon  will  blow  us  home  to  the  old  countrie. 
For  it's  home,  dearie,  home — it's  home  I  want  to  be. 
Our  topsails  are  hoisted,  and  we'll  away  to  sea. 
O,  the  oak  and  the  ash  and  the  bonnie  birken  tree 
They're  all  gro\^•ing  green  in  the  old  countrie. 

Wiilmm  Ernest  Henley  [1840-1903] 


HOT  WEATHER  IX  THE   PLAINS— INDIA 

Far  be^'ond  the  sky-line,  where  the  steamers  go. 
There's  a  cool,  green  country,  there's  the  land  I  know; 
WTiere  the  gray  mist  rises  from  the  hidden  pool, 
And  the  dew  falls  softly  on  the  meadows  cool. 
WTien  the  exile's  death  has  claimed  me  it  is  there  my  soul 

shaU  fly, 
To  the  pleasant  English  country-,  when  my  time  has  come  to 

die; 
WTiere  the  west  wind  on  the  uplands  echoes  back  the  sea- 
bird's  cry —  ^       "      ■"  , 
Oh!  it's  there  my  soul  will  hasten  though  it's  here  my  bones 
must  lie. 

From  the  many  temples,  tinkling  bells  ring  clear. 
But  a  fairer  music  in  my  heart  I  hear — 
Lilt  of  English  skylark,  plash  of  woodland  streams, 
Songs  of  thrush  and  blackbird  fill  my  waking  dreams. 
In  each  pause  from  work  and  worry,  it  is  there  my  thoughts 

will  fly, 
To  the  pleasant  English  country  with  the  pearly,  mist)'- 

sky — 
And  the  present's  toil  and  trouble  fade  and  cease  and  pass 

me  by — 
Oh!  it's  there  I  fain  would  wander,  but  it's  here  my  bones 
must  lie. 

Hard  and  hot  the  sky  spreads,  one  unchanging  glare. 
Far  and  wide  the  earth  lies  burnt  and  brown  and  bare, 
Sunset  brings  no  solace,  night-time  no  redress, 
StiU  the  breathless  silence  mocks  the  land's  distress. 


Heart's   Content 


3^3^ 


So  my  thoughts  recross  the  waters  to  the  spring-times  long 

gone  by, 
Passed  'mid  EngUsh  woods  and  pastures,  'neath  a  softer, 

sweeter  sky ; 
For  when  death  shall  end  my  exile,  thither  will  my  spirit 

fly- 
Oh!  it's  there  my  soul  shall  wander,  though  it's  here  my 

bones  must  lie. 

E.  H.  Tipple.  [i8    - 


HEART'S   CONTENT 

"A  sail!  a  sail!     Oh,  whence  away, 

And  whither,  o'er  the  foam? 
Good  brother  mariners,  we  pray, 

God  speed  you  safely  home!" 
"Now  wish  us  not  so  foul  a  wind. 

Until  the  fair  be  spent; 
For  hearth  and  home  we  leave  behind: 

We  sail  for  Heart's  Content." 

"For  Heart's  Content!     And  sail  3'e  so, 

With  canvas  flowing  free? 
But,  pray  you,  tell  us,  if  ye  know, 

Where  may  that  harbor  be? 
For  we  that  greet  you,  worn  of  time, 

Wave-racked,  and  tempest-rent, 
By  sun  and  star,  in  every  clime. 

Have  searched  for  Heart's  Content. 

"In  ever\'  clime  the  world  around, 

The  waste  of  waters  o'er; 
An  El  Dorado  have  we  found. 

That  ne'er  was  found  before. 
The  isles  of  spice,  the  lands  of  dawn, 

Where  East  and  West  are  blent — 
All  these  our  ej'es  have  looked  upon, 

But  where  is  Heart's  Content? 


3'2-3^     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"Oh,  turn  again,  while  yet  ye  may, 

And  ere  the  hearths  are  cold, 
And  all  the  embers  ashen-gray,  -  ;   i 

By  which  ye  sat  of  old, 
And  dumb  in  death  the  loving  lips 

That  mourned  as  forth  ye  went 
To  join  the  fleet  of  missing  ships. 

In  quest  of  Heart's  Content; 

"And  seek  again  the  harbor-lights, 

Which  faithful  fingers  trim, 
Ere  yet  alike  the  days  and  nights 

Unto  your  eyes  are  dim! 
For  woe,  alas!  to  those  that  roam 

Till  time  and  tide  are  spent, 
And  win  no  more  the  port  of  home — 

The  only  Heart's  Content!" 

Unknown 


SONG 

Stay,  stay  at  home,  my  heart,  and  rest; 
Home-keeping  hearts  are  happiest. 
For  those  that  wander  they  know  not  where 
Are  full  of  trouble  and  full  of  care; 
To  stay  at  home  is  best. 

Weary  and  homesick  and  distressed, 
They  wander  east,  they  wander  west, 
And  are  baffled  and  beaten  and  blown  about 
By  the  winds  of  the  wilderness  of  doubt; 
To  stay  at  home  is  best. 

Then  stay  at  home,  my  heart,  and  rest; 
The  bird  is  safest  in  its  nest; 
Over  all  that  flutter  their  wings  and  fly 
A  hawk  is  hovering  in  the  sky; 
To  stay  at  home  is  best. 

Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  [1S07-1 


The  Old  Home  3^33 


MY  EARLY  HOME 

Here  sparrows  build  upon  the  trees, 

And  stockdove  hides  her  nest ; 
The  leaves  are  winnowed  by  the  breeze 

Into  a  calmer  rest: 
The  black-cap's  song  was  very  sweet, 

That  used  the  rose  to  kiss; 
It  made  the  Paradise  complete: 

My  early  home  was  this. 

The  red-breast  from  the  sweetbrier  bush 

Dropped  down  to  pick  the  worm; 
On  the  horse-chestnut  sang  the  thrush, 

O'er  the  house  where  I  was  born; 
The  moonlight,  like  a  shower  of  pearls, 

Fell  o'er  this  'bow-er  of  bliss', 
And  on  the  bench  sat  boys  and  girls: 

My  early  home  was  this. 

The  old  house  stooped  just  like  a  cave. 

Thatched  o'er  with  mosses  green; 
Winter  around  the  walls  would  rave, 

But  all  was  calm  within ; 
The  trees  are  here  all  green  again. 

Here  bees  the  flowers  still  kiss, 
But  flowers  and  trees  seemed  sweeter  then: 

My  early  home  was  this. 

John  Clare  [1793-1864] 


THE  OLD   HOME 

An  old  lane,  an  old  gate,  an  old  house  by  a  tree; 
A  wild  wood,  a  wild  brook — they  will  not  let  me  be: 
In  boyhood  I  knew  them,  and  still  they  call  to  me. 

Down  deep  in  my  heart's  core  I  hear  them  and  my  eyes 
Through  tear-mists  behold  them  licncath  the  oldtime  skies, 
'Mid  bee-boorn  and  rose-bloom  and  orchard-lands  arise. 


3^34    Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

I  hear  them;  and  heartsick  with  longing  is  my  soul, 

To  walk  there,  to  dream  there,  beneath  the  sky's  blue  bowl; 

Around  me,  within  me,  the  weary  world  made  whole. 

To  talk  with  the  wild  brook  of  all  the  long  ago ; 

To  whisper  the  wood-wind  of  things  we  used  to  know 

When  we  were  old  companions,  before  my  heart  knew  woe. 

To  walk  with  the  morning  and  watch  its  rose  unfold; 
To  drowse  with  the  noontide  luUed  in  its  heart  of  gold; 
To  lie  with  the  night-time  and  dream  the  dreams  of  old. 

To  tell  to  the  old  trees,  and  to  each  listening  leaf, 
The  longing,  the  yearning,  as  in  my  boyhood  brief, 
The  old  hope,  the  old  love,  would  ease  me  of  my  grief. 

The  old  lane,  the  old  gate,  the  old  house  by  the  tree, 
The  wild  wood,  the  wild  brook — they  will  not  let  me  be: 
In  boyhood  I  knew  them,  and  still  they  call  to  me. 

Madison  Cawein  [1865-1914] 


THE   AULD   HOUSE 

Oh,  the  auld  house,  the  auld  house,— 

What  though  the  rooms  were  wee? 
Oh,  kind  hearts  were  dweUing  there, 

And  bairnies  fu'  o'  glee; 
The  wild  rose  and  the  jessamine 

Still  hang  upon  the  wa': 
How  mony  cherished  memories 

Do  they  sweet  flowers  reca'! 

Oh,  the  auld  laird,  the  auld  laird, 

Sae  canty,  kind,  and  crouse, —  -/ 

How  mony  did  he  welcome  to 

His  ain  wee  dear  auld  house;  ,  ■ 

And  the  leddy  too,  sae  genty. 

There  sheltered  Scotland's  heir,  1 

And  clipped  a  lock  wi'  her  ain  hand, 

Frae  his  lang  3^ellow  hair.  \>\\fi- 


The  Auld  House  3-^35 

The  mavis  still  doth  sweetly  sing, 

The  bluebells  sweetly  blaw, 
The  bonny  Earn's  clear  winding  still, 

But  the  auld  house  is  awa'. 
The  auld  house,  the  auld  house, — 

Deserted  though  ye  be, 
There  ne'er  can  be  a  new  house 

Will  seem  sac  fair  to  me. 

Still  flourishing  the  auld  pear-tree 

The  bairnics  liked  to  see; 
And  oh,  how  often  did  they  speir 

When  ripe  they  a'  wad  be! 
The  voices  sweet,  the  wee  bit  feet 

Aye  rinnin'  here  and  there, 
The  merry  shout — oh!  whiles  we  greet 

To  think  we'll  hear  nae  mair. 

For  they  are  a'  wide  scattered  now; 

Some  to  the  Indies  ganc. 
And  ane,  alas!  to  her  lang  hame; 

Not  here  we'll  meet  again. 
The  kirkyard,  the  kirk  yard! 

Wi'  flowers  o'  every  hue. 
Sheltered  by  the  hoUy's  shade 

An'  the  dark  sombre  yew. 

The  settmg  sun,  the  setting  sun! 

How  glorious  it  gaed  doon; 
The  cloudy  splendor  raised  our  hearts 

To  cloudless  skies  aboon. 
The  auld  dial,  the  auld  dial! 

It  tauld  how  time  did  pass; 
The  wintry  winds  hae  dung  it  doon, 

Now  hid  'mang  weeds  and  grass. 

Carolina  Nairnc  [  1 7  66-1 845] 


3236     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


THE  ROWAN  TREE 

O  ROWAN  tree,  O  rowan  tree!  thou'lt  aye  be  dear  to  me! 
Intwined  thou  art  wi'  mony  ties  o'  hame  and  infancy. 
Thy  leaves  were  aye  the  first  o'  spring,  thy  flowers  the  sim- 
mer's pride; 
There  wasna  sic  a  bonnie  tree  in  a'  the  country  side. 
0  rowan  tree! 

How  fair  wert  thou  in  simmer  time,  wi'  a'  thy  clusters  white, 
How  rich  and  gay  thy  autumn  dress,  wi'  berries  red  and 

bright! 
On  thy  fair  stem  were  mony  names  which  now  nae  mair  I  see, 
But  they're  engraven  on  my  heart — forgot  they  ne'er  can  be! 
O  rowan  tree ! 

We  sat  aneath  thy  spreading  shade,  the  bairnies  round  thee 

ran. 
They  pu'd  thy  bonnie  berries  red,  and  necklaces  they  Strang. 
My  mother!  O  I  see  her  still,  she  smiled  our  sports  to  see, 
Wi'  little  Jeanie  on  her  lap,  and  Jamie  at  her  knee. 
O  rowan  tree! 

O  there  arose  my  father's  prayer,  in  holy  evening's  calm; 
How  sweet  was  then  my  mother's  voice  in  the  Martyr's 

psalm ! 
Now  a'  are  gane!  we  meet  nae  mair  aneath  the  rowan  tree! 
But  hallowed  thoughts  around  thee  twine  o'  hame  and  in- 
fancy, 

0  rowan  tree! 

Carolina  Nairne  [i 766-1 845] 


THE  FIRE  OF  DRIFT-WOOD 

We  sat  within  the  farm-house  old. 
Whose  windows,  looking  o'er  the  bay, 

Gave  to  the  sea-breeze  damp  and  cold 
An  easy  entrance,  night  and  day. 


The  Fire  of  Drift-Wood 

Not  far  away  we  saw  the  port, 

The  strange,  old-fashioned,  silent  town, 

The  lighthouse,  the  dismantled  fort. 
The  wooden  houses,  quaint  and  brown. 

We  sat  and  talked  until  the  night, 
Descending,  filled  the  little  room; 

Our  faces  faded  from  the  sight, 
Our  voices  only  broke  the  gloom. 

We  spake  of  many  a  vanished  scene, 
Of  what  we  once  had  thought  and  said, 

Of  what  had  been,  and  might  have  been. 
And  who  was  changed,  and  who  was  dead; 

And  all  that  fills  the  heart  of  friends. 
When  first  they  feel,  with  secret  pain. 

Their  lives  thenceforth  have  separate  ends, 
And  never  can  be  one  again; 

The  first  slight  swerving  of  the  heart. 
That  words  are  powerless  to  express, 

And  leave  it  still  unsaid  in  part, 
Or  say  it  in  too  great  excess. 

The  very  tones  in  which  we  spake 

Had  something  strange,  I  could  but  mark; 

The  leaves  of  memory  seemed  to  make 
A  mournful  rustling  in  the  dark. 

Oft  (lied  the  words  upon  our  lips, 

As  suddenly,  from  out  the  fire 
Built  of  the  wreck  of  stranded  ships. 

The  flames  would  leap  and  then  expire. 

And,  as  their  splendor  flashed  and  failed. 
We  thought  of  wrecks  upon  the  main, 

Of  ships  dismasted,  that  were  hailed. 
And  sent  no  answer  back  again. 


3237 


3238     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

The  windows,  rattling  in  their  frames, 

The  ocean,  roaring  up  the  beach, 
The  gusty  blast,  the  bickering  flames, 

All  mingled  vaguely  in  our  speech ; 

Until  they  made  themselves  a  part 
Of  fancies  floating  through  the  brain, 

The  long-lost  ventures  of  the  heart, 
That  send  no  answers  back  again. 

O  flames  that  glowed!    O  hearts  that  yearned! 

They  were  indeed  too  much  akin, 
The  drift-wood  fire  without  that  burned, 

The  thoughts  that  burned  and  glowed  within. 
Henry  Wadstvorth  Longfellow  [i 807-1 882 


MY  AIN  FIRESIDE 

I  HAE  seen  great  anes  and  sat  in  great  ha's, 

'Mang  lords  and  fine  ladies  a'  covered  wi'  braws, 

At  feasts  made  for  princes  wi'  princes  I've  been, 

When  the  grand  shine  o'  splendor  has  dazzled  my  een; 

But  a  sight  sae  dehghtfu'  I  trow  I  ne'er  spied 

As  the  bonny  blithe  blink  o'  my  ain  fireside. 

My  ain  fireside,  my  ain  fireside, 

O,  cheery 's  the  blink  o'  my  ain  fireside; 

My  ain  fireside,  my  ain  fireside, 

O,  there's  naught  to  compare  wi'  ane's  ain  fireside. 

Ance  mair,  Gude  be  thankit,  round  my  ain  heartsome  ingle 

Wi'  the  friends  o'  my  youth  I  cordially  mingle; 

Nae  forms  to  compel  me  to  seem  wae  or  glad, 

I  may  laugh  when  I'm  merry,  and  sigh  when  I'm  sad. 

Nae  falsehood  to  dread,  and  nae  malice  to  fear, 

But  truth  to  delight  me,  and  friendship  to  cheer; 

Of  a'  roads  to  happiness  ever  were  tried, 

There's  nane  half  so  sure  as  ane's  ain  fireside. 

My  ain  fireside,  my  ain  fireside, 

O,  there's  naught  to  compare  wi'  ane's  ain  fireside. 


The  Cane-Bottomed  Chair         3239 

When  I  draw  in  my  stool  on  my  cozy  hearthstane, 
My  heart  loups  sae  hght  I  scarce  ken  't  for  my  ain; 
Care's  down  on  the  vvmd,  it  is  clean  out  o'  sight, 
Past  troubles  they  seem  but  as  dreams  o'  the  night. 
I  hear  but  kend  voices,  kend  faces  I  see. 
And  mark  saft  affection  glent  fond  frae  ilk  ee; 
Nae  fleechings  0'  flattery,  nae  boastings  o'  pride, 
'Tis  heart  speaks  to  heart  at  ane's  ain  fireside. 

M}-  ain  fireside,  my  ain  fireside, 

O,  there's  naught  to  compare  wi'  ane's  ain  fireside. 
Elizabeth  Hamilton  [1758-1816] 


THE  INGLE-SIDE 

It's  rare  to  see  the  morning  bleeze 

Like  a  bonfire  frae  the  sea. 
It's  fair  to  see  the  burnie  kiss 

The  lip  o'  the  flowery  lea; 
An'  fine  it  is  on  green  hiUside, 

Where  himis  the  bonnie  bee, 
But  rarer,  fairer,  finer  far 

Is  the  ingle-side  for  me. 

Glens  may  be  gilt  wi'  gowans  rare. 

The  birds  may  fill  the  tree; 
An'  haughs  hae  a'  the  scented  ware 

The  simmer-growth  can  gie: 
But  the  canty  hearth  where  cronies  meet, 

An'  the  darling  o'  our  e'e, 
That  makes  to  us  a  warl'  complete: 

Oh,  the  ingle-side  for  me! 

Heio  Aiiislee  [1792-187 8] 


THE   CANE-BOTTOMED   CHAIR 

In  tattered  old  slippers  that  toast  at  the  bars. 
And  a  ragged  old  jacket  perfumed  with  cigars, 
Away  from  the  world  and  its  toils  and  its  cares, 
I've  a  snug  little  kingdom  up  four  pair  of  stairs. 


3240    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

To  mount  to  this  realm  is  a  toil,  to  be  sure, 

But  the  fire  there  is  bright  and  the  air  rather  pure; 

And  the  view  I  behold  on  a  sunshiny  day 

Is  grand,  through  the  chimney-pots  over  the  way. 

This  snug  little  chamber  is  crammed  in  all  nooks 

With  worthJess  old  knicknacks  and  silly  old  books, 

And  foolish  old  odds  and  foolish  old  ends, 

Cracked  bargains  from  brokers,  cheap  keepsakes  from  friends. 

Old  armor,  prints,  pictures,  pipes,  china  (all  cracked), 

Old  rickety  tables,  and  chairs  broken-backed; 

A  twopenny  treasury,  wondrous  to  see; 

What  matter?  'tis  pleasant  to  you,  friend,  and  me. 

No  better  divan  need  the  Sultan  require, 
Than  the  creaking  old  sofa  that  basks  by  the  fire, 
And  'tis  wonderful,  surely,  what  music  you  get 
From  the  rickety,  ramshackle,  wheezy  spinet. 

That  praying-rug  came  from  a  Turcoman's  camp; 
By  Tiber  once  twinkled  that  brazen  old  lamp; 
A  Mameluke  fierce  yonder  dagger  has  drawn: 
'Tis  a  murderous  knife  to  toast  mufiins  upon. 

Long,  long  through  the  hours,  and  the  night,  and  the  chimes, 
Here  we  talk  of  old  books,  and  old  friends,  and  old  times: 
As  we  sit  in  a  fog  made  of  rick  Latakie, 
This  chamber  is  pleasant  to  you,  friend,  and  me. 

But  of  all  the  cheap  treasures  that  garnish  my  nest, 
There's  one  that  I  love  and  I  cherish  the  best; 
For  the  finest  of  couches  that's  padded  with  hair 
I  never  would  change  thee,  my  cane-bottomed  chair. 

'Tis  a  bandy-legged,  high-shouldered,  worm-eaten  seat. 
With  a  creaking  old  back,  and  twisted  old  feet; 
But  since  the  fair  morning  when  Fanny  sat  there, 
I  bless  thee  and  love  thee,  old  cane-bottomed  chair. 

If  chairs  have  but  feeling,  in  holding  such  charms, 

A  thrill  must  have  passed  through  your  withered  old  anus! 


Duna  3-4T 

I  looked,  and  I  longed,  and  I  wished  in  despair; 
I  wished  myself  turned  to  a  cane-bottomed  chair. 

It  was  but  a  moment  she  sat  in  this  place. 

She'd  a  scarf  on  her  neck,  and  a  smile  on  her  face! 

A  smile  on  her  face,  and  a  rose  in  her  hair. 

And  she  sat  there,  and  bloomed  in  my  cane-bottomed  chair. 

And  so  I  have  valued  my  chair  ever  since. 

Like  the  shrine  of  a  saint,  or  the  throne  of  a  prince; 

Saint  Fanny,  my  patroness  sweet  I  declare, 

The  queen  of  my  heart  and  my  cane-bottomed  chair. 

When  the  candles  burn  low,  and  the  company's  gone, 
In  the  silence  of  night  as  I  sit  here  alone — 
I  sit  here  alone,  but  we  yet  are  a  pair — 
My  Fanny  I  see  in  my  cane-bottomed  chair. 

She  comes  from  the  past,  and  revisits  my  room; 
She  looks  as  she  then  did,  all  beauty  and  bloom; 
So  smiling  and  tender,  so  fresh  and  so  fair. 
And  yonder  she  sits  in  my  cane-bottomed  chair. 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray  [1811-1863] 

DUNA 

When  I  was  a  little  lad 

With  folly  on  my  lips. 

Fain  was  I  for  journeying 

All  the  seas  in  ships. 

But  now  across  the  southern  swell, 

Every  dawn  I  hear 

The  little  streams  of  Duna 

Running  clear. 

When  I  was  a  young  man. 
Before  my  beard  was  gray, 
All  to  ships  and  sailormen 
I  gave  my  heart  away. 
But  I'm  weary  of  the  sea-wind, 
I'm  weary  of  the  foam, 
And  the  little  stars  of  Duna 
Call  me  home. 

Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall  [1883- 


3242     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

THE  OLD   CLOCK  ON  THE   STAIRS 

Somewhat  back  from  the  village  street 

Stands  the  old-fashioned  country-seat. 

Across  its  antique  portico 

Tall  poplar-trees  their  shadows  throw; 

And  from  its  station  in  the  hall 

An  ancient  timepiece  says  to  all, — 

"  Forever — never ! 

Never — forever! " 

Half-way  up  the  stairs  it  stands, 

And  points  and  beckons  with  its  hands 

From  its  case  of  massive  oak, 

Like  a  monk,  who,  under  his  cloak, 

Crosses  himself,  and  sighs,  alas! 

With  sorrowful  voice  to  all  who  pass, — 

' '  Forever — never ! 

Never — forever! " 

By  day  its  voice  is  low  and  light; 

But  in  the  silent  dead  of  night. 

Distinct  as  a  passing  footstep's  fall, 

It  echoes  along  the  vacant  hall, 

Along  the  ceiling,  along  the  floor. 

And  seems  to  say,  at  each  chamber-door,^ 

' '  Forever — never ! 

Never — forever! " 

Through  days  of  sorrow  and  of  mirth, 
Through  days  of  death  and  days  of  birth, 
Through  every  swift  vicissitude 
Of  changeful  time,  unchanged  it  has  stood, 
And  as  if,  like  God,  it  all  things  saw. 
It  calmly  repeats  those  words  of  awe, — 

"  Forever — never  1 

Never — forever ! " 

In  that  mansion  used  to  be 
Free-hearted  Hospitality; 
His  great  fires  up  the  chimney  roared; 
The  stranger  feasted  at  his  board; 


The  Old  Clock  on  the  Stairs 

But,  like  the  skeleton  at  the  feast, 
That  warning  timepiece  never  ceased, — 

"  Forever — never ! 

Never — forever!" 

There  groups  of  merry  children  played, 

There  youths  and  maidens  dreaming  strayed ; 

0  precious  hours!     O  golden  prime. 

And  affluence  of  love  and  time! 

Even  as  a  miser  counts  his  gold, 

Those  hours  the  ancient  timepiece  told, — 

"Forever — never!  iyiM/l  T 

Never — forever!" 

From  that  chamber,  clothed  in  white, 
The  bride  came  forth  on  her  wedding  night; 
There,  in  that  silent  room  below. 
The  dead  lay  in  his  shroud  of  snow; 
And  in  the  hush  that  followed  the  prayer, 
Was  heard  the  old  clock  on  the  stair, — 

"  Forever — never! 

Never — forever ! " 

All  are  scattered  now  and  fled, 
Some  are  married,  some  are  dead; 
And  when  I  ask,  with  throbs  of  pain, 
"Ah!  when  shall  they  all  meet  again?" 
As  in  the  days  long  since  gone  by. 
The  ancient  timepiece  makes  reply, — 

"Forever — never! 

Never — forever! " 

Never  here,  forever  there. 
Where  all  parting,  pain,  and  care. 
And  death,  and  time  shall  disappear, — 
Forever  there,  but  never  here! 
The  horologe  of  Eternity 
Sayeth  this  incessantly, — 

"  Forever — never ! 

Never — forever!" 
Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [i  807-1 J 


3243 


32,44     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


"MOTHER,  HOME,  HEAVEN" 

Three  words  fall  sweetly  on  my  soul, 

As  music  from  an  angel's  lyre, 
That  bid  my  spirit  spurn  control, 

And  upward  to  its  source  aspire; 
The  sweetest  sounds  to  mortals  given 
Are  heard  in  Mother,  Home,  and  Heaven. 

Dear  Mother! — ne'er  shall  I  forget 

Thy  brow,  thine  eye,  thy  pleasant  smile; 

Though  in  the  sea  of  death  hath  set 
Thy  star  of  life,  my  guide  awhile. 

Oh,  never  shall  thy  form  depart 

From  the  bright  pictures  in  my  heart. 

And  like  a  bird  that  from  the  flowers, 
Wing-weary  seeks  her  wonted  nest. 

My  spirit,  e'en  in  manhood's  hours, 
Turns  back  in  childhood's  Home  to  rest; 

The  cottage,  garden,  hill,  and  stream, 

Still  linger  like  a  pleasant  dream. 

And  while  to  one  engulfing  grave 
By  Time's  swift  tide  we're  driven. 

How  sweet  the  thought  that  every  wave 
But  bears  us  nearer  Heaven ! 

There  we  shall  meet,  when  life  is  o'er. 

In  that  blest  Home,  to  part  no  more. 

William  Goldsmith  Brown  [181 2-1906] 

THE  HERO 

My  hero  is  na  decked  wi'  gowd, 

He  has  nae  glittering  state; 
Renown  upon  a  field  o'  blood 

In  war  he  hasna  met. 
He  has  nae  siller  in  his  pouch, 

Nae  menials  at  his  ca' ; 
The  proud  o'  earth  frae  him  would  turn,  . 
,  r       And  bid  him  stand  awa'. 


The   Hero  3245 

His  coat  is  hame-spun  hodden-gray, 

His  shoon  are  clouted  sair, 
His  garments,  maist  unhero-like. 

Are  a'  the  waur  o'  wear: 
His  hmbs  are  strong — his  shoulders  broad. 

His  hands  were  made  to  plow; 
He's  rough  without,  but  sound  within; 

His  heart  is  bauldl}'  true. 

He  toils  at  e'en,  he  toils  at  morn, 

His  wark  is  never  through; 
A  coming  life  o'  wear}^  toil 

Is  ever  in  his  view. 
But  on  he  trudges,  keeping  aye 

A  stout  heart  to  the  brae, 
And  proud  to  be  an  honest  man 

Until  his  dying  day. 

His  hame  a  hame  o'  happiness 

And  kindly  love  may  be; 
And  monie  a  nameless  dweUing-place 

Like  his  we  still  may  see. 
His  happy  altar-hearth  so  bright 

Is  ever  bleezing  there; 
And  cheerfu'  faces  round  it  set 

Are  an  unending  prayer. 

The  poor  man  in  his  humble  hame, 

Like  God,  who  dwells  aboon, 
Makes  happy  hearts  around  him  there, 

Sae  Joyfu'  late  and  soon. 
His  toil  is  sair,  his  toil  is  lang; 

But  weary  nights  and  days, 
Hame — happiness  akin  to  his — 

A  hunder-fauld  repays. 

Go,  mock  at  conquerors  and  kings! 

What  happiness  give  they? 
Go,  tell  the  painted  butterflies 

To  kneel  them  down  and  pray! 


3246    Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Go,  stand  erect  in  manhood's  pride, 

Be  what  a  man  should  be, 
Then  come,  and  to  my  herb  bend 

Upon  the  grass  your  knee! 

Robert  Nicoll  [i 814-1837] 

THE   COTTER'S   SATURDAY  NIGHT 

INSCRIBED    TO   ROBERT    AIKEN,   ESQ. 

Let  not  Ambition  mock  their  useful  toil, 
Their  homely  joys,  and  destiny  obscure; 

Nor  Grandeur  hear  with  a  disdainful  smile 

The  short  and  simple  annals  of  the  poor. — Gray 

My  loved,  my  honored,  much-respected  friend! 

No  mercenary  bard  his  homage  pays; 
With  honest  pride,  I  scorn  each  scliish  end; 

My  dearest  meed,  a  friend's  esteem  and  praise. 

To  you  I  sing,  in  simple  Scottish  lays. 
The  lowly  train  in  life's  sequestered  scene; 

The  native  feelings  strong,  the  guileless  ways; 
What  Aiken  in  a  cottage  would  have  been; 
Ah!  though  his  worth  unknown,  far  happier  there,  I  ween. 

November  chill  blaws  loud  wi'  angry  sugh; 

The  shortening  winter-day  is  near  a  close; 
The  miry  beasts  retreating  frae  the  pleugh, 

The  blackening  trains  o'  craws  to  their  repose: 

The  toilworn  cotter  frae  his  labor  goes, — 
This  night  his  weekly  moil  is  at  an  end, — 

Collects  his  spades,  his  mattocks,  and  his  hoes, 
Hoping  the  morn  in  ease  and  rest  to  spend. 
And  weary,  o'er  the  moor,  his  course  does  hameward  bend. 

At  length  his  lonely  cot  appears  in  view. 

Beneath  the  shelter  of  an  aged  tree; 
The  expectant  wee  things,  toddlin',  stacher  through 

To  meet  their  dad,  wi'  fiichterin'  noise  an'  glee. 

His  wee  bit  ingle,  blinking  bonnily. 
His  clean  hearthstane,  his  thriftie  wilic's  smile, 

The  lisping  infant  prattling  on  his  knee. 
Does  a'  his  weary  kiaugh  and  care  beguile, 
And  makes  him  quite  forget  his  labor  and  his  toil. 


The  Cotter's   Saturday   Night       3247 

Belyve,  the  elder  bairns  come  drapping  in, 

At  service  out,  amang  the  farmers  roun'; 
Some  ca'  the  plough,  some  herd,  some  tentie  rin 

A  cannic  errand  to  a  neibor  town; 

Their  eldest  hope,  their  Jenny,  woman  grown, 
In  youthfu'  bloom,  love  sparkling  in  her  e'e,  .'H 

Comes  hame,  perhaps  to  shew  a  braw  new  gown,  • 
Or  deposit  her  sair-won  penny-fee, 
To  help  her  parents  dear,  if  they  jn  hardship  be. 

With  joy  unfeigned,  brothers  and  sisters  meet,  ■  (  ■ 

And  each  for  other's  weelfare  kindly  spiers:  ' 

The  social  hours,  swift-winged,  unnoticed  fleet; 

Each  tells  the  uncos  that  he  sees  or  hears ; 

The  parents,  partial,  eye  their  hopeful  years; 
Anticipation  forward  points  the  view.  .-.  > 

The  mother,  wi'  her  needle  and  her  shears, 
Gars  auld  claes  look  amaist  as  weel's  the  new; 
The  father  mixes  a'  wi'  admonition  due. 

Their  master's  and  their  mistress's  command, 

The  younkers  a'  are  warned  to  obey; 
And  mind  their  labors  wi'  an  eydcnt  hand. 

And  ne'er,  though  out  o'  sight,  to  jauk  or  play:    ; 

"And  oh!  be  sure  to  fear  the  Lord  alway! 
And  mind  your  duty,  duly,  morn  and  night! 

Lest  in  temptation's  path  ye  gang  astray,  *■ 

Implore  His  counsel  and  assisting  might: 
They  never  sought  in  vain  that  sought  the  Lord  aright!" 

But,  hark!  a  rap  comes  gently  to  the  door; 

Jenny,  wha  kens  the  meaning  o'  the  same, 
Tells  how  a  neibor  lad  cam  o'er  the  moor. 

To  do  some  errands,  and  convoy  her  hame. 

The  wily  mother  sees  the  conscious  flame 
Sparkle  in  Jenny's  e'e,  and  flush  her  cheek; 

With  heart-struck  anxious  care  inquires  his  name, 
While  Jenny  haiflins  is  afraid  to  speak; 
Weel  pleased  the  mother  hears  it's  nae  wild,  worthless  rake. 


3248     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Wi'  kindly  welcome,  Jenny  brings  him  ben; 

A  strappin'  youth;  he  taks  the  mother's  eye; 
Blithe  Jenny  sees  the  visit's  no  ill-ta'en; 

The  father  cracks  of  horses,  pleughs,  and  kye. 

The  youngster's  artless  heart  o'erflows  wi'  joy, 
But  blate  and  lathefu',  scarce  can  weel  behave; 

The  mother,  wi'  a  woman's  wiles,  can  spy 
What  makes  the  youth  sae  bashfu'  an'  sae  grave: 
Weel  pleased  to  think  her  bairn's  respected  like  the  lave. 

O  happy  love!  where  love  like  this  is  found! 

O  heartfelt  raptures!  bliss  beyond  compare! 
I've  paced  much  this  weary,  mortal  round. 

And  sage  experience  bids  me  this  declare : — 

If  Heaven  a  draught  of  heavenly  pleasure  spare, 
One  cordial  in  this  melancholy  vale, 

'Tis  when  a  youthful,  loving,  modest  pair 
In  other's  arms  breathe  out  the  tender  tale. 
Beneath  the  milk-white  thorn  that  scents  the  evening  gale. 

Is  there,  in  human  form,  that  bears  a  heart, 
A  wretch,  a  villain,  lost  to  love  and  truth, 
That  can,  with  studied,  sly,  ensnaring  art, 
Betray  sweet  Jenny's  unsuspecting  youth? 
Curse  on  his  perjured  arts!  dissembling  smooth! 
Are  honor,  virtue,  conscience,  all  exiled? 
■*         Is  there  no  pity,  no  relenting  ruth. 

Points  to  the  parents  fondling  o'er  their  child? 
Then  paints  the  ruined  maid,  and  their  distraction  wild? 

But  now  the  supper  crowns  their  simple  board, 
The  halesomc  parritch,  chief  o'  Scotia's  food, 

The  soupe  their  only  hawkie  does  afford. 

That  'yont  the  hallan  snugly  chows  her  cood: 
The  dame  brings  forth,  in  complimental  mood, 

To  grace  the  lad,  her  weel-hained  kebbuck,  fell, 
And  aft  he's  pressed,  and  aft  he  ca's  it  guid; 

The  frugal  wifie,  garrulous,  will  tell 
How  'twas  a  towmond  auld,  sin'  lint  was  i'  the  bell. 


The  Cotter's  Saturday   Night      3249 

The  cheerfu'  supper  done,  wi'  serious  face, 

They,  round  the  ingle,  form  a  circle  wide; 
The  sire  turns  o'er,  wi'  patriarchal  grace, 

The  big  ha'  Bible,  ance  his  father's  pride; 

His  bonnet  reverently  is  laid  aside, 
His  lyart  haffets  wearing  thin  and  bare; 

Those  strains  that  once  did  sweet  in  Zion  glide, 
Pie  wales  a  portion  with  judicious  care; 
And  "Let  us  worship  God!"  he  says,  with  solemn  air. 

They  chant  their  artless  notes  in  simple  guise; 

They  tune  their  hearts,  by  far  the  noblest  aim : 
Perhaps  "Dundee's"  wild-warbling  measures  rise, 

Or  plaintive  "Martyrs,"  worthy  of  the  name. 

Or  noble  "Elgin"  beets  the  heavenward  flame, 
The  sweetest  far  of  Scotia's  holy  lays: 

Compared  wiih  these,  Italian  trills  are  tame; 
The  tickled  ear  no  heartfelt  raptures  raise; 
Nae  unison  hae  they  with  our  Creator's  praise. 

The  priest-like  father  reads  the  sacred  page, — 

How  Abram  was  the  friend  of  God  on  high; 
Or  Moses  bade  eternal  warfare  wage 

With  Amalek's  ungracious  progeny; 

Or  how  the  royal  bard  did  groaning  lie 
Beneath  the  stroke  of  Heaven's  avenging  ire; 

Or  Job's  pathetic  plaint,  and  wailing  cry; 
Or  rapt  Isaiah's  wild,  seraphic  fire; 
Or  other  holy  seers  that  tune  the  sacred  lyre. 

Perhaps  the  Christian  volume  is  the  theme,— 
How  guiltless  blood  for  guilty  man  was  shed; 

How  He,  who  bore  in  heaven  the  second  name. 
Had  not  on  earth  whereon  to  lay  his  head : 
How  his  first  followers  and  servants  sped 
.    The  precepts  sage  they  wrote  to  many  a  land; 

How  he,  who  lone  in  Patmos  banished,  I' 

Saw  in  the  sun  a  mighty  angel  stand, 
And  heard  great  Babylon's  doom  pronounced  by  Heaven's 
command. 


3250    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Then  kneeling  down  to  Heaven's  Eternal  King, 

The  saint,  the  father,  and  the  husband  prays: 
Hope  "springs  exulting  on  triumphant  wing," 

That  thus  they  all  shall  meet  in  future  days: 

There  ever  bask  in  uncreated  rays, 
No  more  to  sigh,  or  shed  the  bitter  tear, 

Together  hymning  their  Creator's  praise, 
In  such  society,  yet  still  more  dear; 
While  circling  Time  moves  round  in  an  eternal  sphere. 

Compared  with  this,  how  poor  Religion's  pride, 

In  air  the  pomp  of  method  and  of  art. 
When  men  display  to  congregations  wide, 

Devotion's  every  grace,  except  the  heart! 

The  Power,  incensed,  the  pageant  will  desert, 
The  pompous  strain,  the  sacerdotal  stole; 

But,  haply,  in  some  cottage  far  apart, 
May  hear,  well  pleased,  the  language  of  the  soul; 
And  in  His  Book  of  Life  the  inmates  poor  enroll. 

Then  homeward  all  take  ofT  their  several  way; 

The  youngling  cottagers  retire  to  rest: 
The  parent-pair  their  secret  homage  pay. 

And  proffer  up  to  Heaven  the  warm  request. 

That  He,  who  stills  the  raven's  clamorous  nest, 
And  decks  the  lily  fair  in  flowery  pride. 

Would,  in  the  way  His  wisdom  sees  the  best, 
For  them  and  for  their  little  ones  provide;  :'-■'  ""  ' 

But,  chiefly,  in  their  hearts  with  grace  divine  preside'.' 

From  scenes  like  these  old  Scotia's  grandeur  springs. 

That  makes  her  loved  at  home,  revered  abroad; 
Princes  and  lords  are  but  the  breath  of  kings, 

"An  honest  man's  the  noblest  work  of  God"; 

And  certes,  in  fair  Virtue's  heavenly  road, 
The  cottage  leaves  the  palace  far  behind: 

What  is  a  lordling's  pomp? — a  cumbrous  load, 
Disguising  oft  the  wretch  of  human  kind. 
Studied  in  arts  of  hell,  in  wickedness  refined! 


My   Mother's   Picture  3'^ 5^ 

0  ScoUa!  my  dear,  my  native  soil! 

For  whom  my  warmest  wish  to  Heaven  is  sent, 
Long  may  thy  hardy  sons  of  rustic  toil 

Be  blest  with  health,  and  peace,  and  sweet  content! 

And,  oh,  may  Heaven  their  simple  lives  prevent 
From  luxury's  contagion,  weak  and  vile! 

Then,  howe'er  crowns  and  coronets  be  r-^nt, 
A  virtuous  populace  may  rise  the  while, 
And  stand  a  wall  of  tire  around  their  much-loved  isle. 

O  Thou!  who  poured  the  patriotic  tide, 

That  streamed  through  Wallace's  undaunted  heart; 
Who  dared  to  nobly  stem  tyrannic  pride. 

Or  nobly  die,  the  second  glorious  part, 

(The  patriot's  God  peculiarly  thou  art. 
His  friend,  inspirer,  guardian,  and  reward!) 

O,  never,  never  Scotia's  realm  desert; 
But  still  the  patriot,  and  the  patriot  bard. 
In  bright  succession  raise,  her  ornament  and  guard! 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1796] 


ON  THE  RECEIPT  OF  MY  MOTHER'S   PICTURE 
OUT  OF  NORFOLK 

THE  GIFT  OF  MY  COUSIN,  ANN  BODHAM 

O  TBAT  those  lips  had  language!    Life  has  passed 
With  me  but  roughly  since  I  heard  thee  last. 
Those  lips  are  thine, — thy  own  sweet  smile  I  see, 
The  same  that  oft  in  childhood  solaced  me; 
Voice  only  fails,  else  how  distinct  they  say, 
"Grieve  not,  my  child;  chase  all  thy  fears  away!" 
The  meek  intelligence  of  those  dear  eyes 
(Blest  be  the  art  that  can  immortalize, 
The  art  that  baffles  Time's  tyrannic  claim 
To  quench  it!)  here  shines  on  me  still  the  same. 

Faithful  rem.embrancer  of  one  so  dear! 
O  welcome  guest,  though  unexpected  here! 
Who  bid'st  me  honor  with  an  artless  song, 
Affectionate,  a  mother  lost  so  long. 


3252     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

I  will  obey,  not  willingly  alone, 

But  gladly,  as  the  precept  were  her  own: 

And,  while  that  face  renews  my  filial  grief, 

Fancy  shall  weave  a  charm  for  my  relief, 

Shall  steep  me  in  Elysian  reverie, 

A  momentary  dream  that  thou  art  she. 

My  mother!  when  I  learned  that  thou  wast  dead, 
Say,  wast  thou  conscious  of  the  tears  I  shed? 
Hovered  thy  spirit  o'er  thy  sorrowing  son, 
Wretch  even  then,  life's  journey  just  begun? 
Perhaps  thou  gavest  me,  though  unfelt,  a  kiss: 
Perhaps  a  tear,  if  souls  can  weep  in  bliss — 
Ah,  that  maternal  smile!    It  answers — Yes. 
I  heard  the  bell  tolled  on  thy  burial  day; 
I  saw  the  hearse  that  bore  thee  slow  away; 
And,  turning  from  my  nursery  window,  drew 
A  long,  long  sigh,  and  v/ept  a  last  adieu! 
But  was  it  such? — It  v/as.— Where  thou  art  gone 
Adieus  and  farewells  are  a  sound  unknown. 
May  I  but  meet  thee  on  that  peaceful  shore. 
The  parting  word  shall  pass  my  lips  no  more. 
Thy  maidens,  grieved  themselves  at  my  concern, 
Ofi  gave  me  promise  of  thy  quick  return. 
What  ardently  I  wished  I  long  beUeved, 
And,  disappointed  still,  was  still  deceived. 
By  expectation  every  day  beguiled. 
Dupe  of  to-morrow  even  from  a  child. 
Thus  many  a  sad  to-morrow  came  and  went, 
Till,  all  my  stock  of  infant  sorrow  spent, 
I  learned  at  last  submission  to  my  lot; 
But,  though  I  less  deplored  thee,  ne'er  forgot. 

Where  once  we  dwelt  our  nam.e  is  heard  no  more; 
Children  not  thine  have  trod  my  nursery  floor; 
And  where  the  gardener  Robin,  day  by  day, 
Drew  me  to  school  along  the  pubHc  way, 
Delighted  with  my  bawble  coach,  and  wrapped 
In  scarlet  mantle  warm,  and  velvet  capped, 
,  'Tis  now  become  a  history  little  known 
That  once  we  called  the  pastoral  house  our  own. 


My   Mother's    Picture  3^53 

Short-lived  possession !  but  the  record  fair, 

That  memory  keeps  of  all  thy  kindness  there, 

Still  outlives  many  a  storm  that  has  effaced 

A  thousand  other  themes,  less  deeply  traced. 

Thy  nightly  visits  to  my  chamber  made, 

That  thou  might'st  know  me  safe  and  vvannly  laid;^) 

Thy  morning  bounties  ere  I  left  my  home,  -T 

The  biscuit,  or  confectionery  plum; 

The  fragrant  waters  on  my  cheek  bestowed 

By  thy  own  hand,  till  fresh  they  shone  and  glowed;  -; 

All  this,  and,  more  endearing  still  than  all. 

Thy  constant  flow  of  love,  that  knew  no  fall. 

Ne'er  roughened  by  those  cataracts  and  brakes 

That  humor  interposed  too  often  makes; 

All  this  still  legible  in  memory's  page,  .■T 

And  still  to  be  so  to  my  latest  age. 

Adds  joy  to  duty,  makes  me  glad  to  pay 

Such  honors  to  thee  as  my  numbers  may; 

Perhaps  a  frail  memorial,  but  sincere. 

Not  scorned  in  heaven,  though  little  noticed  here. 

Could  Time,  his  flight  reversed,  restore  the  hours, 
When,  playing  with  thy  vesture's  tissued  flowers, 
The  violet,  the  pink,  the  jessamine, 
I  pricked  them  into  paper  with  a  pin 
(And  thou  wast  happier  than  myself  the  while, 
Wouldst  softly  speak,  and  stroke  my  head  and  smile), 
Could  those  few  pleasant  days  again  appear, 
Might  one  wish  bring  them,  would  I  wish  them  here? 
I  would  not  trust  my  heart, — the  dear  delight 
Seems  so  to  be  desired,  perhaps  I  might, — 
But  no, — what  here  we  call  our  life  is  such. 
So  little  to  be  loved,  and  thou  so  much. 
That  I  should  ill  requite  thee  to  constrain 
Thy  unbound  spirit  into  bonds  again. 

Thou,  as  a  gallant  bark,  from  Albion's  coast' 
(The  storms  all  weathered  and  the  ocean  crossed), 
Shoots  into  port  at  some  well-havened  isle. 
Where  spices  breathe,  and  brighter  seasons  smile; 
There  sits  quiescent  on  the  floods,  that  show 
Her  beauteous  form  reflected  clear  below, 


3254     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

While  airs  impregnated  with  incense  play 

Around  her,  fanning  light  her  streamers  gay; 

So  thou,  with  sails  how  swift!  hast  reached  the  shore, 

"Where  tempests  never  beat  nor  billows  roar," 

And  thy  loved  consort  on  the  dangerous  tide 

Of  life  long  since  has  anchored  by  thy  side. 

But  me,  scarce  hoping  to  attain  that  rest, 

Always  from  port  withheld,  always  distressed, —    ,   ; 

Me  howling  blasts  drive  devious,  tempest- tossed, 

Sails  ripped,  seams  opening  wide,  and  compass  lost;.; 

And  da)'  by  day  some  current's  thwarting  force 

Sets  me  more  distant  from  a  prosperous  course. 

Yet  oh,  the  thought  that  thou  art  safe,  and  he! 

That  thought  is  joy,  arrive  what  may  to  me. 

My  boast  is  not  that  I  deduce  my  birth 

From  loins  enthroned,  and  rulers  of  the  earth; 

But  higher  far  my  proud  pretensions  rise, — 

The  son  of  parents  passed  into  the  skies! 

And  now,  farewell! — Time,  unrevoked,  has  run 
His  wonted  course;  yet  what  I  wished  is  done. 
By  contemplation's  help,  not  sought  in  vain, 
I  seem  to  have  lived  my  childhood  o'er  again: 
To  have  renewed  the  joys  that  once  were  mine, 
Without  the  sin  of  violating  thine; 
And,  while  the  wings  of  Fancy  still  are  free, 
And  I  can  view  this  mimic  show  of  thee, 
Time  has  but  half  succeeded  in  his  theft, — 
Thyself  removed,  thy  power  to  soothe  me  left. 

William  Cowpcr    [1731-1800] 


THE  CROWING  OF  THE  RED  COCK 

Across  the  Eastern  sky  has  glowed 

The  flicker  of  a  blood-red  dawn, 
Once  more  the  clarion  cock  has  crowed, 
-  J  Once  more  the  sword  of  Christ  is  drawn. 
A  million  burning  rooftrees  light 
The  world-wide  path  of  Israel's  flight. 


The  World's  Justice  S'^SS 

Where  is  the  Hebrew's  Fatherland? 

The  folk  of  Christ  is  sore  bestead; 
The  Son  of  Man  is  bruised  and  banned, 

Nor  finds  whereon  to  lay  his  head. 
His  cup  is  gall,  his  meat  is  tears, 
His  passion  lasts  a  thousand  years. 

Each  crime  that  wakes  in  man  the  beast, 

Is  visited  upon  his  kind. 
The  lust  of  mobs,  the  greed  of  priest, 

The  tyranny  of  kings,  combined 
To  root  his  seed  from  earth  again; 
His  record  is  one  cry  of  pain. 

When  the  long  roll  of  Christian  guilt 
Against  his  sires  and  kin  is  known, 

The  flood  of  tears,  the  Hfe-blood  spilt, 
The  agony  of  ages  showTi, 

What  oceans  can  the  stain  remove 

From  Christian  law  and  Christian  love? 

Nay,  close  the  book;  not  now,  not  here, 

The  hideous  tale  of  sin  narrate, 
Re-echoing  in  the  martyr's  ear 

Even  he  might  nurse  revengeful  hate. 
Even  he  might  turn  in  wrath  sublime. 
With  blood  for  blood  and  crime  for  crime. 

Coward?    Not  he,  who  faces  death, 
Who  singly  against  worlds  has  fought. 

For  what?    A  name  he  may  not  breathe, 
For  liberty  of  prayer  and  thought. 

The  angry  sword  he  will  not  whet, 

His  nobler  task  is — to  forget. 

Emma  Lazarus  [1849-1887] 

THE  WORLD'S  JUSTICE 

If  the  sudden  tidings  came 

That  on  some  far,  foreign  coast, 
Buried  ages  long  from  fame, 

Had  been  found  a  remnant  lost 


^2^6     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Of  that  hoary  race  who  dwelt 

By  the  golden  Nile  divine, 
Spake  the  Pharaoh's  tongue  and  knelt 

At  the  moon-crowned  Isis'  shrine — 
How  at  reverend  Egypt's  feet,  ;  1 

Pilgrims  from  all  lands  would  meet!    '  i 

If  the  sudden  news  were  known, 

That  anigh  the  desert-place 
Where  once  blossomed  Babylon, 

Scions  of  a  mighty  race 
Still  survived,  of  giant  build, 

Huntsmen,  warriors,  priest  and  sage, 
Whose  ancestral  fame  had  filled, 

Trumpet-tongued,  the  earlier  age, 
How  at  old  Assyria's  feet 
Pilgrims  from  all  lands  would  meet! 

Yet  when  Egypt's  self  was  young, 

And  Assyria's  bloom  unworn. 
Ere  the  mythic  Homer  sung, 

Ere  the  gods  of  Greece  were  born, 
Lived  the  nation  of  one  God, 

Priests  of  freedom,  sons  of  Shcm, 
Never  quelled  by  yoke  or  rod. 

Founders  of  Jerusalem — 
Is  there  one  abides  to-day, 
Seeker  of  dead  cities,  say! 

Answer,  now  as  then,  they  arc; 

Scattered  broadcast  o'er  the  lands, 
Knit  in  spirit  nigh  and  far, 
[v88i-^4.    With  indissoluble  bands. 

Half  the  world  adores  their  God, 

They  the  living  law  proclaim, 
And  their  guerdon  is — the  rod. 

Stripes  and  scourgings,  death  and  shame. 
Still  on  Israel's  head  forlorn. 
Every  nation  heaps  its  scorn. 

Emma  Lazarus  [1849-1887] 


fu.  The   Bridge  3^57 

DOVER   CLIFFS 

On  these  white  cliffs,  that  calm  above  the  flood 

Uplift  their  shadowing  heads,  and  at  their  feet 

Hear  not  the  surge  that  has  for  ages  beat. 

How  many  a  lonely  wanderer  has  stood; 

And,  whilst  the  lifted  murmur  met  his  ear 

And  o'er  the  distant  billows  the  still  eve 

Sailed  slow,  has  thought  of  all  his  heart  m.ust  leave 

To-morrow;  of  the  friends  he  loved  most  dear; 

Of  social  scenes  from  which  he  wept  to  part. 

Oh!  if,  like  me,  he  knew  how  fruitless  aU 

The  thoughts  that  would  full  fain  the  past  recall, 

Soon  would  he  quell  the  risings  of  his  heart, 

And  brave  the  wild  winds  and  unhearing  tide, — 

The  World  his  country,  and  his  God  his  guide. 

William  Lisle  Bowles  [1762-1850] 

THE  BRIDGE 

Across  the  foaming  river 

The  old  bridge  bends  its  bow; 
My  father's  fathers  built  it 

In  ages  long  ago. 

They  never  left  the  farmstead 

Past  which  the  waters  curled. 
Why  should  one  ever  wander 

When  here  is  all  the  world : 

Family,  friends  and  garden; 

Small  fields  of  rice  and  tea; 
The  cattle  in  the  meadow; 

The  birds  in  stream  and  tree; 

The  pageant  of  the  seasons 

As  the  slow  years  go  by ; 
Between  the  peaks  above  us 

An  azure  bridge  of  sky. 

The  dead  they  live  and  linger 

In  each  familiar  place 
With  kindly  thoughts  to  hearten 

The  children  of  their  race. 

Frederick  Peterson  [1859- 


3258     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 


THE   EXILE'S   SONG'^f^ '^''^^'^  ^<^ 

Oh,  why  left  I  my  hame? 

Why  did  I  cross  the  deep?  .,.,|^ 

Oh,  why  left  I  the  land 

Where  my  forefathers  sleep? 
I  sigh  for  Scotia's  shore, 

And  I  gaze  across  the  sea, 
But  I  canna  get  a  blink 

O'  my  ain  countrie!  _,^ 

ifT 
The  palm-tree  waveth  high,  •'•.■?. 

And  fair  the  myrtle  springs; 
And  to  the  Indian  maid 

The  bulbul  sweetly  sings; 
But  I  dinna  see  the  broom 

Wi'  its  tassels  on  the  lea, 
Nor  hear  the  lintie's  sang 

O'  my  ain  countrie! 

Oh,  here  no  Sabbath  bell 

Awakes  the  Sabbath  morn, 
Nor  song  of  reapers  heard 

Amang  the  yellow  corn : 
For  the  tyrant's  voice  is  here, 

And  the  wail  o'  slaverie; 
But  the  sun  of  freedom  shines 

In  my  ain  countrie! 

There's  a  hope  for  every  woe, 

And  a  balm  for  every  pain. 
But  the  first  joys  o'  our  heart 

Come  never  back  again. 
There's  a  track  upon  the  deep, 

And  a  path  across  the  sea; 
But  the  weary  ne'er  return 

To  their  ain  countrie! 

Robert  GilfiUan  [1708-1850] 


Father  Land  and   Mother  Tongue    3259 


"THE   SUN   RISES   BRIGHT  IN   FRANCE" 

The  sun  rises  bright  in  France, 

And  fair  sets  he; 
But  he  has  tint  the  bhthe  bhnk  he  had 

In  my  ain  countrie. 

O,  it's  nae  my  ain  ruin 

That  saddens  aye  my  e'e, 
But  the  dear  Marie  I  left  behift' 

Wi'  sweet  bairnies  three. 

My  lanely  hearth  burned  bonnie, 

An'  smiled  my  ain  Marie; 
I've  left  a'  my  heart  behin' 

In  my  ain  countrie. 

The  bird  comes  back  to  summer, 

And  the  blossom  to  the  bee; 
But  I'll  win  back,  O  never. 

To  my  ain  countrie. 

O,  I  am  leal  to  high  Heaven, 

Which  aye  was  leal  to  me. 
An'  there  I'll  meet  ye  a'  soon 

Frae  my  ain  countrie! 

Allan  Cunningham  [1784-184 


FATHER  LAND   AND   MOTHER  TONGUE 

Our  Father  Land!  and  wouldst  thou  know 

Why  we  should  call  it  Father  Land? 
It  is  that  Adam  here  below 

Was  made  of  earth  by  Nature's  hand; 
And  he,  our  father  made  of  earth, 

Hath  peopled  earth  on  every  hand; 
And  we,  in  memory  of  his  birth, 

Do  call  our  country  Father  Land. 


3260     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

At  first,  in  Eden's  bowers,  they  say, 

No  sound  of  speech  had  Adam  caught, 
But  whistled  Hke  a  bird  all  day, — 

And  maybe  'twas  for  want  of  thought: 
But  Nature,  with  resistless  laws, 

Made  Adam  soon  surpass  the  birds; 
She  gave  him  lovely  Eve  because 

If  he'd  a  wife  they  must  have  words. 

And  so  the  native  land,  I  hold. 

By  male  descent  is  proudly  mine; 
The  language,  as  the  tale  hath  told, 

Was  given  in  the  female  line. 
And  thus  we  see  on  either  hand 

We  name  our  blessings  whence  they've  sprung; 
We  call  our  country  Father  Land, 

We  call  our  language  Mother  Tongue. 

Samuel  Lover  [1797-1868 


THE  FATHERLAND 

Where  is  the  true  man's  fatherland? 

Is  it  where  he  by  chance  is  born? 

Doth  not  the  yearning  spirit  scorn 
In  such  scant  borders  to  be  spanned? 
Oh,  yes!  his  fatherland  must  be 
As  the  blue  heaven  wide  and  free! 

Is  it  alone  where  freedom  is. 

Where  God  is  God  and  man  is  man? 

Doth  he  not  claim  a  broader  span 
For  the  soul's  love  of  home  than  this? 
Oh,  yes!  his  fatherland  must  be 

As  the  blue  heaven  wide  and  free! 

,  '''■'  •'.*'■ 

WTiere'er  a  human  heart  doth  wear 
Joy's  myrtle-wreath  or  sorrow's  gyves, 
Where'er  a  human  spirit  strives 


The  Call   to  a   Scot  3261 

After  a  life  more  true  and  fair, 

There  is  the  true  man's  birthplace  grand, 

His  is  a  world-wide  fatherland! 

Where'er  a  single  slave  doth  pine, 

Where'er  one  man  may  help  another, —  ■ 

Thank  God  for  such  a  birthright,  brother, — 

That  spot  of  earth  is  thine  and  mine! 

There  is  the  true  man's  birthplace  grand, 

His  is  a  world-wide  fatherland! 

James  Russell  Lowell  [1819-1891] 


THE  CALL  TO  A  SCOT 

There  came  an  ancient  man  and  slow 
Who  piped  his  way  along  our  street — 

How  could  the  neighbors'  children  know 
That  to  her  ears  'twas  passing  sweet? 

With  smiles  they  spoke  the  ragged  kilt, 
And  jeered  the  pipes,  in  mirthful  file; 

But,  strangely  moved,  she  heard  the  lilt 
That  rallied  Carrick  and  Argyle. 

A  stroller,  playing  in  the  street, 
Half-hearted,  weary,  out  of  place — • 

But  his  old  measure  stirred  her  feet, 
My  baby  with  the  Gaelic  face: 

She  squared  her  shoulders  as  she  stood 
To  watch  the  piper  'round  the  turn — 

Nor  dreamed  what  beat  within  her  blood 
Was  Robert  Bruce  and  Bannockburn! 

Ridh  Guthrie  Harding  [1882- 


nom"yii\  r;  loJlA 


NARRATIVE  AND  DESCRIPTIVE 
POEMS 

'"'the  deserted  village 

Sweet  Auburn!  loveliest  village  of  the  plain, 
Where  health  and  plenty  cheered  the  laboring  swain, 
Where  smiling  spring  its  earliest  visit  paid, 
And  parting  summer's  lingering  blooms  delayed: 
Dear  lovely  bowers  of  innocence  and  ease, 
Seats  of  my  youth,  when  every  sport  could  please: 
How  often  have  I  loitered  o'er  thy  green, 
Where  humble  happiness  endeared  each  scene! 
How  often  have  I  paused  on  every  charm, 
The  sheltered  cot,  the  cultivated  farm. 
The  never-failing  brook,  the  busy  mill, 
The  decent  church  that  topped  the  neighboring  hill, 
The  hawthorn-bush,  with  seats  beneath  the  shade, 
For  talking  age  and  whispering  lovers  made! 
How  often  have  I  blessed  the  coming  day, 
When  toil  remitting  lent  its  turn  to  play, 
And  all  the  village  train,  from  labor  free. 
Led  up  their  sports  beneath  the  spreading  tree: 
While  many  a  pastime  circled  in  the  shade. 
The  young  contending  as  the  old  surveyed; 
And  many  a  gambol  frolicked  o'er  the  ground. 
And  sleights  of  art  and  feats  of  strength  went  round: 
And  still,  as  each  repeated  pleasure  tired. 
Succeeding  sports  the  mirthful  band  inspired; 
The  dancing  pair  that  simply  sought  renown, 
By  holding  out,  to  tire  each  other  down; 
The  swain  mistrustless  of  his  smutted  face, 
While  secret  laughter  tittered  round  the  place; 
The  bashful  virgin's  sidelong  looks  of  love. 
The  matron's  glance  that  would  those  looks  reprove,— 
3262 


The  Deserted  Village  3^^3 

These  were  thy  charms,  sweet  village!  sports  like  these, 
With  sweet  succession,  taught  e'en  toil  to  please; 
These,  round  thy  bovvers  their  cheerful  influence  shed, 
These  were  thy  charms, — but  all  these  charms  are  fled! 

Sweet  smiling  village,  loveliest  of  the  lawn. 
Thy  sports  are  fled,  and  all  thy  charms  withdrawn; 
Amidst  thy  bowers  the  tyrant's  hand  is  seen, 
And  desolation  saddens  all  thy  green; 
One  only  master  grasps  the  whole  domain, 
And  half  a  tillage  stints  thy  smiling  plain; 
No  more  thy  glassy  brook  reflects  the  day, 
But,  choked  with  sedges,  works  its  weedy  way; 
Along  thy  glades,  a  solitary  guest. 
The  hollow-sounding  bittern  guards  its  nest; 
Amidst  thy  desert-walks  the  lapwing  flies. 
And  tires  their  echoes  with  unvaried  cries. 
Sunk  are  thy  bowers  in  shapeless  ruin  all. 
And  the  long  grass  o'er  tops  the  moldering.wall. 
And,  trembling,  shrinking  from  the  spoiler's  hand, 
Far,  far  away  thy  children  leave  the  land. 

Ill  fares  the  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey, 
Where  wealth  accumulates,  and  men  decay: 
Princes  and  lords  may  flourish,  or  may  fade; 
A  breath  can  make  them,  as  a  breath  has  made; 
But  a  bold  peasantry,  their  country's  pride, 
When  once  destroyed,  can  never  be  supplied. 

A  time  there  was,  ere  England's  griefs  began. 
When  every  rood  of  ground  maintained  its  man; 
For  him  light  Labor  spread  her  wholesome  store, 
Just  gave  what  life  required,  but  gave  no  more: 
His  best  companions,  innocence  and  health; 
And  his  best  riches,  ignorance  of  wealth. 

But  times  are  altered:  trade's  unfeeling  train 
Usurp  the  land  and  dispossess  the  swain; 
Along  the  lawn,  where  scattered  hamlets  rose. 
Unwieldy  wealth  and  cumbrous  pomp  repose. 
And  every  want  to  luxury  allied, 
And  every  pang  that  folly  pays  to  pride. 


3264     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

/J'    'Those  gentle  hours  that  plenty  bade  to  bloom,    ^  ,  , 
Those  calm  desires  that  asked  but  little  room,  [li'i'lJ 
'  Those  healthful  sports  that  graced  the  peaceful  scenC; 
Lived  in  each  look,  and  brightened  all  the  green, — 
These,  far  departing,  seek  a  kinder  shore, 
And  rural  mirth  and  manners  are  no  more. 

Sweet  Auburn!  parent  of  the  blissful  hour, 
Thy  glades  forlorn  confess  the  tyrant's  power. 
Here,  as  I  take  my  solitary  rounds. 
Amidst  thy  tangling  walks  and  ruined  grounds, 
And,  many  a  year  elapsed,  return  to  view 
Where  once  the  cottage  stood,  the  hawthorn  grew, 
Remembrance  wakes,  with  all  her  busy  train. 
Swells  at  my  breast,  and  turns  the  past  to  pam. 

In  aU  my  wanderings  round  this  world  of  care, 
In  all  my  griefs — and  God  has  given  my  share — 
I  still  had  hopes  my  latest  hours  to  crown, 
Amidst  these  hunjble  bowers  to  lay  me  down; 
To  husband  out  life's  taper  at  the  close. 
And  keep  the  flame  from  wasting  by  repose; 
I  still  had  hopes — for  pride  attends  us  still — 
Amidst  the  swains  to  show  my  book-learned  skill,  . 
Around  my  fire  an  evening  group  to  draw. 
And  tell  of  all  I  felt  and  all  I  saw; 
And,  as  a  hare,  whom  hounds  and  horns  pursue, 
Pants  to  the  place  from  whence  at  first  she  flew, 
I  still  had  hopes,  my  long  vexations  past, 
Here  to  return, — and  die  at  home  at  last. 

O  blest  retirement!  friend  to  life's  decline, 
Retreats  from  care,  that  never  must  be  mine. 
How  blest  is  he  who  crowns  in  shades  like  these 
A  youth  of  labor  with  an  age  of  ease; 
Who  quits  a  world  where  strong  temptations  try^ 
And,  since  'tis  hard  to  combat,  learns  to  fly! 
For  him  no  wretches,  born  to  work  and  weep. 
Explore  the  mine,  or  tempt  the  dangerous  deep; 
No  surly  porter  stands  in  guilty  state. 
To  spurn  imploring  famine  from  the  gate: 


The   Deserted   Village insoSL    3265 

But  on  he  moves  to  meet  his  latter  end, 
Angels  around  befriending  virtue's  friend; 
Sinks  to  the  grave  with  unperceivcd  decay, 
While  Resignation  gently  slopes  the  way; 
And,  all  his  prospects  brightening  to  the  last, 
His  heaven  commences  ere  the  world  be  past. 

.riT 
Sw^eet  was  the  sound,  when  oft,  at  evening's  close,j  // 
Up  yonder  hill  the  village  murmur  rose;  ,,1  f 

There,  as  I  passed  with  careless  steps  and  slow. 
The  mingling  notes  came  softened  from  below; 
The  swain  responsive  as  the  milkmaid  sung. 
The  sober  herd  that  lowed  to  meet  their  young; 
The  noisy  geese  that  gabbled  o'er  the  pool. 
The  playful  children  just  let  loose  from  school; 
The  watch-dog's  voice  that  bayed  the  whispering  wind, 
And  the  loud  laugh  that  spoke  the  vacant  mind,—    ,,  ) 
These  all  in  sweet  confusion  sought  the  shade. 
And  filled  each  pause  the  nightingale  had  made. 
But  now  the  sounds  of  population  fail, 
No  cheerful  murmurs  fluctuate  in  the  gale. 
No  busy  steps  the  grass-grown  foot-way  tread, 
But  all  the  bloomy  flush  of  life  is  fled. 
All  but  yon  widowed,  solitary  thing, 
That  feebly  bends  beside  the  plashy  spring; 
She,  wretched  matron,  forced  in  age,  for  bread. 
To  strip  the  brook  with  mantling  cresses  spread. 
To  pick  her  wintry  fagot  from  the  thorn, 
To  seek  her  nightly  shed,  and  weep  till  morn; 
She  only  left  of  all  the  harmless  train. 
The  sad  historian  of  the  pensive  plain. 

Near  yonder  copse,  where  once  the  garden  smiled, 
And  stiU  where  many  a  garden-flower  grows  wild ; 
There,  where  a  few  torn  shrubs  the  place  disclose. 
The  vfllagc  preacher's  modest  mansion  rose. 
A  man  he  was  to  all  the  country  dear, 
And  passing  rich  with  forty  pounds  a  year; 
Remote  from  towns  he  ran  his  godly  race. 
Nor  e'er  had  changed,  nor  wished  to  change,  his  place; 


3266     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Unskillful  he  to  fawn,  or  seek  for  power, 

By  doctrines  fashioned  to  the  varying  hour; 

Far  other  aims  his  heart  had  learned  to  prize, 

More  skilled  to  raise  the  wretched  than  to  rise. 

His  house  was  known  to  all  the  vagrant  train. 

He  chid  their  wanderings,  but  relieved  their  pain; 

The  long-remembered  beggar  was  his  guest. 

Whose  beard  descending  swept  his  aged  breast; 

The  ruined  spendthrift,  now  no  longer  proud. 

Claimed  kindred  tliere,  and  had  his  claims  allowed; 

The  broken  soldier,  kindly  bade  to  stay, 

Sate  by  his  fire,  and  talked  the  night  away; 

Wept  o'er  his  wounds,  or,  tales  of  sorrow  done, 

Shouldered  his  crutch,  and  showed  how  fields  were  won. 

Pleased  wdth  his  guests,  the  good  man  learned  to  glow,        J 

And  quite  forgot  their  vices  in  their  woe;  1 

Careless  their  merits  or  their  faults  to  scan, 

His  pity  gave  ere  charity  began. 

Thus  to  relieve  the  wretched  was  his  pride, 
And  e'en  his  failings  leaned  to  Virtue's  side; 
But  in  his  duty  prompt  at  every  call, 
He  watched  and  wept,  he  prayed  and  felt  for  all; 
And,  as  a  bird  each  fond  endearment  tries. 
To  tempt  its  new-fledged  offspring  to  the  skies, 
He  tried  each  art,  reproved  each  dull  delay,  > 

Allured  to  brighter  worlds,  and  led  the  way.  • 

Beside  the  bed  where  parting  life  was  laid,  ' 

And  sorrow,  guilt,  and  pain,  by  turns  dismayed. 
The  reverend  champion  stood.     At  his  control. 
Despair  and  anguish  fled  the  struggling  soul; 
Comfort  came  down  the  trembling  wretch  to  raise, 
And  his  last  faltering  accents  whispered  praise. 

At  church,  with  meek  and  unaffected  grace. 
His  looks  adorned  the  venerable  place; 
Truth  from  his  lips  prevailed  with  double  sway. 
And  fools,  who  came  to  scofT,  remained  to  pray. 
The  service  past,  around  the  pious  man, 
With  steady  zeal,  each  honest  rustic  ran;       sii  vj^  lo/L 


The   Deserted  Village  3267 

E'en  children  followed,  with  endearing  wile,  oT 

And  plucked  his  gown,  to  share  the  good  man's  smile. 
His  ready  smile  a  parent's  warmth  expressed, 
Their  welfare  pleased  him,  and  their  cares  distressed; 
To  them  his  heart,  his  love,  his  griefs  were  given, 
But  all  his  serious  thoughts  had  rest  in  heaven. 
As  some  tall  cUff,  that  lifts  its  awful  form. 
Swells  from  the  vale,  and  midway  leaves  the  storm. 
Though  round  its  breast  the  rolling  clouds  are  spread, 
Eternal  sunshine  settles  on  its  head. 

Beside  yon  straggling  fence  that  skirts  the  way, 
With  blossomed  furze  unproiitably  gay, 
There,  in  his  noisy  mansion,  skilled  to  rule. 
The  village  master  taught  his  little  school; 
A  man  severe  he  was,  and  stern  to  view; 
I  knew  him  well,  and  every  truant  knew: 
Well  had  the  boding  tremblers  learned  to  trace 
The  day's  disasters  in  his  morning  face; 
Full  well  they  laughed,  with  counterfeited  glee, 
At  all  his  jokes,  for  many  a  joke  had  he; 
Full  well  the  busy  whisper,  circling  round. 
Conveyed  the  dismal  tidings  when  he  frowned; 
Yet  he  was  kind,  or,  if  severe  in  aught. 
The  love  he  bore  to  learning  was  in  fault. 
The  village  all  declared  how  much  he  knew; 
'Twas  certain  he  could  write,  and  cipher  too; 
Lands  he  could  measure,  terms  and  tides  presage, 
And  e'en  the  story  ran  that  he  could  gauge; 
In  arguing,  too,  the  parson  owned  his  skill, 
For,  e'en  though  vanquished,  he  could  argue  still, 
While  words  of  learned  length  and  thundering  sound 
Amazed  the  gazing  rustics  ranged  around; 
And  still  they  gazed,  and  still  the  wonder  grew 
That  one  small  head  could  carry  all  he  knew. 

But  past  is  all  his  fame.     The  very  spot 
Where  many  a  time  he  triumphed,  is  forgot. — 
Near  yonder  thorn,  that  lifts  its  head  on  high. 
Where  once  the  sign-post  caught  the  passing  eye, 


3268     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Low  lies  that  house  where  nut-brown  draughts  inspired 
Where  graybeard  mirth  and  smiling  toil  retired, 
Where  village  statesmen  talked  with  looks  profound, 
And  news  much  older  than  their  ale  went  round. 
Imagination  fondly  stoops  to  trace 
The  parlor  splendors  of  that  festive  place, —  j.M 

The  whitewashed  wall;  the  nicely  sanded  floor;  rnofl  zh 
The  varnished  clock  that  ticked  behind  the  door;  "  P. 
The  chest,  contrived  a  double  debt  to  pay,  i 

A  bed  by  night,  a  chest  of  drawers  by  day; 
The  pictures  placed  for  ornament  and  use ; 
The  twelve  good  rules;  the  royal  game  of  goose; 
The  hearth,  except  when  winter  chilled  the  day, 
With  aspen  boughs  and  flowers  and  fennel  gay; 
While  broken  teacups,  wisely  kept  for  show. 
Ranged  o'er  the  chimney,  glistened  in  a  row. 

Vain,  transitory  splendors!  could  not  all 
Reprieve  the  tottering  mansion  from  its  fall?  '' 

Obscure  it  sinks,  nor  shall  it  more  impart 
An  hour's  importance  to  the  poor  man's  heart; 
Thither  no  more  the  peasant  shall  repair  .   I 

To  sweet  oblivion  of  his  daily  care;  ■) 

No  more  the  farmer's  news,  the  barber's  tale,  V 

No  more  the  woodman's  ballad  shall  prevail ; 
No  more  the  smith  his  dusky  brow  shall  clear, 
Relax  his  ponderous  strength,  and  lean  to  hear; 
The  host  himself  no  longer  shall  be  found  ..i. 

Careful  to  see  the  mantling  bhss  go  round;  / 

Nor  the  coy  maid,  half  willing  to  be  pressed,  'i I 

Shall  kiss  the  cup  to  pass  it  to  the  rest.  -'i 

// 

Yes!  let  the  rich  deride,  the  proud  disdain,  .7. 

These  simple  blessings  of  the  lowly  train;  rA 

To  me  more  dear,  congenial  to  my  heart,  'T 

One  native  charm,  than  all  the  gloss  of  art. 
Spontaneous  joys,  where  nature  has  its  play. 
The  soul  adopts,  and  owns  their  first-born  sway; 
Lightly  they  frolic  o'er  the  vacant  mind, 
Unenvied,  unmolested,  unconfined:  'J^no  3T3/1W 


'!<'  :  The   Deserted  Village  3269 

But  the  long  ponip,  the  midnight  masquerade, 
With  all  the  freaks  of  wanton  wealth  arrayed, — 
In  these,  ere  triflers  half  their  wish  obtain. 
The  toiling  pleasure  sickens  into  pain; 
And,  e'en  while  fashion's  brightest  arts  decoy, 
The  heart,  distrusting,  asks  if  this  be  joy. 

Ye  friends  to  truth,  ye  statesmen,  who  survey 
The  rich  man's  joys  increase,  the  poor's  decay, 
'Tis  yours  to  judge,  hoAV  wide  the  limits  stand 
Between  a  splendid  and  a  happy  land. 
Proud  swells  the  tide  with  loads  of  freighted  ore, 
And  shouting  Folly  hails  them  from  her  shore; 
Hoards  e'en  beyond  the  miser's  wish  abound. 
And  rich  men  flock  from  all  the  world  around. 
Yet  count  our  gains.     This  wealth  is  but  a  name 
That  leaves  our  useful  products  still  the  same. 
Not  so  the  loss.     The  man  of  wealth  and  pride 
Takes  up  a  space  that  many  poor  supplied; 
Space  for  his  lake,  his  park's  extended  bounds, 
Space  for  his  horses,  equipage,  and  hounds: 
The  robe  that  wraps  his  limbs  in  silken  slolh 
Has  robbed  the  neighboring  fields  of  half  their  growth; 
His  seat,  where  solitary  sports  are  seen. 
Indignant  spurns  the  cottage  from  the  green ; 
Around  the  world  each  needful  product  flies. 
For  all  the  luxuries  the  world  suppHes: 
While  thus  the  land,  adorned  for  pleasure  all. 
In  barren  splendor  feebly  waits  the  fall. 

As  some  fair  female,  unadorned  and  plain, 
Secure  to  please  while  youth  confirms  her  reign, 
Slights  every  borrowed  charm  that  dress  supplies, 
Nor  shares  with  art  the  triumph  of  her  eyes. 
But  when  those  charms  are  past, — for  charms  are  frail,— 
When  time  advances,  and  when  lovers  fail, 
She  then  shines  forth,  solicitous  to  bless, 
In  all  the  gleaming  impotence  of  dress; 
Thus  fares  the  land,  by  luxury  betrayed, 
In  nature's  simplest  charms  at  first  arrayed. 


3270     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

But  verging  to  decline,  its  splendors  rise, 

Its  vistas  strike,  its  palaces  surprise; 

While,  scourged  by  famine  from  the  smiling  land, 

The  mournful  peasant  leads  his  humble  band; 

And  while  he  sinks,  without  one  arm  to  save, 

The  country  blooms, — a  garden  and  a  grave. 

Where  then,  ah!  where  shall  poverty  reside. 
To  'scape  the  pressure  of  contiguous  pride? 
If  to  some  common's  fenceless  limits  strayed, 
He  drives  his  flock  to  pick  the  scanty  blade, 
Those  fenceless  fields  the  sons  of  wealth  divide, 
And  e'en  the  bare-worn  common  is  denied. 
If  to  the  city  sped, — what  waits  him  there? 
To  see  profusion  that  he  must  not  share; 
To  see  ten  thousand  baneful  arts  combined 
To  pamper  luxury  and  thin  mankind; 
To  see  each  joy  the  sons  of  pleasure  know 
Extorted  from  his  fellow-creature's  woe. 
Here  while  the  courtier  glitters  in  brocade, 
There  the  pale  artist  plies  the  sickly  trade; 
Here  while  the  proud  their  long-drawn  pomps  display, 
There  the  black  gibbet  glooms  beside  the  way. 
The  dome  where  Pleasure  holds  her  midnight  reign, 
Here,  richly  decked,  admits  the  gorgeous  train; 
Tumultuous  grandeur  crowds  the  blazing  square. 
The  rattling  chariots  clash,  the  torches  glare. 
Sure  scenes  like  these  no  troubles  e'er  annoy! 
Sure  these  denote  one  universal  joy! 
Are  these  thy  serious  thoughts? — Ah,  turn  thine  eyes 
Where  the  poor  houseless  shivering  female  lies. 
She  once,  perhaps,  in  village  plenty  blest. 
Has  wept  at  tales  of  innocence  distressed ; 
Her  modest  looks  the  cottage  might  adorn,  ■'^ 

Sweet  as  the  primrose  peeps  beneath  the  thorn; 
Now  lost  to  all,  her  friends,  her  virtue  fled, 
Near  her  betrayer's  door  she  lays  her  head, 
And,  pinched  with  cold,  and  shrinking  from  the  shower, 
With  heavy  heart  deplores  that  luckless  hour,        '^^  "i 
When  idly  first,  ambitious  of  the  town, 
She  left  her  wheel  and  robes  of  country  brown. 


The   Deserted   Village  '^'271 

Do  thine,  sweet  Auburn,  thine,  the  lovcHest  train, 
Do  thy  fair  tribes  participate  her  pain? 
E'en  now,  perhaps,  by  cold  and  hunger  led. 
At  proud  men's  doors  they  ask  a  Httle  bread! 

Ah,  no!     To  distant  climes,  a  dreary  scene, 
Where  half  the  convex  world  intrudes  between, 
Through  torrid  tracts  with  fainting  steps  they  go. 
Where  wild  Altama  murmurs  to  their  woe. 
Far  different  there  from  all  that  charmed  before. 
The  various  terrors  of  that  horrid  shore, — 
Those  blazing  suns  that  dart  a  downward  ray. 
And  fiercely  shed  intolerable  day; 
Those  matted  woods  where  birds  forget  to  sing. 
But  silent  bats  in  drowsy  clusters  cling; 
Those  poisonous  fields  with  rank  luxuriance  crowned, 
Where  the  dark  scorpion  gathers  death  around; 
Where  at  each  step  the  stranger  fears  to  wake 
The  rattling  terrors  of  the  vengeful  snake; 
Where  crouching  tigers  wait  their  hapless  prey, 
And  savage  men  more  murderous  still  than  they; 
While  oft  in  whirls  the  mad  tornado  flies, 
Mingling  the  ravaged  landscape  with  the  skies. 
Far  different  these  from  every  former  scene, 
The  cooling  brook,  the  grassy-vested  green. 
The  breezy  covert  of  the  warbling  grove, 
That  only  sheltered  thefts  of  harmless  love. 

Good  Heaven!  what  sorrows  gloomed  that  parting  day 
That  called  them  from  their  native  walks  away; 
When  the  poor  exiies,  every  pleasure  past, 
Hung  round  the  bowers,  and  fondly  looked  their  last, 
And  took  a  long  farewell,  and  wished  in  vain 
For  seats  like  these  beyond  the  western  main; 
And,  shuddering  still  to  face  the  distant  deep. 
Returned  and  wept,  and  still  returned  to  weep. 
The  good  old  sire  the  first  prepared  to  go 
To  new-found  worlds,  and  wept  for  others'  woe; 
But  for  himself,  in  conscious  virtue  brave, 
He  only  wished  for  worlds  beyond  the  grave. 


3272     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

His  lovely  daughter,  lovelier  in  her  tears, 

The  fond  companion  of  his  helpless  years, 

Silent  went  next,  neglectful  of  her  charms, 

And  left  a  lover's  for  a  father's  arms. 

With  louder  plaints  the  mother  spoke  her  woes, 

And  blessed  the  cot  where  every  pleasure  rose; 

And  kissed  her  thoughtless  babes  with  many  a  tear, 

And  clasped  them  close,  in  sorrow  doubly  dear; 

Whilst  her  fond  husband  strove  to  lend  relief 

In  all  the  silent  manliness  of  grief. 

0  Luxury!  thou  cursed  by  Heaven's  decree, 
How  ill  exchanged  are  things  like  these  for  thee! 
How  do  thy  potions,  with  insidious  joy. 
Diffuse  their  pleasures  only  to  destroy! 
Kingdoms  by  thee,  to  sickly  greatness  grown, 
Boast  of  a  florid  vigor  not  their' own. 
At  every  draught  more  large  and  large  they  grow, 
A  bloated  mass  of  rank,  unwieldy  woe; 
Till,  sapped  their  strength,  and  every  part  unsound, 
Down,  down  they  sink,  and  spread  a  ruin  round. 

E'en  now  the  devastation  is  begun. 
And  half  the  business  of  destruction  done; 
Even  now,  methinks,  as  pondering  here  I  stand, 
I  see  the  rural  virtues  leave  the  land. 
Down  where  yon  anchoring  vessel  spreads  the  sail 
That  idly  waiting  flaps  with  every  gale. 
Downward  they  move,  a  melancholy  band, 
Pass  from  the  shore,  and  darken  all  the  strand. 
Contented  toil,  and  hospitable  care, 
And  kind  connubial  tenderness,  are  there; 
And  piety  with  wishes  placed  above, 
And  steady  loyalty,  and  faithful  love. 
And  thou,  sweet  Poetry,  thou  loveliest  maid. 
Still  first  to  fly  where  sensual  joys  invade; 
Unfit,  in  these  degenerate  times  of  shame, 
To  catch  the  heart,  or  strike  for  honest  fame; 
Dear  charming  nymph,  neglected  and  decried, 
My  shame  in  crowds,  my  solitary  pride; 


The   Prisoner  of  Chillon 


3273 


Thou  source  of  all  my  bliss  and  all  my  woe, 
That  found'st  me  poor  at  first,  and  keep'st  me  so; 
Thou  guide,  by  which  the  nobler  arts  excel, 
Thou  nurse  of  every  virtue,  fare  thee  well! 
Farewell;  and  oh,  where'er  thy  voice  be  tried, 
On  Torno's  clifTs,  on  Pambamarca's  side. 
Whether  where  equinoctial  fervors  glow, 
Or  winter  wraps  the  polar  world  in  snow, 
Still  let  thy  voice,  prevailing  over  time. 
Redress  the  rigors  of  the  inclement  clime; 
Aid  slighted  truth  with  thy  persuasive  strain; 
Teach  erring  man  to  spurn  the  rage  of  gain; 
Teach  him,  that  states  of  native  strength  possessed, 
Though  very  poor,  may  still  be  very  blest; 
That  trade's  proud  empire  hastes  to  swift  decay, 
As  ocean  sweeps  the  labored  mole  away; 
While  self-dependent  power  can  time  defy, 
As  rocks  resist  the  billows  and  the  sky. 

Oliver  Goldsmith  [  1 7  2 8- 1 7  74] 


THE  PRISONER   OF   CHILLON:  A  FABLE 

SONNET   ON   CniLLON 

Eternal  Spirit  of  the  chainless  Mind! 
Brightest  in  dungeons,  Liberty,  thou  art, 
For  there  thy  habitation  is  the  heart — 
The  heart  which  love  of  thee  alone  can  bind; 
And  when  thy  sons  to  fetters  are  consigned — 
To  fetters,  and  the  damp  vault's  dayless  gloom— 
Their  country  conquers  with  their  martyrdom. 
And  Freedom's  fame  finds  wings  on  every  wind. 
Chillon!  thy  prison  is  a  hoh^  place. 
And  thy  sad  floor  an  altar;  for  'twas  trod,  - 
Until  his  very  steps  have  left  a  trace 
Worn,  as  if  thy  cold  pavement  were  a  sod, 
By  Bonnivard! — May  none  those  marks  efface! 
For  they  appeal  from  tyranny  to  God. 


3^74    Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

ro    ,r„(T 
I 

My  hair  is  gray,  but  not  with  years, 
Nor  grew  it  white 
In  a  single  night, 
As  men's  have  grown  from  sudden  fears. 
My  hmbs  are  bowed,  though  not  with  toil, 

But  rusted  with  a  vile  repose. 
For  they  have  been  a  dungeon's  spoil. 

And  mine  has  been  the  fate  of  those 
To  whom  the  goodly  earth  and  air 
Are  banned  and  barred — forbidden  fare. 
But  this  was  for  my  father's  faith, 
I  suffered  chains  and  courted  death. 
That  father  perished  at  the  stake 
For  tenets  he  would  not  forsake; 
And  for  the  same  his  lineal  race 
In  darkness  found  a  dwelling-place. 
We  were  seven, — ^who  now  are  one — 

Six  in  youth,  and  one  in  age, 
Finished  as  they  had  begun. 

Proud  of  Persecution's  rage: 
One  in  fire,  and  two  in  field, 
Their  belief  with  blood  have  sealed — 
Dying  as  their  father  died, 
For  the  God  their  foes  denied; 
Three  were  in  a  dungeon  cast, 
Of  whom  this  wreck  is  left  the  last. 


There  are  seven  pillars,  of  Gothic  mold, 
In  Chillon's  dungeons  deep  and  old; 
There  are  seven  columns,  massy  and  gray, 
Dim  with  a  dull  imprisoned  ray — 
A  sunbeam  which  hath  lost  its  way, 
And  through  the  crevice  and  the  cleft 
Of  the  thick  wall  is  fallen  and  left. 
Creeping  o'er  the  floor  so  damp, 
Like  a  marsh's  meteor-lamp. 


The   Prisoner  of  Chillon  3275 

And  in  cacli  pillar  there  is  a  ring, 

And  in  each  ring  there  is  a  chain: 
That  iron  is  a  cankering  thing, 

For  in  these  hm-bs  its  teeth  remain, 
With  marivs  that  will  not  wear  away 
Till  I  have  done  with  this  new  day. 
Which  now  is  painful  to  these  eyes, 
Which  have  not  seen  the  sun  so  rise 
For  years — I  cannot  count  them  o'er; 
I  lost  their  long  and  heavy  score 
When  my  last  brother  drooped  and  died, 
And  I  lay  living  by  his  side. 

Ill 

They  chained  us  each  to  a  column  stone, 

And  we  were  three — yet,  each  alone; 

We  could  not  move  a  single  pace; 

W^e  could  not  see  each  other's  face. 

But  with  that  pale  and  livid  light 

That  made  us  strangers  in  our  sight; 

And  thus  together,  yet  apart, 

Fettered  in  hand,  but  joined  in  iicart, 

'Twas  still  some  solace,  in  the  dearth 

Of  the  pure  elements  of  earth, 

To  hearken  to  each  other's  speech, 

And  each  turn  comforter  to  each 

With  some  new  hope  or  legend  old, 

Or  song  heroically  bold ; 

But  even  these  at  length  grew  cold. 

Our  voices  took  a  dreary  tone, 

An  echo  of  the  dungeon-stone, 

A  grating  sound— not  full  and  free, 
As  they  of  yore  were  wont  to  be;     ' 
It  might  be  fancy — but  to  me 

They  never  sounded  like  our  own. 

IV 

I  was  the  eldest  of  the  three, 

And  to  uphold  and  cheer  the  rest 
I  ought  to  do.  and  did,  my  best — 

And  each  did  well  in  liis  degree. 


3276     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

The  youngest,  whom  my  father  loved, 
Because  our  mother's  brow  was  g'ven 
To  him,  with  eyes  as  blue  as  heaven — 

For  him  my  soul  was  sorely  moved; 
And  truly  might  it  be  distressed 
To  see  such  bird  in  such  a  nest; 
For  he  was  beautiful  as  day 

(When  day  was  beautiful  to  me 

As  to  young  eagles,  being  free), — 

A  polar  day,  which  will  not  see 
A  sunset  till  its  summer's  gone — 

Its  sleepless  summer  of  long  light, 
The  snow-clad  offspring  of  the  sun : 

And  thus  he  was  as  pure  and  bright, 
And  in  his  natural  spirit  gay, 
With  tears  for  naught  but  others'  ills; 
And  then  they  flowed  like  mountain  rills, 
Unless  he  could  assuage  the  woe 
Which  he  abhorred  to  view  below. 

V 

The  other  was  as  pure  of  mind, 

But  formed  to  combat  with  his  kind; 

Strong  in  his  frame,  and  of  a  mood 

Which  'gainst  the  world  in  war  had  stood, 

And  perished  in  the  foremost  rank 
With  jo}^;  but  not  in  chains  to  pine.:  /. 

His  spirit  withered  with  their  clank;  :  lO 
I  saw  it  silently  decline —  -eovo  Uiii 
And  so,  perchance,  in  sooth,  did  mine: 

But  yet  I  forced  it  on,  to  cheer 

Those  relics  of  a  home  so  dear. 

He  was  a  hunter  of  the  hills, 

Had  followed  there  the  deer  and  wolf; 
To  him  this  dungeon  was  a  gulf, 

And  fettered  feet  the  worst  of  ills. 

VI 

Lake  Leman  lies  by  Chillon's  walls, 
A  thousand  feet  in  depth  below. 
Its  massy  waters  meet  and  flow; 


The   Prisoner  of  Chillon  3^77 

Thus  much  the  fathom-Hne  was  sent 
From  ChiUon's  snow-while  battlement, 

Which  round  about  the  wave  enthralls; 
A  double  dungeon  wall  and  wave 
Have  made — and  like  a  living  grave, 
Below  the  surface  of  the  lake 
The  dark  vault  lies  wherein  we  lay; 
We  heard  it  ripple  night  and  day; 

Sounding  o'er  our  heads  it  knocked. 
And  I  have  felt  the  winter's  spray 
Wash  through  the  bars  when  winds  were  high. 
And  wanton  in  the  happy  sky; 

And  then  the  very  rock  hath  rocked. 
And  I  have  felt  it  shake,  unshocked; 
Because  I  could  have  smiled  to  see 
The  death  that  would  have  set  me  free. 


I  said  my  nearer  brother  pined; 

I  said  his  mighty  heart  declined. 

He  loathed  and  put  away  his  food; 

It  was  not  that  'twas  coarse  and  rude, 

For  we  were  used  to  hunters'  fare, 

And  for  the  like  had  little  care. 

The  milk  drawn  from  the  mountain  goat 

Was  changed  for  water  from  the  moat; 

Our  bread  was  such  as  captives'  tears 

Have  moistened  many  a  thousand  years. 

Since  man  first  pent  his  fellow-men. 

Like  brutes,  within  an  iron  den. 

But  what  were  these  to  us  or  him? 

These  wasted  not  his  heart  or  limb; 

My  brother's  soul  was  of  that  mold  ,  ^ 

Which  in  a  palace  had  grown  cold,  j 

Had  his  free  breathing  been  denied  j 

The  range  of  the  steep  mountain's  side. 

But  why  delay  the  truth? — he  died. 

I  saw,  and  could  not  hold  his  head, 

Nor  reach  his  dying  hand — nor  dead, — 

Though  hard  I  strove,  but  strove  in  vain^, 


3278     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

To  rend  and  gnash  my  bonds  in'twiifn: '"' 
He  died — and  they  unlocked  his  chain, 
And  scooped  for  him  a  shallow  grave 
Even  from  the  cold  earth  of  our  cave. 
I  begged  them,  as  a  boon,  to  lay 
His  corse  in  dust  whereon  the  day 
Might  shine — it  was  a  foolish  thought; 
But  then  within  my  brain  it  wrought. 
That  even  in  death  his  freeborn  breast 
In  such  a  dungeon  could  not  rest. 
I  might  have  spared  my  idle  prayer^ 
They  coldly  laughed,  and  laid  him  there, 
The  flat  and  turfless  earth  above 
The  being  we  so  much  did  love; 
His  empty  chain  above  it  leant — 
Such  murder's  fitting  monument! 


But  he,  the  favorite  and  the  flower, 

Most  cherished  since  his  natal  hour, 

His  mother's  image  in  fair  face, 

The  infant  love  of  all  his  race. 

His  martyred  father's  dearest  thought. 

My  latest  care,  for  whom  I  sought 

To  hoard  my  life,  that  his  might  be 

Less  wretched  now,  and  one  day  free — ■ 

He  too,  who  yet  had  held  untired 

A  spirit  natural  or  inspired — 

He,  too,  was  struck,  and  day  by  day 

Was  withered  on  the  stalk  away.  -' 

Oh,  God!  it  is  a  fearful  thing    '  ''  -'^'9 

To  see  the  human  soul  take  wing         "'"■^  ' 

In  any  shape,  in  any  mood: 

I've  seen  it  rushing  forth  in  blood; 

I've  seen  it  on  the  breaking  ocean  ' 

Strive  with  a  swoln,  convulsive  motion;    '  ^ 

I've  seen  the  sick  and  ghastly  bed  '''- 

Of  Sin,  delirious  with  its  dread;  ^ 

But  these  were  horrors,— this  was  woe      ''^- 

Unmixed  with  such,— but  sure  and  slow.  -^ 


The   Prisoner  of  Chillon  3-79 

He  faded,  and  so  calm  and  meek, 

So  softly  worn,  so  sweetly  weak. 

So  tearless,  yet  so  tender, — kind, 

And  grieved  for  those  he  left  behind; 

With  all  the  while  a  cheek  whose  bloom 

Was  as  a  mockery  of  the  tomb. 

Whose  tints  as  gently  sunk  away 

As  a  departing  rainbow's  ray; 

An  eye  of  most  transparent  light, 

That  almost  made  the  dungeon  bright; 

And  not  a  word  of  murmur,  not 

A  groan  o'er  his  untimely  lot — 

A  little  talk  of  better  days, 

A  httle  hope  my  own  to  raise; 

For  I  was  sunk  in  silence,  lost 

In  this  last  loss,  of  all  the  most. 

And  then  the  sighs  he  would  suppress 

Of  fainting  nature's  feebleness, 

More  slowl}-  drawn,  grew  less  and  less. 

I  listened,  but  I  could  not  hear — 

I  called,  for  I  was  wild  with  fear; 

I  knew  'twas  hopeless,  but  my  dread 

Would  not  be  thus  admonished; 

I  called,  and  thought  I  heard  a  sound — 

I  burst  my  chain  with  one  strong  bound, 

And  rushed  to  him: — I  found  him  not. 

/  only  stirred  in  this  black  spot; 

/  only  lived — /  only  drew 

The  accursed  breath  of  dungeon-dew; 

The  last,  the  sole,  the  dearest  link 

Between  me'  and  the  eternal  brink, 

Which  bound  me  to  my  failing  race, 

Was  broken  in  this  fatal  place. 

One  on  the  earth,  and  one  beneath— 

My  brothers — both  had  ceased  to  breathe. 

I  took  that  hand  which  lay  so  still — 

Alas!  my  own  was  full  as  chill; 

I  had  not  strength  to  stir,  or  strive. 

But  felt  that  I  was  stUl  ahve — 

A  frantic  feeling,  when  we  know 


3280    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

That  what  we  love  shall  ne'er  be  so. 

I  know  not  why 

I  could  not  die, 
I  had  no  earthly  hope, — but  faith, 
And  that  forbade  a  selfish  death. 


What  next  befeU  me  then  and  there 

I  know  not  well, — I  never  knew. 
First  came  the  loss  of  hght  and  air, 

And  then  of  darkness  too. 
I  had  no  thought,  no  feeling — none: 
Among  the  stones  I  stood  a  stone; 
And  was,  scarce  conscious  what  I  wist. 
As  shrubless  crags  witliin  the  mist; 
For  aU  was  blank,  and  bleak,  and  gray; 
It  was  not  night — it  was  not  day; 
It  was  not  even  the  dungeon-light, 
So  hateful  to  my  heavy  sight; 
But  vacancy  absorbing  space, 
And  fixedness, — without  a  place; 
There  were  no  stars,  no  earth,  no  time, 
No  check,  no  change,  no  good,  no  crime,- 
But  silence,  and  a  stirless  breath 
Which  neither  was  of  life  nor  death — 
A  sea  of  stagnant  idleness. 
Blind,  boundless,  mute  and  motionless! 


A  light  broke  in  upon  my  brain — 
It  was  the  carol  of  a  bird; 

It  ceased,  and  then  it  came  again — 
The  sweetest  song  ear  ever  heard; 

And  mine  was  thankful  till  my  eyes 

Ran  over  with  the  glad  surprise, 

And  they  that  moment  could  not  see 

I  was  the  mate  of  misery; 

But  then,  by  dull  degrees,  came  back 


The   Prisoner  of  Chillon  3281. 

My  senses  to  their  wonted  track: 

I  saw  the  dungeon  walls  and  floor 

Close  slowly  round  me  as  before; 

I  saw  the  glimmer  of  the  sun 

Creeping  as  it  before  had  done; 

But  through  the  crevice  where  it  came 

That  bird  was  perched,  as  fond  and  tame, 

And  tamer  than  upon  the  tree — 
A  lovely  bird,  with  azure  wings. 
And  song  that  said  a  thousand  things, 

And  seemed  to  say  them  all  for  me! 
I  never  saw  its  like  before — 
I  ne'er  shall  see  its  likeness  more. 
It  seemed,  like  me,  to  want  a  mate, 
But  was  not  half  so  desolate; 
And  it  was  come  to  love  me  when 
None  Hved  to  love  me  so  again. 
And,  cheering  from  my  dungeon's  brink, 
Had  brought  me  back  to  feel  and  think. 
I  know  not  if  it  late  were  free, 

Or  broke  its  cage  to  perch  on  mine; 
But  knowing  well  captivity. 

Sweet  bird!  I  could  not  wish  for  thine! 
Or  if  it  were,  in  winged  guise, 
A  visitant  from  Paradise; 
For — Heaven  forgive  that  thought,  the  while 
Which  made  me  both  to  weep  and  smile! — 
I  sometimes  deemed  that  it  might  be 
My  brother's  soul  come  down  to  me; 
But  then  at  last  away  it  flew. 
And  then  'twas  mortal — well  I  knew; 
For  he  would  never  thus  have  flown. 
And  left  me  twice  so  doubly  lone — 
Lone — as  the  corse  within  its  shroud, 
Lone — as  a  solitary  cloud, 

A  single  cloud  on  a  sunny  day. 
While  all  the  rest  of  heaven  is  clear, 
A  fro  war  upon  the  atmosphere, 
That  hath  no  business  to  appear 

When  skies  are  blue,  and  earth  is  gay. 


3282     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

XI 

A  kind  of  change  came  in  my  fate — 

My  keepers  grew  compassionate. 

I  know  not  what  had  made  them  so — 

They  were  inured  to  sights  of  woe; 

But  so  it  was — my  broken  chain 

With  hnks  unfastened  did  remain; 

And  it  was  liberty  to  stride 

Along  my  cell  from  side  to  side, 

And  up  and  down,  and  then  athwart, 

And  tread  it  over  every  part; 

And  round  the  pillars  one  by  one, 

Returning  where  my  walk  begun—  ; 

Avoiding  only,  as  I  trod, 

My  brothers'  graves  without  a  sod; 

For  if  I  thought  Avith  heedless  tread 

My  step  profaned  their  lowly  bed. 

My  breath  came  gaspingly  and  thick. 

And  my  crushed  heart  fell  blind  and  sick. 


I  made  a  footing  in  the  wall: 
It  was  not  therefrom  to  escape. 

For  I  had  buried  one  and  all 

Who  loved  me  in  a  human  shape; 

And  the  whole  earth  would  henceforth  be 

A  wider  prison  unto  me ; 

No  child,  no  sire,  no  kin  had  I, 

No  partner  in  my  misery. 

I  thought  of  this,  and  I  was  glad, 

For  thought  of  them  had  made  me  mad; 

But  I  was  curious  to  ascend 

To  my  barred  windows,  and  to  bend 

Once  more,  upon  the  mountains  high, 

The  quiet  of  a  loving  eye. 

XIII 

I  saw  them —and  they  were  the  same; 
They  were  not  changed,  like  me,  in  frame; 


no 


j^^^f^'.The  Prisoner  of  Chlllon  3283 

I  saw  their  thousand  years  of  snow 
On  high — their  wide,  long  lake  below, 
And  the  blue  Rhone  in  fullest  flow; 
I  heard  the  torrents  leap  and  gush 
O'er  channeled  rock  and  broken  bush; 
I  saw  the  white-walled  distant  town, 
And  whiter  sails  go  skimming  down: 
And  then  there  was  a  little  isle, 
Which  in  my  very  face  did  smile — 

The  only  one  in  view; 
A  small,  green  isle,  it  seemed  no  more, 
Scarce  broader  than  my  dungeon  floor; 
But  in  it  there  wei;e  three  tall  trees, 
And  o'er  it  blew  the  mountain  breeze. 
And  by  it  there  were  waters  flowing, 
And  on  it  there  were  young  flowers  growing 

Of  gentle  breath  and  hue. 
The  fish  swam  by  the  castle  wall. 
And  they  seemed  joyous,  each  and  all; 
The  eagle  rode  the  rising  blast — 
Methought  he  never  flew  so  fast 
As  then  to  me  he  seemed  to  fly; 
And  then  new  tears  came  in  my  eye. 
And  I  felt  troubled,  and  would  fain 
I  had  not  left  my  recent  chain; 
And  when  I  did  descend  again. 
The  darkness  of  my  dim  abode  ' 

Fell  on  me  as  a  heavy  load ; 
It  was  as  is  a  new-dug  grave. 
Closing  o'er  one  we  sought  to  save; 
And  yet  my  glance,  too  much  oppressed. 
Had  almost  need  of  such  a  rest.  J; 

XIV 

It  might  be  months,  or  years,  or  days —  ' '"'' ' 

I  kept  no  count,  I  took  no  note —  ,  ^ 

I  had  no  hope  my  eyes  to  raise,  ,  p 

And  clear  them  of  their  dreary  mote;  ,^ 

At  last  men  came  to  set  me  free,  . » 

I  asked  not  why,  and  rocked  not  wherej  rrp 


3284     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

It  was  at  length  the  same  to  me, 
Fettered  or  fetterless  to  be; 
I  learned  to  love  despair. 
And  thus,  when  they  appeared  at  last, 
And  all  my  bonds  aside  were  cast, 
These  heavy  walls  to  me  had  grown 
A  hermitage — and  all  my  own! 
And  half  I  felt  as  they  were  come 
To  tear  me  from  a  second  home. 
With  spiders  I  had  friendship  made, 
And  watched  them  in  their  sullen  trade; 
Had  seen  the  mice  by  moonlight  play — 
And  why  should  I  fefl  less  than  they?'_' 
We  were  all  inmates  of  one  place. 
And  I,  the  monarch  of  each  race. 
Had  power  to  kill;  )^et,  strange  to  tell! 
In  quiet  we  had  learned  to  dwell. 
INIy  very  chains  and  I  grew  friends. 
So  much  a  long  communion  tends 
To  make  us  what  we  are: — even  I 
Regained  my  freedom  with  a  sigh. 

George  Gordon  Byron  [i 788-1824] 


THE  EVE  OF   ST.   AGNES 

St.  Agnes'  Eve— Ah,  bitter  chill  it  was! 
The  owl,  for  all  his  feathers,  v.-as  a-cold; 
The  hare  limped  trembling  through  the  frozen  grass. 
And  silent  was  the  flock  in  woolly  fold: 
Numb  were  the  Beadsman's  fingers,  while  he  told 
His  rosary,  and  while  his  frosted  breath. 
Like  pious  incense  from  a  censer  old, 
Seemed  taking  flight  for  heaven,  without  a  death, 
Past  the  sweet  Virgin's  picture,  while  his  prayer  he  saith. 

His  prayer  he  saith,  this  patient,  holy  man; 
Then  takes  his  lamp,  and  riseth  from  his  knees, 
And  back  returneth,  meager,  barefoot,  wan, 
Along  the  chapel  aisle  by  slow  degrees: 
The  sculptured  dead,  on  each  side,  seem  to  freeze, 


The   Eve  of  St.   Agnes  3'^^S 

Emprisoned  in  l^lack,  purgatorial  rails: 
Knights,  ladies,  praying  in  dumb  orat'ries. 
He  passe th  by;  and  his  weak  spirit  fails 
To  think  how  they  may  ache  in  icy  hoods  and  mails. 

Northward  he  turneth  through  a  little  door. 
And  scarce  three  steps,  ere  Music's  golden  tongue 
Flattered  to  tears  this  aged  man  and  poor; 
But  no — already  had  his  death-bell  rung; 
The  joys  of  all  his  life  were  said  and  sung; 
His  was  harsh  penance  on  St.  Agnes'  Eve: 
Another  way  he  w'ent,  and  soon  among 
Rough  ashes  sat  he  for  his  soul's  reprieve, 
And  all  night  kept  awake,  for  sinners'  sake  to  grieve. 

That  ancient  Beadsman  heard  the  prelude  soft; 
And  so  it  chanced,  for  many  a  door  was  wide, 
From  hurry  to  and  fro.     Soon,  up  aloft. 
The  silver,  snarling  trumpets  'gan  to  chide: 
The  level  chambers,  ready  with  their  pride. 
Were  glowing  to  receive  a  thousand  guests: 
The  carved  angels,  ever  eager-eyed. 
Stared,  where  upon  their  heads  the  cornice  rests. 
With  hair  blown  back,  and  wings  put  cross-wise  on  their 
breasts. 

At  length  burst  in  the  argent  revelry, 
With  plume,  tiara,  and  all  rich  array, 
Numerous  as  shadows  haunting  faerily 
The  brain,  newstuffed  in  youth,  with  triumphs  gay 
Of  old  romance.     These  let  us  wish  away, 
And  turn,  sole-thought ed,  to  one  Lady  there, 
Whose  heart  had  brooded,  all  that  wintry  day, 
On  love,  and  winged  St.  Agnes'  saintly  care, 

As  she  had  heard  old  dames  full  many  times  declare. 

.ii 

They  told  her  how,  upon  St.  Agnes'  eve, 

Young  virgins  might  have  visions  of  delight, 

And  soft  adorings  from  their  loves  receive 

Upon  the  honeyed  middle  of  the  night,    .   ^^    , ,   ,,,,,,,_, 


3^86     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

If  ceremonies  due  they  did  aright; 
As,  supperiess  to  bed  they  must  retire, 
And  couch  supine  their  beauties,  lily  white; 
Nor  look  behind,  nor  sideways,  but  require 
Of  Heaven  with  upward  eyes  for  all  that  they  desire. 

Full  of  this  whim  was  thoughtful  Madeline: 
The  music,  yearning  like  a  God  in  pain, 
She  scarcely  heard:  her  maiden  eyes  divine 
Fixed  on  the  floor,  saw  many  a  sweeping  train  ; 

Pass  by — she  heeded  not  at  all :  in  vain 
Came  many  a  tiptoe,  amorous  cavalier, 
And  back  retired;  not  cooled  by  high  disdain. 
But  she  saw  not:  her  heart  was  otherwhere: 
She  sighed  for  Agnes'  dreams,  the  sweetest  of  the  year. 

She  danced  along  with  vague,  regardless  eyes. 
Anxious  her  lips,  her  breathing  quick  and  short: 
The  hallowed  hour  was  near  at  hand:  she  sighs 
Amid  the  timbrels,  and  the  thronged  resort 
Of  whisperers  in  anger,  or  in  sport; 
'Mid  looks  of  love,  defiance,  hate,  and  scorn, 
Hoodwinked  with  faery  fancy;  all  amort. 
Save  to  St.  Agnes  and  her  lambs  unshorn. 
And  all  the  bliss  to  be  before  to-morrow  morn. 

So,  purposing  each  moment  to  retire, 
She  lingered  still.     Meantime,  across  the  moors, 
Had  come  young  Porphyro,  with  heart  on  fire 
For  Madeline.     Beside  the  portal  doors. 
Buttressed  from  moonlight,  stands  he,  and  implores 
All  saints  to  give  him  sight  of  Madeline, 
But  for  one  moment  in  the  tedious  hours. 
That  he  might  gaze  and  worship  all  unseen; 
Perchance  speak,  kneel,  touch,  kiss — in  sooth  such  things 
have  been. 

He  ventures  in:  let  no  buzzed  whisper  tell:        ^*^   ^    _ 
All  eyes  be  mufiied,  or  a  hundred  swords  '  '^  '^  gmjo  / 

Will  storm  his  heart,  Love's  feverous  citadel: 
For  him,  those  chambers  held  barbarian  hordes. 


The   Eve  of  St.  Agnes  3287c, 

Hyena  foemcn,  and  hot-blooded  lords,  "      ■'■"'' 

Whose  very  dogs  would  execrations  howl 
Agamst  his  lineage:  not  one  breast  affords 
Him  any  mercy,  in  that  mansion  foul. 
Save  one  old  beldame,  weak  in  body  and  in  soul.  •  I 

Ah,  happy  chance!  the  aged  creature  came, 
Shuffling  along  with  ivory-headed  wand. 
To  where  he  stood,  hid  from  the  torch's  flame, 
Behind  a  broad  hall-pillar,  far  beyond 
The  sound  of  merriment  and  chorus  bland : 
He  startled  her;  but  soon  she  knew  his  face,  ' 

And  grasped  his  fingers  in  her  palsied  hand,  ' 

Saying,  "Mercy,  Porphyro!  hie  thee  from  this  place;' 
They  are  all  here  to-night,  the  whole  blood-thirsty  race ! 

"Get  hence!  get  hence!  there's  dwarfish  Hildebrand; 
He  had  a  fever  late,  and  in  the  fit 
He  cursed  thee  and  thine,  both  house  and  land: 
Then  there's  that  old  Lord  Maurice,  not  a  whit 
More  tame  for  his  gray  hairs — Alas  me!  flit! 
Flit  like  a  ghost  away." — "Ah,  Gossip,  dear. 
We're  safe  enough;  here  in  this  armchair  sit, 
And  tell  me  how" — "Good  Saints!  not  here,  not  here: 
Follow  me,  child,  or  else  these  stones  will  be  thy  bier." 

He  followed  through  a  lowly  arched  way, 
Brushing  the  cobwebs  with  his  lofty  plume,  ;  /i 

And  as  she  muttered  "  Well-a-well-a-day ! "  vi 

He  found  him  in  a  little  moonlight  room,  f- 

Pale,  latticed,  chill,  and  silent  as  a  tomb. 
"Now  tell  me  where  is  Madeline,"  said  he,  .   ,,  , 

"O  tell  me,  Angela,  by  the  holy  loom,  ,yi 

Which  none  but  secret  sisterhood  may  see. 
When  they  St.  Agnes'  wool  are  weaving  piously." 

"St.  Agnes!    Ah!  it  is  St.  Agnes'  Eve- 
Yet  men  will  murder  upon  holy  days: 
Thou  must  hold  Avater  in  a  witch's  sieve, 
And  be  liege-lord  of  all  the  Elves  and  Fays, 


3288     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

To  venture  so:  it  fills  me  with  amaze 
To  see  thee,  Porphyro! — St.  Agnes'  Eve! 
God's  help!  my  lady  fair  the  conjurer  plays 
This  very  night:  good  angels  her  deceive! 
But  let  me  laugh  awhile, — I've  mickle  time  to  grieve." 

Feebly  she  laugheth  in  the  languid  moon, 
While  Porphyro  upon  her  face  doth  look, 
Like  puzzled  urchin  on  an  aged  crone 
Who  keepeth  closed  a  wondrous  riddle-book, 
As  spectacled  she  sits  in  chimney  nook. 
But  soon  his  eyes  grew  brilliant,  when  she  told 
His  lady's  purpose;  and  he  scarce  could  brook 
Tears,  at  the  thought  of  those  enchantments  cold, 
And  Madeline  asleep  in  lap  of  legends  old. 

Sudden  a  thought  came  like  a  full-blown  rose. 
Flushing  his  brow,  and  in  his  pained  heart 
Made  purple  riot:  then  doth  he  propose 
A  stratagem,  that  makes  the  beldame  start: 
"A  cruel  man  and  impious  thou  art: 
Sweet  lady!  let  her  pray,  and  sleep,  and  dream 
Alone  with  her  good  angels,  far  apart 
From  wicked  men  like  thee.     Go,  go! — I  deem 
Thou  canst  not  surely  be  the  same  that  thou  didst  seem." 

"I  will  not  harm  her,  by  all  saints  I  swear," 
Quoth  Porphyro:  "O  may  I  ne'er  find  grace 
When  my  weak  voice  shall  whisper  its  last  prayer, 
If  one  of  her  soft  ringlets  I  displace, 
Or  look  with  ruffian  passion  in  her  face. 
Good  Angela,  believe  me,  by  these  tears; 
Or  I  will,  even  in  a  moment's  space, 
Awake,  with  horrid  shout,  my  foemen's  ears, 
And  beard  them,  though  they  be  more  fanged  than  wolves 
and  bears." 

"Ah!  why  wilt  thou  affright  a  feeble  .soul? 
A  poor,  weak,  palsy-stricken,  churchyard  thing, 
Whose  passing-bell  may  ere  the  midnight  toll; 
Whose  prayers  for  thee,  each  morn  and  evening, 


The   Eve  of  St.  Agnes  3289 

Were  never  missed." — Thus  plaining,  doth  she  bring 
A  gentler  speech  from  burning  Porphyro ; 
So  woeful,  and  of  such  deep  sorrowing, 
That  Angela  gives  promise  she  will  do 
Whatever  he  shall  wish,  betide  her  weal  or  woe. 

Which  was,  to  lead  him,  in  close  secrecy,  '^ 

Even  to  Madeline's  chamber,  and  there  hide 
Him  in  a  closet,  of  such  privacy  ' 

That  he  might  see  her  beauty  unespfed. 
And  win  perhaps  that  night  a  peerless  bride, 
While  legioned  fairies  paced  the  coverlet, 
And  pale  enchantment  held  her  sleepy-eyed. 
Never  on  such  a  night  have  lovers  met. 
Since  Merlin  paid  his  Demon  all  the  monstrous  debt. 

"It  shall  be  as  thou  wishest,"  said  the  Dame: 
"All  cates  and  dainties  shall  be  stored  there 
Quickly  on  this  feast-night :  by  the  tambour  frame 
Her  own  lute  thou  wilt  see:  no  time  to  spare, 
For  I  am  slow  and  feeble,  and  scarce  dare 
On  such  a  catering  trust  my  dizzy  head. 
Wait  here,  my  child,  with  patience;  kneel  in  prayer 
The  while:  Ah!  thou  must  needs  the  lady  wed,         ■'^- 
Or  may  I  never  leave  my  grave  among  the  dead." 

So  saying,  she  hobbled  off  with  busy  fear. 
The  lover's  endless  minutes  slowly  passed; 
The  dame  returned  and  whispered  in  his  ear 
To  follow  her;  with  aged  eyes  aghast 
From  fright  of  dim  espial.     Safe  at  last. 
Through  many  a  dusky  gallery,  they  gain 
The  maiden's  chamber,  silken,  hushed,  and  chaste; 
Wliere  Porphyro  took  covert,  pleased  amain. 
His  poor  guide  hurried  back  with  agues  in  her  brain.    ■ 

Her  faltering  hand  upon  the  balustrade, 
Old  Angela  was  feeling  for  the  stair. 
When  jMadeline,  St.  Agnes'  charmed  maid, 
Rose,  like  a  missioned  spirit,  unaware: 
With  silver  taper's  light,  and  pious  care, 


3290     Poems,  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

She  turned,  and  down  the  aged  gossip  led 
To  a  safe  level  matting.     Now  prepare, 
Young  Porphyro,  for  gazing  on  that  bed; 
She  comes,  she  comes  again,  like  ring-dove  frayed  and  fled. 

Out  went  the  taper  as  she  hurried  in; 
Its  little  smoke,  in  pallid  moonshine,  died: 
She  closed  the  door,  she  panted,  aU  akin 
To  spirits  of  the  air,  and  visions  wide: 
No  uttered  syllable,  or,  woe  betide! 
But  to  her  heart,  her  heart  was  voluble. 
Paining  with  eloquence  her  balmy  side; 
As  though  a  tongueless  nightingale  should  swell 
Her  throat  in  vain,  and  die,  heart-stifled,  in  her  dell. 

A  casement  high  and  triple-arched  there  was. 
All  garlanded  with  carven  imageries 
Of  fruits,  and  flowers,  and  bunches  of  knot-grass, 
And  diamonded  with  panes  of  quaint  device, 
Innumerable  of  stains  and  splendid  dyes, 
As  are  the  tiger-moth's  deep-damasked  wings; 
And  in  the  midst,  'mong  thousand  heraldries. 
And  twilight  saints,  and  dim  emblazonings, 
A  shielded   scutcheon  blushed  with   blood  of  queens  and 
kings. 

Full  on  this  casement  shone  the  wintry  moon. 
And  threw  warm  gules  on  MadeHne's  fair  breast. 
As  down  she  knelt  for  Heaven's  grace  and  boon; 
Rose-bloom  fell  on  her  hands,  together  pressed. 
And  on  her  silver  cross  soft  amethyst. 
And  on  her  hair  a  glory,  like  a  saint: 
She  seemed  a  splendid  angel,  newly  dressed, 
Save  wings,  for  heaven: — rPorphyro  grew  faint: 
She  knelt,  so  pure  a  thing,  so  free  from  mortal  taint. 

Anon  his  heart  revives:  her  vespers  done, 
Of  all  its  wreathed  pearls  her  hair  she  frees; 
Unclasps  her  warmed  jewels  one  by  one; 
Loosens  her  fragrant  bodice ;  by  degrees 
Her  rich  attire  creeps  rustling  to  her  knees: 


The   Eve  of  St.  Agnes  3291 

Half-hidden,  like  a  merrnaid  in  seaweed, 
Pensive  awhile  she  dreams  awake,  and  sees, 
In  fancy,  fair  St.  Agnes  in  her  bed. 
But  dares  not  look  behind,  or  all  the  charm  is  fled. 

Soon,  trembUng  in  her  soft  and  chilly  nest, 
In  sort  of  wakeful  swoon,  perplexed  she  lay. 
Until  the  poppied  warmth  of  sleep  oppressed 
Her  soothed  limbs,  and  soul  fatigued  away; 
Flown,  like  a  thought,  until  the  morrow-day; 
BhssfuUy  havened  both  from  joy  and  pain; 
Clasped  like  a  missal  where  swart  Paynims  pray; 
Blinded  alike  from  sunshine  and  from  rain, 
As  though  a  rose  should  shut,  and  be  a  bud  again. 

Stolen  to  this  paradise,  and  so  entranced, 
Porphyro  gazed  upon  her  empty  dress,  ■'  '^ 

And  listened  to  her  breathing,  if  it  chanced  '  ^'^^^ 

To  wake  into  a  slumberous  tenderness; 
WTiich  when  he  heard,  that  minute  did  he  bless 
And  breathed  himself:  then  from  the  closet  crept 
Noiseless  as  fear  in  a  wide  wilderness. 
And  over  the  hushed  carpet,  silent,  stept, 
And  'tween  the  curtains  peeped,  where,  lo — how  fast  she 
slept. 

Then  by  the  bed-side,  where  the  faded  moon 
Made  a  dim,  silver  twihght,  soft  he  set 
A  table,  and,  half  anguished,  threw  thereon 
A  cloth  of  woven  crimson,  gold,  and  jet: — ■ 
O  for  some  drowsy  Morphean  amulet! 
The  boisterous,  midnight,  festive  clarion,  ^  ./ 

The  kettle-drum,  and  far-heard  clarionet,  A\ 

>\ffray  his  ears,  though  but  in  dying  tone:— 
■The  hall-door  shuts  again,  and  all  the  noise  is  gone. 

And  still  she  slept  an  azure-lidded  sleep. 
In  blanched  linen,  smooth  and  lavcndered, 
While  he  forth  from  the  closet  brought  a  heap 
Of  candied  apple,  quince,  and  plum,  and  gourd; 
With  jclhes  soother  than  the  creamy  curd, 


3292     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  lucent  syrops,  tinct  with  cinnamon;   '^tiifi-tlfirl 
Manna  and  dates,  in  argosy  transferred 
From  Fez;  and  spiced  dainties,  every  one, 
From  silken  Samarcand  to  cedared  Lebanon. 

These  delicates  he  heaped  with  glowing  hand 
On  golden  dishes  and  in  baskets  bright 
Of  wreathed  silver:  sumptuous  they  stand 
In  the  retired  quiet  of  the  night, 
Filling  the  chilly  room  with  perfume  light — 
"And  now,  my  love,  my  seraph  fair,  awake! 
Thou  art  my  heaven,  and  I  thine  eremite: 
Open  thine  eyes,  for  meek  St.  Agnes'  sake, 
Or  I  shall  drowse  beside  thee,  so  my  soul  doth  ache." 

Thus  whispering,  his  warm,  unnerved  arm 
Sank  in  her  pillow.     Shaded  was  her  dream 
By  the  dusk  curtains: — 'twas  a  midnight  charm 
Impossible  to  melt  as  iced  stream: 
The  lustrous  salvers  in  the  moonlight  gleam; 
Broad  golden  fringe  upon  the  carpet  lies: 
It  seemed  he  never,  never  could  redeem 
,        From  such  a  steadfast  spell  his  lady's  eyes; 
So  mused  awhile,  entoiled  in  woofed  phantasies. 

Awakening  up,  he  took  her  hollow  lute,— 
Tumultuous, — and,  in  chords  that  tenderest  be, 
He  played  an  ancient  ditty,  long  since  mute. 
In  Provence  called,  "La  belle  dame  sans  merci": 
Close  to  her  ear  touching  the  melody; — 
Wherewith  disturbed,  she  uttered  a  soft  moan: 
He  ceased — she  panted  quick — and  suddenly 
Her  blue  affrayed  eyes  wide  open  shone: 
Upon  his  knees  he  sank,  pale  as  smooth-sculptured  stone. 

Her  eyes  were  open,  but  she  still  beheld, 
Now  wide  awake,  the  vision  of  her  sleep.: 
There  was  a  painful  change,  that  nigh  expelled 
The  blisses  of  her  dream  so  pure  and  deep: 
At  which  fair  Madeline  began  to  weep, 


The   Eve  of  St.   Agnes  ?2Q'2 

And  moan  forth  witless  words  with  many  a  sigh, 
While  still  her  gaze  on  Porphyro  would  keep; 
Who  knelt,  with  joined  hands  and  piteous  eye, 
Fearing  to  move  or  speak,  she  looked  so  dreamingly. 

"Ah,  Porphyro!"  said  she,  "but  even  now 
Thy  voice  was  at  sweet  tremble  in  mine  ear, 
Made  tuneable  wdth  every  sweetest  vow; 
And  those  sad  eyes  were  spiritual  and  clear; 
How  changed  thou  art!  how  pallid,  chill,  and  drear! 
Give  me  that  voice  again,  my  Porphyro, 
Those  looks  immortal,  those  complainings  dear! 
Oh  leave  me  not  in  this  eternal  woe. 
For  if  thou  diest,  my  Love,  I  know  not  where  to  go." 

Beyond  a  mortal  man  impassioned  far 
At  these  voluptuous  accents,  he  arose, 
Ethereal,  flushed,  and  like  a  throbbing  star 
Seen  'mid  the  sapphire  heaven's  deep  repose; 
Into  her  dream  he  melted,  as  the  rose 
Blendeth  its  odor  with  the  violet,— 
Solution  sweet:  meantime  the  frost-wind  blows 
Like  Love's  alarum,  pattering  the  sharp  sleet 
Against  the  window-panes;  St.  Agnes'  moon  hath  set. 

'Tis  dark,  quick  pattereth  the  flaw-blown  sleet: 
"  This  is  no  dream,  my  bride,  my  Madeline!  " 
'Tis  dark:  the  iced  gusts  still  rave  and  beat: 
"No  dream,  alas!  alas!  and  woe  is  mine! 
Porphyro  will  leave  me  here  to  fade  and  pine. — 
Cruel!  what  traitor  could  thee  hither  bring? 
I  curse  not,  for  my  heart  is  lost  in  thine, 
Though  thou  forsakest  a  deceived  thing; — 
A  dove  forlorn  and  lost  with  sick  unpruned  wing." 

"My  Madeline!  sweet  dreamer!  lovely  bride! 

Say,  may  I  be  for  aye  thy  vassal  blest? 

Thy  beauty's  shield,  heart-shaped  and  vermeil-dyed? 

Ah,  silver  shrine,  here  will  I  take  my  rest 

After  so  many  hours  of  toil  and  quest, 


3294     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

A  famished  pilgrim, — saved  by  miracle. 
Though  I  have  found,  I  will  not  rob  thy  nest 
Saving  of  thy  sweet  self;  if  thou  thinkest  well ,  /r 
To  trust,  fair  MadeUne,  to  no  rude  infidel.    .      •      -r 

"Hark!  'tis  an  elfin-storm  from  faery  land, 
Of  haggard  seeming,  but  a  boon  indeed: 
Arise — arise!  the  morning  is  at  hand; — 
The  bloated  v/assailers  will  never  heed : — 
Let  us  away,  my  love,  with  happy  speed; 
There  are  no  ears  to  hear,  or  eyes  to  see, — 
Drowned  all  in  Rhenish  and  the  sleepy  mead: 
Awake!  arise!  my  love,  and  fearless  be, 
For  o'er  the  southern  moors  I  have  a  home  for  thee." 

She  hurried  at  his  words,  beset  with  fears,  .    ... 
For  there  were  sleeping  dragons  all  around„[/,  / 
At  glaring  watch,  perhaps,  with  ready  spears. — 
Down  the  wide  stairs  a  darkling  way  they  found. — 
In  all  the  house  was  heard  no  human  sound. 
A  chain-drooped  lamp  was  flickering  by  each  door; 
The  arras,  rich  with  horsemen,  hawk,  and  hound, 
Fluttered  in  the  besieging  wind's  uproar; 
And  the  long  carpets  rose  along  the  gusty  floor. 

They  glide,  like  phantoms,  into  the  wide  hall; 
Like  phantoms,  to  the  iron  porch,  they  glide; 
Where  lay  the  Porter,  in  uneasy  sprawl, 
With  a  huge  empty  flagon  by  his  side: 
The  wakeful  bloodhound  rose,  and  shook  his  hide. 
But  his  sagacious  eye  an  inmate  owns: 
By  one,  and  one,  the  bolts  full  easy  slide:— 
The  chains  lie  silent  on  the  footworn  stones; — 
The  key  turns,  and  the  door  upon  its  hinges  groans. 

And  they  are  gone:  ay,  ages  long  ago,jj^.j,r  .a/^-. 
These  lovers  fled  away  into  the  storrtt  .. ,  ...^    ,^,p 
That  night  the  Baron  dreamt  of  many  a  woe, 
And  all  his  warrior-guests,  with  shade  and  form 
Of  witch,  and  demon,  and  large  coffin-worni,  ,  i^ 


Locksley  Hall  3-95 


Were  long  be-nightmared.     Angela  the  old 
Died  palsj^-twitched,  with  meager  face  deform; 
The  Beadsman,  after  thousand  avcs  told, 
For  aye  unsought-for  slept  amongst  his  ashes  cold. 

John  Keats  [1705-1821] 


LOCKSLEY  HALL 

Comrades,  leave  me  here  a  little,  while  as  yet  'tis  early 

morn ; 
Leave  me  here,  and  when  j^ou  want  me,  sound  upon  the  bugle 

horn. 

'Tis  the  place,  and  all  around  it,  as  of  old,  the  curlews  call, 
Dreary  gleams  about  tlie  moorland,  flying  over  Locksley 
Hall: 

Locksley  Hall,  that  in  the  distance  overlooks  the  sandy 

tracts. 
And  the  hollow^  ocean-ridges  roaring  into  cataracts. 

Many  a  night  from  yonder  ivied  casement,  ere  I  went  to  rest, 
Did  I  look  on  great  Orion  sloping  slowly  to  the  west. 

Many  a  night  I  saw  the  Pleiads,  rising  through  the  mellow 

shade,  ' 

Glitter  like  a  swarm  of  fireflies  tangled  in  a  silver  braid'.'"-' 

Here  about  the  beach  I  wandered,  nourishing  a  youth  sub- 
lime 
With  the  fairy  tales  of  science,  and  the  long  result  of  time; 

When  the  centuries  behind  me  like  a  fruitful  land  reposed; 
When  I  clung  to  all  the  present  for  the  promise  that  it  closed ; 

'-'vVhen  I  dipped  into  the  future  far  as  human  eye  could  see. 
Saw  the  vision  of  the  world,  and  all  the  wonder  that  would  be. 

yJ^jBJa:  9f[j  ibjjvv  -i.Y  j;ib  ^.Ti>h:/f  ^tlj  vff  tjmn  -  / 
In  the  spring  a  fuller  crimson  comes  upon  the  robin's  breast; 
In  the  spring  the  wanton  lapwing  gets  himself  another  crest; 


3296     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

In  the  spring  a  livelier  iris  changes  on  the  burnished  dove; 
In  the  spring  a  young  man's  fancy  lightly  turns  to  thoughts 
of  love. 

Then  her  cheek  was  pale  and  thinner  than  should  be  for  one 

so  young, 
And   her  eyes  on  all  my  motions  with  a  mute  observance 

hung. 

And  I  said,  "My  cousin  Amy,  speak,  and  speak  the  truth 

to  me; 
Trust  me,  cousin,  all  the  current  of  my  being  sets  to  thee." 

On  her  pallid  cheek  and  forehead  came  a  color  and  a  hght, 
As  I  have  seen  the  rosy  red  flushing  in  the  northern  night. 

And  she  turned, — her  bosom  shaken  with  a  sudden  storm 

of  sighs; 
All  the  spirit  deeply  dawning  in  the  dark  of  hazel  eyes, — 

Saying,  "I  have  hid  my  feelings,  fearing  they  should  do  me 

wrong;" 
Saying,  "Dost  thou  love  me,  cousin?"  weeping,  "I  have 

loved  thee  long." 

Love  took  up  the  glass  of  Time,  and  turned  it  in  his  glowing 

hands ; 
Every  moment,  lightly  shaken,  ran  itself  in  golden  sands. 

Love  took  up  the  harp  of  Life,  and  smote  on  all  the  chords 

with  might; 
Smote  the  chord  of  Self,  that,  trembling,  passed  in  music 

out  of  sight. 

Many  a  morning  on  the  moorland  did  we  hear  the  copses 

ring. 
And  her  whisper  thronged  my  pulses  with  the  fulness  of  the 

spring. 

Many  an  evening  by  the  waters  did  we  watch  the  stately 

ships, 
And  our  spirits  rushed  together  at  the  touching  of  the  lips. 


Locksley   Hall  3297 

O  my  cousin,  shallow-hearted!    O  my  Amy,  mine  no  more! 
O  the  dreary,  dreary  moorland!    O  the  barren,  barren  shore! 

Falser  than  all  fancy  fathoms,  falser  than  all  songs  have 

sung. 
Puppet  to  a  father's  threat,  and  servile  to  a  shrewish  tongue! 

Is  it  well  to  wish  thee  happy? — having  known  me;  to  decline 
On  a  range  of  lower  feelings  and  a  narrower  heart  than  mine ! 

Yet  it  shall  be:  thou  sha?t  lower  to  his  level  day  by  day, 
What  is  fine  within  thee  growing  coarse  to  sympathize  with 
clay. 

As  the  husband  is,  the  wife  is;  thou  art  mated  with  a  clown. 
And  the  grossness  of  his  nature  will  have  weight  to  drag  thee 
dowTi. 

He  will  hold  thee,  when  his  passion  shall  have  spent  its  novel 

force, 
Something  better  than  his  dog,  a  little  dearer  than  his  horse. 

What  is  this?  his  eyes  are  heavy, — think  not  they  are  glazed 

with  wine. 
Go  to  him;  it  is  thy  duty, — kiss  him,  take  his  hand  in  thine. 

It  may  be  my  lord  is  weary,  that  his  brain  is  overwrought, — 
Soothe  him  with  thy  finer  fancies,   touch  him  with  thy 
lighter  thought. 

He  will  answer  to  the  purpose,  easy  things  to  understand, — 
Better  thou  wert  dead  before  me,  though  I  slew  thee  with 
my  hand. 

Better  thou  and  I  were  lying,  hidden  from  the  heart's  dis- 
grace. 
Rolled  in  one  another's  arms,  and  silent  in  a  last  embrace. 

Cursed  be  the  social  wants  that  sin  against  the  strength  of 

youth ! 
Cursed  be  the  social  lies  that  warp  us  from  the  living  truth! 


3298     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Cursed  be  the  sickly  forms  that  err  from  honest  Nature's 

rule ! 
Cursed  be  the  gold  that  gilds  the  straitened  forehead  of  the 

fool! 

Well — 'tis   well  that  I   should  bluster! — Hadst   thou  less 

unworthy  proved, 
Would  to  God — for  I  have  loved  thee  more  than  ever  wife 

was  loved. 

Am  I  mad,  that  I  should  cherish  that  which  bears  but  bitter 

fruit? 
I  will  pluck  it  from  my  bosom,  though  my  heart  be  at  the 

root. 

Never!  though  my  mortal  summers  to  such  length  of  years 

should  come 
As  the  many-wintered  crow  that  leads  the  clanging  rookery 

home. 

Where  is  comfort?  in  division  of  the  records  of  the  mind? 
Can  I  part  her  from   herself,  and  love  her,  as  I  knew  her, 
kind? 

I  remember  one  that  perished;  sweetly  did  she  speak  and 

move; 
Such  a  one  do  I  remember,  whom  to  look  at  was  to  love. 

Can  I  think  of  her  as  dead,  and  love  her  for  the  love  she  bore? 
No, — she  never  loved  me  truly;  love  is  love  for  evermore. 

Comfort?  comfort  scorned  of  devils!  this  is  truth  the  poet 

sings, 
That  a  sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering  happier 

things.  f,j  taHo^^ 

Drug  thy  memories,  lest  thou  learn  it,  lest  thy  heart  be  put 

to  proof, 
In  the  dead,  unhappy  night,  and  when  the  rain  is  on  the  roof. 


Locksley   Hall  3299 

Like  a  dog,  he  hunts  in  dreams;  and  thou  art  staring  at  the 

wall, 
Where  the  dying  night-lamp  flickers,  and  the  shadows  rise 

and  fall. 

Then  a  hand  shall  pass  before  thee,  pointing  to  his  drunken 

sleep. 
To  thy  widowed  marriage-pillows,  to  the  tears  that  thou 

wilt  weep. 

Thou  shalt  hear  the   "Never,   never,"  whispered  by  the 

phantom  years, 
And  a  song  from  out  the  distance  in  the  ringing  of  thine  ears''^ 

And  an  eye  shall  vex  thee,  looking  ancient  kindness  on  thy 

pain. 
Turn  thee,  turn  thee  on  thy  pillow;  get  thee  to  thy  rest 

again. 

Nay,  but  Nature  brings  thee  solace;  for  a  tender  voice  will 

cry; 
'Tis  a  purer  life  than  thine,  a  lip  to  drain  thy  trouble  dry. 

Baby  hps  will  laugh  me  down;  my  latest  rival  brings  thee 

rest, — 
Baby  fingers,  waxen  touches,  press  me  from  the  mother's 

breast. 

O,  the  child  too  clothes  the  father  with  a  dearness  not  his  due. 
Half  is  thine  and  half  is  his:  it  will  be  worthy  of  the  two. 

O,  I  see  thee  old  and  formal,  fitted  to  thy  petty  part, 
With  a  little  hoard  of  maxims  preaching  down  a  daughter's 
heart. 

"They  were  dangerous  guides,  the  feelings — she  herself 
was  not  exempt — 

Truly,  she  herself  had  suffered" — Perish  in  thy  self- 
contempt  ! 


3300     Poems  of  Sentiment  .and  Reflection 

Overlive  it — lower  yet — be  happy!  Wherefore  should  I  care? 
I  myself  must  mix  with  action,  lest  I  wither  by  despair. 

What  is  that  which  I  should  turn  to,  lighting  upon  days  like 

these? 
Every  door  is  barred  with  gold,  and  opens  but  to  golden  keys. 

Every  gate  is  thronged  with  suitors,  all  the  markets  over- 
flow. 
I  have  but  an  angry  fancy:  what  is  that  which  I  should  do? 

I  had  been  content  to  perish,  falling  on  the  foeman's  ground, 
When  the  ranks  are  rolled  in  vapor,  and  the  winds  are  laid 
with  sound. 

But  the  jingling  of  the  guinea  helps  the  hurt  that  Honor 

feels, 
And  the  nations  do  but  murmur,  snarling  at  each  other's 

heels. 

Can  I  but  relive  in  sadness?    I  will  turn  that  earlier  page. 
Hide  me  from  my  deep  emotion,  O  thou  wondrous  Mother- 
Age! 

Make  me  feel  the  wild  pulsation  that  I  felt  before  the  strife, 
When  I  heard  my  days  before  me,  and  the  tumult  of  my  life; 

Yearning  for  the  large  excitement  that  the  coming  years 

would  yield, 
Eager-hearted  as  a  boy  when  first  he  leaves  his  father's  field, 

And  at  night  along  the   dusky  highway  near  and  nearer 

drawn. 
Sees  in  heaven  the  fight  of  London  flaring  like  a  dreary 

dawn; 

And  his  spirit  leaps  within  him  to  be  gone  before  him  then. 
Underneath  the  light  he  looks  at,  in  among  the  throngs  of 
men; 


Locksley   Hall  3301 

Men,  my  brothers,  men  the  workers,  ever  reaping  something 

new: 
That  which  they  have  done  but  earnest  of  the  things  that 

they  shall  do. 

jFoT  I  dipped  into  the  future,  far  as  human  eye  could  see, 
Saw  the  Vision  of  the  world,  and  all  th&  wonder  that  would 
be;  ' 

Saw  the  heavens  fill  with  commerce,  argosies  of  magic  sails, 
Pilots  of  the  purple  twilight,  dropping  down  with  costly 
bales; 

Heard  the  heavens  fill  with  shouting,  and  there  rained  a 

ghastly  dew 
From  the  nations'  air}'  navies  grappling  in  the  central  blue; 

Far  along  the  world-wide  whisper  of  the  south-wind  rushing 

warm. 
With  the  standards  of  the  peoples  plunging  through  the 

thunder-storm; 

Till  the  war-drum  throbbed  no  longer,  and  the  battle-flags 

were  furled 
In  the  Parliament  of  man,  the  Federation  of  the  world. 

There  the  common  sense  of  most  shall  hold  a  fretful  realm 

in  awe. 
And  the  kindly  earth  shall  slumber,  lapped  in  universal  law. 

So  I  triumphed  ere  my  passion  sweeping  through  me  left  me 

dry, 
Left  me  with  the   palsied    heart,    and    left  me  with  the 

jaundiced  eye; 

Eye,  to  which  all  order  festers,  all  things  here  are  out  of 

joint. 
Science  moves,  but  slowly,  slowly,  creeping  on  from  point 

to  point : 


33'^-     f*oems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Slowly  comes  a  hungry  people,  as  a  lion,  creeping  nigher, 
Glares  at  one  that  nods  and  winks  behind  a  slowly-dying  fire. 

Yet  I  doubt  not  through  the  ages  one  increasing  purpose 

runs, 
And  the  thoughts  of  men  are  widened  with  the  process  of 

the  suns. 

What  is  that  to  him  that  reaps  not  harvest  of  his  youthful 

joys. 
Though  the  deep  heart  of  existence  beat  forever  like  a  boy's? 

Knowledge  comes,  but  wisdom  lingers;  and  I  linger  on  the 

shore. 
And  the  individual  withers,  and  the  world  is  more  and  more. 

Knowledge  comes,  but  wisdom  lingers,  and  he  bears  a  laden 

breast. 
Full  of  sad  experience,  moving  toward  the  stillnes^  .qf  his 

rest.  -J-r'"*'-  ■■^rfj  HtiW 

Hark!  my  merry  comrades  call  me,  sounding  on  the  bugle- 
'        horn,—  ^  _.,j.^^  3^,j  [(ij 

They  to  whom  my  foolish  passion  were  a  target  for  their 
scorn. 

Shall  it  not  be  scorn  to  me  to   harp  on  such  a  moldered 

string? 
I  am  shamed  through  all  my  nature  to  have  loved  so  slight 

a  thing. 

'■"n  .!]  'iq-yyuz  noiazisq  ym  ■ 

Weakness  to  be  wroth  with  weakness!  woman's  pleasure, 

woman's  pain — ■ 
Nature  made  them  blinder  motions  bounded  in  a  shallower 

brain. 

T  .213 tag}  i 

Woman  is  the  lesser  man,  and  all  thy  passions,  matched  with 

mine, 
Are  as  moonlight  unto  sunlight,  and  as  water  unto  wine — 


nohDaftav       Locksley   Hall  33^2 

Here  at  least,  where  nature  sickens,  nothing.    Ah,  for  some 

retreat 
Deep  in  yonder  shining  Orient,  where  my  life  began  to  beat! 

Where  in  wild  IMahratta-battle  fell  my  father,  evil-starred; 
I  was  left  a  trampled  orphan,  and  a  selfish  uncle's  ward. 

Or  to  burst  all  links  of  habit, — there  to  wander  far  away. 
On  from  island  unto  island  at  the  gateways  of  the  day,—  j  , ; 

Larger  constellations  burning,   mellow  moons  and  happy 

skies, 
Breadths  of  tropic  shade  and  palms  in  cluster,  knots  of 

Paradise. 

Never  comes  the  trader,  never  floats  an  European  flag, — 
Slides  the  bird  o'er  lustrous  woodland,  swings  the  trailer 
from  the  crag, — 

Droops    the    heavy-blossomed    bower,    hangs    the    heavy- 
fruited  tree, —  r|T 
Summer  isles  of  Eden  lying  in  dark-purple  spheres  of  sea. 

There,  methinks,  would  be  enjoyment  more  than  in  this 
s      march  of  mind- 
In  the  steamship,  in  the  railway,  in  the  thoughts  that  shake 
mankind. 

There  the  passions,  cramped  no  longer,  shall  have  scope  and 

breathing-space;  , , 
I  will  take  some  savage  woman,  she  shall  rear  my  dusky  race. 

Iron-jointed,  supple-sinewed,  they  shall  dive,  and  they  shall 
run,  ''^^ 

Catch  the  wild  goat  by  the  hair,  and  hurl  their  lances  in  the 
sun. 

Whistle  back  the  parrot's  call,  and  leap  the  rainbows  of  the 

brooks. 
Not  with  blinded  eyesight  poring  over  miserable  books — 

Fool,  again  the  dream,  the  fancy!  b-ut  I  know  my  words  are 

wild. 
But  I  count  the  gray  barbarian  lower  than  the  Ch^Stian 

child. 


3304     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

I,  to  herd  with  narrow  foreheads,  vacant  of  our  glorious 

gains, 
Like  a  beast  with  lower  pleasures,  like  a  beast  with  lower 

pains! 

Mated  with  a  squaHd   savage, — what    to  me  were  sun  or 

clime? 
I,  the  heir  of  all  the  ages,  in  the  foremost  files  of  time, — 

I,  that  rather  held  it  better  men  should  perish  one  by  one, 
Than  that  earth  should  stand  at  gaze  like  Joshua's  moon 
in  Ajalon!  Jo  <:fijl)(;) 

Not  in  vain  the  distance  beacons.      Forward,  forward   let 

us  range; 
Let  the  great  world  spin  for  ever  down  the  ringing  grooves  of 

change. 

Through  the  shadow  of  the  globe  we  sweep  into  the  younger 

day; 
Better  fifty  years  of  Europe  than  a  cycle  of  Cathay. 

Mother-Age, — for  mine  I  knew  not, — help  me  as  when  life 

begun, — 
Rift  the  hills,  and  roll  the  waters,  flash  the  lightnings,  weigh 

the  sun. 

O,  I  see  the  crescent  promise  of  my  si)irit  hath  not  set ; 
Ancient  founts  of  inspiration  well  through  all  my  fancy  yet. 

Howsoever  these  things  be,  a  long  farewell  to  Locksley  Hall! 
Now  for  me  the  woods  may  wither,,  now  for  me,  the  roof-tree 
fall. 

Comes  a  vapor  from  the  margin,  blackening  over  heath  and 

holt. 
Cramming  all  the  blast  before  it,  in  its  breast  a  thunderbolt. 

Let  it  fall  on  Locksley  Hall,  with  rain  or  hail,  or  fire  or 

snow; 
For  the  mighty  wind  arises,  roaring  seaward,  and  I  go. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1800-1892] 


The  Scholar-Gipsy  33'^S 


THE   SCHOLAR-GIPSY 

Go,  for  they  call  you,  Shepherd,  from  the  hill; 
Go,  Shepherd,  and  untie  the  wattled  cotes: 

No  longer  leave  thy  wistful  flock  unfed. 
Nor  let  thy  bawling  fellows  rack  their  throats, 

Nor  the  cropped  grasses  shoot  another  head. 
But  when  the  fields  are  still, 
And  the  tired  men  and  dogs  all  gone  to  rest, 

And  only  the  white  sheep  are  sometimes  seen 

Cross  and  recross  the  strips  of  moon-blanched  green; 
Come,  Shepherd,  and  again  begin  the  quest. 

Here,  where  the  reaper  was  at  work  of  late, 
In  this  high  field's  dark  corner,  where  he  leaves 

His  coat,  his  basket,  and  his  earthen  cruise. 
And  in  the  sun  all  morning  binds  the  sheaves. 

Then  here,  at  noon,  comes  back  his  stores  to  use; 
Here  will  I  sit  and  wait, 
WTiile  to  my  ear  from  uplands  far  away 

The  bleating  of  the  folded  flocks  is  borne. 

With  distant  cries  of  reapers  in  the  corn- 
All  the  live  murmur  of  a  summer's  day. 

Screened  is  this  nook  o'er  the  high,  half-reaped  field, 
And  here  till  sundown,  Shepherd,  will  I  be. 

Through  the  thick  corn  the  scarlet  poppies  peep, 
And  round  green  roots  and  yellowing  stalks  I  see 

Pale  blue  convolvulus  in  tendrils  creep: 
And  air-swept  lindens  yield 
Their  scent,  and  rustle  down  their  perfumed  showers 

Of  bloom  on  the  bent  grass  where  I  am  laid. 

And  bower  me  from  the  August  sun  with  shade; 
And  the  eye  travels  down  to  Oxford's  towers: 

And  near  me  on  the  grass  lies  Glanvil's  book — 
Come,  let  me  read  the  oft-read  tale  again: 

,^,;;     The  story  of  that  Oxford  scholar  poor, 
Of  pregnant  parts  and  quick  inventive  brain, 


33o6     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Who,  tired  of  knocking  at  Preferment's  door, 
One  summer  morn  forsook 

His  friends,  and  went  to  learn  the  Gipsy  lore, 

And  roamed  the  world  with  that  wild  brotherhood, 
And  came,  as  most  men  deemed,  to  little  good, 

But  came  to  Oxford  and  his  friends  no  more. 

But  once,  years  after,  in  the  country  lanes. 
Two  scholars,  whom  at  college  erst  he  knew, 

Met  him,  and  of  his  way  of  life  inquired. 
Whereat  he  answered  that  the  Gipsy  crew, 

His  mates,  had  arts  to  rule  as  they  desired 
The  workings  of  men's  brains: 
And  they  can  bind  them  to  what  thoughts  they  will: 

"And  I,"  he  said,  "the  secret  of  their  art. 

When  fully  learned,  will  to  the  world  impart: 
But  it  needs  Heaven-sent  moments  for  this  skill!" 

This  said,  he  left  them,  and  returned  no  more. 
But  rumors  hung  about  the  country-side. 

That  the  lost  Scholar  long  was  seen  to  stray. 
Seen  by  rare  glimpses,  pensive  and  tongue-tied, 

In  hat  of  antique  shape,  and  cloak  of  gray. 
The  same  the  Gipsies  wore. 
Shepherds  had  met  him  on  the  Hurst  in  spring;    i  ■ ' 

At  some  lone  alehouse  in  the  Berkshire  moors,' 

On  the  warm  ingle-bench,  the  smock-f rocked  boors 
Had  found  him  seated  at  their  entering. 

But,  'mid  their  drink  and  clatter,  he  would  fly: 
And  I  myself  seem  half  to  know  thy  looks, 

.  And  put  the  shepherds.  Wanderer,  on  thy  trace; 
And  boys  who  in  lone  wheatfields  scare  the  rooks 
I  ask  if  thou  hast  passed  their  quiet  place; 
Or  in  my  boat  I  lie 
Moored  to  the  cool  bank  in  the  summer  heats, 
'Mid  wide  grass  meadows  which  the  sunshine  fills, 

And  watch  the  warm  green-muffled  Cumnor  hills, 
And  wonder  if  thou  haunt'st  their  shy  retreats. 


The  Scholar-Gipsy  33oy 

For  most,  I  know,  thou  lov'st  retired  ground.      '  -    '   '-^^ 
Thee,  at  the  ferry,  Oxford  riders  blithe. 

Returning  home  on  summer  nights,  have  met 
Crossing  the  striph'ng  Thames  at  Bablock-hithe, 

Traihng  in  the  cool  stream  thy  fingers  wet^  ngtioiH  i 
As  the  slow  punt  swings  round: 
And  leaning  backwards  in  a  pensive  dream, 

And  fostering  in  thy  lap  a  heap  of  flowers 

Plucked  in  shy  fields  and  distant  Wychwood  bowers, 
And  thine  eyes  resting  on  the  moonlit  stream: 

And  then  they  land,  and  thou  art  seen  no  more. 
Maidens  who  from  the  distant  hamlets  come 

To  dance  around  the  Fyfield  elm  in  May, 
Oft  through  the  darkening  fields  have  seen  thee  roam, 

Or  cross  a  stile  into  the  public  way. 
Oft  thou  hast  giv'en  them  store 
Of  flowers — the  frail-leafed,  white  anemone — 

Dark  bluebells  drenched  with  dews  of  summer  eves,, 

And  purple  orchises  with  spotted  leaves —  .        ' . 
But  none  has  words  she  can  report  of  thee. 


And,  above  Godstow  Bridge,  when  hay-time's  here 
In  June,  and  many  a  scythe  in  sunshine  flames. 

Men  who  through  those  wide  fields  of  breezy  grass 
Where    black-winged    swallows     haunt    the     glittering 
Thames, 
To  bathe  in  the  abandoned  lasher  pass, 
Have  often  passed  thee  near 
Sitting  upon  the  river  bank  o'ergrown: 
Marked  thine  outlandish  garb,  thy  figure  spare,  '^ 

Thy  dark  vague  eyes,  and  soft  abstracted  air; 
But,  when  they  came  from  bathing,  thou  wert  gone. 

At  some  lone  homestead  in  the  Cumnor  hills,  ' ' 

Where  at  her  open  door  the  housewife  darns. 

Thou  hast  been  seen,  or  hanging  on  a  gate  ' 

To  watch  the  threshers  in  the  mossy  bams. 
Children,  who  early  range  these  slopes  and  late 
For  cresses  from  the  rills, 


33^8     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Have  known  thee  watching,  all  an  April  day, 
The  springing  pastures  and  the  feeding  kine ; 
And    marked    thee,   when    the   stars    come   out    and 
shine, 

Through  the  long  dewy  grass  move  slow  away. 

In  autumn,  on  the  skirts  of  Bagley  Wood, 
Where  most  the  Gipsies  by  the  turf-edged  way 

Pitch  their  smoked  tents,  and  every  bush  3'ou  see 
With  scarlet  patches  tagged  and  shreds  of  gray, 

Above  the  forest-ground  called  Thessaly — 
The  blackbird  picking  food 
Sees  thee,  nor  stops  his  meal,  nor  fears  at  all; 

So  often  has  he  known  thee  past  him  stray 

Rapt,  twirling  in  thy  hand  a  withered  spray, 
And  waiting  for  the  spark  from  Heaven  to  fall. 

And  once,  in  winter,  on  the  causeway  chill 
Where  home  through  flooded  fields  foot-travelers  go, 

Have  I  not  passed  thee  on  the  wooden  bridge 
Wrapped  in  thy  cloak  and  battling  with  the  snow, 
Thy  face  towards  Hinksey  and  its  wintry  ridge? 
And  thou  hast  climbed  the  hill 
And  gained  the  white  brow  of  the  Cumnor  range; 

Turned   once  to   watch,   while    thick   the   snowflakes 

fall, 
The  line  of  festal  light  in  Christ  Church  hall — 

Then  sought  thy  straw  in  some  sequestered  grange. 

'  i  '■  ■  ■  ■ ,'  1; 

.  '■  r  tu,nu  -J 
But  what— I  dream!    Two  hundred  years  are  flown 

Since  first  thy  story  ran  through  Oxford  halls, 
And  the  grave  Glanvil  did  the  tale  inscribe 
That  thou  wert  wandered  from  the  studious  walls 
To  learn  strange  arts,  and  join  a  Gipsy  tribe: 
And  thou  from  earth  art  gone 
Long  since,  and  in  some  quiet  churchyard  laid; 

Some  country  nook,  where  o'er  thy  unknown  grave 
Tall  grasses  and  white  flowering  nettles  wave- 
Under  a  dark  red-fruited  yew-tree's  shade. 


nobpaftaH  The  Scholar-Gipsy- rnaoH     3309 

■ — No,  no,  thou  hast  not  felt  the  lapse  of  hours.    '  phgoiJI 
For  what  wears  out  the  life  of  mortal  men? 

"lis  that  from  change  to  change  their  being  roUs  . 
'Tis  that  repeated  shocks,  again,  again,  rfA 

Exhaust  the  energy  of  strongest  souls, 
And  numb  the  elastic  powers. 
Till  having  used  our  nerves  with  bliss  and  teejajj;  ly.j. 

And  tired  upon  a  thousand  schemes  our  wit,        ^ 

To  the  just-pausing  Genius  we  remit  ^H  ; 

Our  worn-out  life,  and  arc — what  we  have  been.     / 

Thou  hast  not  lived,  why  shouldst  thou  perish,  so?     'hT 
Thou  hadst  one  aim,  ojic  business,  one  desire: 

Else  wert  thou  long  since  numbered  with  the  dead — ■ 
Else  hadst  thou  spent,  like  other  men,  thy  fire. 

The  generations  of  thy  peers  are  fled, 
And  we  ourselves  shall  go; 
But  thou  possessest  an  immortal  lot, 

And  we  imagine  thee  exempt  from  age 

And  living  as  thou  liv'st  on  Glanvil's  page, 
Because  thou  hadst — what  we,  alas,  have  not! 

For  early  didst  thou  leave  the  world,  with  powers 

Fresh,  undiverted  to  the  world  without,  lii 

Firm  to  their  mark,  not  spent  on  other  things; 
Free  from  the  sick  fatigue,  the  languid  doubt, 

Which  much  to  have  tried,  in  much  been  baffled,  brings 
O  Life  unlike  to  ours! 
Who  fluctuate  idly  without  term  or  scope. 

Of  whom  each  strives,  nor  knows  for  what  he  strive.^, 

And  each  half  lives  a  hundred  different  lives; 
Who  wait  like  thee,  but  not,  like  thee,  in  hope. 

Thou  waitest  for  the  spark  from  Heaven:  and  we, 
Vague  half-believers  of  our  casual  creeds. 

Who  never  deeply  felt,  nor  clearly  willed, 
Whose  insight  never  has  borne  fruit  in  deeds,  ^^ 

Whose  weak  resolves  never  have  been  fulfilled;    '  J 
For  whom  each  year  we  see        'fic  ,X'^/r£  siJ  ivr;  If 


33^^    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Breeds  new  beginnings,  disappointments  new; 
Who  hesitate  and  falter  Ufe  away, 
And  lose  to-morrow  the  ground  won  to-day — 

Ah,  do  not  we,  Wanderer,  await  it  too? 

Yes,  we  await  it,  but  if  still  delays. 

And  then  we  suffer;  and  amongst  us  One, 

Who  most  has  suffered,  takes  dejectedly 
His  seat  upon  the  intellectual  throne; 
And  all  his  store  of  sad  experience  he 
Lays  bare  of  wretched  days; 
Tells  us  his  misery's  birth  and  growth  and  signSjr'-'  "rrfX 
And  how  the  dying  spark  of  hope  was  fed. 
And    how    the    breast    was    soothed,    and    how    the 
head, 
And  all  his  hourly  varied  anodynes. 

This  for  our  wisest:  and  we  others  pine,  '     • 

And  wish  the  long  unhappy  dream  would  end. 
And  waive  all  claim  to  bhss,  and  try  to  bear, 
With  close-lipped  Patience  for  our  only  friend. 
Sad  Patience,  too  near  neighbor  to  Despair: 
But  none  has  hope  like  thine. 
Thou  through   the  fields  and   through  the  woods  dost 
stray. 
Roaming  the  country-side,  a  truant  boy,  il  aavl 

Nursing  thy  project  in  unclouded  joy,  ■'','' 

And  every  doubt  long  blown  by  time  away. 

,7 
O  born  in  days  when  wits  were  fresh  and  clear, 
And  life  ran  gaily  as  the  sparkling  Thames; 
Before  this  strange  disease  of  modern  life. 
With  its  sick  hurry,  its  divided  aims. 

Its  heads  o'ertaxed,  its  palsied  hearts,  was  rife-rrr/  uorlT 
Fly  hence,  our  contact  fear!  .       ; 

Still  fly,  plunge  deeper  in  the  bowering  wood! 
Averse,  as  Dido  did  with  gesture  stern  // 

From  her  false  friend's  approach  in  Hades  turn, 
Wave  us  away,  and  keep  thy  solitude.         .riv/-  loi 


The  Scholar-Gipsy  33^^ 

Still  nursing  the  unconquerable  hope,         .     '  9i>*2JuO 
Still  clutching  the  inviolable  shade,      J^'"  ,3i3riT 

With  a  free  onward  impulse  brushing  thfougH,^ 
By  night,  the  silvered  branches  of  the  glade —     -^^"^ 

Far  on  the  forest-skirts,  where  none  pursue, 
On  some  mild  pastoral  slope 
Emerge,  and  resting  on  the  moonlit  pales, 

Freshen  thy  flowers,  as  in  former  years, 

With  dew,  or  listen  with  enchanted  ears, 
From  the  dark  dingles,  to  the  nightingales. 

But  lly  our  paths,  our  feverish  contact  fly! 
For  strong  the  infection  of  our  mental  strife. 

Which,  though  it  gives  no  bliss,  yet  spoils  for  rest; 
And  we  should  win  thee  from  thy  own  fair  life, 

Like  us  distracted,  and  like  us  unblest. 
Soon,  soon  thy  cheer  would  die. 
Thy  hopes  grow  timorous,  and  unfixed  thy  powerg. 

And  thy  clear  aims  be  cross  and  shifting  made: 

And  then  ihy  glad  perennial  youtli  would  fade. 
Fade,  and  grow  old  at  last,  and  die  hke  ours. 

Then  fly  our  greetings,  fly  our  speech  and  smiles! 
— As  some  grave  Tyrian  trader,  from  the  sea, 

Descried  at  sunrise  an  emerging  prow 
Lifting  the  cool-haired  creepers  stealthily. 
The  fringes  of  a  southward-facing  brow 
Among  the  .-F^gean  isles; 
And  saw  the  merry  Grecian  coaster  come. 

Freighted  with  amber  grapes,  and  Chian  wine. 
Green  bursting  figs,  and  tunnies  steeped  in  brine; 
And  knew  the  intruders  on  his  ancient  home, 

The  young  light-hearted  Masters  of  the  waves; 
And  snatched  his  rudder,  and  shook  out  more  sail. 

And  day  and  night  held  on  indignantly 
O'er  the  blue  Midland  waters  with  the  gale,  ^ 
Betwixt  the  Syrtes  and  soft  Sicily,  "'"' 

To  where  the  Atlantic  raves  ~^ 


3312     Poems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Outside  the  Western  Straits,  and  unbent  sails     i  'VuP. 

There,  where  down  cloudy  cb"ffs,  through  sheets  of  foam, 

Sh}'  traffickers,  the  dark  Iberians  come; 
And  on  the  beach  undid  his  corded  bales. 

Matthew  Arnold  [1822-1888] 


JUGGLING  JERRY 

Pitch  here  the  tent,  while  the  old  horse  grazes: 

By  the  old  hedge-side  we'll  halt  a  stage. 
It's  nigh  my  last  above  the  daisies:  » 

My  next  leaf'll  be  man's  blank  page. 
Yes,  my  old  girl!  and  it's  no  use  crying: 

Juggler,  constable,  king,  must  bow. 
One  that  outjuggles  all's  been  spying 

Long  to  have  me,  and  he  has  me  now. 

We've  traveled  times  to  this  old  common 

Often  we've  hung  our  pots  in  the  gorse. 
We've  had  a  stirring  life,  old  woman! 

You,  and  I,  and  the  old  gray  horse. 
Races,  and  fairs,  and  royal  occasions, 

Found  us  coming  to  their  call: 
Now  they'll  miss  us  at  our  stations: 

There's  a  Juggler  outjuggles  all! 

Up  goes  the  lark,  as  if  all  were  jolly! 

Over  the  duck-pond  the  willow  shakes. 
Easy  to  think  that  grieving's  folly. 

When  the  hand's  firm  as  driven  stakes! 
Ay,  when  we're  strong,  and  braced,  and  manful, 

Life's  a  sweet  fiddle:  but  we're  a  batch 
Born  to  become  the  Great  Juggler's  han'ful: 

Balls  he  shies  up,  and  is  safe  to  catch. 

Here's  where  the  lads  of  the  village  cricket.:' 

I  was  a  lad  not  wide  from  here: 
Couldn't  I  whip  off  the  bale  from  the  wicket? 

Like  an  old  world  those  days  appear! 


nomafi  Juggling  Jerry  3313 

Donkey,   sheep,   geese,   and   thatched   ale-house — I   know 
them! 

They  are  old  friends  of  my  halts,  and  seem, 
Somehow,  as  if  kind  thanks  I  owe  them : 

Juggling  don't  hinder  the  heart's  esteem. 

Juggling's  no  sin,  for  we  must  have  victual; 

Nature  allows  us  to  bait  for  the  fool. 
Holding  one's  own  makes  us  juggle  no  little; 

But,  to  increase  it,  hard  juggling's  the  rule. 
You  that  are  sneering  at  my  profession. 

Haven't  you  juggled  a  vast  amount? 
There's  the  Prime  ]\Iinister,  in  one  Session, 

Juggles  more  games  tJxan  my  sins'll  count. 

I've  murdered  insects  with  mock  thunder: 

Conscience,  for  that,  in  men  don't  quail. 
I've  made  bread  from  the  bump  of  wonder: 

That's  my  business,  and  there's  my  tale. 
Fashion  and  rank  all  praised  the  professor: 

Ay!  and  I've  had  my  smile  from  the  Queen: 
Bravo,  Jerry!  she  meant:  God  bless  her! 

Ain't  this  a  sermon  on  that  scene? 

I've  studied  men  from  my  topsy-turvy 

Close,  and,  I  reckon,  rather  true. 
Some  are  fine  fellows:  some,  right  scurvy: 

Most,  a  dash  between  the  two. 
But  it's  a  woman,  old  girl,  that  makes  me 

Think  more  kindly  of  the  race: 
And  it's  a  woman,  old  girl,  that  shakes  me 

When  the  Great  Juggler  I  must  face. 

We  two  were  married,  due  and  legal: 

Honest  we've  lived  since  we've  been  one. 
Lord!  I  coukl  then  jump  like  an  eagle: 

You  danced  bright  as  a  bit  o'  the  sun. 
Birds  in  a  May-bush  wo  were!  right  merry! 

All  night  we  kissed,  we  juggled  all  day. 
Joy  was  the  heart  of  Juggling  Jerry ! 

Now  from  his  old  girl  he's  juggled  away. 


23"^"^     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

It's  past  parsons  to  console  us: 

No,  nor  no  doctor  fetch  for  me: 
I  can  die  without  my  bolus;  ^-^    _,j|- 

Two  of  a  trade,  lass,  never  agree!  ,-//'s-; of.;, 

Parson  and  Doctor! — don't  they  love  rarely, 

Fighting  the  devil  in  other  men's  fields! 
Stand  up  yourself  and  match  him  fairly: 

Then  see  how  the  rascal  yields! 

I,  lass,  have  lived  no  gipsy,  flaunting 

Finery  while  his  poor  helpmate  grubs: 
Coin  I've  stored,  and  you  won't  be  wanting: 

You  shan't  beg  from  the  troughs  and  tubs. 
Nobly  you've  stuck  to  me,  though  in  his  kitchen     '  i 

Many  a  Marquis  would  hail  you  Cook! 
Palaces  you  could  have  ruled  and  grown  rich  &/^  ^^  ^ 

But  your  old  Jerry  you  never  forsook.  'i^ano  J 

Hand  up  the  chirper!  ripe  ale  winks  in  it;  '  ' 

Let's  have  comfort  and  be  at  peace.  '  ''*^"'<*'Si 

Once  a  stout  draught  made  me  light  as  a  linne'lEf'  '^ 
Cheer  up!  the  Lord  must  have  his  lease.       ^'-  '^''^T*i 

May  be — for  none  see  in  that  black  hollow —       "'''' 
It's  just  a  place  where  we're  held  in  pawn. 

And,  when  the  Great  Juggler  makes  as  to  swallow, 

■    It's  just  the  sword-trick — I  ain't  quite  gone! 


j; 


Yonder  came  smells  of  the  gorse,  so  nutty, 

Gold-like  and  warm:  it's  the  prime  of  May. 
Better  than  mortar,  brick  and  putty, 

Is  God's  house  on  a  blowing  day. 
Lean  me  more  up  the  mound;  now  I  feel  it: 

All  the  old  heath-smells!     Ain't  it  strange? 
There's  the  world  laughing,  as  if  to  conceal  it, 

But  He's  by  us,  juggling  the  change. 

I  mind  it  well,  by  the  sea-beach  lying. 

Once — it's  long  gone — when  two  gulls  we  beheldy._ 
Which,  as  the  moon  got  up,  were  flying  ,,,[ 

Down  a  big  wave  that  sparked  and  swelled. 


rtnh^^ft^.^       A   Court   Lady     -fn3o4     331^ 

Crack,  went  a  gun:  one  fell;  the  second     'f  ■ '  •-    •'  •''■='  '■  ' 
Wheeled  round  him  twice,  and  was  off  for  new  luck: 
■'There  in  the  dark  her  white  wing  beckoned: — '■  jiIj  vboolCi 
Drop  me  a  kiss — I'm  the  bird  dead-struck! 

George  Meredith  [182 8-1909] 

b  i>rf  irrti  ,A 

A  COURT  LADY  .b^ii^ 

Her  hair  was  tawny  with  gold,  her  eyes  with  purple  were 

dark. 
Her  cheeks'  pale  opal  burnt  with  a  red  and  restless  spark.'  i 

Never  was  lady  of  ]\Iilan  nobler  in  name  and  in  race; 
Never  was  lady  of  Italy  fairer  to  see  in  the  face. 

Never  was  lady  on  earth  more  true  as  woman  and  wife, 
Larger  in  judgment  and  instinct,  prouder  in  manners  and 
Hfe. 

She  stood  in  the  early  morning,  and  said  to  her  maidens, 

"Bring 
That  silken  robe  made  ready  to  wear  at  the  Court  of  the 

King. 

"Bring  me  the  clasps  of  diamond,  lucid,  clear  of  the  mote, 
Clasp  me  the  large  at  the  waist,  and  clasp  me  the  small  at 
, ,  .  the  throat. 

,;.  li;>.  :,    .A,,      11,1  n^/ud 

Diamonds  to  fasten  the  hair,  and  diamonds  to  fasten  the 
sleeves. 
Laces  to  drop  from  their  rays,  like  a  powder  of  snow  from 
the  eaves." 

Gorgeous  she  entered  the  sunlight  which  gathered  her  up  in 

a  flame. 
While,  straight  in  her  open  carriage,  she  to  the  hospital  came. 

In  she  went  at  the  door,  and  gazing  from  end  to  end, 
"Many  and  low  are  the  pallets,  but  each  is  the  place  of  a 
friend." 


33 16     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Up  she  passed  through  the  ■vKardg,  ajad  stood  at  a  young  man's 

bed:  ■■■ff  bnr,  .a-jiv/l  tmd  bniro-: 

Bloody  the  band  on  his  brow,  and  livid  the  droop  of  his  head. 

"Art  thou  a  Lombard,  my  brother?    Happy  art  thou,"  she 

cried, 
And  smiled  like  Italy  on  him:  he  dreamed  in  her  face  and 

died. 

Pale  with  his  passing  soul,  she  went  on  still  to  a  second: 
He  was  a  grave  hard  man,  whose  years  by  dungeons  were 
reckoned. 

Wounds  in  his  body  were  sore,  wounds  in  his  life  were  sorer. 
"Art  thou  a  Romagnole?"     Her  eyes  drove  lightnings  be- 
fore her. 

"Austrian  and  priest  had  joined  to  double  and  tighten  the 

cord 
Able  to  bind  thee,  O  strong  one, — free  by  the  stroke  of  a 

sword. 

"Now  be  grave  for  the  rest  of  us,  using  the  life  overcast 
To  ripen  our  wine  of  the  present,  (too  new)  in  glooms  of 
.     I  the  past." 

Down  she  stepped  to  a  pallet  where  lay  a  face  like  a  girl's, 
Young,  and  pathetic  with  dying, — a  deep  black  hole  in  the 
curls. 

"Art  thou  from  Tuscany,  brother?  and  seest  thou,  dreaming 

in  pain, 
Thy  mother  stand  in  the  piazza,  searching  the -list  of  the 

slain?"  .ufir.fi  ji 

Kind  as  a  mother  herself,  she  touched  his  cheeks  with  her 

hands:  ■■'  J '0-3  m.'n'i  jjnrsi;g  l)fic  ,'ioob 
"Blessed  is  ^he' who  has  botn'e  thee,  although  she  should 

weep  as  she  stands." 


A  Court   Lady  33^7 

On  she  passed  to  a  Frenchman,  his  arm  carried  off  by  a  ball: 
Kneeling,^ — "O  more  than  my  brother!  how  shall  I  thank 
thee  for  all? 

"Each  of  the  heroes  around  us  has  fought  for  his  land  and 

line, 
But  thou  hast  fought  for  a  stranger,  in  hale  of  a  wrong  not 

thine. 

"Happy  are  all  free  peoples,  too  strong  to  be  dispossessed: 
But  blessed  are  those  among  nations,  who  dare  to  be  strong 
for  the  rest!" 

Ever  she  passed  on  her  way,  and  came  to  a  couch  where 

pined 
One  with  a  face  from  Venetia,  white  with  a  hope  out  of  mind. 

Long  she  stood  and  gazed,  and  twice  she  tried  at  the  name, 
But  two  great  crystal  tears  were  all  that  faltered  and  came. 

Only  a  tear  for  Venice? — she  turned  as  in  passion  and  loss. 
And  stooped   to  his  forehead  and  kissed  it,  as  if  she  were 
kissing  the  cross. 

Faint  with  that  strain  of  heart  she  moved  on  then  to  an- 
other. 

Stern  and  strong  in  his  death.  "And  dost  thou  suffer,  my 
brother?" 

Holding  his  hands  in  hers: — "Out  of  the  Piedmont  lion 
Cometh  the  sweetness  of  freedom !  sweetest  to  live  or  to  die 
on." 

Holding  his  cold   rough  hands,^"Well,  oh,  well  have  ye 

done 
In  noble,  noble  Piedmont,  who  would  not  be  noble  alone." 

Back  he  fell  while  she  spoke.     She  rose  to  her  feet  with  a 

spring, —  .  • 

"  That  was  a  Piedmontese!  and  this  is  the  Court  of  the  King." 
Elizabeth  Barrett  Browniug  [1806-1861] 


33 1 8     Poems  of  Sentiment  and    Reflection 


THE  HIGH  TIDE  ON  THE  COAST  OF 
LINCOLNSHIRE 

(1571) 
The  old  mayor  climbed  the  belfry  tower, 

The  ringers  ran  by  two,  by  three; 
"PiiU,  if  ye  never  pulled  before; 

Good  ringers,  pull  your  best,"  quoth  he. 
"Play  uppe,  play  uppe,  O  Boston  bells! 
Play  all  your  changes,  all  your  swells, 

Play  uppe,  '  The  Brides  of  Enderby'. " 

Men  say  it  was  a  stolen  tyde — 
The  Lord  that  sent  it.  He  knows  all; 

But  in  m}iae  ears  doth  still  abide 
The  message  that  the  bells  let  fall: 

And  there  was  naught  of  strange,  beside 

The  flight  of  mews  and  peewits  pied 

By  millions  crouched  on  the  old  sea  wall. 

I  sat  and  spun  within  the  doore. 

My  thread  brake  off,  I  raised  myne  eyes; 
The  level  sun,  like  ruddy  ore. 

Lay  sinking  in  the  barren  skies; 
And  dark  against  day's  golden  death 
She  moved  where  Lindis  wandereth, 
IMy  Sonne's  fairc  wife,  Elizabeth. 

"Cusha!  Cusha!  Cusha!"  calling, 
Ere  the  early  dews  were  faUing, 
Farre  away  I  heard  her  song, 
"Cusha!  Cusha!"  all  along; 
Where  the  reedy  Lindis  floweth, 

Floweth,  floweth. 
From  the  meads  where  melick  groweth 
Faintly  came  her  milking  song — 

"Cusha!  Cusha!  Cusha!"  caUing, 
"For  the  dews  will  soone  be  falling; 

-•     •  "Leave  your  meadow  grasses  mellow, 

[id^i-oo-  Mellow,  mellow; 


High  Tide  on  the  Coast  of  Lincolnshire     3319 

Quit  your  cowslips,  cowslips  yellow; 

Come  uppc,  Whitefoot,  come  uppe,  Lightfoot; 

Quit  the  stalks  of  parsley  hollow, 

Hollo\v,  hollow; 
Come  uppe.  Jetty,  rise  and  follow, 
From  the  clovers  liff  your  head; 
Come  uppe,  Whitefoot,  come  uppe,  Lightfoot, 
Come  uppe,  Jetty,  rise  and  follow, 
Jetty,  to  the  milking  shed." 

If  it  be  long,  ay,  long  ago. 

When  I  beginne  to  think  howc  long, 

Againe  I  hear  the  Lindis  flow, 

Swift  as  an  arrowe,  sharpe  and  strong; 

And  all  the  aire,  it  seemcth  mee»  .,,-f,  ,,   j  p 

Bin  full  of  floating  bells  (sayth  shee), 

That  ring  the  tune  of  Enderby. 

Alle  fresh  the  level  pasture  lay, 

And  not  a  shadowe  mote  be  seene, 
Save  where  full  fyve  good  miles  away 

The  steeple  towered  from  out  the  greene; 
And  lo!  the  great  beU  farre  and  wide 
Was  heard  in  all  the  country  side 
That  Saturday  at  eventide. 

The  swanherds  where  their  sedges  are 
Moved  on  in  sunset's  golden  breath, 

The  shepherde  lads  I  heard  afarre, 
And  my  Sonne's  wife,  Elizabeth; 

Till  floating  o'er  the  grassy  sea 

Came  downe  that  kyndly  message  free, 

The  "Brides  of  Mavis  Enderby." 

Then  some  looked  uppe  into  the  sky, 

And  all  along  where  Lindis  flows 
To  where  the  goodly  vessels  lie. 

And  where  the  lordly  steeple  shows. 
They  sayde,   "And  why  should  this  thing  be? 
What  danger  lowers  by  land  or  sea? 
They  ring  the  tune  of  Enderby! 


33  20    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"For  evil  news  from  Mablethorpe, 
Of  pyrate  galleys  warping  down; 
For  shippes  ashore  beyond  the  scorpe,    ' 

The}'  have  not  spared  to  wake  the  towne : 
But  while  the  west  bin  red  to  see, 
And  storms  be  none,  atid  pyrates  flee, 
Why  ring  '  The  Brides  of  Enderby'?" 

I  looked  without,  and  lo!  my  sonne 

Came  riding  downe  with  might  and  main: 
He  raised  a  shout  as  he  drew  on. 
Till  all  the  welkin  rang  again, 
"Elizabeth!  Elizabeth!" 
(A  sweeter  woman  ne'er  drew  breath 
Than  my  Sonne's  wife,  Elizabeth.) 

"The  olde  sea  wall  (he  erred)  is  downe, 
The  rising  tide  comes  on  apace. 

And  boats  adrift  in  yonder  towne 
Go  sailing  uppe  the  ma,rket-place." 

He  shook  as  one  that  looks  on  death: 

"  God  save  you,  mother! "  straight  he  saith; 

"Where  is  my  wife,  Elizabeth?" 

"Good  sonne,  where  Lindis  winds  her  way, 

With  her  two  bairns  I  marked  her  long; 
And  ere  yon  bells  beganne  to  play, 
Afar  I  heard  her  milking  song." 
He  looked  across  the  grassy  lea, 
To  right,  to  left,  "Ho,  Enderby!" 
They  rang  "The  Brides  of  Enderby!" 

With  that  he  cried  and  beat  his  breast; 

For,  lo!  along  the  river's  bed 
A  mighty  eygre  reared  his  crest. 

And  uppe  the  Lindis  raging  sped. 
It  swept  with  thunderous  noises  loud;       '!" 
Shaped  like  a  curling  snow-white  cloud,     '■ 
Or  like  a  demon  in  a  shroud. 


High  Tide  on  the  Coast  of  Lincohishire     332 1 

And  rearing  Lindis  backward  pressed, 
Shook  all  her  trembling  bankes  amaine ; 

Then  madly  at  the  eygre's  breast 

Flung  uppe  her  weltering  walls  again. 

Then  bankes  came  downe  with  ruin  and  rout — 

Then  beaten  foam  flew  round  about — 

Then  all  the  mighty  floods  were  out. 

So  farre,  so  fast  the  eygre  drave, 

The  heart  had  hardly  time  to  beat 
Before  a  shallow  seething  wave 

Sobbed  in  the  grasses  at  oure  feet: 
The  feet  had  hardly  time  to  flee 
Before  it  brake  against  the  knee, 
And  all  the  world  was  in  the  sea. 

Upon  the  roofe  we  sate  that  night, 
The  noise  of  bells  went  sweeping  by; 

I  marked  the  lofty  beacon  light 

Stream  from  the  church  tower,  red  and  high — 

A  lurid  mark  and  dread  to  see ; 

And  awsome  bells  they  were  to  mee. 

That  in  the  dark  rang  "Enderby." 

They  rang  the  sailor  lads  to  guide 

From  roofe  to  roofe  who  fearless  rowed; 

And  I — my  sonne  was  at  my  side, 
A«d  yet  the  ruddy  beacon  glowed: 

And  yet  he  moaned  beneath  his  breath, 

"O  come  in  life,  or  come  in  death! 

O  lost!  my  love,- Elizabeth!" 

And  didst  thou  visit  him  no  more? 

Thou  didst,  thou  didst,  my  daughter  deare; 
The  waters  laid  thee  at  his  doore. 

Ere  yet  the  early  dawn  was  clear. 
Thy  pretty  bairns  in  fast  embrace, 
The  lifted  sun  shone  on  thy  face, 
Downe  drifted  to  thy  dwelling-place. 


33^^     Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Reflection 

That  flow  strewed  wrecks  about  the  grass, 
That  ebbe  swept  out  the  flocks  to  sea; 

A  fatal  ebbe  and  flow,  alas! 

To  manye  more  than  myne  and  mee; 

But  each  will  mourn  his  own  (she  saith) ; 

And  sweeter  woman  ne'er  drew  breath 

Than  my  Sonne's  wife,  Elizabeth. 

I  shall  never  hear  her  more 
By  the  reedy  Lindis  shore, 
"Cusha!  Cusha!  Cusha!"  calling, 
Ere  the  early  dews  be  falling; 
I  shall  never  hear  her  song, 
"Cusha!  Cusha!"  all  along 
Where  the  sunny  Lindis  floweth, 

Goeth,  floweth; 
From  the  meads  where  melick  groweth, 

When  the  water  winding  down, 

Onward  floweth  to  the  town. 

r 

I  shaU  never  see  her  more 

Where  the  reeds  and  rushes  quiver, 

Shiver,  quiver; 
Stand  beside  the  sobbing  river, 
Sobbing,  throbbing,  in  its  falling 
To  the  sandy  lonesome  shore; 
I  shall  never  hear  her  calling, 
"Leave  your  meadow  grasses  mellow. 

Mellow,  mellow; 
Quit  your  cowslips,  cowslips  yellow; 
Come  uppe,  Whitefoot,  come  uppe,  Lightfoot; 
Quit  your  pipes  of  parsley  hoUow, 

Hollow,  hollow; 
Come  uppe,  Lightfoot,  rise  and  follow; 

Lightfoot,  Whitefoot, 
From  your  clovers  lift  the  head; 
Come  uppe,  Jetty,  follow,  follow, 
Jetty,  to  the  milking  shed." 

Jean  Ingelow  [i82o-i8g7] 


The  Skeleton  in  Armor  33'^3 


THE  SKELETON  IN  ARMOR 

"Speak!  speak!  thou  fearful  guest! 
Who,  with  thy  hollow  breast 
Still  in  rude  armor  dressed, 

Comest  to  daunt  me! 
Wrapped  not  in  Eastern  balms, 
But  with  thy  fleshless  palms 
Stretched,  as  if  asking  alms. 

Why  dost  thou  haunt  me?" 

Then,  from  those  cavernous  eyes 
Pale  flashes  seemed  to  rise. 
As  when  the  Northern  skies 

Gleam  in  December; 
And,  like  the  water's  flow 
Under  December's  snow. 
Came  a  dull  voice  of  woe 

From  the  heart's  chamber. 

"I  was  a  Viking  old! 

My  deeds,  though  manifold, 

No  Skald  in  song  has  told. 

No  Saga  taught  thee! 
Take  heed,  that  in  thy  verse 
Thou  dost  the  tale  rehearse. 
Else  dread  a  dead  man's  curse; 

For  this  I  sought  thee. 

"Far  in  the  Northern  Land, 
By  the  wild  Baltic's  strand, 
I,  with  my  childish  hand, 

Tamed  the  gerfalcon; 
And,  with  my  skates  fast-bound. 
Skimmed  the  half-frozen  Sound, 
That  the  poor  whimpering  hound 

Trembled  to  walk  on. 

"Oft  to  his  frozen  lair 
Tracked  I  the  grisly  bear, 
While  from  my  path  the  hare 
Fled  like  a  shadow; 


33^4    Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Oft  through  the  forest  dark 
Followed  the  were-wolf's  bark, 
Until  the  soaring  lark 

Sang  from  the  meadow. 

"But  when  I  older  grew, 
Joining  a  corsair's  crew, 
O'er  the  dark  sea  I  flew 

With  the  marauders. 
Wild  was  the  life  we  led; 
Many  the  souls  that  sped, 
Many  the  hearts  that  bled, 

By  our  stern  orders. 

"Many  a  wassail-bout 
Wore  the  long  Winter  out; 
Often  our  midnight  shout 

Set  the  cocks  crowing, 
As  we  the  Berserk's  tale 
Measured  in  cups  of  ale. 
Draining  the  oaken  pail. 

Filled  to  o'erflowing. 

"Once  as  I  told  in  glee 
Tales  of  the  stormy  sea, 
Soft  eyes  did  gaze  on  me. 

Burning  yet  tender; 
And  as  the  white  stars  shine 
On  the  dark  Norway  pine, 
On  that  dark  heart  of  mine 

Fell  their  soft  splendor. 

"I  wooed  the  blue-eyed  maid, 
Yielding,  yet  half  afraid. 
And  in  the  forest's  shade 

Our  vows  were  plighted. 
Under  its  loosened  vest 
Fluttered  her  little  breast,   i 
Like  birds  within  their  nest 

By  the  hawk  frighted. 


The  Skeleton  in  Armor 

"Bright  in  her  father's  hall 
Shields  gleamed  upon  the  wall, 
Loud  sang  the  minstrels  all, 

Chanting  his  glory; 
When  of  old  Hildebrand 
I  asked  his  daughter's  hand, 
Mute  did  the  minstrels  stand 

To  hear  my  story. 

"While  the  brown  ale  he  quaffed, 
Loud  then  the  champion  laughed. 
And  as  the  wind-gusts  waft 

The  sea-foam  brightly, 
So  the  loud  laugh  of  scorn. 
Out  of  those  lips  unshorn. 
From  the  deep  drinking-horn 

Blew  the  foam  lightly. 

"She  was  a  Prince's  child, 

I  but  a  Viking  wild, 

And  though  she  blushed  and  smiled, 

I  was  discarded! 
Should  not  the  dove  so  white 
Follow  the- sea-mew's  flight, 
Why  did  they  leave  that  night 

Her  nest  unguarded? 

"Scarce  had  I  put  to  sea, 
Bearing  the  maid  with  me, 
Fairest  of  all  was  she 

Among  the  Norsemen! 
When  on  the  white  sea-strand, 
Waving  his  armed  hand, 
Saw  we  old  Hildebrand, 

With  twenty  horsemen. 

"Then  launched  they  to  the  blast, 
Bent  like  a  reed  each  mast, 
Yet  we  were  gaining  fast. 

When  the  wind  failed  us; 


33'^S 


33'^^     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  with  a  sudden  flaw 
Came  round  the  gusty  Skaw, 
So  that  our  foe  we  saw 
Laugh  as  he  hailed  us. 

"And  as  to  catch  the  gale 
Round  veered  the  flapping  sail, 
'Death!'  was  the  helmsman's  hail, 

'Death  without  quarter!' 
Mid-ships  with  iron  keel 
Struck  we  her  ribs  of  steel; 
Down  her  black  hulk  did  reel 

Through  the  black  water! 

"As  with  his  wings  aslant. 
Sails  the  fierce  cormorant. 
Seeking  some  rocky  haunt. 

With  his  prey  laden, — 
So  toward  the  open  main, 
Beating  to  sea  again, 
Through  the  wild  hurricane. 

Bore  I  the  maiden. 

"Three  weeks  we  westward  bore. 
And  when  the  storm  was  o'er. 
Cloud-like  we  saw  the  shore 

Stretching  to  leeward; 
There  for  my  lady's  bower 
Built  I  the  lofty  tower. 
Which,  to  this  very  hour, 

Stands  looking  seaward. 

'There  lived  we  many  years; 
Time  dried  the  maiden's  tears; 
She  had  forgot  her  fears, 

She  was  a  mother; 
Death  closed  her  mild  blue  eyes. 
Under  that  tower  she  lies; 
Ne'er  shall  the  sun  arise 

On  such  another! 


Daniel  Gray  33^7 

"Still  grew  my  bosom  then, 
Still  as  a  stagnant  fen! 
Hateful  to  me  were  men, 

The  sunlight  hateful! 
In  the  vast  forest  here, 
Clad  in  my  warlike  gear, 
Fell  I  upon  my  spear, 

Oh,  death  was  grateful! 

"Thus,  seamed  with  many  scars. 
Bursting  these  prison  bars, 
Up  to  its  native  stars 

My  soul  ascended! 
There  from  the  flowing  bowl 
Deep  drinks  the  warrior's  soul. 
Skoal  !  to  the  Northland!  skoal!" 

Thus  the  tale  ended. 
Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  [1807-188 2] 


DANIEL   GRAY 

If  I  shaU  ever  win  the  home  in  heaven 
For  whose  sweet  rest  I  humbly  hope  and  pray. 
In  the  great  company  of  the  forgiven 
I  shall  be  sure  to  find  old  Daniel  Gray. 

I  knew  him  well;  in  truth,  few  knew  him  better; 
For  my  young  eyes  oft  read  for  him  the  AVord, 
And  saw  how  meekly  from  the  crystal  letter 
He  drank  the  life  of  his  beloved  Lord. 

Old  Daniel  Gray  was  not  a  man  who  lifted 
On  ready  words  his  freight  of  gratitude, 
Nor  was  he  called  upon  among  the  gifted. 
In  the  prayer-meetings  of  his  neighborhood. 

He  had  a  few  old-fashioned  words  and  phrases. 
Linked  in  with  sacred  texts  and  Sunday  rhymes; 
And  I  suppose  that  in  his  prayers  and  graces 
I've  heard  them  all  at  least  a  thousand  times. 


33^8     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

I  see  him  now — his  form,  his  face,  his  motions, 
His  homespun  habit,  and  his  silver  hair, — 
And  hear  the  language  of  his  trite  devotions. 
Rising  behind  the  straight-backed  kitchen  chair. 

I  can  remember  how  the  sentence  sounded— 
"Help  us,  O  Lord,  to  pray  and  not  to  faint!" 
And  how  the  "  conquering-and-to-conquer  "  rounded 
The  loftier  aspirations  of  the  saint. 

He  had  some  notions  that  did  not  improve  him. 
He  never  kissed  his  children — so  they  say; 
And  finest  scenes  and  fairest  flowers  would  move  him 
Less  than  a  horseshoe  picked  up  in  the  way. 

He  had  a  hearty  hatred  of  oppression, 
And  righteous  words  for  sin  of  every  kind ; 
Alas,  that  the  transgressor  and  transgression 
Were  linked  so  closely  in  his  honest  mind! 

He  could  see  naught  but  vanity  in  beauty, 
And  naught  but  weakness  in  a  fond  caress, 
And  pitied  men  whose  views  of  Christian  duty 
Allowed  indulgence  in  such  fooHshness. 

Yet  there  was  love  and  tenderness  within  him;  ,  . 
And  I  am  told  that  when  his  Charley  died. 
Nor  nature's  need  nor  gentle  words  could  win  him 
From  his  fond  vigils  at  the  sleeper's  side. 

And  when  they  came  to  bury  little  Charley,. 
They  found  fresh  dewdrops  sprinkled  in  his  hair, 
And  on  his  breast  a  rose-bud  gathered  early, 
And  guessed,  but  did  not  know  who  placed  it  there. 

Honest  and  faithful,  constant  in  his  calling. 
Strictly  attendant  on  the  means  of  grace, 
Instant  in  prayer,  and  fearful  most  of  falling, 
Old  Daniel  Gray  was  always  in  his  place. 


"Curfew   Must  Not   Ring  To-night"    3329 

A  practical  old  man,  and  yet,  a  dreamer, 
He  thought  that  in  some  strange,  unlooked-for  way 
His  mighty  Friend  in  Heaven,  the  great  Redeemer, 
Would  honor  him  with  wealth  some  golden  day. 

This  dream  he  carried  in  a  hopeful  spirit 
Until  in  death  his  patient  eye  grew  dim, 
And  his  Redeemer  called  him  to  inherit 
The  heaven  of  wealth  long  garnered  up  for  him. 

So,  if  I  ever  win  the  home  in  Heaven 

For  whose  sweet  rest  I  humbly  hope  and  pray. 

In  the  great  company  of  the  forgiven 

I  shall  be  sure  to  find  old  Daniel  Gray. 

Josiah  Gilbert  Holland  [181 9-1 881] 


"CURFEW  MUST  NOT  RING  TO-NIGHT" 

Slowly  England's  sun  was  setting  o'er  the  hilltops  far  away. 
Filling  all  the  land  with  beauty  at  the  close  of  one  sad  day, 
And  the  last  rays  kissed  the  forehead  of  a  man  and  maiden 

fair, — 
He  with  footsteps  slow  and  weary,  she  with  sunny  floating 

hair; 
He  with  bowed  head,  sad  and  thoughtful^  she  with  lips  all 

cold  and  white. 
Struggling  to  keep  back  the  murmur, — 
"Curfew  must  not  ring  to-night." 

"Sexton,"  Bessie's  white  lips  faltered,  pointing  to  the  prison 

old, 
With  its  turrets  tall  and  gloomy,  with  its  walls  dark,  damp, 

and  cold, 
'■'.'/I've  a  lover  in  that  prison,  doomed  this  very  night  to  rlie, 
At  the  ringing  of  the  Curfew,  and  no  earthly  help  is  nigh; 
Cromwell   will   not   come  till   sunset,"  and   her   lips  grew 

strangely  white 
As  she  breathed  the  husky  whisper:— 

"Curfew  must  not  ring  to-night." 


333*^     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"Bessie,"  calmly  spoke  the  sexton, — every  word  pierced 

her  young  heart 
Like  the  piercing  of  an  arrow,  like  a  deadly  poisoned  dart, — 
"Long,  long  years  I've  rung  the  Curfew  from  that  gloomy, 

shadowed  tower; 
livery  evening,  just  at  sunset,  it  has  told  the  twilight  hour; 
I  have  done  my  duty  ever,  tried  to  do  it  just  and  right. 
Now  I'm  old  I  will  not  falter, — 

Curfew,  it  must  ring  to-night." 

Wild  her  eyes  and  pale  her  features,  stern  and  white  her 

thoughtful  brow. 
As  within  her  secret  bosom  Bessie  made  a  solemn  vow. 
She  had  listened  while  the  judges  read,  without  a  tear  or 

sigh: 
"At  the  ringing  of  the  Curfew,  Basil  Underwood  must  die." 
And  her  breath  came  fast  and  faster,  and  her  eyes  grew 

large  and  bright; 
In  an  undertone  she  murmured: — 

"Curfew  must  not  ring  to-night."  ''• 

With  quick  step  she  bounded  forward,  sprang  within  the 

old  church  door. 
Left  the  old  man  threading  slowly  paths  he'd  trod  so  oft 

before ; 
Not  one  moment  paused  the  maiden,  but  with  eye  and  cheek 

aglow 
Mounted  up  the  gloomy  tower,  where  the  bell  swung  to  and 

fro: 
As  she  cHmbed  the  dusty  ladder,  on  which  fell  no  ray  of  light. 
Up  and  up, — her  white  lips  saying: — 

■  "Curfew  must  not  ring  to-night!" 

She  has  reached  the  topmost  ladder;  o'er  her  hangs  the  great, 

dark  bell; 
Awful  is  the  gloom  beneath  her,  like  the  pathway  down  to 

hell. 
Lo,   the  ponderous  tongue  is  swinging, — 'tis  the  hour  of 

Curfew  now. 
And  the  sight  has  chilled  her  bosom,  stopped  her  breath, 

and  paled  her  brow. 


"Curfew   Must   Not   Ring  To-night"    3331 

Shall  she  lei  it  ring?    No,  never!  flash  her  eyes  with  sudden 

light, 
As'she  springs,  and  grasps  it  firmly, — 

"Curfew  shall  not  ring  to-night!" 

Out  she  swung — far  out;  the  city  seemed  a  speck,  of  light 

below, 
There  'twixt  heaven  and  earth  suspended  as  the  bell  swung 

to  and  fro, 
And  the  half-deaf  sexton  ringing  (years  he  had  not  heard 

the  bell), 
Sadly   thought    the    twilight    Curfew   rang   young   Basil's 

funeral  knell. 
Still  the  maiden  clung  more  firmly,  and  with  trembling  lips 

so  white, 
Said  to  hush  her  heart's  wild  throbbing: — 
"Curfew  shall  not  ring  to-night!" 

It  was  o'er,  the  bell  ceased  sv/aying,  and  the  maiden  stepped 

once  more 
Firmly  on  the  dark  old  ladder  where  for  hundred  years  before 
Human  foot  had  not  been  planted.    The  brave  deed  that  she 

had  done 
Should  be  told  long  ages  after:  as  the  rays  of  setting  sun 
Crimson  all  the  sky  with  beauty,  aged  sires,  with  heads  of 

white. 
Tell  the  eager,  listening  children, 

■"Curfew  did  not  ring  that  night." 

O'er  the  distant  hills  came  Cromwell;  Bessie  sees  him,  and 

her  brow, 
Lately  white  with  fear  and  anguish,  has  no  anxious  traces 

now. 
At  his  feet  she  tells  her  story,  shows  her  hands  all  bruised 

and  torn; 
And  her  face  so  sweet  and  pleading,  yet  with  sorrow  pale 

and  worn. 
Touched  his  heart  with  sudden  pity,  lit  his  eyes  with  misty 

light: 
"Go!  your  lover  lives,"  said  Cromwell, 
"Curfew  shall  not  ring  to-night." 


333'^     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

Wide  they  flung  the  massive  portal;  led  the  prisoner  forth  to 
die, — 

All  his  bright  young  life  before  him.     'Neath  the  darkening 
English  sky 

Bessie  comes  with  flying  footsteps,  eyes  aglow  with  love- 
light  sweet; 

Kneeling  on  the  turf  beside  him,  lays  his  pardon  at  his  feet. 

In  his  brave,  strong  arms  he  clasped  her,  kissed  the  face  up- 
turned and  white, 

Whispered,  "Darling,  you  have  saved  me, — 
Curfew  will  not  ring  to-night!" 

Rose  Harfwick  Thorpe  [1850- 


THE  OLD   SERGEANT 

[JANUARY  I,  1863] 

The  Carrier  cannot  sing  to-day  the  ballads 

With  which  he  used  to  go,  '' 

Rhyming  the  glad  rounds  of  the  happy  New  Years 

Thai  are  now  beneath  the  snow: 

For  the  same  awful  and  portentous  Shadow 

That  overcast  the  earth. 
And  smote  the  land  last  year  with  desolation, 

Still  darkens  every  hearth. 

And  the  Carrier  hears  Beethoven's  mighty  death-march 

Come  up  from  every  mart; 
And  he  hears  and  feels  it  breathing  in.  his  bosom, 

A  nd  beating  in  his  heart. 

And  to-day,  a  scarred  and  weather-beaten  veteran, 

Again  he  comes  along. 
To  tell  the  story  of  the  Old  Year's  struggles 

In  another  New  Year's  song. 

And  the  song  is  his,  but  not  so  with  the  story; 

For  the  story,  you  must  know. 
Was  told  in  prose  to  Assistant-Surgeon  Austin, 

By  a  soldier  of  Shiloh: 


The  Old  Sergeant  3333 

By  Robert  Burton,  ivho  was  broughl  up  on  the  Adams, 

With  his  death-wound  in  his  side, 
And  who  told  the  story  to  the  Assistant-Surgeon, 

On  the  same  night  that  he  died. 

W- 

But  the  singer  feds  it  will  belter  suit  the  ballad, 

If  all  should  deem  it  right, 
To  tell  the  story  as  if  ivhat  it  speaks  of 

Had  happened  but  last  night. 

"Come  a  little  nearer,  Doctor, — thank  you;  let  me  take  the 

cup: 
Draw  your  chair  up, — draw  it  closer;  just  another  little  sup! 
May  be  you  think  I'm  better;  but  I'm  pretty  well  used  up, — ■ 
Doctor,  you've  done  all  you  could  do,  but  I'm  just  a-going 

up! 

"Feel  my  pulse,  sir,  if  you  want  to,  but  it  ain't  much  use  to 

try"— 
"Never  say  that,"  said  the  Surgeon,  as  he  smothered  down 

a  sigh; 
"It  will  never  do,  old  comrade,  for  a  soldier  to  say  die!" 
"What  you  say  will  make  no  difference.  Doctor,  when  you 

come  to  die. 

"Doctor,  what  has  been  the  matter?"     "You  were  very 

faint,  they  say; 
You  must  try  to  get  to  sleep  now."     "Doctor,  have  I  been 


away 


5" 


"Not  that  anybody  knows  of!"     "Doctor — Doctor,  please 

to  stay! 
There  is  something  I  must  teU  you,  and  you  won't  have  long 

to  stay! 
Ifii 

"I  have  got  my  marching  orders,  and  I'm  ready  now  to  go; 
Doctor,  did  you  say  I  fainted? — but  it  couldn't  ha'  been  so. 
For  as  sure  as  I'm  a  Sergeant,  and  was  wounded  at  Shiloh, 
I've  this  ver>'  night  been  back  there,  on  the  old  field  of 

Shiloh! 


3334     i'*oems   of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"This  is  all  that  I  remember:  the  last  time  the  Lighter 
ca,me  '.>'i  ivuw<)'j:-\\'.',,ob  ?.\\\  AW'W 

And  the  lights  had  all  been  lowered,  and '  the  rioises  much 

the  same, 
He  had  not  been  gone  five  minutes  before  something  called 

my  name: 
'  Orderly  Sergeant-^Robert  Burton!' — just  that  way  it 

called  my  name. 

"And  I  wondered  who  could  call  me  so  distinctly  and  so 

slow, 
Knew  it  couldn't  be  the  Lighter;  he  could  not  have  spoken  so; 
And  I  tried  lo  answer,  'Here,  sir!'  but  I  couldn't  make 

it  go; 
For  I  couldn't  move  a  muscle,  and  I  couldn't  make  it  go.   ^ 

"Then  I  thought:  It's  all  a  nightmare,  all  a  humbug  and  a 
bore; 

Just  another  foolish  grape-vine — and  it  won't  come  any 
more; 

But  it  came,  sir,  notwithstanding,  just  the  same  way  as  be- 
fore: 

■'^Orderly  Sergeant — Robert  Burton!' — even  plainer 
than  before. 

» 

"That  is  all  that  I  remember,  till  a  sudden  burst  of  light. 
And  I  stood  beside  the  river,  where  we  stood  that  Sunday 

night. 
Waiting  to  be  ferried  over  to  the  dark  bluffs  opposite, 
When  the  river  was  perdition  and  all  hell  was  opposite! — 

''And  the  same  old  palpitation  came  again  in  all  its 
power. 

And  I  heard  a  Bugle  sounding,  as  from  some  celestial 
Tower; 

And  the  same  mysterious  voice  said:  'It  is  the  Eleventh 
Hour! 

'Orderly  Sergeant! — Robert  Burton — It  is  the  Elev- 
enth Hour!' 


!•;  The  Old  Sergeant  3335 

" Dr.  Austin ! — what  day  is  this? "     "It  is  Wednesday  night, 

you  know." 
"Yes, — to-morrow  will  be  New  Year's  and  a  right  good  time 

below ! 
What  time  is  it,  Dr.  Austin?"     "Nearly  Twelve."     "Then 

don't  you  go! 
Can  it  be  that  all  this  happened — all  this^not  an  hour  ago! 

"There  was  where  the  gunboats  opened  on  the  dark  re- 
bellious host; 

And  where  Webster  scmicircled  his  last  guns  upon  the  coast; 

There  were  still  the  two  log-houses,  just  the  same,  or  else 
their  ghost! 

And  the  same  old  transport  came  and  took  me  over — or  its 
ghost! 

fr 

"And  the  old  field  lay  before  me,  ah  deserted,  far  a^d  wide; 

There  was  where  they  fell  on  Prentiss — there  McClernand 
met  the  tide; 

There  was  where  stern  Sherman  rallied,  and  where  Hurl- 
but's  heroes  died, — 

Lower  down,  where  Wallace  charged  them,  and  kept  charg- 
ing till  Jie  died. 

"There  was  where  Lew  Wallace  showed  them  he  was  of  the 

canny  kin. 
There  was  where  old  Nelson  thundered,  and  where  Rousseau 

waded  in; 
There  McCook  sent  'em  to  breakfast,  and  we  all  began  to 

win—  ,[  i,fiA 

There  was  where  the  grape-shot  took  me,  just  as  we  began 

to  win. 

"Now,  a  shroud  of  snow  and  silence  over  everything  was 
-h     spread ;  ,-.£ 

And  but  for  this  old  blue  mantle  and  the  old  hat  on  my 

head, 
I  should  not  have  even  doubted,  to  this  moment,  I  was 

dead, — 
For  my  footsteps  were  as  silent  as  the  snow  upon  the  dead! 


333^     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

"Death  and  silence! — Death  and  silence!  all  around  me  as  I 

sped ! 
And  behold,  a  mighty  Tower,  as  if  builded  to  the  dead, 
To  the  Heaven  of  the  heavens  lifted  up  its  mighty  head. 
Till  the  Stars  and  Stripes  of  Heaven  all  seemed  waving  from 

its  head! 

"Round  and  mighty-based  it  towered  up  into  the  infinite — 
And  I  knew  no  mortal  mason  could  have  built  a  shaft  so 

bright; 
For  it  shone,  like  solid  sunshine;  and  a  winding  stair  of 

light     ^  odj  Jeu't  ,ao2!JOf{-goI 
Wound  around  it  and  around  it  till  it  wound  dear  out  of 

sight ! 

"And,  behold,  as  I  approached  it — with  a  rapt  and  dazzled 

stare,—  lohd 'id  bloii  hio  odi  bnJ." 

Thinking  that  I  saw  old  comrades  just  ascending  the  great 

Stair, — 
Suddenly  the  solemn  challenge  broke  of,  '  Halt !  and  who 

goes  there?' 
'  I'm  a  friend,'  I  said,  '  if  you  are.'     '  Then  advance,  sir,  to 

the  Stair!' 

"I  advanced!     That  sentry,  Doctor,  was  Elijah  Ballantyne! 
First  of  all  to  fall  on  Monday,  after  we  had  formed  the 

line! 
'  Welcome,  my  old  Sergeant,  welcome!     Welcome  by  that 

countersign!' 
And  he  pointed  to  the  scar  there,  under  this  old  cloak  of 

mine. 

"As  he  grasped  my  hand,  I  shuddered,  thinking  only  of  the 

'  grave; 
But  he  smiled  and  pointed  upward  with  a  bright  and  blood- 
less glaive: 

*  That's  the  way,  sir,  to  Headquarters.'     '  What  Headquar- 

ters?'    '  Of  the  Brave.' 

*  But  the  great  Tower? '     '  That  was  builded  of  the  great 
'  ■       deeds  of  the  Brave!'    -  Jn-^Iia  ^.i. 


Jim    Bludso  of  the    IVairie   Belle     3337 

"Then  a  sudden  shame  came  o'er  me  aL  his  unifurm  of  h'glil; 

At  m}^  own  so  old  and  tattered,  and  at  his  so  new  and  bright ; 

'Ah!'  said  he,  'you  have  forgotten  the  New  Uniform  to- 
night! 

Hurry  back,  for  you  must  be  here  at  just  twelve  o'clock  to- 
night!' 

"And  the  next  thing  I  remember,  you  were  sitting  there,  and 
I  .  .  .  .  ri-t  f  If  I  (fa  oT 

Doctor — did  you  hear  a  footstep?  Hark! — God  bless  you 
aU!     Good-by! 

Doctor,  please  to  give  my  musket  and  my  knapsack,  when 
.1  die. 

To  my  son — my  son  that's  coming, — he  won't  get  here  till 
I  die! 

"Tell  him  his  old  father  blessed  him- -as  he  never  did  be- 
fore,— 

And  to  carry  that  old  musket  .  .  .  Hark!  a  knock  is  at 
the  door!  .  .  . 

Till  the  Union  .  .  .  See!  it  opens!"  .  .  .  "Father! 
Father!  speak  once  more!"  .  .  . 

" Bless  you  !" — gasped  the  old  gray  Sergeant.  And  he  lay 
and  said  no  more! 

Byron  Forccythc  Willson  [1837-1867] 


JIM   BLUDSO  OF  THE   PRAIRIE   BELLE 

Wall,  no!  I  can't  tell  whar  he  lives, 

Becase  he  don't  live,  you  see; 
Leastways,  he's  got  out  of  the  habit 

Of  livin'  like  you  and  me. 
Whar  have  you  been  for  the  last  three  year 

That  you  haven't  heard  folks  tell 
How  Jimmy  Bludso  passed  in  his  checks 

The  night  of  the  Prairie  Belle? 

He  weren't  no  saint, — them  engineers 

Is  all  pretty  much  alike, — 
One  wife  in  Natchez-under-the-Hill 

And  another  one  here,  in  Pike; 


^^^S     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

'''•''     A  keerless  man  in  his  talk,  was  Jim, 
And  an  awkward  hand  in  a  row, 
But  he  never  flunked,  and  he  never  lied, — 
I  reckon  he  never  knowed  how. 

And  this  was  all  the  religion  he  had, — 

To  trcc.t  his  engine  well; 
Never  be  passed  on  the  river; 

To  mind  the  pilot's  bell; 
And  if  ever  the  Prairie  Belle  took  fire, — 

A  thousand  times  he  swore 
He'd  hold  her  nozzle  agin  the  bank 

Till  the  last  soul  got  ashore.  . 

"'  All  boats  has  their  daj'-  on  the  Mississip, 

And  her  day  come  at  last, — 
The  Movastar  was  a  better  boat. 

But  the  Belle  she  wouldn't  be  passed. 
And  so  she  come  tearin'  along  that  night  — 

The  oldest  craft  on  the  line — 
With  a  nigger  squat  on  her  safety-valve, 

And  her  furnace  crammed,  rosin  and  pine. 

The  fire  bust  out  as  she  clared  the  bar,  i ' 

And  burnt  a  hole  in  the  night, 
And  quick  as  a  flash  she  turned,  and  made 

For  that  wilier-bank  on  the  right. 
There  was  runnin'  and  cursin',  but  Jim  yelled  out, 

Over  all  the  infernal  roar, 
"•I'll  hold  her  nozzle  agin  the  bank 

Till  the  last  galoot's  ashore." 

Through  the  hot,  black  breath  of  the  burnin'  boat 

Jim  Bludso's  voice  was  heard,     ' '"  '^ 
And  they  all  had  trust  in  his  cussediiess,' 

And  knowed  he  would  keep  his  word. 
And,  sure's  you're  born,  they  all  gofoflf 

Afore  the  smoke-stacks  fell, — 
And  Bludso's  ghost  went  up  alone 

In  the  smoke  of  the  Prairie  Belle. 

He  weren't  no  saint, — but  at  jedgment 
I'd  run  my  chance  with  Jim, 


loiiDaft^fl    ;     Little    Breeches  3339 

'Longside  of  some  pious  gentlemen 
That  wouldn't  shook  hands  with  him. 

He  seen  his  duty,  a  dead-sure  thing, — ■   '  > 
And  went  for  it  thar  and  then; 

And  Christ  ain't  a  going  to  be  too  hard 
On  a  man  that  died  for  men. 

John  Hay  [1838-1905] 


LITTLE  BREECHES 

I  don't  go  much  on  religion, 

I  never  ain't  had  no  show; 
But  I've  got  a  middlin'  tight  grip,  sir. 

On  the  handful  o'  things  I  know. 
I  don't  pan  out  on  the  prophets 

And  free-will,  and  that  sort  of  thing,— 
But  I  b'lieve  in  God  and  the  angels. 

Ever  sence  one  night  last  spring. 

I  come  into  town  with  some  turnips. 

And  my  little  Gabc  come  along, — 
No  four-year-old  in  the  county 

Could  beat  him  for  pretty  and  strong, 
Peart  and  chipper  and  sassy. 

Always  ready  to  swear  and  fight, — 
And  I'd  larnt  him  to  chaw  terbacker. 

Jest  to  keep  his  milk-teeth  white. 

The  snow  come  down  like  a  blanket 

As  I  passed  by  Taggarl's  store; 
I  went  in  for  a  jug  of  molasses 

And  left  the  team  at  the  door.  , . 

They  scared  at  something  and  started,— 

I  heard  one  little  squall, 
And  hell-to-split  over  the  prairie 

Went  team.  Little  Breeches  and  all. 

Hell-to-split  over  the  prairie! 

I  was  almost  froze  with  skeer; 
But  we  rousted  up  some  torches. 

And  sarchcd  for  'cm  far  and  near. 


3340     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

At  last  we  struck  hosses  and  wagon,     roJ- 
Snowed  under  a  soft  white  moundyfr 

Upsot,  dead  beat, — but  of  little  Gabe 
No  hide  nor  hair  was  found. 

And  here  all  hope  soured  on  me 

Of  my  fellow-critter's  aid, — 
I  jest  flopped  down  on  my  marrow-bones, 

Crotch-deep  in  the  snow,  and  prayed. 

By  this,  the  torches  was  played  out, 
And  me  and  Isrul  Parr      ''rrii;  i^jvorr 

Went  off  for  some  wood  to  a  sheepfold 
That  he  said  was  somewhar  thar. 

We  found  it  at  last,  and  a  little  shed 

Where  they  shut  up  the  lambs  at  night. 
We  looked  in,  and  seen  them  huddled  thar, 

So  warm  and  sleepy  and  white; 
And  thar  sot  Little  Breeches  and  chirped, 

As  peart  as  ever  you  see, 
"I  want  a  chaw  of  terbacker. 

And  that's  what's  the  matter  of  me." 

How  did  he  get  thar?     Angels. 

He  could  never  have  walked  in  that  storm. 
They  jest  scooped  down  and  toted  him 

To  whar  it  was  safe  a,nd  warm. 
And  I  think  that  saving  a  little  child, 

And  fotching  him  to  his  own. 
Is  a  derned  sight  better  business 

Than  loafing  around  the  Throne. 

John  Hay  [1838-1905] 


THE   VAGABONDS 

We  are  two  travelers,  Roger  and  I.     I  H 
Roger's  my  dog. — Come  here,  you  scamp! 

Jump  for  the  gentlemen, — mind  your  eye! 
Over  the  table, — look  out  for  the  lamp! — 


noinoh         The  Vagabonds       maol   3341 

The  rogue  is  growing  a  little  old;!,  -v^nTm  '^mo"  '^vp•^  l!'-^"'// 
Five  years  we've  tramped  through  wind  and  weather, 

And  slept  out-doors  when  nights  were  cold, 
And  ate  and  drank — and  starved — together. 

We've  learned  what  comfort  is,  I  tell  you! 

A  bed  on  the  lloor,  a  bit  of  rosin,  •  ff  q^j 

A  fire  to  thaw  our  thumbs  (poor  fellow!  ■  .■  ^.v 

The  paw  he  holds  up  there's  been  frozen), 
Plenty  of  catgut  for  my  fiddle  ;,r 

(This  out-door  business  is  bad  for  strings). 
Then  a  few  nice  buckwheats  hot  from  the  griddle, 

And  Roger  and  I  set  up  for  kings! 

No,  thank  ye,  Sir, — I  never  drink; 

Roger  and  I  are  exceedingly  moral, — 
Aren't  we,  Roger? — See  him  wink! — 

Well,  something  hot,  then — we  won't  quarrel. 
He's  thirsty,  too, — see  him  nod  his  head? 

What  a  pity.  Sir,  that  dogs  can't  talk! 
He  understands  every  word  that's  said, — • 

And  he  knows  good  milk  from  water-and-chalk. 

The  truth  is,  Sir,  now  I  refiect, 

I've  been  so  sadly  given  to  grog,  ,  [ 

I  wonder  I've  not  lost  the  respect 

(Here's  to  you.  Sir!)  even  of  my  dog. 
But  he  sticks  by,  through  thick  and  thin; 

And  this  old  coat,  with  its  empty  pockets 
And  rags  that  smell  of  tobacco  and  gin. 

He'll  follow  while  he,has,  eyps  in  his  sockets. 

There  isn't  another  creature  living 

Would  do  it,  and  prove,  through  every  disaster,  ;,'-; 

So  fond,  so  faithful,  and  so  forgiving. 

To  such  a  miserable,  thankless  master! 
No,  Sir! — see  him  wag  his  tail  and  grin!  1  .rr,-,  }X 

By  George!  it  makes  my  old  eyes  water! — 
That  is,  there's  something  in  this  gin 
(jc,^That  chokes  a  fellow.     But  no  matter! 


3342     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

We'll  have  some  music,  if  you're  willing,'-'"""-'  ''•'•  '*'-''?'^i  '♦^'^ 

And  Roger  (hem!  what  a  plague  a  cough  is,  Sir!) 
Shall  march  a  little.     Start,  you  villain! 

Paws  up!     Eyes  front!     Salute  your  officer! 
'Bout  face!     Attention!     Take  your  rifle! 

(Some  dogs  have  arms,  you  see!)     Now  hold  your 
Cap  while  the  gentlemen  give  a  trifle, 

To  aid  a  poor  old  patriot  soldier! 

March!     Halt!     Now  show  how  the  rebel  shakes     0^^'-*^'^ 

When  he  stands  up  to  hear  his  sentence.  '^^  ^) 

Now  tell  us  how  many  drams  it  takes  '  ^'^^  '^  aodT 

To  honor  a  jolly  new  acquaintance.  >  ■'.vr  f.K/. 

Five  yelps, — that's  five;  he's  mighty  knowing! 

The  night's  before  us,  fiU  the  glasses!— 
Quick,  Sir!     I'm  ill, — my  brain  is  going !^ 

Some  brandy, — thank  you, — there! — it  passes!  '^- 

Why  not  reform?     That's  easily  said;  '' 

But  I've  gone  through  such  wretched  treatment,    '■"  ^' 
Sometimes  forgetting  the  taste  of  bread,  ' ''"^  '■'^^ 

And  scarce  remembering  what  meat  meant, 
That  my  poor  stomach's  past  reform; 

And  there  are  times  when,  mad  Mith  thinking,       '"^^  ^^^T 
I'd  seU  out  heaven  for  something  warm 

To  prop  a  horrible  inward  sinking. 

Is  there  a  way  to  forget  to  think? 

At  your  age.  Sir,  home,  fortune,  friends, 
A  dear  girl's  love, — ^but  I  took  to  drink; — 

The  same  old  story;  you  know  how  it  ends. 
If  you  could  have  seen  these  classic  features, — • 

You  needn't  laugh.  Sir;  they  were  not  then 
Such  a  burning  libel  on  God's  creatures; 

I  was  one  of  your  handsome  men! 

If  you  had  seen  her,  so  fair  and  young, 

Whose  head  was  happy  on  this  breast! 
If  you  could  have  heard  the  songs  I  sung 

When  the  wine  went  round,  you  wouldn't  have  guessed 


The  Vagabonds  3343 

That  ever  I,  Sir,  should  be  straying 

From  door  to  door,  with  fiddle  and  dog, 
Ragged  and  penniless,  and  playing 

To  you  to-night  for  a  glass  of  grog! 

She's  married  since, — a  parson's  wife: 

'Twas  better  for  her  that  we  should  part, —  i 

Better  the  soberest,  prosiest  life 

Than  a  blasted  home  and  a  broken  heart. 
I  have  seen  her?     Once:  I  was  weak  and  spent 

On  the  dusty  road:  a  carriage  stopped: 
But  little  she  dreamed,  as  on  she  went. 

Who  kissed  the  coin  that  her  fingers  dropped! 

You've  set  me  talking,  Sir;  I'm  sorry, 

It  makes  me  wild  to  think  of  the  change! 
What  do  you  care  for  a  beggar's  story? 

Is  it  amusing?  you  find  it  strange? 
I  had  a  mother  so  proud  of  me! 

'Twas  well  she  died  before — Do  you  know 
If  the  happy  spirits  in  heaven  can  see  i' 

The  ruin  and  wretchedness  here  below? 

Another  glass,  and  strong,  to  deaden 

This  pain;  then  Roger  and  I  will  start. 
I  wonder,  has  he  such  a  lumpish,  leaden, 

Aching  thing  in  place  of  a  heart? 
He  is  sad  sometimes,  and  would  weep,  if  he  could, 

No  doubt,  remembering  things  that  were, — 
A  virtuous  kennel,  with  plenty  of  food, 

And  himself,  a  sober,  respectable  cur. 

I'm  better  now;  that  glass  was  warming. — 

You  rascal!  limber  your  lazy  feet! 
We  must  be  fiddling  and  performing 

For  supper  and  bed,  or  starve  in  the  street. — 
Not  a  very  gay  life  to  lead,  you  think? 

But  soon  we  shall  go  where  lodgings  are  free, 
And  the  sleepers  need  neither  victuals  nor  drink; — ■ 

The  sooner  the  better  for  Roger  and  me!  '' 

John  Townsatd  Trowbridge  [1827-1016]* 


3344     Poems  ot  Sentiment  and   Reflection 
HOW  WE   BEAT  THE   FAVORITE 

A    LAY   OF   THE   LOAMSHIRE   HUNT   CUP      ^', 

"Aye,  squire,"  said  Stevens,  "they  back  him  at  evens; 

The  race  is  all  over,  bar  shouting,  they  say; 
The  Clown  ought  to  beat  her;  Dick  Neville  is  sweeter 

Than  ever — he  swears  he  can  win  all  the  way.         '^' 

"A  gentleman  rider — well,  I'm  an  outsider, 
But  if  he's  a  gent,  who  the  mischief's  a  jock? 

You  swells  mostly  blunder,  Dick  rides  for  the  plunder, 
He  rides,  too,  like  thunder — he  sits  like  a  rock. 

"He  calls  'hunted  fairly  '  a  horse  that  has  barely 
Been  stripped  for  a  trot  within  sight  of  the  hounds, 

A  horse  that  at  Warwick  beat  Birdlime  and  Yorick, 
And  gave  Abdelkader  at  Aintree  nine  pounds. 

"They  say  we  have  no  test  to  warrant  a  protest; 

Dick  rides  for  a  lord  and  stands  in  with  a  steward; 
The  light  of  their  faces  they  show  him — his  case  is 

Prejudged  and  his  verdict  already  secured. 

"But  none  can  outlast  her,  and  few  travel  faster. 
She  strides  in  her  work  clean  away  from  The  Drag; 

You  hold  her  and  sit  her,  she  couldn't  be  fitterjabnov/  I 
Whenever  you  hit  her  she'll  spring  like  a  stag.    ' 

"And  p'raps  the  green  jacket,  at  odds  though  they  back  it, 
May  fall,  or  there's  no  knowing  what  may  turn  up. 

The  mare  is  quite  ready,  sit  still  and  ride  steady, 
Keep  cool;  and  I  think  you  may  just  win  the  Cup." 

Dark-brown  with  tan  muzzle,  just  stripped  for  the  tussle, 
Stood  Iseult,  arching  her  neck  to  the  curb, 

A  lean  head  and  fiery,  strong  quarters  and  wiry, 

A  loin  rather  Hght,  but  a  shoulder  superb.     ^^^  ^      .^ 

Some  parting  injunction,  bestowed  with  great  unction, 

I  tried  to  recall,  but  forgot  like  a  dunce. 
When  Reginald  Murray,  full  tilt  on  White  Surrey, 

Came  down  in  a  hurry  to  start  us  at  once. 


:      '     How  We   Beat  the   Favorite        3345 

"Keep  back  in  the  yellow!    Come  up  on  Othello! 

Hold  hard  on  the  Chestnut!    Turn  round  on  The  Drag! 
Keep  back  there  on  Spartan!    Back  you,  sir,  in  tartanl, . 

So,  steady  there,  easy,"  and  down  went  the  flag.    (y^f'Y 

We  started,  and  Kerr  made  strong  running  on  Mermaid, 
Through  furrows  that  led  to  the  first  stake-and-bound, 

The  crack,  half  extended,  looked  bloodlike  and  splendid,  . 
Held  wide  on  the  right  where  the  headland  was  sound. 

I  pulled  hard  to  baffle  her  rush  with  the  snaffle, 
Before  her  two-thirds  of  the  field  got  away. 

All  through  the  wet  pasture  where  floods  of  the  last  year 
Still  loitered,  they  clotted  my  crimson  with  clay. 

The  fourth  fence,  a  wattle,  floored  Monk  and  Blue-bottle; 

The  Drag  came  to  grief  at  the  blackthorn  and  ditch, 
The  rails  toppled  over  Redoubt  and  Red  Rover, 

The  lane  stopped  Lycurgus  and  Leicestershire  Witch. 

She  passed  like  an  arrow  Kildare  and  Cock  Sparrow, 
And  Mantrap  and  Mermaid  refused  the  stone  wall; 

And  Giles  on  The  Greyling  came  down  at  the  paling, 
And  I  was  left  sailing  in  front  of  them  all. 

I  took  them  a  burster,  nor  eased  her  nor  nursed  her 
Until  the  Black  Bullfinch  led  into  the  plow. 

And  through  the  strong  bramble  we  bored  with  a  scramble — 
My  cap  was  knocked  off  by  the  hazel-tree  bough. 

Where  furrows  looked  lighter  I  drew  the  rein  tighter; 

Her  dark  chest  all  dappled  with  flakes  of  white  foam, 
Her  flanks  mud-bespattered,  a  weak  rail  she  shattered; 

We  landed  on  turf  with  our  heads  turned  for  home. 

Then  crashed  a  low  binder,  and  then  close  behind  her 
The  sward  to  the  strokes  of  the  favorite  shook;  ;y 

His  rush  roused  her  mettle,  yet  ever  so  little 

She  shortened  her  stride  as  we  raced  at  the  brook. 

She  rose  when  I  hit  her.    I  saw  the  stream  glitter, 
A  wide  scarlet  nostril  flashed  close  to  my  knee. 

Between  sky  and  water  The  Clown  came  and  caught  her  — 
The  space  that  he  cleared  was  a  caution  to  see. 


334^     Poems  of  Sentiment  and   Reflection 

And  forcing  the  running,  discarding  all  cunning, 
A  length  to  the  front  went  the  rider  in  green; 

A  long  strip  of  stubble,  and  then  the  big  double, 
Two  stiff  flights  of  rails  with  a  quickset  between. 

She  raced  at  the  rasper,  I  felt  my  knees  grasp  her, 
I  found  my  hands  give  to  her  strain  on  the  bit. 

She  rose  when  The  Clown  did — our  silks  as  we  bounded 
Brushed  lightly,  our  stirrups  clashed  loud  as  we  lit. 

A  rise  steeply  sloping,  a  fence  with  stone  coping — - 
The  last — we  diverged  round  the  base  of  the  hill; 

His  path  was  the  nearer,  his  leap  was  the  clearer, 
I  flogged  up  the  straight,  and  he  led  sitting  still. 

She  came  to  his  quarter,  and  on  still  I  brought  her, 
And  up  to  his  girth,  to  his  breast-plate  she  drew; 

A  short  prayer  from  Neville  just  reached  me, — "The  devil!" 
He  muttered, — locked  level  the  hurdles  we  flew. 

A  hum  of  hoarse  cheering,  a  dense  crowd  careering, 
All  sights  seen  obscurely,  all  shouts  vaguely  heard; 

"The  green  wins!"  "The  crimson!"    The  multitude  swims 
on, 
And  figures  are  blended  and  features  are  blurred. 

"The  horse  is  her  master!"  "The  green  forges  past  her!" 
"The   Clown  wiU  outlast   her!"     "The   Clown   wins!" 
"The  Clown!" 

The  white  railing  races  with  all  the  white  faces. 
The  chestnut  outpaces,  outstretches  the  brown. 

On  still  past  the  gateway  she  strains  in  the  straightway. 
Still  struggles,  "The  Clov/n  by  a  short  neck  at  most,"  ^ 

He  swerves,  the  green  scourges,  the  stand  rocks  and  surges. 
And  flashes,  and  verges,  and  flits  the  white  post.,  „  ,  , , , 

Ay!  so  ends  the  tussle, — I  knew  the  tan  muzzle 

Was  first,  though  the  ring-men  were  yelling  "Dead  heat! " 

A  nose  I  could  swear  by,  but  Clarke  said  "The  mare  by 
A  short  head."    And  that's  how  the  favorite  was  beat.  ■  T 
Adam  Lindsay  Gordon  [i 833-1 870] 


PART  VII 

POEMS    OF    SORROW,    DEATH   AND 
IMMORTALITY 


"DEATH,  BE  NOT  PROUD" 

From  "  Holy  Sonnets  " 

Death,  be  not  proud,  though  some  have  called  thee 
Mighty  and  dreadful,  for  thou  art  not  so: 
For  those  whom  thou  think'st  thou  dost  overthrow   *''  • 
Die  not,  poor  Death;  nor  yet  canst  thou  kill  me. 
From  Rest  and  Sleep,  which  but  thy  picture  be. 
Much  pleasure,  then  from  thee  much  more  must  flow; 
And  soonest  our  best  men  with  thee  do  go — 
Rest  of  their  bones  and  souls'  delivery! 
Thou'rt  slave  to  fate,  chance,  kings,  and  desperate  men, 
And  dost  with  poison,  war,  and  sickness  dwell; 
And  poppy  or  charms  can  make  us  sleep  as  well 
And  better  than  thy  stroke.    Why  swell'st  thou  then? 
One  short  sleep  past,  we  wake  eternally. 
And  Death  shall  be  no  more:  Death,  thou  shalt  die! 

John  Donne  [1573-1631] 


IN  THE   SHADOW 

MELANCHOLY 

From  "  The  Nice  Valor  " 

Hence,  all  you  vain  delights, 

As  short  as  are  the  nights, 

Wherein  you  spend  your  folly: 

There's  naught  in  this  life  sweet 

If  man  were  wise  to  see't, 

But  only  melancholy, 

O  sweetest  Melancholy! 
Welcome,  folded  arms,  and  fixed  eyes, 
A  sigh  that  piercing  mortifies, 
A  look  that's  fastened  to  the  ground, 
A  tongue  chained  up  without  a  sound! 
Fountain-heads  and  pathless  groves, 
Places  which  pale  passion  loves! 
Moonlight  walks,  when  all  the  fowls 
Are  warmly  housed  save  bats  and  owls! 
A  midnight  bell,  a  parting  groan! 
These  are  the  sounds  we  feed  upon ; 
Then  stretch  our  bones  in  a  still  gloomy  valley; 
Nothing's  so  dainty  sweet  as  lovely  melancholy. 

John  Fldchcr  [1579-1625] 


ON  MELANCHOLY 

No,  no!  go  not  to  Lethe,  neither  twist 

Wolf's-bane,  tight-rooted,  for  its  poisonous  wine; 
Nor  suffer  thy  pale  forehead  to  be  kissed 

By  nightshade,  ruby  grape  of  Proserpine; 
Make  not  your  rosary  of  yew-berries, 
3349 


335"^ 


In  the  Shadow 


Nor  let  the  beetle,  nor  the  death-moth  be 
Your  mournful  Psyche,  nor  the  downy  owl 
A  partner  in  your  sorrow's  mysteries; 

For  shade  to  shade  will  come  too  drov/sily, 
And  drown  the  wakeful  anguish  of  the  soul. 

But  when  the  melancholy  fit  shall  fall 

Sudden  from  heaven  like  a  weeping  cloud, 
That  fosters  the  droop-headed  flowers  all, 

And  hides  the  green  hill  in  an  April  shroud; 
Then  glut  thy  sorrow  on  a  morning  rose. 

Or  on  the  rainbow  of  the  salt  sand-wave, 
Or  on  the  wealth  of  globed  peonies; 
Or  if  thy  mistress  some  rich  anger  shows, 

Emprison  her  soft  hand,  and  let  her  rave, 
And  feed  deep,  deep  upon  her  peerless  eyes. 

She  dwells  with  Beauty  ^Beauty  that  must  die; 

And  Joy,  whose  hand  is  ever  at  his  lips 
Bidding  adieu;  and  aching  Pleasure  nigh. 

Turning  to  poison  while  the  bee-mouth  sips: 
Ay,  in  the  very  temple  of  Delight 

Veiled  Melancholy  has  her  sovereign  shrine. 

Though  seen  of  none  save  him  whose  strenuous  tongue 
Can  burst  Joy's  grape  against  his  palate  fine: 
His  soul  shall  taste  the  sadness  of  her  might. 
And  be  among  her  cloudy  trophies  hung. 

John  Keats  [1795-1821] 


THE  RAINY  DAY 

The  day  is  cold,  and  dark,  and  dreary; 
It  rains,  and  the  wind  is  never  weary; 
The  vine  still  clings  to  the  moldering  wall, 
But  at  every  gust  the  dead  leaves  fall, 
And  the  day  is  dark  and  dieary. 

My  fife  is  cold,  and  dark,  and  dreary; 
It  rains,  and  the  wind  is  never  weary; 


"Moan,   Moan,  Ye   Dying  Gales"      3351 

My  thoughts  still  ding  to  the  moldering  Past, 
But  the  hopes  of  youth  fall  thick  in  the  blast 
And  the  days  are  dark  and  dreary. 

Be  still,  sad  heart!  and  cease  repining; 
Behind  the  clouds  is  the  sun  still  shining; 

Thy  fate  is  the  common  fate  of  all, 
Into  each  life  some  rain  must  fall. 
Some  days  must  be  dark  and  dreary. 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 

THE   PRECEPT  OF   SILENCE 

I  KNOW  you:  solitary  griefs. 
Desolate  passions,  aching  hours! 
I  know  you:  tremulous  beliefs, 
Agonized  hopes,  and  ashen  flowers! 

The  winds  are  sometimes  sad  to  me; 
The  starry  spaces  full  of  fear: 
Mine  is  the  sorrow  on  the  sea, 
And  mine  the  sigh  of  places  drear. 

Some  players  upon  plaintive  strings 
Publish  their  wistfulness  abroad: 
I  have  not  spoken  of  these  things, 
Save  to  one  man,  and  unto  God. 

Lionel  Johnson  [1867-1902] 

"MOAN,  MOAN,  YE  DYING  G.\LES  " 

Moan,  moan,  ye  dying  gales! 
The  saddest  of  your  tales 

Is  not  so  sad  as  life; 
Nor  have  you  e'er  began 
A  theme  so  wild  as  man. 

Or  with  such  sorrow  rife. 

Fall,  fall,  thou  withered  leaf! 
Autumn  sears  not  like  grief. 

Nor  kills  such  lovely  flowers; 
More  terrible  the  storm, 
More  mournful  the  deform. 

When  dark  misfortune  lowers. 


S3S'^  1^  th^  Shadow 

Hush!  hush!  thou  trembhng  lyre, 
Silence,  ye  vocal  choir, 

And  thou,  melKfluous  lute, 
For  man  soon  breathes  his  last, 
And  all  his  hope  is  past. 

And  all  his  music  mute. 

Then,  when  the  gale  is  sighing,     * 
And  when  the  leaves  are  dying. 

And  when  the  song  is  o'er, 
O,  let  us  think  of  those 
Whose  lives  are  lost  in  woes. 

Whose  cup  of  grief  runs  o'er. 

Henry  Neele  [i  798-1 82S 


SORROW 

Count  each  affliction,  whether  light  or  grave, 

God's  messenger  sent  down  to  thee;  do  thou 
With  courtesy  receive  him;  rise  and  bow; 
And,  ere  his  shadow  pass  thy  threshold,  crave 
Permission  first  his  heavenly  feet  to  lave; 

Then  lay  before  him  all  thou  hast ;  allow 

No  cloud  of  passion  to  usurp  thy  brow. 
Or  mar  thy  hospitality;  no  wave 

Of  mortal  tumult  to  obliterate 

The  soul's  marmoreal  calmness.     Grief  should  be. 
Like  joy,  majestic,  equable,  sedate; 

Confirming,  cleansing,  raising,  making  free; 
Strong  to  consume  small  troubles;  to  commend 
Great  thoughts,  grave  thoughts,  thoughts  lasting  to  the  end. 
Aubrey  Thomas  De  Vcrc  [1814-1902] 


TIME  AND   GRIEF 

O  time!  who  know'st  a  lenient  hand  to  lay 
Softest  on  Sorrow's  wound,  and  slowly  thence 
(Lulling  to  sad  repose  the  weary  sense) 
The  faint  pang  stealest  unperceived  away; 


Pai'^  3353 

On  thee  I  rest  my  only  hope  at  last, 
And  think,  when  thou  hast  dried  the  bitter  tear 
That  flows  in  vain  o'er  all  my  soul  held  dear, 
I  may  look  back  on  every  sorrow  past, 
And  meet  life's  peaceful  evening  with  a  smile: 
As  some  lone  bird,  at  day's  departing  hour, 
Sings  in  the  sunbeam,  of  the  transient  shower 
Forgetful,  though  its  wings  are  wet  the  while: — 
Yet  ah!  how  nuich  must  that  poor  heart  endure. 
Which  hopes  from  thee,  and  thee  alone,  a  cure! 

William  Lisle  Bowles  [i 762-1 850] 

GRIEF 

I  TELL  you,  hopeless  grief  is  passionless; 

That  only  men  incredulous  of  despair. 

Half-taught  in  anguish,  through  the  midnight  air 
Beat  upward  to  God's  throne  in  loud  access 
Of  shrieking  and  reproach.     Full  desertness, 

In  souls  as  countries,  lieth  silent-bare 

Under  the  blanching,  vertical  eye-glare 
Of  the  absolute  Heavens.     Deep-hearted  man,  express 
Grief  for  thy  Dead  in  silence  like  to  death — 

Most  like  a  monumental  statue  set 
In  everlasting  watch  and  moveless  woe 
Till  itself  crumble  to  the  dust  beneath. 

Touch  it;  the  marble  eyelids  are  not  wet: 
If  it  could  weep,  it  could  arise  and  go. 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [i  806-1 861] 

PAIN 

Dismal  and  purposeless  and  gray 
The  world  and  all  its  woe,  we  say, 
Poor  slaves!  who  in  hot  hours  of  pain 
Yearn  for  the  night  to  come  again. 

Like  tortured  men  at  length  set  free, 
We  stagger  from  our  misery. 
And  watch  with  foolish,  pain-dimmed  eyes 
Vague  lands  and  unremembered  skies. 


3354 


In  the  Shadow 

When  lo !  what  sudden  splendor  spreads 
Its  heaven  of  rose  above  our  heads! 
What  soft  winds  visit  our  despair; 
What  Hghts,  what  voices  everywhere! 

Ere  sorrow  taught  us,  knew  we  these 
Stupendous  hills,  amazing  seas? 
Shone  there  such  moonlight  on  the  lawn; 
So  deep  a  secret  in  the  dawn? 

What  wandering  hue  from  Paradise 
Has  found  a  home  in  children's  eyes? 
What  women  these,  whose  faces  bless 
Life  with  such  tranquil  tenderness? 

When  earth  and  sky  and  man  seem  fair, 
Be  this  my  watchword,  this  my  prayer: 
Grant  me,  O  Gods,  to  prize  aright 
Sorrow,  since  sorrow  gives  me  sight. 

St.  John  Lucas  [i8    - 

A  FAREWELL 

Flow  down,  cold  rivulet,  to  the  sea, 

Thy  tribute  wave  deliver 
No  more  by  thee  my  steps  shall  be, 

For  ever  and  for  ever. 

Flow,  softly  flow,  by  lawn  and  lea, 

A  rivulet,  then  a  river: 
No  where  by  thee  my  steps  shall  be, 

For  ever  and  for  ever. 

But  here  will  sigh  thine  alder-tree. 
And  here  thine  aspen  shiver; 

And  here  by  thee  will  hum  the  bee, 
For  ever  and  for  ever. 

A  thousand  suns  will  stream  on  thee, 
A  thousand  moons  will  quiver; 

But  not  by  thee  my  steps  shall  be, 
For  ever  and  for  ever. 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809- 


"The   Day  is   Done"  3355 


"THE  DAY  IS  DONE" 

The  day  is  done,  and  the  darkness 
Falls  from  the  wings  of  Night, 

As  a  feather  is  wafted  downward 
From  an  eagle  in  his  flight. 

I  see  the  hghts  of  the  village 

Gleam  through  the  rain  and  the  mist. 
And  a  feeling  of  sadness  comes  o'er  me 

That  my  soul  cannot  resist: 

A  feeling  of  sadness  and  longing, 

That  is  not  akin  to  pain. 
And  resembles  sorrow  only 

As  the  mist  resembles  the  rain. 

Come,  read  to  me  some  poem, 
Some  simple  and  heartfelt  lay. 

That  shall  soothe  this  restless  feeling, 
And  banish  the  thoughts  of  day. 

Not  from  the  grand  old  masters. 

Not  from  the  bards  subHme, 
Whose  distant  footsteps  echo 

Through  the  corridors  of  Time. 

For,  like  strains  of  martial  music, 
Their  mighty  thoughts  suggest 

Life's  endless  toil  and  endeavor; 
And  to-night  I  long  for  rest. 

Read  from  some  humbler  poet. 

Whose  songs  gushed  from  his  heart, 

As  showers  from  the  clouds  of  summer, 
Or  tears  from  the  eyelids  start; 

Who,  through  long  days  of  labor, 

And  nights  devoid  of  ease. 
Still  heard  in  his  soul  the  music 

Of  wonderful  melodies 


^;^^6  In  the  Shadow 

Such  songs  have  power  to  quiet 

The  restless  pulse  of  care, 
And  come  like  the  benediction 

That  follows  after  prayer. 

Then  read  from  the  treasured  volume 

The  poem  of  thy  choice, 
And  lend  to  the  rhyme  of  the  poet 

The  beauty  of  thy  voice. 

And  the  night  shall  be  filled  with  music, 
And  the  cares,  that  infest  the  day. 

Shall  fold  their  tents,  like  the  Arabs, 
And  as  silently  steal  away. 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807-ii 


THE  BRIDGE 

I  STOOD  on  the  bridge  at  midnight, 
As  the  clocks  were  striking  the  hour, 

And  the  moon  rose  o'er  the  city, 
Behind  the  dark  church-tower. 

I  saw  her  bright  reflection 

In  the  waters  under  me, 
Like  a  golden  goblet  falling 

And  sinking  into  the  sea. 

And  far  in  the  hazy  distance 

Of  that  lovely  night  in  June, 
The  blaze  of  the  flaming  furnace 

Gleamed  redder  than  the  moon. 

Among  the  long,  black  rafters 

The  wavering  shadows  lay. 
And  the  current  that  came  from  the  ocean 

Seemed  to  lift  and  bear  them  away. 

As,  sweeping  and  eddying  through  them, 

Rose  the  belated  tide. 
And,  streaming  into  the  moonlight, 

The  seaweed  floated  wide. 


The  Bridge  3357 

And  like  those  waters  rushing 

Among  the  wooden  piers, 
A  flood  of  thoughts  came  o'er  me 

That  filled  my  eyes  with  tears. 

How  often,  oh,  how  often. 

In  the  days  that  had  gone  by,' 
I  had  stood  on  that  bridge  at  midnight 

And  gazed  on  that  wave  and  sky! 

How  often,  oh,  how  often, 

I  had  wished  that  the  ebbing  tide 

Would  bear  me  away  on  its  bosom 
O'er  the  ocean  wild  and  wide! 

For  my  heart  was  hot  and  restless, 

And  my  life  was  full  of  care, 
And  the  burden  laid  upon,  me 

Seemed  greater  than  I  could  bear. 

But  now  it  has  fallen  from  me, 

It  is  buried  in  the  sea ; 
And  only  the  sorrow  of  others 

Throws  its  shadow  over  me. 

Yet  whenever  I  cross  the  river 

On  its  bridge  with  wooden  piers. 
Like  the  odor  of  brine  from  the  ocean 

Comes  the  thought  of  other  years. 

And  I  think  how  many  thousands 

Of  care-encumbered  men, 
Each  bearing  his  burden  of  sorrow, 

Have  crossed  the  bridge  since  then, 

I  see  the  long  procession 

Still  passing  to  and  fro, 
The  yoimg  heart  hot  and  restless. 

And  the  old  subdued  and  slow! 


23 S^  I"  the  Shadow 

And  forever  and  forever, 

As  long  as  the  river  flows, 
As  long  as  the  heart  has  passions, 

As  long  as  life  has  woes; 

The  moon  and  its  broken  reflection 

And  its  shadow  shall  appear, 
As  the  symbol  of  love  in  heaven, 

And  its  wavering  image  here. 

Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow  [1S07-1882] 


"MY  LIFE  IS   LIKE  THE   SUMMER  ROSE" 

My  life  is  like  the  summer  rose 

That  opens  to  the  morning  sky, 
But,  ere  the  shades  of  evening  close. 

Is  scattered  on  the  ground — to  die! 
Yet  on  the  rose's  humble  bed 
The  sweetest  dews  of  night  are  shed, 
As  if  she  wept  the  waste  to  see, — 
But  none  shall  weep  a  tear  for  me! 

My  life  is  like  the  autumn  leaf 

That  trembles  in  the  moon's  pale  ray; 
Its  hold  is  frail, — its  date  is  brief, 

Restless, — and  soon  to  pass  away! 
Yet,  ere  that  leaf  shall  fall  and  fade, 
The  parent  tree  will  mourn  its  shade. 
The  winds  bewail  the  leafless  tree, — 
But  none  shall  breathe  a  sigh  for  me! 

My  life  is  like  the  prints,  which  feet 

Have  left  on  Tampa's  desert  strand; 
Soon  as  the  rising  tide  shall  beat. 

All  trace  will  vanish  from  the  sand; 
Yet,  as  if  grieving  to  efface 
All  vestige  of  the  human  race. 
On  that  lone  shore  loud  moans  the  sea, — 
But  none,  alas!  shall  mourn  for  mc! 

Richard  Henry  Wilde  [178Q-1847] 


"As   I    Laye  A-thynkynge"        3359 


"AS  I  LAYE  A-THYNKYNGE" 

As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge,  a-thynk>Tige, 
Merrie  sang  the  Birde  as  she  sat  upon  the  spraye; 
There  came  a  noble  Knyghte, 
With  his  hauberke  shynynge  brighte, 
And  his  gallant  heart  was  lyghte, 
Free  and  gaye; 
As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  he  rode  upon  his  waye. 

As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge, 
Sadly  sang  the  Birde  as  she  sat  upon  the  tree! 
There  seemed  a  crimson  plain, 
Where  a  gallant  Knyghte  lay  slayne. 
And  a  steed  with  broken  rein 
Ran  free, 
As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  most  pitiful  to  see! 

As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge, 
Merrie  sang  the  Birde  as  she  sat  upon  the  boughe; 
A  lovely  maide  came  by, 
And  a  gentil  youthe  was  nyghe, 
'  And  he  breathed  many  a  syghe 
And  a  vowe; 
As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  her  hearte  was  gladsome  now. 

As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge. 
Sadly  sang  the  Birde  as  she  sat  upon  the  thorne; 

No  more  a  youth  was  there. 

But  a  Maiden  rent  her  haire, 

And  cried  in  sad  despaire 

"That  I  was  borne!" 
As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  she  perished  forlorne. 

As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge, 
Sweetly  sang  the  Birde  as  she  sat  upon  the  briar; 

There  came  a  lovely  Childe, 

And  his  face  was  meek  and  mild, 

Yet  joyously  he  smiled 
On  his  sire; 
As  I  laye  a-thynkynge.  a  Cherub  mote  admire. 


3360  In  the  Shadow 

But  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge, 
And  sadly  sang  the  Birde  as  it  perched  upon  a  bier; 

That  joyous  smile  was  gone, 

And  the  face  was  white  and  wan, 

As  the  downe  upon  the  Swan 
Doth  appear, 
As  I  laye  a-thynkynge — oh!  bitter  flowed  the  tear! 

As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  the  golden  sun  was  sinking, 
O  merrie  sang  that  Birde  as  it  glittered  on  her  breast 

With  a  thousand  glorious  dyes, 

While,  soaring  to  the  skies, 

'Mid  the  stars  she  seemed  to  rise, 
As  to  her  nest; 

As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkynge, 
As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  her  meaning  was  expressed: — • 
"Follow,  follow  me  away, 
It  boots  not  to  delay," — 
'Twas  so  she  seemed  to  saye, 
"Here  is  rest!" 

Richard  Harris  Barham  [1788-1845] 

THE  HARP  OF   SORROW 

Sorrow  has  a  harp  of  seven  strings 
And  plays  on  it  unceasing  all  the  day; 
The  first  string  sings  of  love  that  is  long  dead, 
The  second  sings  of  lost  hopes  buried; 
The  third  of  happiness  forgot  and  fied. 
Of  vigil  kept  in  vain  the  fourth  cord  sings. 
And  the  fifth  string  of  roses  dropped  away. 
The  sixth  string  calls  and  is  unanswered, 
The  seventh  with  your  name  for  ever  rings-^ 
I  listen  for  its  singing  all  the  day! 

Eihd  Clifford  [iS    - 

THE  JOURNEY  ONWARDS 

As  slow  our  ship  her  foamy  track 
Against  the  wind  was  cleaving. 
Her  trembling  pennant  still  looked  back 


Song  3361 


To  that  dear  Isle  'twas  leaving. 
So  loth  we  part  from  all  we  love, 

From  all  the  links  that  bind  us; 
So  turn  our  hearts,  as  on  we  rove, 

To  those  we've  left  behind  us! 

When,  round  the  bowl,  of  vanished  years 

We  talk  with  joyous  seeming, 
With  smiles,  that  might  as  well  be  tears. 

So  faint,  so  sad  their  beaming; 
While  memory  brings  us  back  again 

Each  early  tie  that  twined  us, 
Oh,  sweet's  the  cup  that  circles  then 

To  those  we've  left  behind  us ! 

And  when,  in  other  climes,  we  meet 

Some  isle,  or  vale  enchanting, 
Where  all  looks  flowery,  wild,  and  sweet, 

And  naught  but  love  is  wanting; 
We  think  how  great  had  been  our  bliss 

If  Heaven  had  but  assigned  us 
To  live  and  die  in  scenes  like  this. 

With  some  we've  left  behind  us! 

As  travelers  oft  look  back  at  eve 

When  eastward  darkly  going. 
To  gaze  upon  that  light  they  leave 

Still  faint  behind  them  glowing, — 
So,  when  the  close  of  pleasure's  day 

To  gloom  hath  near  consigned  us. 
We  turn  to  catch  one  fading  ray 

Of  joy  that's  left  behind  us. 

Thomas  Moore  [1770-1852] 

SONG 

IN   LFJN'STER 

I  TRY  to  knead  and  spin,  but  my  life  is  low  the  while. 
Oh,  I  long  to  be  alone,  and  walk  abroad  a  mile; 
Yet  if  I  walk  alone,  and  think  of  naught  at  all, 
WTiy  from  me  that's  young  should  the  wild  tears  fall? 


3362  In  the  Shadow 

The  shower-sodden  earth,  the  earth-colored  streams, 
They  breathe  on  me  awake,  and  moan  to  me  in  dreams, 
•  And  yonder  ivy  fondling  the  broke  castle-wall. 
It  pulls  upon  my  heart  till  the  wild  tears  fall. 

The  cabin-door  looks  down  a  furze-lighted  hill, 
And  far  as  Leighlin  Cross  the  fields  are  green  and  still; 
But  once  I  hear  the  blackbird  in  Leighlin  hedges  call, 
The  foolishness  is  on  me,  and  the  wild  tears  fall! 

Louise  Imogen  Guincy  [1861- 


MY  SORROW 

My  sorrow  that  I  am  not  by  the  little  dun, 

By  the  lake  of  the  starlings  at  Rosses  under  the  hill — 

And  the  larks  there,  singing  over  the  fields  of  dew, 

Or  evening  there,  and  the  sedges  still! 

For  plain  I  see  now  the  length  of  the  yellow  sand, 

And  Lissadell  far  off  and  its  leafy  ways, 

And  the  holy  mountain  whose  mighty  heart 

Gathers  into  it  all  the  colored  days. 

My  sorrow  that  I  am  not  by  the  little  dun. 

By  the  lake  of  the  starlings  at  evening  when  all  is  still — 

And  still  in  whispering  sedges  the  herons  stand. 

'Tis  there  I  would  nestle  at  rest  till  the  quivering  moon 

Uprose  in  the  golden  quiet  over  the  hill. 

Semnas  O'SuUivan  [1S79- 


SPIRIT  OF   SADNESS 

She  loved  the  Autumn,  I  the  Spring, 
Sad  all  the  songs  she  loved  to  sing; 
And  in  her  face  was  strangely  set 
Some  great  inherited  regret. 

Some  look  in  all  things  made  her  sigh, 
Yea!  sad  to  her  the  morning  sky: 
"So  sad!  so  sad  its  beauty  seems" — 
I  hear  her  say  it  still  in  dreams. 


3363 


To    EaL      His  Own 

But  when  the  day  grew  gray  and  old, 
And  rising  stars  shone  strange  and  cold, 
Then  only  in  her  face  I  saw 
A  mystic  glee,  a  joyous  awe. 

Spirit  of  Sadness,  in  the  spheres 
Is  there  an  end  of  mortal  tears? 
Or  is  there  still  in  those  great  eyes 
That  look  of  lonely  hills  and  skies? 

Richard  Le  Callicnnc  [1866- 


'TIS  BUT  A  LITTLE   FADED   FLOWER" 

'Tis  but  a  Httle  faded  flower, 

But  oh,  how  fondly  dear! 
'Twin  bring  me  back  one  golden  hour. 

Through  many  a  weary  year. 
I  may  not  to  the  world  impart 

The  secret  of  its  power, 
But  treasured  in  my  inmost  heart, 

I  keep  my  faded  flower. 

Where  is  the  heart  that  doth  not  keep, 

Within  its  inmost  core, 
Some  fond  remem.brance,   hidden   deep, 

Of  days  that  arc  no  more? 
Who  hath  not  saved  some  trifling  thing 

More  prized  than  jewels  rare — 
A  faded  flower,  a  broken  ring, 

A  tress  of  golden  hair? 

Ellen  Clementine  Howarth  [1827-1899] 


TO  EACH  HIS  OWN 

Each  hath  his  drug  for  Sorrow 
(Or  else  the  pain  would  slay!) 

For  one,  it  is  "To-morrow"; 
For  one,  'tis  "Yesterday." 


3364  In  the  Shadow 

"  And  hast  thou  lost,  my  Brother?  " 
"Yea,  but  in  dreams  I  find." 

"And  I"  (so  saith  another) 
"Leave  buried  dead  behind!" 

For  each,  when  gyves  are  fretting, 
A  different  balm  must  be. 

Some  find  it  in  forgetting, 
And  some  in  memory. 

Margaret  Root  Garvin  [il 


SONG 

Rarely,  rarely  comest  thou, 

Spirit  of  Delight! 
Wherefore  hast  thou  left  me  now 

Many  a  day  and  night? 
Many  a  weary  night  and  day 
'Tis  since  thou  art  fled  away. 

How  shall  ever  one  like  me 

Win  thee  back  again? 
With  the  joyous  and  the  free 

Thou  wilt  scoff  at  pain. 
Spirit  false!  thou  hast  forgot 
All  but  those  who  need  thee  not. 

As  a  lizard  with  the  shade 

Of  a  trembhng  leaf, 
Thou  with  sorrow  art  dismayed; 

Even  the  sighs  of  grief 
Reproach  thee,  that  thou  art  not  near, 
And  reproach  thou  wilt  not  hear. 

Let  me  set  my  mournful  ditty 

To  a  merry  measure: 
Thou  wilt  never  come  for  pity, 

Thou  wilt  come  for  pleasure; 
Pity  then  will  cut  away 
Those  cruel  wings,  and  thou  wilt  stay. 


The   Nameless  One  2}6^ 

I  love  all  that  thou  lovest, 

Spirit  of  Delight! 
The  fresh  Earth  in  new  leaves  dressed, 

And  the  starry  night, 
Autumn  evening,  and  the  morn 
When  the  golden  mists  are  born. 

I  love  snow,  and  all  the  forms 

Of  the  radiant  frost; 
I  love  waves,  and  winds,  and  storms — 

Everything  almost 
Which  is  Nature's,  and  may  be 
Untainted  by  man's  misery. 

I  love  tranquil  solitude. 

And  such  society 
As  is  quiet,  wise,  and  good; 

Between  thee  and  me 
What  difference?     But  thou  dost  possess 
The  things  I  seek,  not  love  them  less. 

I  love  Love — though  he  has  wings. 

And  like  light  can  flee; 
But  above  all  other  things. 

Spirit,  I  love  thee! — 
Thou  art  love  and  life!     Oh,  come. 
Make  once  more  my  heart  thy  home! 

Percy  Bysslic  Shelley  [170 2-1 82 2] 


THE  NAMELESS  ONE 

Roll  forth,  my  song,  like  the  rushing  rivei 

That  sweeps  along  to  the  mighty  sea; 
God  will  inspire  me  while  I  deliver 
My  soul  of  thee! 

Tell  thou  the  world,  when  my  bones  lie  whitening 

Amid  the  last  homes  of  youth  and  eld, 
That  once  there  was  one  whose  veins  ran  lightning 
No  eye  beheld. 


23^^  in  In  the  Shadow 

Tell  how  his  boyhood  was  one  drear  night-hour, 

How  shone  for  him,  through  his  griefs  and  gloom, 
No  star  of  all  heaven  sends  to  light  our 
Path  to  the  tomb. 

Roll  on,  my  song,  and  to  after  ages 

Tell  how,  disdaining  all  earth  can  give. 
He  would  have  taught  men,  from  wisdom's  pages. 
The  way  to  live. 

And  tell  how  trampled,  derided,  hated, 

And  worn  by  weakness,  disease,  and  wrong,, , 
He  fled  for  shelter  to  God,  who  mated       .    ,  . . 
His  soul  with  song. 

• — With  song  which  alway,  sublime  or  vapid, 

Flowed  like  a  rill  in  the  morning  beam. 
Perchance  not  deep,  but  intense  and  rapid: 
A  mountain  stream. 

Tell  how  this  Nameless,  condemned  for  years  long 

To  herd  with  demons  from  hell  beneath, 
Saw  things  that  made  him,  with  groans  and  tears,  long 
For  even  death. 

Go  on  to  tell  how,  with  genius  wasted. 

Betrayed  in  friendship,  befooled  in  love. 
With  spirit  shipwrecked,  and  young  hopes  blasted. 
He  still,  still  strove; 

Till,  spent  with  toil,  dreeing  death  for  others 

(And  some  whose  hands  should  have  wrought  for  him. 
If  children  live  not  for  sires  and  mothers). 
His  mind  grew  dim; 

And  he  fell  far  through  that  pit  abysmal. 

The  gulf  and  grave  of  Maginn  and  Burns, 
And  pawned  his  soul  for  the  devil's  dismal. .  ,       ,  .ly  i 
Stock  of  returns.         ,m  ,;!,,, '.f,;'^;',;,^' 

But  yet  redeemed  it  in  days  of  darkness, 
And  shapes  and  signs  of  the  final  wrath, 


"De   Mortuis   Nil   Nisi   Bonum "     3367 

When  death,  in  hideous  and  ghastly  starkness, 
Stood  on  his  path. 

And  tell  how  now,  amid  wreck  and  sorrow, 

And  want,  and  sickness,  and  houseless  nights, 
He  bides  in  calmness  the  silent  morrow, 

That  no  ray  lights.  , 

And  lives  he  still,  then?    Yes!    Old  and  hoary 

At  thirty-nine,  from  despair  and  woe. 
He  lives,  enduring  what  future  story 
Will  never  know. 

Him  grant  a  grave  to,  ye  pitying  noble, 

Deep  in  your  bosoms:  there  let  him  dwell! 
He,  too,  had  tears  for  all  souls  in  trouble, 
Here  and  in  hell. 

James  Clarence  Maugan  [1803-1840] 


"DE  MORTUIS  NIL  NISI  BONUM" 

(written  on  the  night  of  his  suicide) 

"Z)e  mortuis  nil  nisi  bonum."    When 

For  me  this  end  has  come  and  I  am  dead. 
And  the  httle  voluble,  chattering  daws  of  men 

Peck  at  me  curiously,  let  it  then  be  said 
By  some  one  brave  enough  to  speak  the  truth : 

Here  lies  a  great  soul  killed  by  cruel  wrong. 
Down  all  the  balmy  days  of  his  fresh  youth 

To  his  bleak,  desolate  noon,  with  sword  and  song, 
And  speech  that  rushed  up  hotly  from  the  heart. 

He  wrought  for  liberty,  till  his  own  wound 
(He  had  been  stabbed),  concealed  with  painful  art 

Through  wasting  years,  mastered  him,  and  he  swooned, 
And  sank  there  where  you  see  him  lying  now 
With  the  word  "Failure"  written  on  his  brow. 

But  say  that  he  succeeded.    If  he  missed 

World's  honors,  and  world's  plaudits,  and  the  wage 

Of  the  world's  deft  lacqueys,  still  his  lips  were  kissed 
Daily  by  those  high  angels  who  assuage 


3368  In  the  Shadow       /[   aQ - 

The  thirstings  of  the  poets — for  he  was  rrariW 

Born  unto  singing — and  a  burthen  lay 
Mightily  on  him,  and  he  moaned  because 

He  could  not  rightly  utter  to  the  day 
•  What  God  taught  in  the  night.    Sometimes,  nathless, 

Power  fell  upon  him,  and  bright  tongues  of  flame, 
And  blessings  reached  him  from  poor  souls  in  stress; 

And  benedictions  from  black  pits  of  shame, 
And  little  children's  love,  and  old  men's  prayers, 
And  a  Great  Hand  that  led  him  unawares. 

So  he  died  rich.    And  if  his  eyes  were  blurred 

With  big  films — silence!  he  is  in  his  grave.    ,, 
Greatly  he  suffered;  greatly,  too,  he  erred; 

Yet  broke  his  heart  in  trying  to  be  brave. 
Nor  did  he  wait  till  Freedom  had  become 

The  popular  shibboleth  of  courtier's  lips ; 
He  smote  for  her  when  God  Himself  seemed  dumb 

And  all  Plis  arching  skies  were  in  eclipse. 
He  was  a-weary,  but  he  fought  his  fight, 

And  stood  for  simple  manhood;  and  was  joyed 
To  see  the  august  broadening  of  the  light 

And  new  earths  heaving  heavenward  from  the  void;' 
He  loved  his  fellows,  and  their  love  was  sweet— n  lu  i 
Plant  daisies  at  his  head  and  at  his  feet.  '   si;  \>nt' 

Richard  Real/  [1S34-1S7SI 

HOPE  AND   DESPAIR 

Said  God,  "You  sisters,  ere  yc  go  Ilii  iiwuQ 

Down  among  men,  my  work  to  do,        'rf  oT 
I  will  on  each  a  badge  bestow: 
Hope  I  love  best,  and  gold  for  her, 
Yet  a  silver  glory  for  Despair, 
For  she  is  my  angel  too." 


HiiW 


Then  like  a  queen.  Despair 
Put  on  the  stars  to  wear. 
But  Hope  took  ears  of  corn,  and  round  !l 

Her  temples  in  a  wreath  them  bound.— rno  // 
Which  think  ye  looked  the  more  fair?  ,ow  ^rft  \0 
Lascelles  Ahercrombie  [1884- 


Dejection:   An   Ode  33^9 


DEJECTION:  AN  ODE 

Late,  late  yestreen  I  saw  the  new  Moon, 
With  the  old  Moon  in  her  arms; 
And  I  fear,  1  fear,  my  Master  dear! 
\Vc  shall  have  a  deadly  storm. 

Ballad  of  Sir  Patrick  Spcnce. 


Well!  If  the  Bard  was  weather-wise,  who  made 
The  grand  old  ballad  of  Sir  Patrick  Spence, 
This  night,  so  tranquil  now,  will  not  go  hence 

Unroused  by  winds,  that  ply  a  busier  trade 

Than  those  which  mould  yon  cloud  in  lazy  flakes, 

Or  the  dull  sobbing  draft,  that  moans  and  rakes 

Upon  the  strings  of  this  ^olian  lute, 
Which  better  far  were  mute. 
For  lo!  the  New-moon  winter-bright! 
And  overspread  with  phantom  light, 
(With  swimming  phantom  light  o'erspread 
But  rimmed  and  circled  by  a  silver  thread) 

I  see  the  old  Moon  in  her  lap,  foretelling 

The  coming-on  of  rain  and  squally  blast. 

And  oh!  that  even  now  the  gust  were  swelling, 

And  the  slant  night-shower  driving  loud  and  fast! 

Those  sounds  which  oft  have  raised  me,  whilst  they  awed, 
And  sent  my  soul  abroad, 

Might  now  perhaps  their  wonted  impulse  give. 

Might  startle  this  dull  pain,  and  make  it  move  and  live! 


A  grief  without  a  pang,  void,  dark,  and  drear, 
A  stifled,  drowsy,  unimpassioned  grief, 
Which  finds  no  natural  outlet,  no  relief. 
In  word,  or  sigh,  or  tear — 

O  Lady!  in  this  wan  and  heartless  mood. 

To  other  thoughts  by  yonder  throstle  wooed, 
All  this  long  eve,  so  balmy  and  serene. 

Have  I  been  gazing  on  the  western  sky, 
And  its  peculiar  lint  of  yellow  green: 

And  still  I  gaze — and  with  how  blank  an  eye! 


33 7°  ^^  the  Shadow 

And  those  thin  clouds  above,  in  flakes  and  bars, 
That  give  away  their  motion  to  the  stars; 
Those  stars,  that  gUde  behind  them  or  between. 
Now  sparkhng,  now  bedimmed,  but  always  seen: 
Yon  crescent  Moon,  as  fixed  as  if  it  grew 
In  its  own  cloudless,  starless  lake  of  blue; 
I  see  them  all  so  excellently  fair, 
I  see,  not  feel,  how  beautiful  they  are! 

Ill 

My  genial  spirits  fail;  ,  ..jr.j.u, 

And  what  can  these  avail  .^orlj  iisrl 

To  lift  the  smothering  weight  from  off  my  breast?  : 

It  were  a  vain  endeavor, 

Though  I  should  gaze  for  ever 
On  that  green  light  that  lingers  in  the  west: 
I  may  not  hope  from  outward  forms  to  win 
The  passion  and  the  life,  whose  fountains  are  within. 


O  Lady!  we  receive  but  what  we  give, 

And  in  our  life  alone  does  Nature  live: 

Ours  is  her  wedding  garment,  ours  her  shroud! 

And  would  we  aught  behold,  of  higher  worth, 
Than  that  inanimate  cold  world  allowed 
To  the  poor  loveless  ever-anxious  crowd. 

Ah!  from  the  soul  itself  must  issue  forth 
A  light,  a  glory,  a  fair  luminous  cloud 

Enveloping  the  Earth — 
And  from  the  soul  itself  must  there  be  sent 

A  sweet  and  potent  voice,  of  its  own  birth, 
Of  all  sweet  sounds  the  life  and  element! 


O  pure  of  heart!  thou  need'st  not  ask  of  me 
What  this  strong  music  in  the  soul  may  be! 
What,  and  wherein  it  doth  exist. 
This  light,  this  glory,  this  fair  luminous  mist, 
This  beautiful  and  beauty-making  power. 


Dejection:  An  Ode  337i 

Joy,  virtuous  Lady!  Joy  that  ne'er  was  given,         '  » 
Save  to  the  pure,  and  in  their  purest  hour,  ...i  lU 

Life,  and  Life's  effluence,  cloud  at  once  and  shower/ 
Joy,  Lady!  is  the  spirit  and  the  power, 
Which  wedding  Nature  to  us  gives  in  dower 

A  new  Earth  and  new  Heaven,  C 

Undreamt  of  by  the  sensual  and  the  proud —  .;!  jdT 

Joy  is  the  sweet  voice,  Joy  the  luminous  cloud —     '^ 

We  in  ourselves  rejoice! 
And  thence  flows  all  that  charms  or  ear  or  sight, 

All  melodies  the  echoes  of  that  voice, 
AH  colors  a  suffusion  from  that  light. 

\i 
There  was  a  time  when,  though  my  path  was  rough, 

This  joy  within  me  dallied  with  distress. 
And  all  misfortunes  were  but  as  the  stuff 

Whence  Fancy  made  me  dreams  of  happiness: 
For  hope  grew  round  me,  like  the  twining  vine, 
And  fruits,  and  foliage,  not  my  own,  seemed  mine. 
But  now  afflictions  bow  me  down  to  earth: 
Nor  care  I  that  they  rob  me  of  my  mirth; 

But  oh!  each  visitation 
Suspends  what  nature  gave  me  at  my  birth, 

My  shaping  spirit  of  Imagination. 
For  not  to  think  of  what  I  needs  must  feel. 

But  to  be  still  and  patient,  all  I  can; 
And  haply  by  abstruse  research  to  steal 

From  my  own  nature  all  the  natural  man —  ' 

This  was  my  sole  resource,  my  only  plan: 
Till  that  which  suits  a  part  infects  the  whole. 
And  now  is  almost  grown  the  habit  of  my  soul. 

VII 

Hence,  viper  thoughts,  that  coil  around  my  mind. 

Reality's  dark  dream! 
I  turn  from  you,  and  listen  to  the  wind. 

Which  long  has  raved  unnoticed.    What  a  scream 
Of  agony  by  torture  lengthened  out 
That  lute  sent  forth!    Thou  Wind,  that  rav'st  without, 
Bare  crag,  or  mountain-tairn,  or  blasted  tree, 


337^  "^'  ^"   the  ShadowCI 

Or  pine-grove  whither  woodman  never  clomb,         >>! 
Or  lonely  house,  long  held  the  witches'  home,         oj  3v^8 
Methinks  were  fitter  instruments  for  thee,       'n  -iVcJ 
Mad  Lutanist!  who  in  this  month  of  showers,      '.    ;       ,{ 
Of  dark-brown  gardens,  and  of  peeping  flowers,       rijid  //  • 
Mak'st  Devils'  yule,  with  worse  than  wintry  song^  A 
The  blossoms,  buds,  and  timorous  leaves  among.  noibnU 
Thou  Actor,  perfect  in  all  tragic  sounds!  ■  --''  "-r 

Thou  mighty  Poet,  e'en  to  frenzy  bold! 
What  tell'st  thou  now  about? 
'Tis  of  the  rushing  of  an  host  in  rout. 
With  groans,  of  trampled  men,  with  smarting  wounds — 
At  once  they  groan  with  pain,  and  shudder  with  the  cold! 
But  hush!  there  is  a  pause  of  deepest  silence! 
And  all  that  noise,  as  of  a  rushing  crowd, 
With  groans,  and  tremulous  shudderings — all  is  over — 
It  tells  another  tale,  with  sounds  less  deep  and  loud! 
A  tale  of  less  afifright. 
And  tempered  with  delight. 
As  Otway's  self  had  framed  the  tender  lay, — ■ 
'Tis  of  a  little  child 
Upon  a  lonesome  wild, 
Not  far  from  home,  but  she  hath  lost  her  way. 
And  now  moans  low  in  bitter  grief  and  fear. 
And  now  screams  loud,  and  hopes  to  make  her  mother  hear. 

VIII 

'Tis  midnight,  but  small  thoughts  have  I  of  sleep: 
Full  seldom  may  my  friend  such  vigils  keep! 
Visit  her,  gentle  Sleep!  with  wings  of  healing, 

And  may  this  storm  be  but  a  mountain-birth, 
May  all  the  stars  hang  bright  above  her  dwelling,  i.^ 

Silent  as  though  they  watched  the  sleeping  Earth! 
With  light  heart  may  she  rise, 
Gay  fancy,  cheerful  eyes,  ' " 

Joy  lift  her  spirit,  joy  attune  her  voice; 
To  her  may  all  things  live,  from  pole  to  pole, 
Their  life  the  eddying  of  her  living  soul! 

O  simple  spirit,  guided  from  above. 
Dear  Lady!  friend  devoutest  of  my  choice, 
Thus  mayest  thou  ever,  evermore  rejoice.  '' 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [1772-1834] 


At  the  Salon  3373 

WORK  WITHOUT  HOPE 

All  Natuje  seems  at  work.    Slugs  leave  their  lair — 

The  bees  are  stirring — birds  are  on  the  wing — 

And  Winter  slumbering  in  the  open  air, 

Wears  on  his  smiling  face  a  dream  of  Spring! 

And  I  the  while,  the  sole  unbusy  thing, 

Nor  honey  make,  nor  pair,  nor  build,  nor  sing. 

Yet  well  I  ken  the  banks  where  amaranths  blow, 
Have  traced  the  fount  whence  streams  of  nectar  flow. 
Bloom,  O  ye  amaranths!  bloom  for  whom  ye  may, 
For  me  ye  bloom  not!    Glide,  rich  streams,  away! 
With  lips  unbrightened,  wreathless  brow,  I  stroll: 
And  would  you  learn  the  spells  that  drowse  my  soul? 
Work  without  Hope  draws  nectar  in  a  sieve. 
And  Hope  without  an  object  cannot  live. 

Samuel  Taylor  Coleridge  [1772-1834] 

CARE 

All  in  the  leafy  darkness,  when  sleep  had  passed  me  by, 

I  knew  the  surging  of  the  sea — 

Though  never  wave  were  nigh. 
All  in  the  leafy  darkness,  unbroken  by  a  star. 

There  came  the  clamorous  call  of  day. 

While  yet  the  day  was  far. 
All  in  the  leafy  darkness,  woven  with  hushes  deep, 

1  heard  the  vulture  wings  of  Fear 

Above  me  tireless  sweep; 
The  sea  of  Doubt,  the  dread  of  day,  upon  me  surged  and  swept 

All  in  the  leafy  darkness. 

And  while  the  whole  world  slept. 

Virginia  Woodward  Cloud  [18 

AT  THE  SALON 

Brave  as  the  firstborn  flame  upsprings  the  statue, 

A  worshiper  of  the  Sun: 
With  arms  and  lips  and  vital  hair  he  praises 

The  Dawn  begun. 

Buoyancy,  adoration  of  beginnings. 
He  soars  tiptoe. 


3374  I"  the  Shadow 

Nor  heeds  he  that  his  plinth  was  wreathed  with  cypress 
An  hour  ago, 

Memorial  of  the  maker  of  the  statue 

Who  in  his  ultimate  pain 
Set  free  the  spirit  in  the  block  of  marble, 

— Child  of  his  brain. 

The  men  and  women  pacing  through  the  Salon 

By  that  grave  challenge  are  stopped. 
Pondering  on  him  from  whose  arrested  fingers  i  i 

The  tool  has  dropped.  ]'] 

For  him  black  weeds  are  draped  and  just  one  moment 

Chatter  is  mute. 
While,  like  a  skylark,  sings  his  last  glad  sculpture 

Its  flame  salute.  ^ 

Florence  Wilkinson  [i8 


THE  WIND'S  WAY 

A  WHITE  way  is  the  wind's  way, 

The  silver  side  o'  the  leaf: 
Follow  the  wind,  heart  of  mine, 

Heart  of  grief! 

Wind  of  the  dawn,  wind  of  the  dusk, 

Winged  wind  of  the  day, 
Who  would  follow  the  wind  must  go 

The  wind's  way. 

Grace  Hazard  Conkling  [1878- 

TROPICAL  TOWN 

Blue,  pink  and  yellow  houses,  and,  afar, 
The  cemetery,  where  the  green  trees  are. 

Sometimes  you  see  a  hungry  dog  pass  by. 
And  there  are  always  buzzards  in  the  sky, 
Sometimes  you  hear  the  big  cathedral  bell; 
A  blind  man  rings  it;  and  sometimes  you  hear 
A  rumbling  ox-cart  that  brings  wood  to  sell. 
Else  nothing  ever  breaks  the  ancient  spell 


\ry 


Sunset   Wings  3375 

That  holds  the  town  asleep,  save,  once  a  year, 
The  Easter  Festival.  .  . 

I  come  from  there, 
And  when  I  tire  of  hoping,  and  despair 

Is  heavy  over  me,  my  thoughts  go  far, 
Beyond  that  length  of  lazy  street,  to  where 

The  lonely  green  trees  and  the  white  graves  are. 
Salomon  dc  la  Selva  [1893- 


SUNSET  WINGS 

To-NIGHT  this  sunset  spreads  two  golden  wings 

Cleaving  the  western  sky; 
Winged  too  with  wind  it  is,  and  winnowings 
Of  birds;  as  if  the  day's  last  hour  in  rings 

Of  strenuous  flight  must  die. 

Sun-steeped  in  fire,  the  homeward  pinions  sway 

Above  the  dovecote-tops; 
And  clouds  of  starlings,  ere  they  rest  with  day, 
Sink,  clamorous  like  mill-waters,  at  wild  play, 

By  turns  in  every  copse: 

Each  tree  heart-deep  the  wrangling  rout  receives, — 

Save  for  the  whirr  within. 
You  could  not  tell  the  starlings  from  the  leaves; 
Then  one  great  puff  of  wings,  and  the  swarm  heaves 

Away  with  all  its  din. 

Even  thus  Hope's  hours,  in  ever-eddying  flight, 

To  many  a  refuge  tend; 
With  the  first  light  she  laughed,  and  the  last  light 
Glows  round  her  still ;  who  natheless  in  the  night 

At  length  must  make  an  end. 

And  now  the  mustering  rooks  innumerable  ' 

Together  sail  and  soar. 
While  for  the  day's  death,  like  a  tolling  knell, 
Unto  the  heart  they  seem  to  cry,  Farewell, 

No  more,  farewell,  no  more! 


33 7^  In  the  Shadow 

Is  Hope  not  plumed,  as  'twere  a  fiery  dart? 

And  oh!  thou  dying  day,  -^  ^^^■*- 

Even  as  thou  goest  must  she  too  depart, 
And  Sorrow  fold  such  pinions  on  the  heart 

As  will  not  fly  away? 

Dante  Gabriel  RosscUi  [182S-1882 

]\IORALITY 

We  cannot  kindle  when  we  will 

The  fire  which  in  the  heart  resides: 

The  spirit  bloweth  and  is  still, 

In  mystery  our  soul  abides. 

But  tasks  in  hours  of  insight  willed 

Can  be  through  hours  of  gloom  fulfilled.     ,  ^ 

With  aching  hands  and  bleeding  feet  -^ 

We  dig  and  heap,  lay  stone  on  stone; 
We  bear  the  burden  and  the  heat 
Of  the  long  day,  and  wish  'twere  done. 
Not  till  the  hours  of  light  return 
All  we  have  built  do  we  discern. 

Then,  when  the  clouds  are  off  the  soul, 
When  thou  dost  bask  in  Nature's  eye. 
Ask,  how  she  viewed  thy  self-control, 
Thy  struggling,  tasked  morality — 
Nature,  whose  free,  light,  cheerful  air. 
Oft  made  thee,  in  thy  gloom,  despair. 

And  she,  whose  answer  thou  dost  dread 

Whose  eye  thou  wast  afraid  to  seek, 

See,  on  her  face  a  glow  is  spread, 

A  strong  emotion  on  her  cheek! 

"Ah,  child,"  she  cries,  "that  strife  divine, ,j 
Whence  was  it,  for  it  is  not  mine? 

"There  is  no  effort  on  my  brow — ■ 

I  do  not  strive,  I  do  not  weep; 

I  rush  with  the  swift  spheres  and  glow 

In  joy,  and  when  I  will,  I  sleep. 
Yet  that  severe,  that  earnest  air, 
I  saw,  I  felt  it  once — but  where? 


Mutability  3377 

"I  knew  not  yet  the  gauge  of  time, 
Nor  wore  the  manacles  of  space; 
I  felt  it  in  some  other  clime, 
I  saw  it  in  some  other  place. 

'Tvvas  when  the  heavenly  house  I  trod, 

And  Jay  upon  the  breast  of  God. 

Matthew  Arnold  [1S22-1888] 

cm  BONO 

What  is  Hope?    A  smiling  rainbow ,     , 

Children  follow  through  the  wet; 
'Tis  not  here,  still  yonder,  yonder: 

Never  urchin  found  it  yet. 

What  is  Life?    A  thawing  iceboard 

On  a  sea  with  sunny  shore; 
Gay  we  sail;  it  melts  beneath  us; 

We  are  sunk,  and  seen  no  more.  '■   "■     ^' 

What  is  Man?    A  foolish  baby, 

Vainly  strives,  and  fights,  and  frets; 

Demanding  all,  deserving  nothing; 
One  small  grave  is  what'he  gets. 

Thomas  Carlyle  [1795-1881] 

MUTABILITY 

The  flower  that  smUes  to-day 

To-morrow  dies; 
All  that  we  wish  to  stay 

Tempts,  and  then  flies. 
What  is  this  world's  delight? 
Lightning  that  mocks  the  night,  10  ' 

Brief  even  as  bright. 

Virtue,  how  frail  it  is! 

Friendship  how  rare! 
Love,  how  it  sells  poor  bliss 

For  proud  despair! 
But  we,  though  soon  they  fall. 
Survive  their  joy,  and  all 
Which  ours  we  call. 


33 7^  In  the  Shadow 

Whilst  skies  are  blue  and  bright, 

Whilst  flowers  are  gay, 
Whilst  eyes  that  change  ere  night 

Make  glad  the  day, 
Whilst  yet  the  calm  hours  creep, 
Dream  thou — and  from  thy  sleep 
Then  wake  to  weep. 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [179 2-1 8 2 2] 

A  FANCY  FROM   FONTENELLE 

De  memoires  dc  Roses  on  n'a  point  vu  mourir  le  Jardinier 

The  Rose  in  the  garden  slipped  her  bud, 
And  she  laughed  in  the  pride  of  her  youthful  blood, 
As  she  thought  of  the  Gardener  standing  by — 
"He  is  old — so  old!     And  he  soon  must  die!" 

The  fuU  Rose  waxed  in  the  warm  June  air. 
And  she  spread  and  spread  till  her  heart  lay  bare; 
And  she  laughed  once  more  as  she  heard  his  tread — 
"He  is  older  now!     He  will  soon  be  dead!" 

But  the  breeze  of  the  morning  blew,  and  found 

That  the  leaves  of  the  blown  Rose  strewed  the  ground; 

And  he  came  at  noon,  that  Gardener  old. 

And  he  raked  them  gently  under  the  mold. 

And  I  wove  the  thing  to  a  random  rhyme: 
For  the  Rose  is  Beauty;  the  Gardener,  Time. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 

"OH,  EARLIER  SHALL  THE  ROSEBUDS  BLOW" 

Oh,  earlier  shall  the  rosebuds  blow. 
In  after  years,  those  happier  years. 

And  children  weep,  when  we  lie  low, 
Far  fewer  tears,  far  softer  tears. 

Oh,  true  shall  boyish  laughter  ring, 
Like  tinkling  chimes,  in  kinder  times! 

And  merrier  shall  the  maiden  sing: 
And  I  not  there,  and  t  not  there. 


The  Whisperers  3379 

Like  lightning  in  the  summer  night 

Their  mirth  shall  be,  so  quick  and  free; 

And  oh!  the  flash  of  their  delight 
I  shall  not  see,  I  may  not  see. 

In  deeper  dream,  with  wider  range, 

Those  eyes  shall  shine,  but  not  on  mine: 

Unmoved,  unblest,  by  worldly  change, 
The  dead  must  rest,  the  dead  shall  rest. 

William  Johnson  Cory  [i 8 23-1 892] 

THE  DOVE 

I  HAD  a  dove,  and  the  sweet  dove  died; 

And  I  have  thought  it  died  of  grieving: 
O,  what  could  it  grieve  for?     Its  feet  were  tied 

With  a  silken  thread  of  my  own  hand's  weaving; 
Sweet  little  red  feet !  why  should  you  die — 
Why  would  you  leave  me,  sweet  bird!  why? 
You  lived  alone  in  the  forest  tree. 
Why,  pretty  thing!  would  you  not  live  with  me? 
I  kissed  you  oft  and  gave  you  white  peas; 
Why  not  live  sweetly,  as  in  the  green  trees? 

John  Keats  [1795-1821] 

THE  WHISPERERS 

As  beneath  the  moon  I  walked, 
Dog-at-heel  my  shadow  stalked, 
Keeping  ghostly  company: 
And  as  we  went  gallantly 
Down  the  fell-road,  dusty-white, 
Round  us  in  the  windy  night 
Bracken,  rushes,  bent  and  heather 
Whispered  ceaselessly  together: 
"Would  he  ever  journey  more. 
Ever  stride  so  carelessly, 
If  he  knew  what  lies  before, 
And  could  see  what  we  can  see?" 

As  I  listened,  cold  with  dread. 
Every  hair  upon  my  head 


3380  In  the  Shadow 

Strained  to  hear  them  talk  of  me, 
/Whispering,  whispering  ceaselessly: 
"Folly's  fool  the  man  must  be, 
Surely,  since,  though  where  he  goes 
He  knows  not,  his  shadow  knows: 
And  his  secret  shadow  never 
Utters  warning  words,  or  ever 
Seeks  to  save  him  from  his  fate. 
Reckless,  blindfold,  and  unknown,' ' 
Till  death  tells  him  all,  too  late. 
And  his  shadow  walks  alone." 

Wilfnd  Wilson  Gibson  [1878- 

ON  A  TEAR 

0  THAT  the  chemist's  magic  art 

Could  crystallize  this  sacred  treasure! 

Long  should  it  glitter  near  m_v  heart, 
A  secret  source  of  pensive  pleasure. 

The  little  brilliant,  ere  it  fell. 

Its  luster  caught  from  (^^hloe's  eye; 

Then,  trembling,  left  its  coral  cell, — 
The  spring  of  Sensibility ! 

Sweet  drop  of  pure  and  pearly  light! 

In  thee  the  rays  of  Virtue  shine, 
More  calmly  clear,  more  mildly  bright, 

Than  any  gem  that  gilds  the  mine*, 

Benign  restorer  of  the  soul!  (T 

Who  ever  fliest  to  bring  relief, 
When  first  we  feel  the  rude  control 

Of  Love  or  Pity,  Joy  or  Grief. 

The  sage's  and  the  poet's  theme, 

In  every  clime,  in  every  age, 
Thou  charm'st  in  Fancy's  idle  dream, 

In  Reason's  philosophic  page. 

That  very  law  which  molds  a  tear, 
And  bids  it  trickle  from  its  source, — 

That  law  preserves  the  earth  a  sphere. 
And  guides  the  planets  in  their  course. 

Samuel  Rogers  [1763-1855] 


The  Rosary  of  My  Tears  3381 


THE  ROSARY  OF  MY  TEARS 

Some  reckon  their  age  by  years, 

Some  measure  their  Hfe  by  art ; 
But  some  tell  their  days  by  the  flow  of  their  tears, 

And  their  lives  by  the  moans  of  their  heart. 

The  dials  of  earth  may  show  <\i 

The  length,  not  the  depth,  of  years —  ) 

Few  or  many  they  come,  few  or  many  they  go,  :j  I 

But  time  is  best  measured  by  tears.  1 

Ah!  not  by  the  silver  gray 

That  creeps  through  the  sunny  hair, 
And  not  by  the  scenes  that  we  pass  on  our  way. 

And  not  by  the  furrows  the  fingers  of  care 

On  forehead  and  face  have  made, — 

Not  so  do  we  count  our  years; 
Not  by  the  sun  of  the  earth,  but  the  shade 

Of  our  souls,  and  the  fall  of  our  tears,  , , 

For  the  young  are  oft-times  old, 

Though  their  brows  be  bright  and  fair; 

While  their  blood  beats  warm,  their  hearts  are  cold — 
O'er  them  the  spring — but  winter  is  there; 

And  the  old  are  oft-times  young 

When  their  hair  is  thin  and  white; 
And  they  sing  in  age,  as  in  youth  they  sung, 

And  they  laugh,  for  their  cross  was  light. 

But,  bead  by  bead,  I  tell 

The  rosary  of  my  years; 
From  a  cross  to  a  cross  they  lead;  'tis  well,      huKl)H 

And  they're  blest  with  a  blessing  of  tears. 

Better  a  day  of  strife 

Than  a  century  of  sleep; 
Give  me  instead  of  a  long  stream  of  life 

The  tempests  and  tears  of  the  deep. 


3382  In  the  Shadow   ^^-£ 

A  thousand  joys  may  foam 

On  the  billows  of  all  the  years; 
But  never  the  foam  brings  the  lone  back  home, — 

He  reaches  the  haven  through  tears. 

Abram  J.  Ryan  [1839-1888] 

ENDURANCE 

How  much  the  heart  may  bear,  and  yet  not  break! 

How  much  the  flesh  may  suffer,  and  not  die! 
I  question  much  if  any  pain  or  ache    1  \nRm  •; 

Of  soul  or  body  brings  our  end  more  nigh: " 
Death  chooses  his  own  time;  till  that  is  sworn, 
AH  evils  may  be  borne. 

We  shrink  and  shudder  at  the  surgeon's  knife. 
Each  nerve  recoiling  from  the  cruel  steel 

Whose  edge  seems  searching  for  the  quivering  life; 
Yet  to  our  sense  the  bitter  pangs  reveal, 

That  still,  although  the  trembling  flesh  be  torn, 
This  also  can  be  borne. 

We  see  a  sorrow  rising  in  our  way. 

And  try  to  flee  from  the  approaching  ill; 

We  seek  some  small  escape :  we  weep  and  pray ; 
But  when  the  blow  falls,  then  our  hearts  are  still; 

Not  that  the  pain  is  of  its  sharpness  shorn. 
But  that  it  can  be  borne. 

We  wind  our  life  about- another  life; 

We  hold  it  closer,  dearer  than  our  own: 
Anon  it  faints  and  fails  in  deathly  strife, 

Leaving  us  stunned  and  stricken  and  alone; 
But  ah!  we  do  not  die  with  those  we  mourn, — 
This  also  can  be  borne. 

Behold,  we  hve  through  all  things, — famine,  thirst, 

Bereavement,  pain;  all  grief  and  misery. 
All  woe  and  sorrow;  life  inflicts  its  worst 

On  soul  and  body, — but  we  can  not  die. 
Though  we  be  sick,  and  tired,  and  faint,  and  worn, — 
Lo,  all  things  can  be  borne! 

Elizabeth  A  kers  [183  2-1 9 11] 


Langley   Lane  33^3 


LANGLEY  LANE 

In  all  the  land,  range  up,  range  down, 

Is  there  ever  a  place  so  pleasant  and  sweet, 
As  Langley  Lane  in  London  town, 

Just  out  of  the  bustle  of  square  and  street? 
Little  white  cottages  all  in  a  row, 
Gardens  where  bachelors'-buttons  grow, 

Swallows'  nests  in  roof  and  wall, 
And  up  above  the  still  blue  sky, 
Where  the  woolly  white  clouds  go  sailing  by — 

I  seem  to  be  able  to  see  it  all! 

For  now,  in  summer,  I  take  my  chair, 

And  sit  outside  in  the  sun,  and  hear 
The  distant  murmur  of  street  and  square, 

And  the  swallows  and  sparrows  chirping  near; 
And  Fanny,  who  lives  just  over  the  way. 
Comes  running  many  a  time  each  day. 

With  her  Httle  hand's-touch  so  warm  and  kind, 
And  I  smile  and  talk,  with  the  sun  on  my  cheek, 
And  the  little  live  hand  seems  to  stir  and  speak — 

For  Fanny  is  dumb  and  I  am  blind. 

Fanny  is  sweet  thirteen,  and  she 

Has  fine  black  ringlets  and  dark  eyes  clear, 
And  I  am  older  by  summers  three, — 

Why  should  we  hold  one  another  so  dear? 
Because  she  cannot  utter  a  word, 
Nor  hear  the  music  of  bee  or  bird, 

The  water-cart's  splash  or  the  mUkman's  call. 
Because  I  have  never  seen  the  sky. 
Nor  the  little  singers  that  hum  and  fly, — 

Yet  know  she  is  gazing  upon  them  all ! 

For  the  sun  is  shining,  the  swallows  fly, 
The  bees  and  the  blueflies  murmur  low. 

And  I  hear  the  water-cart  go  by. 

With  its  cool  splash-splash  down  the  dusty  row; 

And  the  little  one,  close  at  my  side,  perceives 

Mine  eyes  upraised  to  the  cottage  eaves, 


3384 


In  the  Shadow 


Where  birds  are  chirping  in  summer  shine, 
And  I  hear,  though  I  cannot  look,  and  she, 
Though  she  cannot  hear,  can  the  singers  see, — ■ 

And  the  Uttle  soft  fingers  flutter  in  mine. 

Hath  not  the  dear  little  hand  a  tongue, 

When  it  stirs  on  my  palm  for  the  love  of  me? 
Do  I  not  know  she  is  pretty  and  young? 

Hath  not  my  soul  an  eye  to  see? 
'Tis  pleasure  to  make  one's  bosom  stir, 
To  wonder  how  things  appear  to  her. 

That  I  only  hear  as  thej'^  pass  around; 
And  as  long  as  we  sit  in  the  music  and  light. 
She  is  happy  4.0  keep  God's  sight, 

And  I  am  happy  to  keep  God's  sound. 

Why,  I  know  her  face,  though  I  am  blind — 

I  made  it  of  music  long  ago: 
Strange  large  eyes  and  dark  hair  twined 

Round  the  pensive  light  of  a  brow  of  snow; 
And  when  I  sit  by  my  Httle  one, 
And  hold  her  hand  and  talk  in  the  sun, 

And  hear  the  music  that  haunts  the  place, 
I  know  she  is  raising  her  eyes  to  me, 
And  guessing  how  gentle  my  voice  must  be. 

And  seeing  the  music  upon  my  face. 

Though,  if  ever  the  Lord  should  grant  me  a  prayer 

(I  know  the  fancy  is  only  vain), 
I  should  pray:  Just  once,  when  the  weather  is  fair. 

To  see  little  Fanny  and  Langley  Lane; 
Though  Fanny,  perhaps,  would  pray  to  hear 
The  voice  of  the  friend  she  holds  so  dear. 

The  song  of  the  birds,  the  hum  of  the  street, — 
It  is  better  to  be  as  we  have  been, — 
Each  keeping  up  something,  unheard,  unseen, 

To  make  God's  heaven  more  strange  and  sweet! 

Ah,  life  is  pleasant  in  Langley  Lane! 

There  is  always  .something  sweet  to  hear! 
Chirping  of  birds  or  patter  of  rain; 

And  Fanny,  my  little  one,  always  near; 


The   Weakest  Thing  33^5 

And  though  I  am  weakly  and  can't  live  long, 
And  Fanny  my  darling  is  far  from  strong, 

And  though  we  can  never  married  be,— 
What  then? — since  we  hold  one  another  so  dear, 
For  the  sake  of  the  pleasure  one  cannot  hear, 

And  the  pleasure  that  only  one  can  see? 

Robert  Buchanan  [1841-1901] 


THE  WEAKEST  THING 

Which  is  the  weakest  thing  of  all 

Mine  heart  can  ponder? 
The  sun,  a  little  cloud  can  pall 

With  darkness  yonder? 
The  cloud,  a  little  wind  can  move 

Where'er  it  listeth? 
The  wind,  a  little  leaf  above. 

Though  sere,  resisteth? 

What  time  that  yellow  leaf  was  green. 

My  days  were  gladder; 
But  now,  whatever  Spring  may  mean, 

I  must  grow  sadder. 
Ah  me!  a  leaf  with  sighs  can  wring 

My  lips  asunder? 
Then  is  mine  heart  the  weakest  thing 

Itself  can  ponder. 

Yet,  Heart,  when  sun  and  cloud  are  pined 

And  drop  together, 
And  at  a  blast  which  is  not  wind 

The  forests  wither. 
Thou,  from  the  darkening  deathly  curse 

To  glory  breakest, — 
The  Strongest  of  the  universe 

Guarding  the  weakest! 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [1806-1861] 


33^6  In  the  Shadow 


SONG 

We  only  ask  for  sunshine, 

We  did  not  want  the  rain; 
But  see  the  flowers  that  spring  from  showers 

All  up  and  down  the  plain." 

We  beg  the  gods  for  laughter, 

We  shrink,  we  dread  the  tears; 
But  grief's  redress  is  happiness, 

Alternate  through  the  years. 

Helen  Hay  Whitney  [i8    - 


THE  HOUSE   OF   PAIN 

Unto  the  Prison  House  of  Pain  none  willingly  repair — 

The  bravest  who  an  entrance  gain 
Reluctant  linger  there — 
For  Pleasure,  passing  by  that  door,  stays  not  to  cheer  the 

sight. 
And  Sympathy  but  muffles  sound  and  banishes  the  light. 

Yet  in  the  Prison  House  of  Pain  things  full  of  beauty  blow — 

Like  Christmas  roses,  which  attain 
Perfection  'mid  the  snow — 
Love  entering,   in  his  mild  warmth  the  darkest  shadows 

melt, 
And  often,  where  the  hush  is  deep,  the  waft  of  wings  is  felt. 

Ah,  me!  the  Prison  House  of  Pain! — what  lessons  there  are 
bought! 
Lessons  of  a  sublimer  strain 
Than  any  elsewhere  taught; 
Amid  its  loneliness  and  gloom,  grave  meanings  grow  more 

clear. 
For  to  no  earthly  dwelling-place  seems  God  so  strangely 
near! 

Florence  Earle  Coates  [1850- 


"Multum   Dilexit"  3387 


WISE 

An  apple  orchard  smells  like  wine; 

A  succory  flower  is  blue; 
Until  Grief  touched  these  eyes  of  mine, 

Such  things  I  never  knew. 

And  now  indeed  I  know  so  plain 

Why  one  would  like  to  cry 
When  spouts  are  full  of  April  rain — 

Such  lonely  folk  go  by! 

So  wise,  so  wise — that  my  tears  fall 

Each  breaking  of  the  dawn; 
That  I  do  long  to  tell  you  all — 

But  you  are  dead  and  gone. 

Lizeite  Woodivorth  Reese  [1856- 


"MULTUM  DILEXIT" 

She  sat  and  wept  beside  His  feet;  the  weight 
Of  sin  oppressed  her  heart;  for  all  the  blame, 
And  the  poor  malice  of  the  worldly  shame, 
To  her  was  past,  extinct,  and  out  of  date: 
Only  the  sin  remained, — the  leprous  state; 
She  would  be  melted  by  the  heat  of  love. 
By  fires  far  fiercer  than  are  blown  to  prove 
And  purge  the  silver  ore  adulterate.  f-'J  "srnol  i 

She  sat  and  wept,  and  with  her  untressed  hair 

Still  wiped  the  feet  she  was  so  blessed  to  touch; 

And  He  wiped  off  the  soiling  of  despair 

From  her  sweet  soul,  because  she  loyed  so  much. 

I  am  a  sinner,  full  of  doubts  and  fears: 

Make  me  a  humble  thing  of  love  and  tears. 

Hartley  Coleridge  [i  796-1 849] 


3388  In   the  Shadow 


PIERRETTE  IN  MEMORY 

Pierrette  has  gone,  but  it  was  not 

Exactly  that  she  died, 
So  much  as  vanished  and  forgot 

To  say  where  she  would  hide;'    -j;^  -> 

To  keep  a  sudden  rendezvous, 

It  came  into  her  mind 
That  she  was  late.    What  could  she  do 

But  leave  distress  behind? 

Afraid  of  being  in  disgrace. 

And  hurrying  to  dress, 
She  heard  there  was  another  place 

In  need  of  loveliness. 

A. 

She  went  so  softly  and  so  soon — 

Sh! — hardly  made  a  stir; 
But  going  took  the  stars  and  moon 

And  sun  away  with  her. 

William  Griffith  [1876- 


"WIND  ME  A  SUMMER  CROWN" 

"Wind  me  a  summer  crown,"  she  said, 

"And  set  it  on  my  brows; 
For  I  must  go,  while  I  am  young. 

Home  to  my  Father's  house. 

"And  make  me  ready  for  the  day, 

And  let  me  not  be  stayed; 
I  would  not  linger  on  the  way 

As  if  I  was  afraid. 

"O,  will  the  golden  courts  of  heaven. 

When  I  have  paced  them  o'er, 
Be  lovely  as  the  lily  walks 

Which  I  must  see  no  more? 


To  the  Harpies  33^9 

"And  will  the  seraph  hymns  and  harps, 

When  they  have  filled  my  ear, 
Be  tender  as  my  mother's  voice, 

Which  I  must  never  hear? 

"And  shall  I  lie  where  sunsets  drift, 

Or  where  the  stars  are  born, 
Or  where  the  living  tints  are  mixed 

To  paint  the  clouds  of  morn?" 

Your  mother's  tones  shall  reach  you  still,  • 

Even  sweeter  than  they  were; 
And  the  false  love  that  broke  your  heart 

Shall  be  forgotten  there: 

And  not  a  star  or  flower  is  born 

The  beauty  of  that  shore; 
There  is  a  face  which  you  shall  see 

And  wish  for  nothing  more. 

Menclla  Bute  Smedlcy  [1820-1877] 

TO  THE  HARPIES 

You  who  with  birch  or  laurel 
Are  swift  to  scourge  or  bless — 
Silence  your  foolish  quarrel 
Before  her  loveliness. 

What  though  she  went  a-travel 
Down  paths  you  do  not  know? 
Your  words  shall  not  unravel 
Webs  that  allured  her  so. 

Hush  now  your  foolish  babble 
Around  her  golden  head. 
Shut  out  the  prying  rabble. 
Be  happy.    She  is  dead. 

Now  give  one  final  kindness 
That  late  you  dreamed  not  of — 
Silence,  to  cloak  your  blindness — 
Peace,  since  you  know  not  love. 

Arthur  Davison  Fickc  [1883- 


339'^  I^  the  Shadow 

THE  BRIDGE  OF  SIGHS 

One  more  Unfortunate, 
Weary  of  breath, 

Rashly  importunate, 
Gone  to  her  death! 

Take  her  up  tenderly, 
Lift  her  with  care; 

Fashioned  so  slenderly, 
Young,  and  so  fair! 

Look  at  her  garments 
CHnging  like  cerements: 
Whilst  the  wave  constantly 

Drips  from  her  clothing; 
Take  her  up  instantly, 

Loving,  not  loathing. 

Touch  her  not  scornfully; 
Think  of  her  mournfully, 

Gently  and  humanly; 
Not  of  the  stains  of  her; 
All  that  remains  of  her 

Now  is  pure  womanly. 

Make  no  deep  scrutiny 
Into  her  mutiny 

Rash  and  undutiful; 
Past  all  dishonor, 
Death  has  left  on  her 

Only  the  beautiful. 

Still,  for  all  slips  of  hers, 
One  of  Eve's  family — 

Wipe  those  poor  lips  of  hers 
Oozing  so  clammily. 

Loop  up  her  tresses 

Escaped  from  the  comb, 

Her  fair  auburn  tresses; 

Whilst  wonderment  guesses 
Where  was  her  home? 


The   Bridge  of  Sighs  339 1 

Who  was  her  father? 

Who  was  her  mother? 
Had  she  a  sister? 

Had  she  a  brother? 
Or  was  there  a  dearer  one 
Still,  and  a  nearer  one 

Yet,  than  all  other? 

Alas!  for  the  rarity 
Of  Christian  charity 

Under  the  sun! 
O,  it  was  pitiful! 
Near  a  whole  city  full, 

Home  she  had  none. 

Sisterly,  brotherly. 
Fatherly,  motherly 

Feelings  had  changed: 
Love,  by  harsh  evidence. 
Thrown  from  its  eminence; 
Even  God's  providence 

Seeming  estranged. 

Where  the  lamps  quiver 
So  far  in  the  river, 

With  many  a  light 
From  window  and  casement, 
From  garret  to  basement. 
She  stood,  with  amazement. 

Houseless  by  night. 

The  bleak  wind  of  March 

Made  her  tremble  and  shiver; 
But  not  the  dark  arch 
Or  the  black  flowing  river: 
Mad  from  life's  history. 
Glad  to  death's  mystery. 

Swift  to  be  hurled — • 
Anywhere,  anywhere 

Out  of  the  world! 


339^  ^*^  th^  Shadow  ;  i 

In  she  plunged  boldly — 
No  matter  how  coldly 

The  rough  river  ran— ;-j^] 
Over  the  brink  of  it,      yv 
Picture  it, — think  of  it,    ■  ' 

Dissolute  Man! 
Lave  in  it, — ^drink  of  it, 

Then,  if  you  can! 

Take  her  up  tenderly, 

Lift  her  with  care; 
Fashioned  so  slenderly. 

Young,  and  so  fair! 

Ere  her  Hmbs  frigidly 
Stiffen  too  rigidly, 

Decently,  kindly, 
Smooth  and  compose  them; 
And  her  eyes,  close  them, 

Staring  so  bhndly! 

Dreadfully  staring 

Through  muddy  impurity. 

As  when  with  the  daring 

Last  look  of  despairing, 
Fixed  on  futurity. 

Perishing  gloomily, 
Spurred  by  contumely, 
Cold  inhumanity, 
Burning  insanity, 

Into  her  rest. — 
Cross  her  hands  humb'y 
As  if  praying  dumbly. 

Over  her  breast! 

Owning  her  weakness, 

Her  evil  behavior. 
And  leaving,  with  meekness. 

Her  sins  to  her  Saviour! 

Tlwmas  Hood  [1799-1845] 


The  Song  of  the   Shirt  3393 

■  -77-m  V 
THE  SONG  OF  THE  SHIRT 

With  fingers  weary  and  worn, 

With  eyelids  heavy  and  red, 
A  woman  sat,  in  unwomanly  rags, 

Plying  her  needle  and  thread, — 
Stitch— stitch— stitch ! 
In  poverty,  hunger,  and  dirt; 

And  still  with  a  voice  of  dolorous  pitch 
She  sang  the  "Song  of  the  Shirt!" 

' '  Work.  — work — work 

While  the  cock  is  crowing  aloof! 
And  work — work — work 

Till  the  stars  shine  througl;  *he  roof! 
It's  oh !  to  be  a  slave 

Along  with  the  barbarous  Turk, 
Where  woman  has  never  a  soul  to  save, 

If  this  is  Christian  work! 

"Work — work — work 

TUl  the  brain  begins  to  swim! 
Work — work — work 

Till  the  eyes  are  heavy  and  dim! 
Seam,  and  gusset,  and  band. 

Band,  and  gusset,  and  seam, — 
Till  over  the  buttons  I  fall  asleep, 
' '-''  And  sew  them  on  in  a  dream! 

"O  men  with  sisters  dear! 

O  men  with  mothers  and  wives! 
It  is  not  linen  you're  wearing  out, 

But  human  creatures'  lives! 
Stitch — stitch — stitch, 

In  poverty,  hunger  and  dirt, — 
Sewing  at  once,  with  a  double  thread, 

A  shroud  as  well  as  a  shirt ! 

"But  why  do  I  talk  of  death,— 

That  phantom  of  grisly  bone? 
I  hardly  fear  his  terrible  shape. 

It  seems  so  like  my  own, — 


22gA.  Ii^  the  Shadow 

It  seems  so  like  my  own 

Because  of  the  fasts  I  keep; 
O  God!  that  bread  should  be  so  dear^/. 

And  flesh  and  blood  so  cheap! 

"  Work — work — work ! 

My  labor  never  flags; 
And  what  are  its  wages?     A  bed  of  straw, 

A  crust  of  bread — and  rags. 
That  shattered  roof — and  this  naked  floor — 

A  table — a  broken  chair — 
And  a  wall  so  blank  my  shadow  I  thank 

For  sometimes  falling  there! 

"Work — work — work 

From  weary  chime  to  chime! 
Work — ^work— work 

As  prisoners  work  for  crime! 
Band,  and  gusset,  and  seam. 

Seam,  and  gusset,  and  band, — 
Till  the  heart  is  sick  and  the  brain  benumbed, 

As  well  as  the  weary  hand. 

' '  Work — work — work 

In  the  dull  December  light! 
And  work — work — work 

When  the  weather  is  warm  and  bright! 
While  underneath  the  eaves 

The  brooding  swallows  cling, 
As  if  to  show  me  their  sunny  backs, 

And  twit  me  with  the  Spring. 

"Oh  but  to  breathe  the  breath 

Of  the  cowslip  and  primrose  sweet,-— 
With  the  sky  above  my  head. 

And  the  grass  beneath  my  feet! 
For  only  one  short  hour 

To  feel  as  I  used  to  feel. 
Before  I  knew  the  woes  of  want  • 

And  the  walk  that  costs  a  meal! 


Stanzas  3395 

"  Oh  but  for  one  short  hour, — 

A  respite,  however  brief! 
No  blessed  leisure  for  love  or  hope, 

But  only  time  for  grief! 
A  little  weeping  would  ease  my  heart; 

But  in  their  briny  bed 
My  tears  must  stop,  for  every  drop 

Hinders  needle  and  thread!" 

With  fingers  weary  and  worn, 

With  eyelids  heavy  and  red, 
A  woman  sat,  in  unwomanly  rags, 

Plying  her  needle  and  thread, — 
Stitch — stitch — stitch! 

In  poverty,  hunger,  and  dirt; 
And  still  with  a  voice  of  dolorous  pitch — 
Would  that  its  tone  could  reach  the  rich! — 

She  sang  this  "Song  of  the  Shirt!" 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1845] 


STANZAS 

In  a  drear-nighted  December, 

Too  happy,  happy  tree, 
Thy  branches  ne'er  remember 

Their  green  felicity: 
The  north  cannot  undo  them, 
With  a  sleety  whistle  through  them; 
Nor  frozen  thawings  glue  them 

From  budding  at  the  prime. 

In  a  drear-nighted  December, 
Too  happy,  happy  brook, 
Liux  jv/  Li.ii<.  Thy  bubblings  ne'er  remember 
Apollo's  summer  look; 
f,,  ^1,  +  ,.,.  But  with  a  sweet  forgetting,  ■      rrp 

They  stay  their  crystal  fretting. 
Never,  never  petting  ,  ,ry. 

About  the  frozen  time. 


339^  ^n  the  Shadow 

Ah!  would  'twere  so  with  many 

A  gentle  girl  and  boy! 
But  were  there  ever  any 

Writhed  not  at  passed  joy? 
To  know  the  change  and  feel  it, 
When  there  is  none  to  heal  it, 
Nor  numbed  sense  to  steal  it, 

Was  never  said  in  rhyme. 

John  Keats  [1795-1821] 

THE  DEAD   FAITH 

She  made  a  little  shadow-hidden  grave 

The  day  Faith  died; 
Therein  she  laid  it,  heard  the  clod's  sick  fall, 

And  smiled  aside — 
"If  less  I  ask,"  tear-blind,  she  mocked,  "I  may 

Be  less  denied." 

h  ■ 

She  set  a  rose  to  blossom  in  her  hair, 

The  day  Faith  died — • 
"Now  glad,"  she  said,  "and  free  at  last,  I  go, 

And  life  is  wide." 
But  through  long  nights  she  stared  into  the  dark, 

And  knew  she  lied. 

Fannie  Heaslip  Lea  [1884- 

THE  BALLAD   OF  THE  BOAT 

The  stream  was  smooth  as  glass,  we  said,  "Arise  and  let's 

away": 
The  Siren  sang  beside  the  boat  that  in  the  rushes  lay; 
And  spread  the  sail,  and  strong  the  oar,  we  gaily  took  our 

way. 
When  shall  the  sandy  bar  be  crossed?     When  shall  we  find 

the  bay? 

The  broadening  flood  swells  slowly  out  o'er  cattle-dotted 

plains, 
The  stream  is  strong  and  turbulent,  and  dark  with  heavy 

rains; 


Eldorado  3397 

The  laborer  looks  up  to  see  our  shallop  speed  away. 
When  shall  the  sandy  bar  be  crossed?     When  shall  we  find 
the  bay? 

Now  are  the  clouds  like  fiery  shrouds;  the  sun,  superbly 

large, 
Slow  as  an  oak  to  woodman's  stroke  sinks  flaming  at  their 

marge. 
The  waves  are  bright  with  mirrored  light  as  jacinths  on  our 

way. 
When  shall  the  sandy  bar  be  crossed?     When  shall  we  find 

the  bay? 

The  moon  is  high  up  in  the  sky,  and  now  no  more  we  see 
The  spreading  river's  either  bank,  and  surging  distantly 
There  booms  a  sullen  thunder  as  of  breakers  far  away. 
Now  shall  the  sandy  bar  be  crossed,  now  shall  we  find  the 
bay! 

The  sea-gull  shrieks  high  overhead,  and  dimly  to  our  sight 
The  moonlit  crests  of  foaming  waves  gleam  towering  through 

the  night. 
We'll  steal  upon  the  mermaid  soon,  and  start  her  from  her 

lay, 
When  once  the  sandy  bar  is  crossed,  and  we  are  in  the  bay. 

\Vhat  rises  white  and  awful  as  a  shroud-enfolded  ghost? 
What  roar  of  rampant  tumult  bursts  in  clangor  on  the  coast? 
Pull  back!  pull  back!     The  raging  flood  sweeps  every  oar 

away. 
O  stream,  is  this  thy  bar  of  sand?     0  boat,  is  this  the  bay? 

Richard  Ganictt  [1835-1006] 

ELDORADO 

Gaily  bedight, 

A  gallant  knight 
In  sunshine  and  in  shadow 

Had  journeyed  long, 

Singing  a  song, 
In  search  of  Eldorado. 


3398  In  the  Shadow 


btu 


But  he  grew  old —  i. 

This  knight  so  bold —  ff 

And  o'er  his  heart  a  shadow 

Fell,  as  he  found 

No  spot  of  ground 
That  looked  hke  Eldorado. 

And,  as  his  strength  [ 

"fi'O  Failed  him  at  length,  ^rfin 

He  met  a  pilgrim  shadow: 

''■  "Shadow,"  said  he, 

"Where  can  it  be — 

This  land  of  Eldorado?" 

,,^         ,  .  jfr{?!fno(ii 

Over  the  mountams 

Of  the  moon, 
Down  the  valley  of  the  Shadow 

Ride,  boldly  ride," 

The  shade  replied, 
"If  you  seek  for  Eldorado!" 

Edgar  Allan  Poe  [i8og-i84g] 

A  LOST  CHORD 

Seated  one  day  at  the  Organ, 

I  was  weary  and  ill  at  ease, 
And  my  fingers  wandered  idly 

Over  the  noisy  keys. 

I  do  not  know  what  I  was  playing,  if!)1 

Or  what  I  was  dreaming  then; 

But  I  struck  one  chord  of  music, 
Like  the  sound  of  a  great  Amen. 

It  flooded  the  crimson  twilight. 
Like  the  close  of  an  Angel's  Psalm, 

And  it  lay  on  my  fevered  spirit 
With  a  touch  of  infinite  calm. 

It  quieted  pain  and  sorrow, 

Like  love  overcoming  strife; 
It  seemed  the  harmonious  echo 

From  our  discordant  life. 


Little   Gray   Songs   from   St.   Joseph's     3399 

It  linked  all  perplexed  meanings 

Into  one  perfect  peace, 
And  trembled  away  into  silence 

As  if  it  were  loth  to  cease. 

I  have  sought,  but  I  seek  it  vainly, 

That  one  lost  chord  divine, 
Which  came  from  the  soul  of  the  Organ, 

And  entered  into  mine. 

It  may  be  that  Death's  bright  angel 

Will  speak  in  that  chord  again, — 
It  may  be  that  only  in  Heaven 

I  shall  hear  that  grand  Amen. 

Adelaide' Anne  Procter  [182 5- 1864] 

LITTLE  GRAY  SONGS  FROM  ST.  JOSEPH'S 

XXX 

"With  cassock  black,  baret  and  book, 

Father  Saran  goes  by; 
I  think  he  goes  to  say  a  prayer 

For  one  who  has  to  die. 

Even  so,  some  day,  Father  Saran 

May  say  a  prayer  for  me; 
Myself  meanwhile,  the  Sister  tells, 

Should  pray  unceasingly. 

They  kneel  who  pray:  how  may  I  kneel 

Who  face  to  ceiling  lie, 
Shut  out  by  all  that  man  has  made 

From  God  who  made  the  sky? 

They  lift  who  pray — the  low  earth-born — 

A  humble  heart  to  God: 
But  O,  my  heart  of  clay  is  proud — 

True  sister  to  the  sod. 

I  look  into  the  face  of  God,  • 

They  say  bends  over  me; 
I  search  the  dark,  dark  face  of  God — 

O  what  is  it  I  see? 


I 

3400  In  the  Shadow  lO  abiiJ     | 


I  see — who  lie  fast  bound,  who  may 

Not  kneel,  who  can  but  seek— 
I  see  mine  own  face  over  me,  - ;  .': 

With  tears  upon  its  cheek. 

XLVII  , 

My  little  soul  I  never  saw,  ' 

Nor  can  I  count  its  days; 
I  do  not  know  its  wondrous  law 

And  yet  I  know  its  ways. 

Oh,  it  is  young  as  morning-hours, 

And  old  as  is  the  night;  ■  ^ ' 

Oh,  it  has  growth  of  budding  flowers,      i- 
(i-o- :      Yet  tastes  my  body's  bhght. 

And  it  is  silent  and  apart,  .  JIJTTIJ 

And  far  and  fair  and  still, 
Yet  ever  beats  within  my  heart, 

And  cries  within  my  will. 

And  it  is  light  and  bright  and  strange, 

And  sees  life  far  away. 
Yet  far  with  near  can  interchange 

And  dwell  within  the  day. 

My  soul  has  died  a  thousand  deaths, 

And  yet  it  does  not  die; 
My  soul  has  broke  a  thousand  faiths, 

And  yet  it  cannot  lie; 

My  soul — there's  naught  can  make  it  less; 

My  soul — there's  naught  can  mar; 
Yet  here  it  weeps  with  loneliness 

Within  its  lonely  star. 

My  soul — not  any  dark  can  bind, 

Nor  hinder  any  hand. 
Yet  here  it  weeps — long  blind,  long  blind — 

And  cannot  understand. 

Grace  Fallow  Norton  [18 


Sonnets  3  401 

BIRTHRIGHT 

Lord  Rameses  of  Egypt  sighed 
Because  a  summer  evening  passed; 
And  little  Ariadne  cried 
That  summer  fancy  fell  at  last 
To  dust;  and  young  Verona  died 
When  beauty's  hour  was  overcast. 

Theirs  was  the  bitterness  we  know 
Because  the  clouds  of  hawthorn  keep 
So  short  a  state,  and  kisses  go 
To  tombs  unfathomably  deep, 
While  Rameses  and  Romeo 
And  little  Ariadne  sleep. 

John  Drinkwatcr  [18S2- 

IMMORTALIS 
All  loved  and  lovely  women  dear  to  rhyme: 
Thais,  Cassandra,  Helen  and  their  fames, 
Burn  like  tall  candles  through  forgotten  time. 
Lighting  the  Past's  dim  arras  with  their  names. 
Around  their  faces  wars  the  eager  dark 
Wherein  all  other  lights  are  sunken  now, 
Yet,  casting  back,  the  seeker  still  may  mark 
A  flame  of  hair,  a  bright  immortal  brow. 

Surely,  where  they  have  passed,  one  after  one, 
Wearing  their  radiance  to  the  darkened  room, — 
Surely,  newcomers  to  Oblivion 
May  still  descry  in  that  all-quenching  gloom. 
Rare  faces  lovely,  lifted  and  alight. 
Like  tapers  burning  through  the  windy  night. 

David  Morion  [i.S 

SONNETS 

Long,  long  ago,  when  all  the  glittering  earth 
Was  heaven  itself,  when  drunkards  in  the  street 
Were  like  mazed  kings  shaking  at  giving  birth 
To  acts  of  war  that  sickle  men  like  wheat, 
When  the  white  clover  opened  Paradise 
And  God  lived  in  a  cottage  up  the  brook. 
Beauty,  you  lifted  up  my  sleeping  eyes 


3402  In   the   JShadow 

And  filled  my  heart  with  longing  with  a  look; 

And  all  the  day  I  searched  but  could  not  find 

The  beautiful  dark-eyed  who  touched  me  there, 

Delight  in  her  made  trouble  in  my  mind, 

She  was  within  all  Nature,  everywhere, 

The  breath  I  breathed,  the  brook,  the  flower,  the  grass, 

Were  her,  her  word,  her  beauty,  all  she  was. 

If  I  could  come  again  to  that  dear  place 

Where  once  I  came,  where  Beauty  lived  and  moved. 

Where,  by  the  sea,  I  saw  her  face  to  face. 

That  soul  ahve  by  which  the  world  has  loved; 

If,  as  I  stood  at  gaze  among  the  leaves. 

She  would  appear  again,  as  once  before. 

While  the  red  herdsman  gathered  up  his  sheaves 

And  brimming  waters  trembled  up  the  shore; 

If,  as  I  gazed,  her  Beauty  that  was  dumb. 

In  that  old  time,  before  I  learned  to  speak, 

Would  lean  to  me  and  revelation  come. 

Words  to  the  lips  and  color  to  the  cheek, 

Joy  with  its  searing-iron  would  burn  me  wise, 

I  should  know  ail;  all  powers,  all  mysteries. 

Roses  are  beauty,  but  I  never  see 

Those  blood  drops  from  the  burning  heart  of  June 

Glowing  like  thought  upon  the  living  tree, 

Without  a  pity  that  they  die  so  soon. 

Die  into  petals,  like  those  roses  old. 

Those  women,  who  were  summer  in  men's  hearts 

Before  the  smile  upon  the  Sphinx  was  cold, 

Or  sand  had  hid  the  Syrian  and  his  arts. 

O  myriad  dust  of  beauty  that  lies  thick 

Under  our  feet  that  not  a  single  grain 

But  stirred  and  moved  in  beauty  and  was  quick 

For  one  brief  moon  and  died  nor  lived  again; 

But  when  the  moon  rose  lay  upon  the  grass 

Pasture  to  living  beauty,  life  that  was. 

O  little  self,  within  whose  smallness  lies 
All  that  man  was,  and  is,  and  will  become. 
Atom  unseen  that  comprehends  the  skies 
And  tells  the  tracks  by  which  the  planets  roam. 


Sonnets  34^3 

That,  without  moving,  knows  the  joys  of  wings, 

The  tiger's  strength,  the  eagle's  secrecy, 

And  in  the  hovel  can  consort  with  kings, 

Or  clothe  a  god  with  his  own  mystery. 

O  with  what  darkness  do  we  cloak  thy  light, 

What  dusty  folly  gather  thee  for  food. 

Thou  who  alone  art  knowledge  and  delight. 

The  heavenly  bread,  the  beautiful,  the  good. 

O  living  self,  O  god,  O  morning  star. 

Give  us  thy  light,  forgive  us  what  we  are. 

There  is  no  God,  as  I  was  taught  in  youth. 
Though  each,  according  to  his  stature,  builds 
Some  covered  shrine  for  what  he  thinks  the  truth, 
Which  day  by  day  his  reddest  heart-blood  gilds. 
There  is  no  God;  but  death,  the  clasping  sea, 
In  which  we  move  like  fish,  deep  over  deep 
Made  of  men's  souls  that  bodies  have  set  free, 
Floods  to  a  Justice  though  it  seems  asleep. 
There  is  no  God,  but  still,  behind  the  veil, 
The  hurt  thing  works,  out  of  its  agony. 
Still,  like  a  touching  of  a  brimming  Grail, 
Return  the  pennies  given  to  passers  by. 
There  is  no  God,  but  we,  who  breathe  the  air, 
Are  God  ourselves  and  touch  God  everywhere. 

Let  that  which  is  to  come  be  as  it  may, 

Darkness,  extinction,  justice,  life  intense, 

The  flies  are  happy  in  the  summer  day. 

Flies  will  be  happy  many  summers  hence. 

Time  with  his  antique  breeds  that  built  the  Sphinx 

Time  with  her  men  to  come  whose  wings  will  tower, 

Poured  and  will  pour,  not  as  the  wise  man  thinks, 

But  with  blind- force,  to  each  his  little  hour. 

And  when  the  hour  has  struck,  comes  death  or  change. 

Which,  whether  good  or  ill,  we  cannot  tell, 

But  the  blind  planet  will  wander  through  her  range 

Bearing  men  like  us  who  will  serve  as  well. 

The  sun  will  rise,  the  winds  that  ever  move 

Will  blow  our  dust  that  once  were  men  in  love. 

John  Masejield  [1874- 


"THE  DESPOT'S  DESPOT" 

VlT^   SUMMA    BREVIS    SPEM   NOS   VETAT   IN- 
COHARE  LONGAM 

They  are  not  long,  the  weeping  and  the  laughter, 
Love  and  desire  and  hate;  ,.  :  -     -ra'T 

I  think  they  have  no  portion  in  us  after. r,.  rr^irorfT 
We  pass  the  gate. 

They  are  not  long,  the  days  of  wine  and  roses: 

Out  of  a  misty -dream 
Our  path  emerges  for  a  while,  then  closes 

Within  a  dream. 

Ernest  Dowson  [1S67-1900] 


DEATH'S   FINAL   CONQUEST 

From  "  The  Contention  of  Ajax  and  Ulysses  " 

The  glories  of  our  blood  and  state       -r  ■,^_,..j  ^  ,' 

Are  shadows,  not  substantial  things; 
There  is  no  armor  against  fate; 
Death  lays  his  icy  hand  on  kings: 
Scepter  and  Crown 
Must  tumble  down, 
And  in  the  dust  be  equal  made 
With  the  poor  crooked  scythe  and  spade. 

Some  men  with  swords  may  reap  -the  field, 

And  plant  fresh  laurels  where  they  kill: 
But  their  strong  nerves  at  last  must  yield; 
They  tame  but  one  another  still : 

Early  or  late  d 

They  stoop  to  fate,  '/a  arlT 

And  must  give  up  their  murmuring  breath   f  '''  ■''^ 
When  they,  pale  captives,  creep  to  death. 
3404 


Man's   Mortality  3405 

The  garlands  wither  on  your  brow; 

Then  boast  no  more  your  mighty  deeds; 
Upon  Death's  purple  altar  now 
See  where  the  victor- victim  bleeds: 
Your  heads  must  come 
To  the  cold  tomb; 
Only  the  actions  of  the  just 
Smell  sweet,  and  blossom  in  their  dust. 

James  Shirley  [1596-1666] 


DEATH'S  SUBTLE  WAYS 

From  "  Cupid  and  Death  " 

Victorious  men  of  earth,  no  more 

Proclaim  how  wide  your  empires  are: 
Though  you  bind  in  every  shore, 
And  your  triumphs  reach  as  far 
As  night  or  day. 
Yet  you,  proud  monarchs,  must  obey, 
And  mingle  with  forgotten  ashes  when 
Death  calls  ye  to  the  crowd  of  common  men. 

Devouring  famine,  plague,  and  war. 

Each  able  to  undo  mankind, 
Death's  servile  emissaries  are; 
Nor  to  these  alone  confined. 
He  hath  at  will 
More  quaint  and  subtle  ways  to  kill: 
A  smile  or  kiss,  as  he  will  use  the  art, 
Shall  have  the  cunning  skill  to  break  a  heart. 

•  James  Shirley  [1596-1666] 


MAN'S   MORT.\LITY 

From  "  Microbiblion" 

Like  as  the  damask  rose  you  see, 
Or  like  the  blossom  on  the  tree, 
Or  like  the  dainty  flower  of  May, 
Or  like  the  morning  of  the  day, 


34o6  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

Or  like  the  sun,  or  like  the  shade, 
Or  like  the  gourd  which  Jonas  had; 
Even  such  is  man,  whose  thread  is  spun, 
Drawn  out,  and  cut,  and  so  is  done. 
The  rose  withers,  the  blossom  blasteth, 
The  flower  fades,  the  morning  hasteth, 
The  sun  sets,  the  shadow  flies. 
The  gourd  consumes,  and  man — he  dies! 

Like  to  the  grass  that's  newly  sprung, 
Or  Hke  a  tale  that's  new  begun. 
Or  like  a  bird  that's  here  to-day. 
Or  like  the  pearled  dew  of  May, 
Or  like  an  hour,  or  like  a  span. 
Or  like  the  singing  of  a  swan; 
Even  such  is  man,  who  lives  by  breath, 
Is  here,  now  there,  in  life  and  death. 
The  grass  withers,  the  tale  is  ended, 
The  bird  is  flown,  the  dew's  ascended, 
The  hour  is  short,  the  span  not  long, 
The  swan  near  death, — man's  life  is  done! 

Like  CO  a  bubble  in  the  brook, 
Or  in  a  glass  much  like  a  look. 
Or  like  a  shuttle  in  a  weaver's  hand. 
Or  like  the  writing  on  the  sand. 
Or  hke  a  thought,  or  hke  a  dream. 
Or  like  the  gliding  of  a  stream; 
Even  such  is  man,  who  lives  by  breath, 
Is  here,  now  there,  in  life  and  death. 
The  bubble's  out,  the  look's  forgot, 
The  shuttle's  flung,  the  writing's  blot. 
The  thought  is  past,  the  dream  is  gone, 
The  water  glides, — man's  life  is  done! 

Like  to  a  blaze  of  fond  delight. 
Or  like  a  morning  clear  and  bright, 
Or  like  a  frost,  or  like  a  shower, 
Or  like  the  pride  of  Babel's  tower, 
Or  like  the  hour  that  guides  the  time, 
Or  like  to  Beauty  in  her  prime; 


To   Death  3407 

Even  such  is  man,  whose  glory  lends 
That  life  a  blaze  or  two,  and  ends. 
The  morn's  o'ercast,  joy  turned  to  pain, 
The  frost  is  thawed,  dried  up  the  rain, 
The  tower  falls,  the  hour  is  run, 
The  beauty  lost, — man's  hfe  is  done! 

Like  to  an  arrow  from  the  bow. 

Or  like  swift  course  of  water-flow, 

Or  like  that  time  'twixt  flood  and  ebb. 

Or  hke  the  spider's  tender  web, 

Or  like  a  race,  or  like  a  goal. 

Or  like  the  dealing  of  a  dole; 

Even  such  is  man,  whose  brittle  stale 

Is  always  subject  unto  Fate. 

The  arrow's  shot,  the  flood  soon  spent, 

The  time's  no  time,  the  web  soon  rent, 

The  race  soon  run,  the  goal  soon  won. 

The  dole  soon  dealt, — man's  life  is  done! 

Like  to  the  lightning  from  the  sky. 
Or  like  a  post  that  quick  doth  hie, 
Or  like  a  quaver  in  a  short  song. 
Or  like  a  journey  three  days  long. 
Or  like  the  snow  when  summer's  come, 
Or  like  the  pear,  or  like  the  plum; 
Even  such  is  man,  who  heaps  up  sorrow, 
Lives  but  this  day,  and  dies  to-morrow. 
The  lightning's  past,  the  post  must  go, 
The  song  is  short,  the  journey's  so. 
The  pear  doth  rot,  the  plum  doth  fall. 
The  snow  dissolves, — and  so  must  all! 

Simon  Waslcll  [    ?    -1632] 


TO  DEATH 

O  KING  of  Terrors!  whose  unbounded  sway 
All  that  have  life  must  certainly  obey; 
The  king,  the  priest,  the  prophet,  all  are  thine. 
Nor  would  even  God  (in  flesh)  thy  stroke  decline 


34o8  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

My  name  is  on  thy  roll,  and  sure  I  must 

Increase  thy  gloomy  kingdom  in  the  dust. 

My  soul  at  this  no  apprehension  feels, 

But  trembles  at  thy  swords,  thy  racks,  thy  wheels, 

Thy  scorching  fevers,  which  distract  the  sense, 

And  snatch  us  raving,  unprepared,  from  hence; 

At  thy  contagious  darts,  that  wound  the  heads 

Of  weeping  friends  who  wait  at  dying  beds. — '■ 

Spare  these,  and  let  thy  time  be  when  it  will; 

My  office  is  to  die,  and  thine  to  kill. 

Gently  thy  fatal  scepter  on  me  lay, 

And  take  to  thy  cold  arms,  insensibly,  thy  prey. 

Amie  Finch  [     ?     -1720] 


THE   GENIUS   OF  DEATH 

What  is  death?     'Tis  to  be  free, 

No  more  to  love  or  hope  or  fear, 
To  join  the  great  equality; 

All,  all  alike  are  humbled  there. 
The  mighty  grave 
Wraps  lord  and  slave; 
Nor  pride  nor  poverty  dares  come 
Within  that  refuge-house, — the  tomb. 

Spirit  with  the  drooping  wing 
And  the  ever-weeping  eye. 
Thou  of  all  earth's  kings  art  king; 
Empires  at  thy  footstool  lie; 
Beneath  thee  strewed, 
Their  multitude 
Sink  like  waves  upon  the  shore; 
Storms  shall  never  raise  them  more. 

What's  the  grandeur  of  the  earth 

To  the  grandeur  round  thy  throne? 
Riches,  glory,  beauty,  birth. 
To  thy  kingdom  all  have  gone. 
Before  thee  stand 
The  wondrous  band, — - 


"  Oh,  Why  Should  the  Spirit  be  Proud  ? "  3409 

Bards,  heroes,  sages,  side  by  side, 
Who  darkened  nations  when  thejf  died. 

Earth  has  hosts,  but  thou  canst  show- 
Many  a  million  for  her  one; 
Through  thy  gates  the  mortal  flow 
Hath  for  countless  years  rolled  on. 
Back  from  the  tomb 
No  step  has  come, 
There  fixed  till  the  last  thunder's  sound 
Shall  bid  thy  prisoners  be  unbound. 

George  Croly  [i 780-1  S6o] 


OH,  WHY  SHOULD  THE  SPIRIT  OF  MORTAL  BE 
PROUD? " 

Oh,  why  should  the  spirit  of  mortal  be  proud? 
Like  a  swift-flitting  meteor,  a  fast-flying  cloud, 
A  flash  of  the  lightning,  a  break  of  the  wave,  ' 
He  passeth  from  life  to  his  rest  in  the  grave. 

The  leaves  of  the  oak  and  the  wiUow  shall  fade, 
Be  scattered  around,  and  together  be  laid; 
As  the  young  and  the  old,  the  low  and  the  high. 
Shall  crumble  to  dust  and  together  shall  lie. 

The  child  that  a  mother  attended  and  loved, 
The  mother  that  infant's  affection  who  proved. 
The  husband  that  mother  and  infant  who  blessed, — 
Each,  all,  are  away  to  their  dweUings  of  rest. 

The  maid  on  whose  brow,  on  whose  cheek,  in  whose  eye. 
Shone  beauty  and  pleasure, — her  triumphs  are  by; 
And  ahke  from  the  minds  of  the  living  erased 
Are  the  memories  of  mortals  who  loved  her  and  praised. 

The  hand  of  the  king,  that  the  scepter  hath  borne; 
The  brov/  of  the  priest,  that  the  mitre  hath  worn; 
The  eyes  of  the  sage,  and  the  heart  of  the  brave, — 
Are  hidden  and  lost  in  the  depths  of  the  grave. 


34 lo  "The   Despot's  Despot" 

The  peasant,  whose  lot  was  to  sow  and  to  reap; 
The  herdsman,  who  climbed  with  his  goats  up  the  steep; 
The  beggar,  who  wandered  in  search  of  his  bread,— 
Have  faded  away  Hke  the  grass  that  we  tread. 

The  saint  who  enjoyed  the  communion  of  heaven, 
The  sinner  who  dared  to  remain  unforgiven, 
The  wise  and  the  foolish,  the  guilty  and  just. 
Have  quietly  mingled  their  bones  in  the  dust. 

So  the  multitude  goes,  like  the  flower  or  weed. 
That  withers  away  to  let  others  succeed; 
So  the  multitude  comes,  even  those  we  behold, 
To  repeat  every  tale  that  has  often  been  told. 

For  we  are  the  same  things  our  fathers  have  been; 
We  see  the  same  sights  our  fathers  have  seen; 
We  drink  the  same  stream,  we  feel  the  same  sun, 
And  run  the  same  course  our  fathers  have  run. 

The  thoughts  we  are  thinking  our  fathers  did  think; 
From  the  death  we  are  shrinking  our  fathers  did  shrink; 
To  the  life  we  are  clinging  our  fathers  did  cling, 
But  it  speeds  from  us  all  like  the  bird  on  the  wing. 

They  loved, — but  the  story  we  cannot  unfold; 
They  scorned, — but  the  heart  of  the  haughty  is  cold; 
They  grieved, — but  no  wail  from  their  slumbers  will  come; 
They  joyed, — but  the  tongue  of  their  gladness  is  dumb. 

They  died, — ah!  they  died; — we,  things  that  are  now, 
That  walk  on  the  turf  that  lies  over  their  brow. 
And  make  in  their  dwellings  a  transient  abode. 
Meet  the  changes  they  met  on  their  pilgrimage  road. 

Yea,  hope  and  despondency,  pleasure  and  pain, 
Are  mingled  together  in  sunshine  and  rain: 
And  the  smile  and  the  tear,  the  song  and  the  dirge, 
Still  follow  each  other  like  surge  upon  surge. 


The   Hour  of  Death  341 1 

'Tis  the  wink  of  an  eye;  'tis  the  draught  of  a  breath 
From  the  blossom  of  health  to  the  paleness  of  death, 
From  the  gilded  saloon  to  the  bier  and  the  shroud; 
Oh,  why  should  the  spirit  of  mortal  be  proud? 

William  Knox  [1780-1825] 


THE  HOUR  OF  DEATH 

Leaves  have  their  time  to  fall, 
And  flowers  to  wither  at  the  north-wind's  breath, 

And  stars  to  set, — but  all. 
Thou  hast  all  seasons  for  thine  ow^n,  O  Death! 

Day  is  for  mortal  care: 
Eve  for  glad  meetings  round  the  joyous  hearth; 

Night,  for  the  dreams  of  sleep,  the  voice  of  prayer. 
But  all  for  thee,  thou  Mightiest  of  the  earth. 

The  banquet  hath  its  hour — 
Its  feverish  hour — of  mirth  and  song  and  wine; 

There  comes  a  day  for  grief's  o'erwhelming  power, 
A  time  for  softer  tears, — but  all  are  thine. 

Youth  and  the  opening  rose 
May  look  Ifke  things  too  glorious  for  decay. 

And  smile  at  thee, — but  thou  art  not  of  those 
That  wait  the  ripened  bloom  to  seize  their  prey. 

Leaves  have  their  time  to  fall. 
And  flowers  to  wither  at  the  north-wind's  breath, 

And  stars  to  set, — but  all. 
Thou  hast  all  seasons  for  thine  own,  O  Death! 

We  know  when  moons  shall  wane. 
When  summer  birds  from  far  shall  cross  the  sea. 

When  autumn's  hue  shall  tinge  the  golden  grain, — 
But  who  shall  teach  us  when  to  look  for  thee? 

Is  it  when  Spring's  first  gale 
Comes  forth  to  whisper  where  the  violets  lie? 

Is  it  when  roses  in  our  paths  grow  pale? 
They  have  one  season — all  are  ours  to  die! 


3412  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

Thou  art  where  billows  foam; 
Thou  art  where  music  melts  upon  the  air; 

Thou  art  around  us  in  our  peaceful  home; 
And  the  world  calls  us  forth — and  thou  art  there. 

Thou  art  where  friend  meets  friend, 
Beneath  the  shadow  of  the  elm  to  rest; 

Thou  art  where  foe  meets  foe,  and  trumpets  rend 
The  skies,  and  swords  beat  down  the  princely  crest. 

Leaves  have  their  time  to  fall, 
And  flowers  to  wither  at  the  north-wind's  breath, 

And  stars  to  set, — but  all. 
Thou  hast  all  seasons  for  thine  own,  O  Death! 

Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans  [1793-183 5] 


THE   SLEEP 

"  He  giveth  his  beloved  sleep." — Psalm  cxxvii.  2 

Of  all  the  thoughts  of  God  that  are 
Borne  inward  into  souls  afar, 
Along  the  Psalmist's  music  deep, 
Now  tell  me  if  that  any  is. 
For  gift  or  grace,  surpassing  this: 
"He  giveth  his  beloved — sleep"? 

What  would  we  give  to  our  beloved? 
The  hero's  heart  to  be  unmoved. 
The  poet's  star-tuned  harp  to  sweep,    . 
The  patriot's  voice  to  teach  and  rouse, 
The  monarch's  crown,  to  light  the  brows? 
He  giveth  his  beloved — sleep. 

What  do  we  give  to  our  beloved? 

A  little  faith  all  undisproved, 

A  little  dust  to  overweep, 

And  bitter  memories  to  make 

The  whole  earth  blasted  for  our  sake: 

He  giveth  his  beloved — sleep. 


The  Sleep  3413 

"Sleep  soft,"  beloved!  we  sometimes  say, 

Who  have  no  tune  to  charm  away 

Sad  dreams  that  through  the  eyeh'ds  creep: 

But  never  doleful  dream  again 

Shall  break  the  happy  slumber  when 

He  giveth  his  beloved — sleep. 

O  earth,  so  full  of  drear\^  noises! 
O  men,  with  wailing  in  your  voices! 
O  delved  gold,  the  waiters  heap! 

0  strife,  O  curse,  that  o'er  it  fall! 
God  strikes  a  silence  through  you  all, 
And  giveth  his  beloved — sleep. 

His  dews  drop  mutely  on  the  hill. 
His  cloud  above  it  saileth  still. 
Though  on  its  slope  men  sow  and  reap: 
More  softly  than  the  dew  is  shed. 
Or  cloud  is  floated  overhead. 
He  giveth  his  beloved — sleep. 

Ay,  men  may  wonder  while  they  scan 
A  living,  thinking,  feeling  man 
Confirmed  in  such  a  rest  to  keep; 
But  Angels  say,  and  through  the  word 

1  think  their  happy  smile  is  heard- — 
"He  giveth  his  beloved — sleep." 

For  me,  my  heart,  that  erst  did  go 

Most  like  a  tired  child  at  a  show, 

That  sees  through  tears  the  mummers  leap, 

Would  now  its  wearied  vision  close. 

Would  childlike  on  his  love  repose 

Who  giveth  his  beloved — sleep. 

And  friends,  dear  friends,  when  it  shall  be 
That  this  low  breath  is  gone  from  me. 
And  round  my  bier  ye  come  to  weep. 
Let  One,  most  loving  of  you  all. 
Say  "Not  a  tear  must  o'er  her  fall! 
He  giveth  his  beloved  sleep." 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Broummg  [1806-1861 


3414  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

AZRAEL 

The  angels  in  high  places 

Who  minister  to  us, 
Reflect  God's  smile, — their  faces 

Are  luminous; 
Save  one,  whose  face  is  hidden, 

(The  Prophet  saith), 
The  unwelcome,  the  unbidden, 

Azrael,  Angel  of  Death. 
And  yet  that  veiled  face,  I  know 

Is  Ht  with  pitying  eyes, 
Like  those  faint  stars,  the  first  to  glow 

Through  cloudy  winter  skies. 

That  they  may  never  tire, 

Angels,  by  God's  decree. 
Bear  wings  of  snow  and  fire, — 

Passion  and  purity; 
Save  one,  all  unavailing, 

(The  Prophet  saith). 
His  wings  are  gray  and  trailing, 

Azrael,  Angel  of  Death. 
And  yet  the  souls  that  Azrael  brings 

Across  the  dark  and  cold, 
Look  up  beneath  those  folded  wings, 

And  find  them  lined  with  gold. 

Robert  Gilbert  Welsh  [18 

"WHERE  LIES  THE  LAND" 

From  "  Songs  in  Absence  " 

Where  hes  the  land  to  which  the  ship  would  go? 
Far,  far  ahead,  is  all  her  seamen  know. 
And  where  the  land  she  travels  from?     Away, 
Far,  far  behind,  is  all  that  they  can  say. 

On  sunny  noons  upon  the  deck's  smooth  face. 
Linked  arm  in  arm,  how  pleasant  here  to  pace; 
Or,  o'er  the  stern  reclining,  watch  below 
The  foaming  wake  far  widening  as  we  go. 


The  Bourne  34^5 

On  stormy  nights,  when  wild  north-westers  rave, 
How  proud  a  thing  to  fight  with  wind  and  wave! 
The  dripping  sailor  on  the  reeling  mast 
Exults  to  bear,  and  scorns  to  wish  it  past. 

Where  lies  the  land  to  which  the  ship  would  go? 
Far,  far  ahead,  is  all  her  seamen  know. 
And  where  the  land  she  travels  from?     Away, 
Far,  far  behind,  is  all  that  they  can  say. 

Arthur  Hugh  dough  [1819-1861] 


UP-HILL 

Does  the  road  wind  up-hill  all  the  way? 

Yes,  to  the  very  end. 
Will  the  day's  journey  take  the  whole  long  day? 

From  morn  to  night,  my  friend. 

But  is  there  for  the  night  a  resting-place? 

A  roof  for  when  the  slow,  dark  hours  begin. 
May  not  the  darkness  hide  it  from  my  face? 

You  cannot  miss  that  inn. 

Shall  I  meet  other  wayfarers  at  night? 

Those  who  have  gone  before. 
Then  must  I  knock,  or  call  when  just  in  sight? 

They  will  not  keep  you  waiting  at  that  door. 

Shall  I  find  comfort,  travel-sore  and  weak? 

Of  labor  you  shall  find  the  sum. 
Will  there  be  beds  for  me  and  all  who  seek? 

Yea,  beds  for  all  who  come. 

Christina  Georgina  Rossetti  [1830-1894] 


THE  BOURNE 

Underneath  the  growing  grass. 
Underneath  the  living  flowers, 
Deeper  than  the  sound  of  showers: 
There  we  shall  not  count  the  hours 

By  the  shadows  as  they  pass. 


34i6  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

Youth  and  health  will  be  but  vain,'''"'"'     "■ 
Beauty  reckoned  of  no  worth: 
There  a  very  little  girth 
Can  hold  round  what  once  the  earth 

Seemed  too  narrow  to  contain. 

Christina  Georgina  Rossclti  [1830-1894] 


THE  CONQUEROR  WORM 

Lo!  'tis  a  gala  night 

Within  the  lonesome  latter  years. 
An  angel  throng,  bewinged,  bedight 

In  veils,  and  drowned  in  tears, 
Sit  in  a  theater  to  see 

A  play  of  hopes  and  fears. 
While  the  orchestra  breathes  fitfully 

The  music  of  the  spheres. 

Mimes,  in  the  form  of  God  on  high, 

Mutter  and  mumble  low, 
And  hither  and  thither  fly; 

Mere  puppets  they,  who  come  and  go 
At  bidding  of  vast  formless  things 

That  shift  the  scenery  to  and  fro, 
Flapping  from  out  their  condor  wings 

Invisible  Woe. 

That  motley  drama — oh,  be  sure 

It  shall  not  be  forgot! 
With  its  Phantom  chased  for  evermore 

By  a  crowd  that  seize  it  not. 
Through  a  circle  that  ever  returneth  in 

To  the  self -same  spot; 
And  much  of  Madness,  and  more  of  Sin, 

And  Horror  the  soul  of  the  plot. 

But  see  amid  the  mimic  rout 

A  crawling  shape  intrude; 
A  blood-red  thing  that  writhes  from  out 

The  scenic  solitude! 


The   City   in   the   Sea  3417 

It  writhes!— it  writhes!— with  mortal  pangs! 

The  mimes  become  its  food, 
And  seraphs  sob  at  vermin  fangs 

In  human  gore  imbued. 

Out— out  are  the  hghts — out  all! 

And,  over  each  quivering  form, 
The  curtain,  a  funeral  pall, 

Comes  down  with  the  rush  of  a  storm, 
While  the  angels,  all  pallid  and  wan. 

Uprising,  unveiling,  affirm 
That  the  play  is  the  tragedy,  "Man," 

And  its  hero,  the  Conqueror  Worm. 

Edgar  Allan  Poc  [1809-1840] 

THE   CITY  IN  THE   SEA 

Lo!  Death  has  reared  himself  a  throne 

In  a  strange  city  lying  alone 

Far  down  within  the  dim  West, 

Where  the  good  and  the  bad  and  the  worst  and  the  best 

Have  gone  to  their  eternal  rest. 

There  shrines  and  palaces  and  towers 

(Time-eaten  towers  that  tremble  not) 

Resemble  nothing  that  is  ours. 

Around,  by  lifting  winds  forgot. 

Resignedly  beneath  the  sky 

The  melancholy  waters  lie. 

No  rays  from  the  holy  heaven  come  down 
On  the  long  night-time  of  that  town; 
But  light  from  out  the  lurid  sea 
Streams  up  the  turrets  silently, 
Gleams  up  the  pinnacles  far  and  free: 
Up  domes,  up  spires,  up  kingly  halls, 
Up  fanes,  up  Babylon-like  walls. 
Up  shadowy,  long-forgotten  bowers 
Of  sculptured  ivy  and  stone  flowers, 
Up  many  and  many  a  marvelous  shrine, 
Whose  wreathed  friezes  intertwine 
The  viol,  the  violet,  and  the  vine. 


341 8  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

Resignedly  beneath  the  sky 

The  melancholy  waters  lie. 

So  blend  the  turrets  and  shadows  there 

That  all  seem  pendulous  in  air, 

Wtiile  from  a  proud  tower  in  the  town 

Death  looks  gigantically  down. 

There  open  fanes  and  gaping  graves 
Yawn  level  with  the  luminous  waves; 
But  not  the  riches  there  that  lie 
In  each  idol's  diamond  eye, — 
Not  the  gaily-jeweled  dead 
J.  Tempt  the  waters  from  their  bed; 

For  no  ripples  curl,  alas, 
Along  that  wilderness  of  glass; 
No  swellings  tell  that  winds  may  be 
Upon  some  far-off  happier  sea; 
No  heavings  hint  that  winds  have  been 
On  seas  less  hideously  serene! 


But  lo,  a  stir  is  in  the  air! 
The  wave — there  is  a  movement  there! 
As  if  the  towers  had  thrust  aside, 
In  slightly  sinking,  the  didl  tide; 
As  if  their  tops  had  feebly  given 
A  void  within  the  filmy  Heaven ! 
The  waves  have  now  a  redder  glow. 
The  hours  are  breathing  faint  and  low; 
And  when,  amid  no  earthly  moans, 
Down,  down  that  town  shall  settle  hence, 
Hell,  rising  from  a  thousand  thrones, 
Shall  do  it  reverence. 

Edgar  Allan  Poe  [1809-1849] 


THE  REAPER  AND  THE  FLOWERS 

There  is  a  Reaper,  whose  name  is  Death, 

And,  with  his  sickle  keen. 
He  reaps  the  bearded  grain  at  a  breath. 

And  the  flowers  that  grow  between. 


The  Closing  Scene  34^9 

"Shall  I  have  naught  that  is  fair? "  saith  he; 

"Have  naught  but  the  bearded  grain? 
Though  the  breath  of  these  flowers  is  sweet  to  me, 

I  will  give  them  all  back  again." 

He  gazed  at  the  flowers  with  tearful  eyes, 

He  kissed  their  drooping  leaves; 
It  was  for  the  Lord  of  Paradise 

He  bound  them  in  his  sheaves. 

"My  Lord  has  need  of  these  flowerets  gay," 

The  Reaper  said,  and  smiled; 
"Dear  tokens  of  the  earth  are  they, 

Where  He  was  once  a  child. 

"They  shall  all  bloom  in  fields  of  light, 

Transplanted  by  my  care, 
And  saints,  upon  their  garments  white. 

These  sacred  blossoms  wear." 

And  the  mother  gave,  in  tears  and  pain, 

The  flowers  she  most  did  love; 
She  knew  she  should  find  them  all  again 

In  the  fields  of  light  above. 

Oh,  not  in  cruelty,  not  in  wrath, 

The  Reaper  came  that  day; 
'Twas  an  angel  visited  the  green  earth. 

And  took  the  flowers  away. 

Henry  Wadsivorth  Longfellow  [i 807-1 882] 


THE   CLOSING   SCENE 

Within  his  sober  realm  of  leafless  trees. 
The  russet  year  inhaled  the  dreamy  air; 

Like  some  tanned  reaper  in  his  hour  of  ease, 
When  all  the  fields  are  lying  brown  and  bare. 

The  gray  barns  looking  from  their  hazy  hills 
O'er  the  dim  waters  widening  in  the  vales. 

Sent  down  the  air  a  greeting  to  the  mills, 
On  the  dull  thunder  of  alternate  flails. 


3420  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

All  sights  were  mellowed  and  all  sounds  subdued, 
The  hills  seemed  farther  and  the  streams  sang  low; 

As  in  a  dream  the  distant  woodman  hewed 
His  winter  log  with  many  a  muffled  blow. 

The  embattled  forests,  erewhile  armed  in  gold, 
Their  banners  bright  with  every  martial  hue, 

Now  stood,  like  some  sad,  beaten  host  of  old. 
Withdrawn  afar  in  Time's  remotest  blue. 

On  slumbrous  wings  the  vulture  held  his  flight; 

The  dove  scarce  heard  his  sighing  mate's  complaint. 
And  like  a  star  slow  drowning  in  the  light. 

The  village  church-vane  seemed  to  pale  and  faint. 

The  sentinel-cock  upon  the  hillside  crew, — 
Crew  thrice,  and  all  was  stiller  than  before, — 

Silent  till  some  replying  warder  blew 
His  alien  horn,  and  then  was  heard  no  more. 

Where  erst  the  jay,  within  the  elm's  tall  crest. 

Made  garrulous  trouble  round  her  uni^edged  young. 

And  where  the  oriole  hung  her  swaying  nest. 
By  every  light  wind  like  a  censer  swung — 

Where  sang  the  noisy  masons  of  the  eaves. 

The  busy  swallows,  circling  ever  near. 
Foreboding,  as  the  rustic  mind  beheves. 

An  early  harvest  and  a  plenteous  year; — 

Where  every  bird  which  charmed  the  vernal  feast, 
Shook  the  sweet  slumber  from  its  wings  at  morn. 

To  warn  the  reaper  of  the  rosy  east, — 
All  now  was  songless,  empty,  and  forlorn. 

Alone  from  out  the  stubble  piped  the  quail. 

And  croaked  the  crow  through  all  the  dreamy  gloom; 

Alone  the  pheasant,  drumming  in  the  vale. 
Made  echo  to  the  distant  cottage  loom. 


The  Closing  Scene  34- 1 

There  was  no  bud,  no  bloom  upon  the  bowers; 

The  spiders  wove  their  thin  shrouds  night  by  night; 
The  thistle-down,  the  only  ghost  of  flowers. 

Sailed  slowly  by,  passed  noiseless  out  of  sight. 

Amid  all  this,  in  this  most  cheerless  air. 

And  where  the  woodbine  shed  upon  the  porch 

Its  crimson  leaves,  as  if  the  Year  stood  there 
Firing  the  floor  with  his  inverted  torch; — 

Amid  all  this,  the  center  of  the  scene, 

The  white-haired  matron,  with  monotonous  tread, 
Plied  the  swift  wheel,  and  with  her  joyless  mien, 

Sat,  like  a  Fate,  and  watched  the  flying  thread. 

She  had  known  Sorrow, — he  had  walked  with  her, 
Oft  supped,  and  broke  the  bitter  ashen  crust; 

And  in  the  dead  leaves  still  she  heard  the  stir 
Of  his  black  mantle  trailing  in  the  dust. 

While  yet  her  cheek  was  bright  with  summer  bloom, 
Her  country  summoned  and  she  gave  her  all; 

And  twice  War  bowed  to  her  his  sable  plume, — 
Re-gave  the  swords  to  rust  upon  the  wall. 

Re-gave  the  swords, — but  not  the  hand  that  drew 

And  struck  for  Liberty  its  dying  blow, 
Nor  him  who,  to  his  sire  and  country  true, 

Fell  'mid  the  ranks  of  the  invading  foe. 

Long,  but  not  loud,  the  droning  wheel  went  on, 

Like  the  low  murmur  of  a  hive  at  noon; 
Long,  but  not  loud,  the  memory  of  the  gone 

Breathed  through  her  lips  a  sad  and  tremulous  tune. 

At  last  the  thread  was  snapped, — her  head  was  bowed; 

Life  dropped  the  distaff  through  his  hands  serene; — 
And  loving  neighbors  smoothed  her  careful  shroud, 

While  Death  and  Winter  closed  the  autumn  scene. 

Thomas  Buchanan  Read  [1822-1872] 


34^2  "The   Despot's   Despot" 


MORS   ET  VITA  -idJ  adT 

We  know  not  yet  what  life  shall  be, 

What  shore  beyond  earth's  shore  be  set; 
What  grief  awaits  us,  or  what  glee, 
We  know  not  yet. 

Still,  somewhere  in  sweet  converse  met. 
Old  friends,  we  say,  beyond  death's  sea 
Shall  meet  and  greet  us,  nor  forget 

Those  days  of  yore,  those  years  when  we 
Were  loved  and  true, — but  will  death  let 
Our  eyes  the  longed-for  vision  see? 
We  know  not  yet. 

Samuel  Waddington  [1844- 


"WHAT  IS  TO  COME" 

What  is  to  come  we  know  not.     But  we  know 
That  what  has  been  was  good — was  good  to  show, 
Better  to  hide,  and  best  of  all  to  bear. 
We  are  the  masters  of  the  days  that  were: 
We  have  lived,  we  have  loved,  we  have  suffered  .  . 
even  so. 

Shall  we  not  take  the  ebb  who  had  the  flow? 
Life  was  our  friend.     Now,  if  it  be  our  foe — 
Dear,  though  it  spoil  and  break  us! — need  we  care 
What  is  to  come? 

Let  the  great  winds  their  worst  and  wildest  blow, 
Or  the  gold  weather  round  us  mellow  slow: 
We  have  fulfilled  ourselves,  and  we  can  dare, 
And  we  can  conquer,  though  we  may  not  share 
In  the  rich  quiet  of  the  after-glow 
What  is  to  come. 

William  Ernest  Henley  [1849-1903] 


"When  the   Most  is  Said"        34^3 


A  ROUNDEL  OF  REST 

If  rest  is  sweet  at  shut  of  day 

For  tired  hands  and  tired  feet, 
How  sweet  at  last  to  rest  for  aye, 
If  rest  is  sweet! 

We  work  or  work  not  through  the  heat: 

Death  bids  us  soon  our  labors  lay 
In  lands  where  night  and  twilight  meet. 

When  the  last  dawns  are  fallen  gray 

And  all  life's  toil  and  ease  complete, 
They  know  who  work,  not  they  who  play, 
If  rest  is  sweet. 

Arthur  Symons  [1865- 


"WHEN  THE    MOST  IS   SAID" 

What's  love,  when  the  most  is  said?  The  flash  of  the 
lightning  fleet. 

Then,  darkness  that  shrouds  the  soul, — but  the  earth  is 
firm  to  my  feet; 

The  rocks  and  the  tides  endure,  the  grasses  and  herbs  re- 
turn. 

The  path  to  my  foot  is  sure,  and  the  sods  to  my  bosom  yearn. 

What's  fame,  when  the  truth  is  told?     A  shout  to  a  distant 

hill, 
The  crags  may  echo  a  while,  but  fainter,  and  fainter  still; 
Yet  forever  the  wind  blows  wide  the  sweetness  of  all  the 

skies. 
The  rain  cries  and  the  snow  flies,  and  the  storm  in  its  bosom 

lies. 

What's  life,  what's  life,  little  heart?     A  dream  when  the 

nights  are  long, 
Toil  in  the  waking  days, — tears,  and  a  kiss,  a  song. 


34^4  "The   Despot's    Despot" 

What's  life,  what's  Hfe,  httle  heart?     To  beat  and  be  glad 

of  breath 
While  death  waits  on  either  side, — before  and  behind  us, 

Death! 

Mary  Ainge  De  Vere  [1844- 


THE   GARDEN  OF  PROSERPINE 

Here,  where  the  world  is  quiet, 

Here,  where  all  trouble  seems 
Dead  winds'  and  spent  waves'  riot 

In  doubtful  dreams  of  dreams, 
I  watch  the  green  field  growing 
For  reaping  folk  and  sowing, 
For  harvest-time  and  mowing, 

A  sleepy  world  of  streams. 

I  arn  tired  of  tears  and  laughter. 

And  men  that  laugh  and  weep; 
Of  what  may  come  hereafter 

For  men  that  sow  to  reap: 
I  am  weary  of  days  and  hours. 
Blown  buds  of  barren  flowers. 
Desires  and  dreams  and  powers. 

And  everything  but  sleep. 

Here  hfe  has  death  for  neighbor, 

And  far  from  eye  or  ear 
Wan  waves  and  wet  winds  labor, 

Weak  ships  and  spirits  steer; 
They  drive  adrift,  and  whither 
They  wot  not  who  make  thither: 
But  no  such  winds  blow  hither, 

And  no  such  things  grow  here. 

No  growth  of  moor  or  coppice. 

No  heather-flower  or  vine,  ,:// 

But  bloomless  buds  of  poppies, 

Green  grapes  of  Proserpine,  ;,;■ 


The   Garden   of  Proserpine         34-5 

Pale  beds  of  blowing  rushes, 
Where  no  leaf  blooms  or  blushes 
Save  this  whercout  she  crushes 
For  dead  men  deadly  wine. 

Pale,  without  name  or  number, 

In  fruitless  fields  of  corn, 
They  bow  themselves  and  slumber 

All  night  till  hght  is  born; 
iVnd  like  a  soul  belated. 
In  hell  and  heaven  unmated. 
By  cloud  and  mist  abated 

Comes  out  of  darkness  morn. 

Though  one  were  strong  as  seven, 

He  too  with  death  shall  dwell. 
Nor  wake  with  wings  in  heaven, 

Nor  weep  for  pains  in  hell; 
Though  one  were  fair  as  roses. 
His  beauty  clouds  and  closes; 
And  well  though  love  reposes, 

In  the  end  it  is  not  well. 

Pale,  beyond  porch  and  portal, 

Crowned  with  calm  leaves,  she  stands 

Who  gathers  all  things  mortal 
With  cold  immortal  hands; 

Her  languid  lips  are  sweeter 

Than  Love's,  who  fears  to  greet  her. 

To  men  that  mix  and  meet  her 
From  many  times  and  lands. 

She  waits  for  each  and  other, 

She  waits  for  all  men  born; 
Forgets  the  earth  her  mother. 

The  life  of  fruits  and  corn ; 
And  spring  and  seed  and  swallow 
Take  wing  for  her  and  follow 
Where  summer  song  rings  hollow 

And  flowers  are  put  to  scorn. 


34^6  "The  Despot's  Despot" 

There  go  the  loves  that  wither, 

The  old  loves  with  wearier  wings; 
And  all  dead  years  draw  thither, 

And  all  disastrous  things; 
Dead  dreams  of  days  forsaken, 
Blind  buds  that  snows  have  shaken, 
Wild  leaves  that  winds  have  taken, 
Red  strays  of  ruined  springs. 

We  are  not  sure  of  sorrow. 

And  joy  was  never  sure; 
To-day  will  die  to-morrow; 

Time  stoops  to  no  man's  lure; 
And  Love,  grown  faint  and  fretful.. 
With  hps  but  half  regretful 
Sighs,  and  with  eyes  forgetful 

Weeps  that  no  loves  endure. 

From  too  much  love  of  living. 
From  hope  and  fear  set  free, 

We  thank  with  brief  thanksgiving 
Whatever  gods  may  be. 

That  no  life  lives  forever; 

That  dead  men  rise  up  never; 

That  even  the  weariest  river 
Winds  somewhere  safe  to  sea. 

Then  star  nor  sun  shall  waken, 

Nor  any  change  of  light : 
Nor  sound  of  waters  shaken, 

Nor  any  sound  or  sight: 
Nor  wintry  leaves  nor  vernal. 
Nor  days  nor  things  diurnal; 
Only  the  sleep  eternal 

In  an  eternal  night. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1009] 


The   Changing   Road  34-7 


THE  CHANGING  ROAD 

Beneath  the  softly  falling  snow, 

The  wood  whose  shy  anemones 
We  plucked  such  little  while  ago 

Becomes  a  wood  of  Christmas  trees. 

Our  paths  of  rustling  silken  grass 
Will  soon  be  ermine  bands  of  white 

Spotted  with  tiny  steps  that  pass 
On  silent  errands  in  the  night. 

The  river  will  be  locked  in  hush, 

But  frosted  like  a  fairy  lawn 
With  knots  of  crystal  flowers  that  flush 

By  moonlight,  blanching  in  the  dawn. 

Flown  are  our  minstrels,  golden-wing 
And  rosy-breast  and  ruby-throat. 

But  all  the  pines  are  murmuring 
A  sweet,  orchestral  under-note. 

So  trustfully  our  hands  we  lay 
Within  the  old,  kind  hands  of  Time, 

Who  holds  on  his  mysterious  way 

From  rime  to  bloom,  from  bloom  to  rime, 

And  lets  us  run  beside  his  knee 

O'er  rough  and  smooth,  and  touch  his  load, 
And  play  we  bear  the  burden,  we, 

And  revel  in  the  changing  road, 

Till  ivory  dawn  and  purple  noon 
And  dove-gray  eve  have  one  by  one 

Traced  on  the  skies  their  ancient  rune, 
And  all  our  httle  strength  is  done. 

Then  Time  shall  hft  a  starry  torch 

In  signal  to  his  gentle  Twin, 
Who,  stooping  from  a  shining  porch, 

Gathers  the  drowsy  children  in. 


34^8  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

I  wonder  if,  through  that  strange  sleep, 
Unstirred  by  clock  or  silver  chime, 

Our  dreams  will  not  the  cadence  keep 
Of  those  unresting  feet  of  Time, 

And  follow  on  his  beauteous  path 
.  From  snow  to  flowers,  from  flowers  to  snow, 

And  marvel  what  high  charge  he  hath. 
Whither  the  fearless  footsteps  go. 

Katharine  Lee  Bales  [1859- 


THE   GREAT  MLSGIVING 

"Not  ours,"    say  some,  "the  thought  of  death  to  dread; 

Asking  no  heaven,  we  fear  no  fabled  hell: 
Life  is  a  feast,  and  we  have  banqueted — 

Shall  not  the  worms  as  well? 

"The  after-silence,  when  the  feast  is  o'er, 
And  void  the  places  where  the  minstrels  stood, 

Differs  in  naught  from  what  hath  been  before, 
And  is  nor  ill  nor  good." 

_  ■  i 
.'^'f'l  '■' ' 
Ah,  biit  the  Apparition — the  dumb  sign — 

The  beckoning  finger  bidding  me  forgo 

The  fellowship,  the  converse,  and  the  wine. 

The  songs,  the  festal  glow! 

And  ah,  to  know  not,  while  with  friends  I  sit, 
And  while  the  purple  joy  is  passed  about. 

Whether  'tis  ampler  day  divinelier  lit 
Or  homeless  night  without ; 

And  whether,  stepping  forth,  my  soul  shall  see 
New  prospects,  or  fall  sheer — a  blinded  thing! 

There  is,  O  grave,  thy  hourly  victory. 
And  there,  O  death,  thy  sting. 

William  Watson  [1858- 


L'Envoi  34-9 


THE  DEAD   COACH 

At  night  when  sick  folk  wakeftil  lie, 
I  heard  the  dead  coach  passing  by, 
And  heard  it  passing  wild  and  fleet, 
And  knew  my  time  was  come  not  yet. 

Click-clack,  click-clack,  the  hoofs  went  past, 
Who  takes  the  dead  coach  travels  fast, 
On  and  away  through  the  wild  night, 
The  dead  must  rest  ere  morning  light. 

If  one  might  follow  on  its  track 
The  coach  and  horses,  midnight  black, 
Within  should  sit  a  shape  of  doom 
That  beckons  one  and  all  to  come. 

God  pity  them  to-night  who  wait 
To  hear  the  dead  coach  at  their  gate, 
And  him  who  hears,  though  sense  be  dim, 
The  mournful  dead  coach  stop  for  him. 

He  shall  go  down  with  a  still  face. 
And  mount  the  steps  and  take  his  place, 
The  door  be  shut,  the  order  said! 
How  fast  the  pace  is  with  the  dead! 

Click-clack,  click-clack,  the  hour  is  chill. 
The  dead  coach  climbs  the  distant  hill. 
Now,  God,  the  Father  of  all  us. 
Wipe  Thou  the  widow's  tears  that  fall! 

Katharine  Tynan  [1861- 


L'ENVOI 

Where  are  the  loves  that  we  loved  before, 
When  once  we  are  alone,  and  shut  the  door? 
No  matter  whose  the  arms  that  held  me  fast, 
The  arms  of  Darkness  hold  me  at  the  last. 


3430  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

No  matter  down  what  primrose  path  I  tend, 
I  kiss  the  lips  of  Silence  in  the  end. 
No  matter  on  what  heart  I  found  delight, 
I  come  again  unto  the  breast  of  Night. 
No  matter  when  or  how  Love  did  befall, 
'Tis  loneliness  that  loves  me  best  of  all. 
And  in  the  end  she  claims  me,  and  I  know 
That  she  will  stay,  though  all  the  rest  may  go. 
No  matter  whose  the  eyes  that  I  would  keep 
Near  in  the  dark,  'tis  in  the  eyes  of  Sleep 
That  I  must  look  and  look  forevermore, 
When  once  I  am  alone  and  shut  the  door. 

Willa  Sibcrt  Cailicr  [1875- 


DEATH 

I  AM  the  key  that  parts  the  gates  of  Fame; 
I  am  the  cloak  that  covers  cowering  Shame; 
I  am  the  final  goal  of  every  race; 
I  am  the  storm-tossed  spirit's  resting-place: 

The  messenger  of  sure  and  swift  relief. 
Welcomed  with  wailings  and  reproachful  grief; 
The  friend  of  those  that  have  no  friend  but  me, 
I  break  all  chains,  and  set  all  captives  free. 

I  am  the  cloud  that,  when  Earth's  day  is  done. 
An  instant  veils  an  unextinguished  sun; 
I  am  the  brooding  hush  that  follows  strife, 
The  waking  from  a  dream  that  Man  calls — Life! 
Florence  Earle  Coates  [1850- 


A  DIRGE 

From  "  The  White  Devil  " 

Call  for  the  robin-redbreast  and  the  wren, 
Since  o'er  shady  groves  they  hover, 
And  with  leaves  and  flowers  do  cover 
The  friendless  bodies  of  unburied  men. 


Dirge  in   Cymbeline  343 1 

Call  unto  his  funeral  dole 

The  ant,  the  field-mouse,  and  the  mole, 

To  rear  him  hillocks  that  shall  keep  him  warm, 

And  (when  gay  tombs  are  robbed)  sustain  no  harm; 

But  keep  the  wolf  far  thence,  that's  foe  to  men, 

For  with  his  nails  he'll  dig  them  up  again. 

John  Webster  [1580?- 1625?] 


DIRGE 

From  "  Cymbeline  " 

Fear  no  more  the  heat  o'  the  sun 

Nor  the  furious  winter's  rages; 
Thou  thy  worldly  task  hast  done, 

Home  art  gone  and  ta'en  thy  wages: 
Golden  lads  and  girls  all  must, 
As  chimney-sweepers,  come  to  dust. 

Fear  no  more  the  frown  o'  the  great, 
Thou  art  past  the  tyrant's  stroke; 

Care  no  more  to  clothe  and  eat; 
To  thee  the  reed  is  as  the  oak: 

The  scepter,  learning,  physic,  must 

All  follow  this,  and  come  to  dust. 

Fear  no  more  the  lightning-flash 
Nor  the  all-dreaded  thunder-stone; 

Fear  not  slander,  censure  rash ; 
Thou  hast  finished  joy  and  moan: 

All  lovers  young,  all  lovers  must 

Consign  to  thee,  and  come  to  dust. 

William  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 


DIRGE  IN   CYMBELINE 

Sung  by  Guiderus  and  Arviragus  aver  Fidcle,  supposed  to  he  dead 

To  fair  Fidele's  grassy  tomb 

Soft  maids  and  village  hinds  shall  bring 
Each  opening  sweet,  of  earliest  bloom, 

And  rifle  all  the  breathing  spring. 


343^  "The  Despot's   Despot" 

No  wailing  ghost  shall  dare  appear, 
To  vex  with  shrieks  this  quiet  grove; 

But  shepherd  lads  assemble  here, 
And  melting  virgins  own  their  love. 

No  withered  witch  shall  here  be  seen, 
,     No  goblins  lead  their  nightly  crew ; 
The  female  fays  shall  haunt  the  green. 
And  dress  thy  grave  with  pearly  dew. 

The  redbreast  oft  at  evening  hours 

Shall  kindly  lend  his  little  aid, 
With  hoary  moss,  and  gathered  flowers, 

To  deck  the  ground  where  thou  art  laid. 

When  howling  winds,  and  beating  rain, 
In  tempests  shake  the  sylvan  cell, 

Or  midst  the  chase  on  every  plain. 

The  tender  thought  on  thee  shall  dwell, 

Each  lonely  scene  shall  thee  restore. 

For  thee  the  tear  be  duly  shed: 
Beloved,  till  life  could  charm  no  more; 

And  mourned,  till  Pity's  self  be  dead. 

William  Collins  [1721-1759] 


HALLOWED   GROUND 

What's  hallowed  ground?     Has  earth  a  clod 
Its  Maker  meant  not  should  be  trod 
By  man,  the  image  of  his  God, 

Erect  and  free, 
Unscourged  by  Superstition's  rod 

To  bow  the  knee? 

That's  hallowed  ground  where,  mourned  and  missed. 
The  lips  repose  our  love  has  kissed; — 
But  where's  their  memory's  mansion?     Is't 

Yon  churchyard's  bowers? 
No!  in  ourselves  their  souls  exist, 

A  part  of  ours. 


Hallowed   Ground  J433 

A  kiss  can  consecrate  the  ground 
Where  mated  hearts  are  mutual  bound: 
The  spot  where  love's  first  links  were  wound, 

That  ne'er  are  riven, 
Is  hallowed  down  to  earth's  profound, 

And  up  to  Heaven! 

For  time  makes  all  but  true  love  old; 
The  burning  thoughts  that  then  were  told 
Run  molten  still  in  memory's  mold; 

And  will  not  cool 
Until  the  heart  itself  be  cold 

In  Lethe's  pool. 

What  hallows  ground  where  heroes  sleep? 
'Tis  not  the  sculptured  piles  you  heap! 
In  dews  that  heavens  far  distant-  weep 

Their  turf  may  bloom ; 
Or  Genii  twine  beneath  the  deep 

Their  coral  tomb. 

But  strew  his  ashes  to  the  wind 

Whose  sword  or  voice  has  served  mankind, — 

And  is  he  dead,  whose  glorious  mind 

Lifts  thine  on  high? — 
To  live  in  hearts  we  leave  behind 

Is  not  to  die. 

Is't  death  to  fall  for  Freedom's  right? 
He's  dead  alone  that  lacks  her  light! 
And  murder  sullies  in  Heaven's  sight 

The  sword  he  draws : — 
What  can  alone  ennoble  tight? 

A  noble  cause! 

Give  that! — and  welcome  War  to  brace 

Her  drums!  and  rend  Heaven's  reeking  space! 

The  colors  planted  face  to  face. 

The  charging  cheer, 
Though  Death's  pale  horse  lead  on  the  chase 

Shall  still  be  dear. 


3434  "Ihe   Despot's   Despot" 

And  place  our  trophies  where  men  kneel 
To  Heaven! — but  Heaven  rebukes  my  zeal 
The  cause  of  Truth  and  human  weal, 

O  God  above! 
Transfer  it  from  the  sword's  appeal 

To  Peace  and  Love. 

Peace,  Love!  the  cherubim,  that  join 
Their  spread  wings  o'er  Devotion's  shrine, 
Prayers  sound  in  vain,  and  temples  shine. 

Where  they  are  not, — 
The  heart  alone  can  make  divine 

Religion's  spot. 

To  incantations  dost  thou  trust. 
And  pompous  rites  in  domes  august? 
See  moldering  stones  and  metal's  rust 

Belie  the  vaunt. 
That  man  can  bless  one  pile  of  dust 

With  chime  or  chaunt. 

The  ticking  wood-worm  mocks  thee,  man! 
Thy  temples, — creeds  themselves  grow  wan! 
But  there's  a  dome  of  nobler  span, 

A  temple  given 
Thy  faith,  that  bigots  dare  not  ban, — 

Its  space  is  Heaven! 

Its  roof,  star-pictured  Nature's  ceiling, 
Where,  trancing  the  rapt  spirit's  feeling, 
And  God  himself  to  man  revealing, 

The  harmonious  spheres 
Make  music,  though  unheard  their  pealing 

By  mortal  ears. 

Fair  stars!  are  not  your  beings  pure? 
Can  sin,  can  death,  your  worlds  obscure? 
Else  why  so  swell  the  thoughts  at  your    "f  i 

Aspect  above? 
Ye  must  be  Heavens  that  make  us  sure 

Of  heavenly  love ! 


The  Churchyard  3435 

And  in  your  harmony  sublime 
I  read  the  doom  of  distant  time: 
That  man's  regenerate  soul  from  crime 

Shall  yet  be  drawn, 
And  reason  on  his  mortal  clime 

Immortal  dawn. 

What's  hallowed  ground?     'Tis  what  gives  birth 
To  sacred  thoughts  in  souls  of  worth! — 
Peace!  Independence!  Truth!  go  forth 

Earth's  compass  round; 
And  your  high-priesthood  shall  make  earth 

All  hallowed  ground. 

Thomas  Campbell  [i 777-1 844] 


THE   CHURCHYARD 

How  slowly  creeps  the  hand  of  Time 

On  the  old  clock's  green-mantled  face! 
Yea,  slowly  as  those  ivies  climb. 

The  hours  roll  round  with  patient  pace; 
The  drowsy  rooks  caw  on  the  tower, 

The  tame  doves  hover  round  and  round; 
Below,  the  slow  grass  hour  by  hour 

Makes  green  God's  sleeping-ground. 

All  moves,  but  nothing  here  is  swift; 

The  grass  grows  deep,  the  green  boughs  shoot; 
From  east  to  west  the  shadows  drift; 

The  earth  feels  heavenward  underfoot ; 
The  slow  stream  through  the  bridge  doth  stray 

With  water-lilies  on  its  marge, 
And  slowly,  piled  with  scented  hay, 

Creeps  by  the  silent  barge. 

All  stirs,  but  nothing  here  is  loud: 
The  cushat  broods,  the  cuckoo  cries; 

Faint,  far  up,  under  a  white  cloud. 
The  lark  trills  soft  to  earth  and  skies; 


343 6  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

And  underneath  the  green  graves  rest; 

And  through  the  place,  with  slow  footfalls, 
With  snowy  cambric  on  his  breast, 

The  old  gray  Vicar  crawls. 

And  close  at  hand,  to  see  him  come, 

Clustering  at  the  playground  gate, 
The  urchins  of  the  school-house,  dumb 

And  bashful,  hang  the  head  and  wait; 
The  little  maidens  curtsey  deep, 

The  boys  their  forelocks  touch  meanwhile, 
The  Vicar  sees  them,  half  asleep. 

And  smiles  a  sleepy  smile. 

Slow  as  the  hand  on  the  clock's  face, 

Slow  as  the  white  cloud  in  the  sky. 
He  Cometh  now  with  tottering  pace 

To  the  old  vicarage  hard  by ; 
Smothered  it  stands  in  ivy  leaves, 

Laurels  and  yews  make  dark  the  ground; 
The  swifts  that  build  beneath  the  eaves 

Wheel  in  still  circles  round. 

And  from  the  portal,  green  and  dark, 

He  glances  at  the  church-clock  old — 
Gray  soul!  why  seek  his  eyes  to  mark 

The  creeping  of  that  finger  cold? 
He  cannot  see,  but  still  as  stone 

He  pauses,  listening  for  the  chime, 
And  hears  from  that  green  tower  intone 

The  eternal  voice  of  Time. 

Robert  Buchanan  [1841-ig 


THE  OLD  CHURCHYARD  OF  BONCHURCH 

The  churchyard  leans  to  the  sea  with  its  dead, — 
It  leans  to  the  sea  with  its  dead  so  long. 
Do  they  hear,  I  wonder,  the  first  bird's  song. 
When  the  winter's  anger  is  all  but  fled; 


The   Old   Churchyard  of  Bonchurch     3437 

The  high,  sweet  voice  of  the  west  wind, 
The  fall  of  the  warm,  soft  rain. 
When  the  second  month  of  the  year 
Puts  heart  in  the  earth  again? 

Do  they  hear,  through  the  glad  April  weather, 
The  green  grasses  waving  above  them? 
Do  they  think  there  are  none  left  to  love  them, 
They  have  lain  for  so  long  there  together? 
Do  they  hear  the  note  of  the  cuckoo,  ^ 

The  cry  of  gulls  on  the  wing. 
The  laughter  of  winds  and  waters, 
The  feet  of  the  dancing  Spring? 

Do  they  feel  the  old  land  shpping  seaward, — ■'^''■ 

The  old  land,  with  its  hills  and  its  graves,— 

As  they  gradually  slide  to  the  waves. 

With  the  wind  blowing  on  them  from  leaward? 

Do  they  know  of  the  change  that  awaits  them, — 

The  sepulchcr  vast  and  strange? 

Do  they  long  for  the  days  to  go  over. 

And  bring  that  miraculous  change? 

Or  love  they  their  night  with  no  moonlight, 
With  no  starlight,  no  dawn  to  its  gloom? 
Do  they  sigh:   " 'Neath  the  snow,  or  the  bloom 
Of  the  wild  things  that  wave  from  our  night, 
We  are  warm,  through  winter  and  summer; 
We  hear  the  winds  rave,  and  we  say: 
*  The  storm-wind  blows  over  our  heads, 
But  we,  here,  arc  out  of  its  way'"? 

Do  they  mumble  low,  one  to  another 
With  a  sense  that  the  waters  that  thunder 
Shall  ingather  them  all,  draw  them  under: 
"Ah,  how  long  to  our  moving,  my  brother? 
How  long  shall  we  quietl}^  rest  here. 
In  graves  of  darkness  and  ease? 
The  waves  even  now,  may  be  on  us 
To  draw  us  do'wm  under  the  seas ! " 


343 8  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

Do  they  think  'twill  be  cold  when  the  waters 
That  they  love  not,  that  neither  can  love  them, 
Shall  eternally  thunder  above  them? 
Have  they  dread  of  the  sea's  shining  daughters, 
That  people  the  bright  sea-regions 
And  play  with  the  young  sea-kings? 
Have  they  dread  of  their  cold  embraces, 
And  dread  of  all  strange  sea- things? 

But  their  dread  or  their  joy, — it  is  bootless: 
They  shall  pass  from  the  breast  of  their  mother; 
They  shall  lie  low,  dead  brother  by  brother, 
In  a  place  that  is  radiant  and  fruitless ; 
And  the  folk  that  sail  over  their  heads 
In  violent  weather 

Shall  come  down  to  them,  haply,  and  all 
They  shall  lie  there,  together. 

Philip  Bourkc  Marston  [1850-1887] 


THE  INDIAN  BURYING-GROUND  . u 

In  spite  of  all  the  learned  have  said, 

I  still  my  old  opinion  keep; 
The  posture  that  we  give  the  dead 

Points  out  the  soul's  eternal  sleep. 

Not  so  the  ancients  of  these  lands; — 
The  Indian,  when  from  life  released. 

Again  is  seated  with  his  frjends. 
And  shares  again  the  joyous  feast. 

His  imaged  birds,  and  painted  bowl. 
And  venison,  for  a  journey  dressed, 

Bespeak  the  nature  of  the  soul, 
Activity,  that  wants  no  rest. 

His  bow  for  action  ready  bent. 
And  arrows  with  a  head  of  stone, 

Can  only  mean  that  life  is  spent,  ,.■  [ 

And  not  the  old  ideas  gone.  ; ,  qT 


3439 


God's-Acre 

Thou,  stranger,  that  shalt  come  this  way, 
No  fraud  upon  the  dead  commit, — 

Observe  the  swelHng  turf,  and  say, 
They  do  not  he,  but  here  they  sit. 

Here  still  a  lofty  rock  remains, 

On  which  the  curious  eye  may  trace 

(Now  wasted  half  by  wearing  rains) 
The  fancies  of  a  ruder  race. 

Here  still  an  aged  elm  aspires, 

Beneath  whose  far  projecting  shade 

(And  which  the  shepherd  still  admires) 
The  children  of  the  forest  played. 

There  oft  a  restless  Indian  queen 
(Pale  Shebah  with  her  braided  hair), 

And  many  a  barbarous  form  is  seen 
To  chide  the  man  that  lingers  there. 

By  midnight  moons,  o'er  moistening  dews, 

In  habit  for  the  chase  arrayed, 
The  hunter  still  the  deer  pursues, 

The  hunter  and  the  deer — a  shade! 

And  long  shall  timorous  Fancy  see 
The  painted  chief,  and  pointed  spear, 

And  Reason's  self  shall  bow  the  knee 
To  shadows  and  delusions  here. 

.,_     ^^  Philip  Freneau  [175 2-1832] 

GOD'S-ACRE 

I  LIKE  that  ancient  Saxon  phrase,  which  calls 
The  burial-ground  God's-Acre!     It  is  just; 

,It  consecrates  each  grave  within  its  walls. 

And  breathes  a  benison  o'er  the  sleeping  dust. 

God's-Acre!     Yes,  that  blessed  name  imparts 
Comfort  to  those  who  in  the  grave  have  sown 

The  seed  that  they  had  garnered  in  their  hearts, 
Their  bread  of  hfe,  alas!  no  more  their  own. 


3440  "The   Despot's    Despot" 

Into  its  furrows  shall  we  all  be  cast, 

In  the  sure  faith,  that  we  shall  rise  again 

At  the  great  harvest,  when  the  archangel's  blast 
Shall  winnow,  like  a  fan,  the  chaff  and  grain. 

Then  shall  the  good  stand  in  immortal  bloom,     i  i 

In  the  fair  garden  of  that  second  birth; 
And  each  bright  blossom  mingle  its  perfume 

With  that  of  flowers,  which  never  bloomed  on  earth. 

With  thy  rude  plowshare.  Death,  turn  up  the  sod, 

And  spread  the  furrow  for  the  seed  we  sow; 
This  is  the  field  and  Acre  of  our  God, 

This  is  the  place  where  human  harvests  grow. 

Henry  Wadsuviih  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 

fi! 
THE   CITY  OF  THE  DEAD 

They  do  neither  plight  nor  wed  -'''- 

In  the  city  of  the  dead. 

In  the  city  where  they  sleep  away  the  hours; 

But  they  lie,  while  o'er  them  range 

Winter  blight  and  Summer  change,  ,  . 

And  a  hundred  happy  whisperings  of  flowers,. 

No,  they  neither  wed  nor  plight. 

And  the  day  is  like  the  night,  ,,  , 

For  their  vision  is  of  other  kind  than  ours.    ! 

They  do  neither  sing  nor  sigh 
,  In  that  burg  of  by  and  by. 
Where  the  streets  have  grasses  growing  cool  and  long; 
But  they  rest  within  their  bed, 
Leaving  all  their  thoughts  unsaid, 
Deeming  silence  better  far  than  sob  or  song. 
No,  they  neither  sigh  nor  sing, 
Though  the  robin  be  a-wing, 
Though  the  leaves  of  Autumn  march  a  million  strong. 

There  is  only  rest  and  peace 

In  the  City  of  Surcease  ■"''' 

From  the  failings  and  the  wailings  'neath  the  sun, 

And  the  wings  of  the  swift  years 

Beat  but  gently  o'er  the  biers, 


The  Old  Sexton 


3441 


?Jaking  music  to  the  sleepers  every  one. 
There  is  only  peace  and  rest; 
But  to  them  it  seemeth  best, 
For  they  lie  at  ease  and  know  that  life  is  done. 
Ricliard  Biirlon  [i8sg- 


THE   GARDEN  THAT  I  LOVE 

The  Garden  that  I  love  is  full  of  Light ; 

It  lies  upon  the  sloping  of  a  hill, 
Where  Dawn  first  stirs  the  curtains  of  the  Night, 

And  the  breeze  whispers  when  the  Noon  is  still. 

The  garden  that  I  love  is  full  of  Peace; 

The  voices  of  the  vale  are  faint  and  far, 
The  busy  murmurs  of  the  highway  cease. 

And  silently,  at  evening,  comes  the  Star. 

■    The  garden  that  I  love  is  full  of  Dreams; 

Visions  of  joy  gone  by,  and  bliss  that  waits, 
Beyond  the  furthest  verge  of  sunset  gleams,    - - 
With  the  wide  opening  of  the  Golden  Gates.  - 

The  garden  that  I  love  is  full  of  Rest; 

God's  own  fair  Acre,  where  His  dear  ones  lie, 
In  the  safe  shelter  of  the  kind  earth's  breast, 

Waiting  His  Easter  dawning  up  the  sky. 

There  may  I  rest,  asleep  with  them  awhile, 

There  may  I  wake,  with  them,  that  glorious  Day, 
When,  in  the  sunshine  of  the  Master's  smile, 
r  J,.    Sorrow  and  sighing  shall  be  swept  away! 

Florence  L.  Henderson  [18    - 


THE  OLD   SEXTON       ,  . 

Nigh  to  a  grave  that  was  newly  made, 
Leaned  a  sexton  old  on  his  earth-worn  spade; 
His  work  was  done,  and  he  paused  to  wait 
The  funeral-train  at  the  open  gate. 


344^  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

A  relic  of  by-gone  days  was  he, 
And  his  locks  were  gray  as  the  foamy  sea; 
And  these  words  came  from  his  lips  so  thin: 
"I  gather  them  in — I  gather  tliem  in — 
Gather — gather — gather  them  in. 

"I  gather  them  in;  for  man  and  boy, 

Year  after  year  of  grief  and  joy, 

I've  builded  the  houses  that  lie  around 

In  every  nook  of  this  burial-ground,  .T 

Mother  and  daughter,  father  and  son, 

Come  to  my  soUtude,  one  by  one;  7/ 

But  come  they  stranger,  or  come  they  kin, 

I  gather  them  in — I  gather  them  in. 

"Many  are  with  me,  yet  I'm  alone; 

I'm  King  of  the  Dead,  and  I  make  my  throne  ,,, 

On  a  monument  slab  of  marble  cold — 

My  scepter  of  rule  is  the  spade  I  hold. 

Come  they  from  cottage,  or  come  they  from  hall, 

Mankind  are  my  subjects,  all,  all,  all! 

May  they  loiter  in  pleasure,  or  toilfully  spin,    ^ 

I  gather  them  in-^I  gather  them  in. 

"I  gather  them  in,  and  their  final  rest 

Is  here,  down  here,  in  the  earth's  dark  breast!" 

And  the  sexton  ceased  as  the  funeral-train 

Wound  mutely  over  that  solemn  plain; 

And  I  said  to  myself:  When  time  is  told, 

A  mightier  voice  than  that  sexton's  old, 

Will  sound  o'er  the  last  trump's  dreadful  din: 

"I  gather  them  in — I  gather  them  in — ■ 

Gather — gather — gather  them  in." 

Park  Benjamin  [i  809-1 864] 

THE  TWO  VILLAGES 

Over  the  river,  on  the  hill, 

Lieth  a  village  white  and  still ; 

All  around  it  the  forest-trees 

Shiver  and  whisper  in  the  breeze;  , 

Over  it  sailing  shadows  go  ,,'  t- 

Of  soaring  hawk  and  screaming  crow, 


Daybreak  3443 

And  mountain  grasses,  low  and  sweet, 
Grow  in  the  middle  of  every  street. 

Over  the  river,  under  the  hill, 
Another  village  lieth  still; 
There  I  see  in  the  cloudy  night 
Twinkling  stars  of  household  light, 
Fires  that  gleam  from  the  smithy's  door, 
Mists  that  curl  on  the  river-shore; 
And  in  the  roads  no  grasses  grow, 
For  the  wheels  that  hasten  to  and  fro. 

In  that  village  on  the  hill 

Never  is  sound  of  smithy  or  mill; 

The  houses  are  thatched  with  grass  and  flowers; 

Never  a  clock  to  toll  the  hours; 

The  marble  doors  are  always  shut. 

You  cannot  enter  in  hall  or  hut ; 

All  the  villagers  he  asleep ; 

Never  a  grain  to  sow  or  reap; 

Never  in  dreams  to  moan  or  sigh; 

Silent  and  idle  and  low  they  lie. 

In  that  village  under  the  hill. 
When  the  night  is  starry  and  still. 
Many  a  weary  soul  in  prayer 
Looks  to  the  other  village  there. 
And  weeping  and  sighing,  longs  to  go 
Up  tp  that  home  from  this  below; 
Longs  to  sleep  in  the  forest  wild, 
Whither  have  vanished  wife  and  child, 
And  heareth,  praying,  this  answer  fall: 
"Patience!  that  village  shall  hold  ye  all!" 

Rose  Terry  Cooke  [1827-1892] 

DAYBREAK 

A  \^^ND  came  up  out  of  the  sea. 

And  said,  "O  mists,  make  room  for  me!" 

It  hailed  the  ships,  and  cried,  "Sail  on, 
Ye  mariners,  the  night  is  gone!" 


3444  "The   Despot's   Despot'" 

And  hurried  landward  far  away, 
Crying,  "Awake!  it  is  the  day!" 

It  said  unto  the  forest,  "Shout! 
Hang  all  your  leafy  banners  out  i "  J  '  i "  ^  / ' 

i  -siorfT 
It  touched  the  wood-bird's  folded  wing. 
And  said,  "O  bird,  awake  and  sing!" 

And  o'er  the  farms,  "0  chanticleer, 
Your  clarion  blow,  the  day  is  near!" 

It  whispered  to  the  fields  of  corn, 

"Bow  down,  and  hail  the  coming  morn!" 

It  shouted  through  the  belfry-tower, 
"Awake,  O  bell!  proclaim  the  hour." 

It  crossed  the  churchyard  with  a  sigh, 
And  said,  "Not  yet!  in  quiet  lie." 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807-1882] 


THANATOPSIS 

To  him  who  in  the  love  of  Nature  holds 
Communion  with  her  visible  forms,  she  speaks 
A  various  language;  for  his  gayer  hours 
She  has  a  voice  of  gladness,  and  a  smile 
And  eloquence  of  beauty,  and  she  glides  • 
Into  his  darker  musings,  with  a  mild 
And  healing  sympathy,  that  steals  away 
Their  sharpness,  ere  he  is  aware.     When  thoughts 
Of  the  last  bitter  hour  come  like  a  blight 
,  Over  thy  spirit,  and  sad  images 
Of  the  stern  agony,  and  shroud,  and  pall, 
And  breathless  darkness,  and  the  narrow  house, 
Make  thee  to  shudder  and  grow  sick  at  heart  ;—■ 
Go  forth,  under  the  open  sky,  and  list 
To  Nature's  teachings,  while  from  all  around— 
Earth  and  her  waters,  and  the  depths  of  air — 
Comes  a  still  voice: — 


Thanatopsis  3445 


Yet  a  few  days,  and  thee 
The  all-beholding  sun  shall  see  no  more 
In  all  his  course;  nor  yet  in  the  cold  ground. 
Where  thy  pale  form  was  laid,  with  many  tears, 
Nor  in  the  embrace  of  ocean,  shall  exist 
Thy  image.     Earth,  that  nourished  thee,  shall  claim 
Thy  growth,  to  be  resolved  to  earth  again, 
And,  lost  each  human  trace,  surrendering  up 
Thine  individual  being,  shalt  thou  go 
To  mix  forever  with  the  elements, 
To  be  a  brother  to  the  insensible  rock 
And  to  the  sluggish  clod,  which  the  rude  swain 
Turns  with  his  share,  and  treads  upon.     The  oak 
Shall  send  his  roots  abroad,  and  pierce  thy  mold. 

Yet  not  to  thine  eternal  resting-place 
Shalt  thou  retire  alone,  nor  couldst  thou  wish 
Couch  more  magnificent.     Thou  shalt  lie  down 
With  patriarchs  of  the  infant  world — with  kings. 
The  powerful  of  the  earth — the  wise,  the  good, 
Fair  forms,  and  hoary  seers  of  ages  past. 
All  in  one  mighty  sepulcher.     The  hills 
Rock-ribbed  and  ancient  as  the  sun, — the  vales 
Stretching  in  pensive  quietness  between; 
The  venerable  woods — rivers  that  move 
In  majesty,  and  the  complaining  brooks 
That  make  the  meadows  green;  and,  poured  round  all. 
Old  Ocean's  gray  and  melancholy  w'aste, — 
Are  but  the  solemn  decorations  all 
Of  the  great  tomb  of  man.     The  golden  sun. 
The  planets,  all  the  infinite  host  of  heaven. 
Are  shining  on  the  sad  abodes  of  death 
Through  the  still  lapse  of  ages.    AU  that  tread 
The  globe  are  but  a  handful  to  the  tribes 
That  slumber  in  its  bosom. — Take  the  wings 
Of  morning,  pierce  the  Barcan  wilderness. 
Or  lose  thyself  in  the  continuous  woods 
Where  rolls  the  Oregon,  and  hears  no  sound, 
Save  his  own  dashings — yet  the  dead  are  there: 
And  millions  in  those  solitudes,  since  first 


344^  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

The  flight  of  years  began,  have  laid  them  down 
In  their  last  sleep — the  dead  reign  there  alone. 
So  shalt  thou  rest,  and  what  if  thou  withdraw 
In  silence  from  the  living,  and  no  friend 
Take  note  of  thy  departure?     All  that  breathe 
Will  share  thy  destiny.     The  gay  will  laugh 
When  thou  art  gone,  the  solemn  brood  of  care 
Plod  on,  and  each  one  as  before  will  chase 
His  favorite  phantom;  yet  all  these  shall  leave 
Their  mirth  and  their  employments,  and  shall  come 
And  make  their  bed  with  thee.     As  the  long  train 
Of  ages  glides  away,  the  sons  of  men — 
The  youth  in  life's  fresh  spring,  and  he  who  goes 
In  the  full  strength  of  years,  matron  and  maid, 
The  speechless  babe,  and  the  gray-headed  man — - 
Shall  one  by  one  be  gathered  to  thy  side, 
By  those,  who  in  their  turn  shall  follow  them. 

Solive.  that  when  thy  summons  comes  to  join 
The  innumerable  caravan,  which  moves 
To  that  mysterious  realm,  where  each  shall  take 
His  chamber  in  the  silent  halls  of  death. 
Thou  go  not,  like  the  quarry-slave  at  night,  i^ 

Scourged  to  his  dungeon,  but,  sustained  and  soothed 
By  an  unfaltering  trust,  approach  thy  grave 
Like  one  who  wraps  the  drapery  of  his  couch 
About  him,  and  lies  down  to  pleasant  dreams. 

William  Cullen  Brymit  [i  794-1878] 


THE  DANCE  OF  DEATH 

(after  holbein) 

"  Contra  vim  Mortis 
Nan  est  medicamen  in  hortis." 

He  is  the  despots'  Despot.    All  must  bide, 
Later  or  soon,  the  message  of  his  might; 
Princes  and  potentates  their  heads  must  hide,  fy/^ 
Touched  by  the  awful  sigil  of  his  right; 
Beside  the  Kaiser  he  at  eve  doth  wait 


The   Dance  of  Death  3447 

And  pours  a  potion  in  his  cup  of  state; 
The  stately  Queen  his  bidding  must  obey; 
No  keen-eyed  Cardinal  shall  him  affray; 
And  to  the  Dame  that  wantoneth  he  saith — 
"Let  be,  Sweet-heart,  to  junket  and  to  play." 
There  is  no  King  more  terrible  than  Death. 

The  lusty  Lord,  rejoicing  in  his  pride, 

He  draweth  down ;  before  the  armed  Knight 

With  jingling  bridle-rein  he  still  doth  ride; 

He  crosseth  the  strong  Captain  in  the  fight; 

The  Burgher  grave  he  beckons  from  debate; 

He  hales  the  Abbot  by  his  shaven  pate. 

Nor  for  the  Abbess'  wailing  will  delay; 

No  bawling  Mendicant  shall  say  him  nay;  / 

E'en  to  the  pyx  the  Priest  he  followeth. 

Nor  can  the  Leech  his  chilling  finger  stay  ... 

There  is  no  King  more  terrible  than  Death. 

All  things  must  bow  to  him.    And  woe  betide 

The  Wine-bibber, — the  Roisterer  by  night; 

Him  the  feast-master,  many  bouts  defied, 

Him  'twixt  the  pledging  and  the  cup  shall  smite; 

Woe  to  the  Lender  at  usurious  rate. 

The  hard  Rich  Man,  the  hirehng  Advocate; 

Woe  to  the  Judge  that  selleth  Law  for  pay; 

Woe  to  the  Thief  that  like  a  beast  of  prey 

With  creeping  tread  the  traveller  harryeth: — 

These,  in  their  sin,  the  sudden  sword  shall  slay  .  .  . 

There  is  no  King  more  terrible  than  Death. 

He  hath  no  pity, — nor  will  be  denied. 

When  the  low  hearth  is  garnished  and  bright, 

Grimly  he  flingeth  the  dim  portal  wide. 

And  steals  the  Infant  in  the  Mother's  sight; 

He  hath  no  pity  for  the  scorned  of  fate: — 

He  spares  not  Lazarus  lying  at  the  gate. 

Nay,  nor  the  Blind  that  stumbleth  as  he  may; 

Nay,  the  tired  Ploughman, — at  the  sinking  ray, — 

In  the  last  furrow, — feels  an  icy  breath, 

And  knows  a  hand  hath  turned  the  team  astray  .  .  . 

There  is  no  King  more  terrible  than  Death. 


344^  "The   Despot's   Despot" 

He  hath  no  pity.    For  the  new-made  Bride, 
BHthe  with  the  promise  of  her  Hfe's  delight, 
That  wanders  gladly  by  her  Husband's  side, 
He  with  the  clatter  of  his  drum  doth  fright; 
He  scares  the  Virgin  at  the  convent  grate; 
The  Maid  half- won,  the  Lover  passionate; 
He  hath  no  grace  for  weakness  and  decay: 
The  tender  Wife,  the  Widow  bent  and  gray, 
The  feeble  Sire  whose  footstep  faltereth, — 
All  these  he  leadeth  by  the  lonely  way  .  .  . 
There  is  no  King  more  terrible  than  Death. 

ENVOY 

Youth,  for  whose  ear  and  monishing  of  late, 

I  sang  of  Prodigals  and  lost  estate. 

Have  thou  thy  joy  of  living  and  be  gay; 

But  know  not  less  that  there  must  come  a  day, — 

Aye,  and  perchance  e'en  now  it  hasteneth, — 

When  thine  own  heart  shall  speak  to  thee  and  say, 

There  is  no  King  more  terrible  than  Death. 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


FACING  THE  SUNSET 

THE  LIE 

Go,  Soul,  the  Body's  guest, 
Upon  a  thankless  arrant; 

Fear  not  to  touch  the  best; 
The  truth  shall  be  thy  warrant: 

Go,  since  I  needs  must  die. 

And  give  the  World  the  lie. 

Say  to  the  Court,  it  glows 
And  shines  like  rotten  wood: 

Say  to  the  Church,  it  shows 

What's  good,  and  doth  no  good: 

If  Court  and  Church  reply 

Then  give  them  both  the  lie. 

Tell  Potentates,  they  live 
Acting  by  others'  action, 

Not  loved  unless  they  give, 
Not  strong  but  by  a  faction: 

If  Potentates  reply. 

Give  Potentates  the  lie. 

Tell  men  of  high  condition 
That  manage  the  Estate, 

Their  purpose  is  ambition. 
Their  practice,  only  hate: 

And  if  they  once  reply, 

Then  give  them  all  the  lie. 

Tell  them  that  brave  it  most. 
They  beg  for  more  by  spending, 

Who,  in  their  greatest  cost. 
Seek  nothing  but  commending: 

And  if  they  make  reply, 

Then  give  them  all  the  lie. 
3449 


345^  Facing  the  Sunset 

Tell  Zeal  it  wants  devotion; 

Tell  Love  it  is  but  lust; 
Tell  Time  it  is  but  motion; 

Tell  Flesh  it  is  but  dust: 
And  wish  them  not  reply, 
For  thou  must  give  the  lie. 

Tell  Age  it  daily  wasteth; 

Tell  Honor  how  it  alters; 
Tell  Beauty  how  she  blast eth; 

Tell  Favor  how  it  falters: 
And  as  they  shall  reply, 
Give  every  one  the  lie. 

Tell  Wit  how  much  it  wrangles 
In  tickle  points  of  niceness; 

Tell  Wisdom  she  entangles 
Herself  in  over-wiseness: 

And  when  they  do  reply, 

Straight  give  them  both  the  lie. 

Tell  Physic  of  her  boldness; 

Tell  Skill  it  is  pretension; 
Tell  Charity  of  coldness; 

Tell  Law  it  is  contention: 
And  as  they  do  reply, 
So  give  them  still  the  lie. 

Tell  Fortune  of  her  blindness; 

Tell  Nature  of  decay; 
Tell  Friendship  of  unkindness; 

Tell  Justice  of  delay: 
And  if  they  will  reply. 
Then  give  them  all  the  lie. 

Tell  Arts  they  have  no  soundness. 
But  vary  by  esteeming; 

Tell  Schools  they  want  profoundness^ 
And  stand  too  much  on  seeming: 

If  Arts  and  Schools  reply, 

Give  Arts  and  Schools  the  lie. 


His   Pilgrimage  345 1 

Tell  Faith  it's  fled  the  City; 

Tell  how  the  Country  erreth, 
Tell  Manhood  shakes  off  pity; 

Tell  Virtue  least  preferreth: 
And  if  they  do  reply, 
Spare  not  to  give  the  lie. 

So  when  thou  hast,  as  I 

Commanded  thee,  done  blabbing, — 
Although  to  give  the  lie 

Deserves  no  less  than  stabbing, — 
Yet,  stab  at  thee  that  will. 
No  stab  the  soul  can  kill! 

Walter  Raleigh  [i552?-i6i8] 

HIS  PILGRIMAGE 

Give  me  my  scallop-shell  of  quiet. 

My  staff  of  faith  to  walk  upon. 
My  scrip  of  joy,  immortal  diet. 

My  bottle  of  salvation, 
My  gown  of  glory,  hope's  true  gage; 
And  thus  I'll  take  my  pilgrimage. 

Blood  must  be  my  body's  balmer, 
No  other  balm  will  there  be  given; 
Whilst  my  soul,  like  quiet  palmer, 
Traveleth  towards  the  land  of  Heaven ; 
Over  the  silver  mountains 
Where  spring  the  nectar  fountains: 

There  will  I  kiss 

The  bowl  of  bliss. 
And  drink  mine  everlasting  fill 
Upon  every  milken  hill. 
My  soul  will  be  a-dry  before; 
But  after,  it  will  thirst  no  more. 

Then  by  that  happy,  blissful  day. 
More  peaceful  pilgrims  I  shall  see, 
That  have  cast  off  their  rags  of  clay, 
And  walk  appareled  fresh  like  me. 

I'll  take  them  first 

To  quench  their  thirst, 


345^  Facing  the  Sunset 

And  taste  of  nectar's  suckets  r  .-r 

At  those  clear  wells 

Where  sweetness  dwells 
Drawn  up  by  saints  in  crystal  buckets. 

And  when  our  bottles  and  all  we 

Are  filled  with  immortality, 

Then  the  blessed  paths  we'll  travel, 

Strowed  with  rubies  thick  as  gravel; — 

Ceilings  of  diamonds,  sapphire  floors. 

High  walls  of  coral,  and  pearly  bowers. 

From  thence  to  Heaven's  bribeless  hall, 

Where  no  corrupted  voices  brawl; 

No  conscience  molten  into  gold. 

No  forged  accuser  bought  or  sold. 

No  cause  deferred,  no  vain- spent  journey, 

For  there  Christ  is  the  King's  Attorney, 

Who  pleads  for  all  without  degrees. 

And  He  hath  angels,  but  no  fees. 

And  when  the  grand  twelve-million  jury 

Of  our  sins,  with  direful  fury. 

Against  our  souls  black  verdicts  give, 

Christ  pleads  His  death,  and  then  we  live. 

Be  Thou  my  speaker,  taintless  pleader, 

Unblotted  lawyer,  true  proceeder! 

Thou  giv'st  salvation  even  for  alms; 

Not  with  a  bribed  lawyer's  palms. 

And  this  is  mine  eternal  plea 

To  Him  that  made  heaven,  earth,  and  sea, 

That,  since  my  flesh  must  die  so  soon. 

And  want  a  head  to  dine  next  noon, 

Just  at  the  stroke,  when  my  veins  start  and  spread, 

Set  on  my  soul  an  everlasting  head ! 

Then  am  I  ready,  like  a  palmer,  fit 

To  tread  those  blest  paths  which  before  I  writ. 

O  death  and  judgment,  heaven  and  hell, 
Who  oft  doth  think,  must  needs  die  well. 

Walter  Raleigh  [  i  s  5  2  ?- 1 6 1 8] 


Death's  Summons  3453 

THE   CONCLUSION 

Even  such  is  Time,  that  takes  in  trust 
Our  youth,  our  joys,  our  all  we  have, 

And  pays  us  but  with  earth  and  dust; 
Who  in  the  dark  and  silent  grave, 

When  we  have  wandered  all  our  ways, 

Shuts  up  the  story  of  our  days; 

But  from  this  earth,  this  grave,  this  dust. 

My  God  will  raise  me  up,  I  trust. 

Walter  Raleigh  [i552?-i6i8] 


DEATH'S   SUMMONS 

Adieu,  farewell,  earth's  bliss! 
This  world  uncertain  is: 
Fond  are  life's  lustful  joys. 
Death  proves  them  all  but  toys. 
None  from  his  darts  can  fly: 
I  am  sick,  I  must  die. 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us! 

Rich  men,  trust  not  in  wealth, 
Gold  cannot  buy  you  health; 
Physic  himself  must  fade; 
All  things  to  end  are  made; 
The  plague  full  swift  goes  by: 
I  am  sick,  I  must  die. 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us! 

Beauty  is  but  a  flower, 
Which  wrinkles  will  devour: 
Brightness  falls  from  the  air; 
Queens  have  died  young  and  fair; 
Dust  hath  closed  Helen's  eye: 
I  am  sick,  I  must  die. 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us! 

Strength  stoops  unto  the  grave: 
Worms  feed  on  Hector  brave; 


3454  Facing  the  Sunset 

Swords  may  not  fight  with  fate; 
Earth  still  holds  ope  her  gate; 
Come,  come,  the  bells  do  cry. 
I  am  sick,  I  must  die. 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us! 

Wit  with  his  wantonness, 
'Vasteth  death's  bitterness; 
Hell's  executioner 
Hath  no  ears  for  to  hear 
What  vain  art  can  reply; 
I  am  sick,  I  must  die. 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us! 

Haste  therefore  each  degree 
To  welcome  destiny! 
Heaven  is  our  heritage, 
Earth  but  a  player's  stage; 
Mount  we  unto  the  sky: 
I  am  sick,  I  must  die. 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us! 

Thomas  Nashe  [i 567-1601] 

HIS  WINDING-SHEET 

Come  thou,  who  art  the  wine  and  wit 

Of  all  I've  writ: 
The  grace,  the  glory,  and  the  best 

Piece  of  the  rest. 
Thou  art  of  what  I  did  intend 

The  all  and  end; 
And  what  was  made,  was  made  to  meet 

Thee,  thee,  my  sheet. 
Come  then,  and  be  to  my  chaste  side 

Both  bed  and  bride: 
We  two,  as  rehques  left,  will  have 

One  rest,  one  grave:  * 

And,  hugging  close,  we  will  not  fear 

Lust  entering  here : 
Where  all  desires  are  dead  and  cold 

As  is  the  mold; 


A   Prayer  in   the   Prospect  of   Death     3455 

And  all  affections  are  forgot, 

Or  trouble  not. 
Here,  here,  the  slaves  and  prisoners  be 

From  shackles  free: 
And  weeping  widows,  long  oppressed, 

Do  here  find  rest. 
The  wronged  client  ends  his  laws 

Here,  and  his  cause. 
Here  those  long  suits  of  Chancery  lie 

Quiet,  or  die: 
And  all  Star-Chamber  bills  do  cease 

Or  hold  their  peace. 
Here  needs  no  Cour«t  for  our  Request 

Where  all  are  best, 
AU  wise,  all  equal,  and  all  just 

Alike  i'  th'  dust. 
Nor  need  we  here  to  fear  the  frown 

Of  court  or  crown: 
Where  Fortune  bears  no  sway  o'er  things, 

There  all  are  kings. 
In  this  securer  place  we'll  keep 

As  lulled  asleep; 
Or  for  a  little  time  we'U  lie 

As  robes  laid  by; 
To  be  another  day  re-worn, 

Turned,  but  not  torn: 
Or  hke  old  testaments  engrossed. 

Locked  up,  not  lost. 
And  for  a  while  lie  here  concealed. 

To  be  revealed 
Next  at  that  great  Platonic  Year, 

And  then  meet  here. 

Robert  Ilerrick  [1591-1674] 


A  PRAYER  IN  THE  PROSPECT  OF  DEATH 

O  Thou  unknown.  Almighty  Cause 

Of  all  my  hope  and  fear! 
In  whose  dread  presence,  ere  an  hour. 

Perhaps  I  must  appear! 


345^  Facing  the  Sunset 

If  I  have  wandered  in  those  paths 

Of  Hfe  I  ought  to  shun, 
As  something,  loudly,  in  my  breast, 

Remonstrates  I  have  done; 

Thou  know'st  that  Thou  hast  formed  me 

With  passions  wild  and  strong; 
And  listening  to  their  witching  voice 

Has  often  led  me  wrong. 

Where  human  weakness  has  come  short, 

Or  frailty  stepped  aside. 
Do  Thou,  All-Good! — for  such  Thou  art,^ 

In  shades  of  darkness  hide. 

Where  with  intention  I  have  erred, 

No  other  plea  I  have. 
But,  Thou  art  good;  and  Goodness  still 

Delighteth  to  forgive. 

Robert  Burns  [1759-1706] 


SONG  OF  THE   SILENT  LAND* 

Into  the  Silent  Land! 

Ah!  who  shall  lead  us  thither? 

Clouds  in  the  evening  sky  more  darkly  gather, 

And  shattered  wrecks  he  thicker  on  the  strand. 

Who  leads  us  with  a  gentle  hand 

Thither,  oh,  thither, 

Into  the  Silent  Land? 

Into  the  Silent  Land! 

To  you,  ye  boundless  regions 

Of  all  perfection!     Tender  niorning- visions 

Of  beauteous  souls!     The  Future's  pledge  and  band! 

Who  in  Life's  battle  firm  doth  stand. 

Shall  bear  Hope's  tender  blossoms 

Into  the  Silent  Land! 

*  For  ttie  originiil  of  this  poem  see  page  3SJ2. 


June  3457 


OLand!   OLand! 

For  all  the  broken-hearted 

The  mildest  herald  by  our  fate  allotted, 

Beckons,  and  with  inverted  torch  doth  stand 

To  lead  us  with  a  gentle  hand 

To  the  land  of  the  great  Departed, 

Into  the  Silent  Land! 

After  von  Salis-Secivis,  by 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [1807- if 

JUNE 

I  GAZED  upon  the  glorious  sky 

And  the  green  mountains  round, 
And  thought  that  when  I  came  to  lie 

At  rest  within  the  ground, 
'Twere  pleasant  that,  in  flowery  June, 
When  brooks  send  up  a  cheerful  tune, 

And  groves  a  joyous  sound, 
The  sexton's  hand,  my  grave  to  make. 
The  rich,  green  mountain-turf  should  break. 

A  cell  within  the  frozen  mould, 

A  coffin  borne  through  sleet, 
And  icy  clods  above  it  rolled, 

While  fierce  the  tempests  beat — • 
Away! — I  will  not  think  of  these — 
Blue  be  the  sky  and  soft  the  breeze. 

Earth  green  beneath  the  feet, 
And  be  the  damp  mould  gently  pressed 
Into  my  narrow  place  of  rest. 

There  through  the  long,  long  summer  hours, 

The  golden  light  should  lie, 
And  thick  young  herbs  and  groups  of  flowers 

Stand  in  their  beauty  by. 
The  oriole  should  build  and  tell 
His  love-tale  close  beside  my  cell; 

The  idle  butterfly 
Should  rest  him  there,  and  there  be  heard 
The  housewife  bee  and  humming-bird. 


345^  Facing  the  Sunset 

And  what  if  cheerful  shouts  at  noon 

Come,  from  the  village  sent, 
Or  songs  of  maids,  beneath  the  moon 

With  fairy  laughter  blent? 
And  what  if,  in  the  evening  light, 
Betrothed  lovers  walk  in  sight 

Of  my  low  monument? 
I  would  the  lovely  scene  around 
Might  know  no  sadder  sight  nor  sound. 

I  know  that  I  no  more  should  see 

The  season's  glorious  show, 
Nor  would  its  brightness  shine  for  me, 

Nor  its  wild  music  flow;. 
But  if,  around  my  place  of  sleep, 
The  friends  I  love  should  come  to  weep, 

They  might  not  haste  to  go. 
Soft  airs,  and  song,  and  light,  and  bloom 
Should  keep  them,  lingering  by  my  tomb. 

These  to  their  softened  hearts  should  bear 

The  thought  of  what  has  been. 
And  speak  of  one  who  cannot  share 

The  gladness  of  the  scene; 
Whose  part,  in  all  the  pomp  that  fills 
The  circuit  of  the  summer  hills. 

Is  that  his  grave  is  green; 
And  deeply  would  their  hearts  rejoice 
To  hear  again  his  living  voice. 

William  Cullen  Bryant  [i  794-1878] 

LOVE,  TIME   AND   DEATH 

Ah  me,  dread  friends  of  mine, — Love,  Time,  and  Death: 

Sweet  Love,  who  came  to  me  on  shining  wing. 

And  gave  her  to  my  arms, — her  lips,  her  breath, 

And  all  her  golden  ringlets  clustering: 

And  Time,  who  gathers  in  the  flying  years, 

He  gave  me  all,  but  where  is  all  he  gave? 

He  took  my  love  and  left  me  barren  tears; 

Weary  and  lone  I  follow  to  the  grave. 


A  Wish  34^9 

There  Death  will  end  this  vision  half-divine. 
Wan  Death,  who  waits  in  shadow  evermore, 
And  silent,  ere  he  give  the  sudden  sign;  ;  // 

Oh,  gently  lead  me  through  thy  narrow  door, 
Thou  gentle  Death,  thou  trustieth  friend  of  mine — 
Ah  me,  for  Love — will  Death  my  Love  restore? 

Frederick  Lockcr-Lampson  [1821-1895] 


A  WISH 

I  ASK  not  that  my  bed  of  death 
From  bands  of  greedy  heirs  be  free; 

For  these  besiege  the  latest  breath 
Of  fortune's  favored  sons,  not  me. 

I  ask  not  each  kind  soul  to  keep 

Tearless,  when  of  my  death  he  hears. 

Let  those  who  will,  if  any,  weep! 

There  are  worse  plagues  on  earth  than  tears. 

I  ask  but  that  my  death  may  find 

The  freedom  to  my  life  denied; 
Ask  but  the  folly  of  mankind 

Then,  then  at  last,  to  quit  my  side. 

Spare  me  the  whispering,  crowded  room, 
The  friends  who  come,  and  gape,  and  go; 

The  ceremonious  air  of  gloom — 

All,  which  makes  death  a  hideous  show! 

Nor  bring,  to  see  me  cease  to  live, 

Some  doctor  full  of  phrase  and  fame,  • 

To  shake  his  sapient  head,  and  give 

The  ill  he  cannot  cure  a  name. 

Nor  fetch,  to  take  the  accustomed  toll, 
Of  the  poor  sinner  bound  for  death, 

His  brother-doctor  of  the  soul, 
To  canvass  with  ofificial  breath 


3460  Facing  the   Sunset 

The  future  and  its  viewless  things — 

That  undiscovered  mystery 
Which  one  who  feels  death's  winnowing  wings 

Must  needs  read  clearer,  sure,  than  he! 

Bring  none  of  these;  but  let  me  be, 

While  all  around  in  silence  lies, 
Moved  to  the  window  near,  and  see 

Once  more,  before  my  dying  eyes, 

Bathed  in  the  sacred  dews  of  morn 
The  wide  aerial  landscape  spread — 

The  world  which  was  ere  I  was  born. 
The  world  which  lasts  when  I  am  dead; 

Which  never  was  the  friend  of  one, 
Nor  promised  love  it  could  not  give, 

But  lit  for  all  its  generous  sun. 
And  lived  itself,  and  made  us  live. 

There  let  me  gaze,  till  I  become 

In  soul,  with  what  I  gaze  on,  wed! 
To  feel  the  universe  my  home; 

To  have  before  my  mind — instead 

Of  the  sick  room,  the  mortal  strife, 

The  turmoil  for  a  little  breath — 
The  pure  eternal  course  of  life. 

Not  human  combatings  with  death! 

Thus  feeling,  gazing,  might  I  grow 
Composed,  refreshed,  ennobled,  clear; 

Then  willing  let  my  spirit  go 

To  work  or  wait  elsewhere  or  here! 

Matthew  Arnold  [1S22-1888] 

NEXT  OF  KIN 

The  shadows  gather  round  me,  while  you  are  in  the  sun: 
My  day  is  almost  ended,  but  yours  is  just  begun: 
The  winds  are  singing  to  us  both  and  the  streams  are  sing- 
ing still,  'A'!  -"^^  J'  ' 
And  they  fill  your  heart  with  music,  but  rnirie  they  cannot 
fiU. 


A   Better   Resurrection  3461 

Your  home  is  built  in  sunlight,  mine  in  another  day: 
Your  home  is  close  at  hand,  sweet  friend,  but  mine  is  far 

away : 
Your  bark  is  in  the  haven  where  you  fain  would  be; 
I  must  launch  out  into  the  deep,  across  the  unknown  sea. 

You,  white  as  dove  or  lily  or  spirit  of  the  light: 
I,  stained  and  cold  and  glad  to  hide  in  the  cold  dark  night: 
You,  joy  to  many  a  loving  heart  and  light  to  many  eyes: 
I,  lonely  in  the  knowledge  earth  is  full  of  vanities. 

Yet  when  your  day  is  over,  as  mine  is  nearly  done, 

And  when  your  race  is  finished,  as  mine  is  almost  run. 

You,  like  me,  shall  cross  your  hands  and  bow  your  graceful 

head: 
Yea,  we  twain  shall  sleep  together  in  an  equal  bed. 

Christina  Gcorgina  Rosselti  [1830-1894! 


A  BETTER  RESURRECTION 

I  HAVE  no  wit,  no  words,  no  tears; 

My  heart  within  me  like  a  stone 
Is  numbed  too  much  for  hopes  o»  tear.«- 
;;;  Look  right,  look  left,  I  dwell  alone; 
I  lift  mine  eyes,  but  dimmed  with  grief 

No  everlasting  hills  I  see; 
My  life  is  in  the  falling  leaf: 
O  Jesu,  quicken  me! 

My  life  is  like  a  faded  leaf. 

My  harvest  dwindled  to  a  husk; 

Truly  my  life  is  void  and  brief 
And  tedious  in  the  barren  dusk; 

My  hfe  is  like  a  frozen  thing, 
No  bud  nor  greenness  can  I  see: 

Yet  rise  it  shall, — the  sap  of  Spring; 
O  Jesu,  rise  in  me! 

My  life  is  like  a  broken  bowl, 
A  broken  bowl  that  cannot  hold 

One  drop  of  water  for  my  soul 
Or  cordial  in  the  searching  cold; 


3462  Facing  the  Sunset 

Cast  in  the  fire  the  perished  thing, 

Melt  and  remold  it,  till  it  be 
A  royal  cup  for  Him  my  King: 
O  Jesu,  drink  of  me! 

Christina  Georgina  Rossetti  [1830-1894] 

'SB  aJiriv/  ,uoY 

„  baniBje 

THE   SUMMER  IS   ENDED       ,      . 

■f  vol  •"^' 

Wreathe  no  more  lilies  in  my  hair,   '  xlanol  ,1 

For  I  am  dying,  Sister  sweet : 

Or,  if  you  will  for  the  last  time 

iij'ir:  Indeed,  why  make  me  fair 

Once  for  my  winding-sheet. 

Pluck  no  more  roses  for  my  breast. 
For  I  like  them  fade  in  my  prime: 
Or,  if  you  will,  why  pluck  them  still, 

That  they  may  share  my  rest 

Once  more  for  the  last  time. 

Weep  not  for  me  when  I  am  gone. 
Dear  tender  one,  but  hope  and  smile: 
Or,  if  you  cannot  choose  but  weep, 

A  little  while  weep  on. 

Only  a  little  while. 

Christina  Georgina  Rossetti  [1830-1894] 


A  LITTLE  PARABLE 

I  MADE  the  cross  myself  whose  weight 

Was  later  laid  on  me. 
This  thought  is  torture  as  I  toil 

Up  life's  steep  Calvary. 

To  think  mine  own  hands  drove  the  nails! 

I  sang  a  merry  song. 
And  chose  the  heaviest  wood  I  had 

To  build  it  firm  and  strong. 


In  the   Hospital  34^3 

If  I  had  guessed — if  I  had  dreamed 

Its  weight  was  meant  for  me, 
I  should  have  made  a  lighter  cross 

To  bear  up  Calvary! 

Anne  Reeve  Aldrich  [1866-1892] 


MY   CROSS 

My  Lord  would  make  a  cross  for  me 

But  I  would  none  of  His, — 
I  thought  I  better  knew  than  He 

To  bear  my  pain  or  bliss. 

;My  Lord  would  make  a  cross  for  me 
But  I  would  make  my  own, — 

In  fashion  light  as  cross  could  be 
But  now  it  weighs  like  stone. 

If  I  had  only  bowed  me  low 

To  take  the  cross  He  laid, 
It  never  would  have  galled  me  so 

As  this,  the  one  I  made. 

For  aye.  His  cross  is  true  and  sure 
In  all  its  breadth  and  length, 

Just  what  His  children  can  endure 
And  measured  to  their  strength. 

But  I  had  fainted  'neath  the  load 

I  on  myself  did  lay. 
Had  He  not  met  me  on  the  road 

And  helped  me  on  the  way! 

Zitella  Cocke  [1847- 


IN  THE  HOSPITAL 

I  LAY  me  down  to  sleep, 
With  little  thought  or  care 

Whether  my  waking  find 
Me  here,  or  .there,. 


0464  Facing  the  Sunset 


A  bowing,  burdened  head, 

That  only  asks  to  rest, 
Unquestioning,  upon 

A  loving  breast. 

My  good  right  hand  forgets 

Its  cunning  now; 
To  march  the  weary  march 

I  know  not  how. 

I  am  not  eager,  bold. 

Nor  strong — all  that  is  past; 
I  am  ready  not  to  do 

At  last,  at  last. 

My  half  day's  work  is  done. 

And  this  is  all  my  part — 
I  give  a  patient  God 

My  patient  heart, 

And  grasp  His  banner  still, 

Though  all  the  blue  be  dim; 
These  stripes  as  well  as  stars 

Lead  after  Him. 

Mary  Woolsc'y  HolM'dnd  [183  2-1 864] 


WHEN 

If  I  were  told  that  I  must  die  to-morrow, 

That  the  next  sun 
Which  sinks  would  bear  me  past  all  fear  and  sorrow 

For  any  one, 
All  the  fight  fought,  all  the  short  journey  through, 

What  should  I  do? 

I  do  not  think  that  I  should  shrink  or  falter. 

But  just  go  on. 
Doing  my  work,  nor  change  nor  seek  to  alter 

Aught  that  is  gone;      ■  '=   ■' 
But  rise  and  move  and  love  and  smile  and  pray 

For  one  more  day. 


When  3465 

And,  lying  down  at  night  for  a  last  sleeping, 

Say  in  that  car 
Which  hearkens  ever:  "Lord,  within  Thy  keeping      r 

How  should  I  fear? 
And  when  to-morrow  brings  Thee  nearer  still, 

Do  thou  Thy  will." 

I  might  not  sleep  for  awe;  but  peaceful,  tender, 

My  soul  would  lie 
All  the  night  long;  and  when  the  morning  splendor 

Flushed  o'er  the  sky, 
I  think  that  I  could  smile — could  calmly  say, 

"It  is  His  day." 

But  if  a  wondrous  hand  from  the  blue  yonder 

Held  out  a  scroll 
On  which  my  life  was  writ,  and  I  with  wonder 

Beheld  unroll 
To  a  long  century's  end  its  mystic  clue. 

What  should  I  do? 

What  could  I  do,  O  blessed  Guide  and  Master, 

Other  than  this: 
Still  to  go  on  as  now,  not  slower,  faster, 

Nor  fear  to  miss 
The  road,  although  so  very  long  it  be, 

W^hilc  led  by  Thee? 


iqi.'Jui 


Step  after  step,  feeling  Thee  close  beside  me. 

Although  unseen, 
Through  thorns,  through  flowers,  whether  the  tempest  hide 
Thee, 

Or  heavens  serene, 
Assured  Thy  faithfulness  cannot  betray, 

Thy  love  decay. 

I  may  not  know;  my  God,  no  hand  revealeth  ,/. 

Thy  counsels  wise;  .|-fi5;irl  bnA 

Along  the  path  a  deepening  shadow  stealeth,        '    '-T 

No  voice  replies  i 

To  all  my  questioning  thought,  the  time  to  tell; 

And  it  is  well. 


J466  Facing  the  Sunset 

Let  me  keep  on,  abiding  and  unf earing 

Thy  will  always, 
Through  a  long  century's  ripening  fruition 

Or  a  short  day's; 
Thou  canst  not  come  too  soon;  and  I  can  wait 

If  Thou  come  late. 

Sarah  Chaiincey  Woolsey  [1845-1505] 

"EX  LIBRIS" 

In  an  old  book  at  even  as  I  read 

Fast  fading  words  adown  my  shadowy  page, 

I  crossed  a  tale  of  how,  in  other  age. 

At  Arqua,  with  his  books  around  him,  sped 

The  word  to  Petrarch;  and  with  noble  head 

Bowed  gently  o'er  his  volume  that  sweet  sage 

To  Silence  paid  his  willing  seigniorage. 

And  they  who  found  him  whispered,  "He  is  dead!" 

Thus  timely  from  old  comradeships  would  I 

To  Silence  also  rise.     Let  there  be  night, 

Stillness,  and  only  these  staid  watchers  by, 

And  no  light  shine  save  my  low  study  light — 

Lest  of  his  kind  intent  some  human  cry  'i  "J  ^^^i^ 

Interpret  not  the  Messenger  aright. 

Arthur  Upson  [1877-1908] 

IN  EXTREMIS  nu  qojr. 

Till  dawn  the  Winds'  insuperable  throng  ,.^ 

Passed  over  like  archangels  in  their  might. 

With  roar  of  chariots  from  their  stormy  height, 

And  broken  thunder  of  mysterious  song — 

By  mariiier  or  sentry  heard  along 

The  star-usurping  battlements  of  night — • 

And  wafture  of  immeasurable  flight,  rr  yora  I 

And  high-blown  trumpets  mutinous  and  strong. 

Till  louder  on  the  dreadful  dark  I  heard  fA 

The  shrieking  of  the  tempest-tortured  tree, 

And  deeper  on  immensity  the  call  a  ur;  ';j 

And  tumult  of  the  empire-forging  sea; 


spinning  3467 


But  near  the  eternal  Peace  I  lay,  nor  stirred, 
Knowing  the  happy  dead  hear  not  at  all. 

George  Sterling  [1869- 


SPINNING 

Like  a  blind  spinner  in  the  sun, 

I  tread  my  days; 
I  know  that  all  the  threads  will  run 

Appointed  ways; 
I  know  each  day  will  bring  its  task, 
And,  being  blind,  no  more  I  ask. 

I  do  not  know  the  use  or  name 

Of  that  I  spin: 
I  only  know  that  some  one  came. 

And  laid  within 
My  hand  the  thread,  and  said,  "Since  you 
Are  blind,  but  one  thing  you  can  do." 

Sometimes  the  threads  so  rough  and  fast 

And  tangled  fly, 
I  know  wild  storms  are  sweeping  past, 

And  fear  that  I 
Shall  fall;  but  dare  not  try  to  find 
A  safer  place,  since  I  am  blind. 

I  know  not  why,  but  I  am  sure 

That  tint  and  place. 
In  some  great  fabric  to  endure 

Past  time  and  race. 
My  threads  will  have;  so  from  the  first, 
Though  blind,  I  never  felt  accurst. 

I  think,  perhaps,  this  trust  has  sprung 

From  one  short  word 
Said  over  me  when  I  was  young, — 

So  young,  I  heard 
It,  knowing  not  that  God's  name  signed 
My  brow,  and  sealed  me  His,  though  blind. 


3468  Facing  the  Sunset 

But  whether  this  be  seal  or  sign 

Within,  without, 
It  matters  not.     The  bond  divine 

I  never  doubt. 
I  know  He  set  me  here,  and  still, 
And  glad,  and  blind,  I  wait  His  will; 

But  listen,  listen,  day  by  day. 

To  hear  their  tread 
Who  bear  .the  finished  web  away. 

And  cut  the  thread. 
And  bring  God's  message  in  the  sun, 
"Thou  poor  blind  spinner,  work  is  done." 
Helen  Hunt  Jackson  [1831-1 


"SOME  TIME  AT  EVE" 

Some  time  at  eve  when  the  tide  is  low, 

I  shall  slip  my  mooring  and  sail  away, 
With  no  response  to  the  friendly  haU 

Of  kindred  craft  in  the  busy  bay. 
In  the  silent  hush  of  the  twilight  pale, 

When  the  night  stoops  down  to  embrace  the  day, 
And  the  voices  call  in  the  waters'  flow — 
Some  time  at  eve  when  the  tide  is  low, 

I  shall  slip  my  mooring  and  sail  away. 

Through  the  purpling  shadows  that  darkly  trail 
O'er  the  ebbing  tide  of  the  Unknown  Sea, 

I  shall  fare  me  away,  with  a  dip  of  sail 

And  a  ripple  of  waters  to  tell  the  tale 
Of  a  lonely  voyager,  sailing  away 
To  the  Mystic  Isles  where  at  anchor  lay 

The  crafts  of  those  who  have  sailed  before 

O'er  the  Unknown  Sea  to  the  Unseen  Shore. 

A  few  who  have  watched  me  sail  away 

Will  miss  my  craft  from  the  busy  bay; 

Some  friendly  barks  that  were  anchored  near, 
Some  loving  souls  that  my  heart  held  dear, 
In  silent  sorrow  will  drop  a  tear — 


Afterwards  3469 


But  I  shall  have  peacefully  furled  my  sail 
In  moorings  sheltered  from  storm  or  gale, 

And  greeted  the  friends  who  have  sailed  before 
O'er  the  Unknown  Sea  to  the  Unseen  Shore. 
Lizzie  Clark  Hardy  [iS    - 

NIGHT 

When  the  time  comes  for  me  to  die, 

To-morrow,  or  some  other  day, 
If  God  should  bid  me  make  reply, 

"What  would'st  thou?"  I  shall  say, 

0  God,  Thy  world  was  great  and  fair; 
Yet  give  me  to  forget  it  clean ! 

Vex  me  no  more  with  things  that  were, 
And  things  that  might  have  been. 

1  loved,  I  toiled,  throve  ill  or  well, 

— Lived  certain  years  and  murmured  not. 
Now  grant  me  in  that  land  to  dwell 
Where  all  things  are  forgot. 

For  others,  Lord,  Thy  purging  fires, 
The  loves  reknit,  the  crown,  the  palm. 

For  me,  the  death  of  all  desires 
In  deep,  eternal  calm. 

Thomas  William  Rnllrslon  [1857- 

AFTERWARDS 

I  KNOW  that  these  poor  rags  of  womanhood, — 
This  oaten  pipe,  whereon  the  wild  winds  played 
Making  sad  music, — tattered  and  outfrayed. 

Cast  off,  played  out, — can  hold  no  more  of  good. 
Of  love,  or  song,  or  sense  of  sun  and  shade. 

What  homely  neighbors  elbow  me  (hard  by 

'Neath  the  black  yews)  I  know  I  shall  not  know. 
Nor  take  account  of  changing  winds  that  blow. 

Shifting  the  golden  arrow,  set  on  high 

On  the  gray  spire,  nor  mark  who  come  and  go. 


347^  Facing  the  Sunset 

Yet  would  I  lie  in  some  familiar  place, 

Nor  share  my  rest  with  uncongenial  dead,— 
Somewhere,  may  be,  where  friendly  feet  will  tread.— 

As  if  from  out  some  little  chink  of  space 

Mine  eyes  might  see  them  tripping  overhead. 

And  though  too  sweet  to  deck  a  sepulcher 

Seem  twinkling  daisy -buds  and  meadow-grass; 
And  so  would  more  than  serve  me,  lest  they  pass 

Who  fain  would  know  what  woman  rested  there, 
What  her  demeanor,  or  her  story  was, — 

For  these  I  would  that  on  a  sculptured  stone 
(Fenced  round  with  ironwork  to  keep  secure) 
Should  sleep  a  form  with  folded  palms  demure. 

In  aspect  like  the  dreamer  that  was  gone, 

With  these  words  carved,  "/  hoped,  hut  was  not  sure.'^ 

Violet  Fane  [i8    - 


A  HUNDRED   YEARS  TO   COME 

Oh,  where  will  be  the  birds  that  sing, 

A  hundred  years  to  come? 
The  flowers  that  now  in  beauty  spring, 

A  hundred  years  to  come? 
The  rosy  lip,  the  lofty  brow, 
The  heart  that  beats  so  gaily  now, — 
Oh,  where  will  be  love's  beaming  eye, 
Joy's  pleasant  smile,  and  sorrow's  sigh, 

A  hundred  years  to  come? 

Who'll  press  for  gold  this  crowded  street, 

A  hundred  years  to  come? 
Who'll  tread  yon  church  with  willing  feet, 

A  hundred  years  to  come? 
Pale,  trembling  age,  and  fiery  youth, 
And  childhood  with  its  brow  of  truth. 
The  rich  and  poor,  on  land  and  sea, — 
Where  will  the  mighty  millions  be, 

A  hundred  years  to  come? 


The   Last  Camp-Fire  347 1 

We  all  within  our  graves  shall  sleep, 

A  hundred  years  to  come; 
No  living  soul  for  us  will  weep 

A  hundred  years  to  come ; 
But  other  men  our  lands  shall  till, 
And  others  then  our  streets  shall  fill, 
While  other  birds  shall  sing  as  gay, 
As  bright  the  sunshine  as  to-day, 

A  hundred  years  to  come! 

William  Goldsmilli  Brown  [i8i 2-1906] 


THE  LAST   CAMP-FIRE 

Scar  not  earth's  breast  that  I  may  have 
Somewhere  above  her  heart  a  grave; 
Mine  was  a  life  whose  swift  desire 
Bent  ever  less  to  dust  than  fire; 
Then  through  the  swift  white  path  of  flame 
Send  back  my  soul  to  whence  it  came; 
From  some  great  peak,  storm  challenging. 
My  death-fire  to  the  heavens  fling; 
The  rocks  my  altar,  and  above 
The  still  eyes  of  the  stars  I  love; 
No  hymn,  save  as  the  midnight  wind 
Comes  whispering  to  seek  his  kind. 

Heap  high  the  logs  of  spruce  and  pine. 
Balsam  for  spices  and  for  wine; 
Brown  cones,  and  knots  a  golden  blur 
Of  hoarded  pitch,  more  sweet  than  myrrh; 
Cedar,  to  stream  across  the  dark 
Its  scented  embers  spark  on  spark; 
Long,  shaggy  boughs  of  juniper. 
And  silvery,  odorous  sheaves  of  fir; 
Spice -wood,  to  die  in  incense  smoke 
Against  the  stubborn  ^roots  of  oak, 
Red  to  the  last  for  hate  or  love 
As  that  red  stubborn  heart  above. 


347-  Facing  the   Sunset 

Watch  till  the  last  pale  ember  dies, 

Till  wan  and  low  the  dead  pyre  lies, 

Then  let  the  thin  white  ashes  blow 

To  all  earth's  winds  a  finer  snow; 

There  is  no  wind  of  hers  but  I 

Have  loved  it  as  it  whistled  by; 

No  leaf  whose  life  I  would  not  share, 

No  weed  that  is  not  some  way  fair; 

Hedge  not  my  dust  in  one  close  urn, 

It  is  to  these  I  would  return, — 

The  wild,  free  winds,  the  things  that  know 

No  master's  rule,  no  ordered  row, — 

To  be,  if  Nature  will,  at  length 
Part  of  some  great  tree's  noble  strength; 
Growth  of  the  grass;  to  live  anew 
In  many  a  wild-flower's  richer  hue; 
Find  immortality,  indeed, 
In  ripened  heart  of  fruit  and  seed. 
Time  grants  not  any  man  redress 
Of  his  broad  law,  forgetfulness; 
I  parley  not  with  shaft  and  stone, 
Content  that  in  the  perfume  blown 
From  next  year's  hillsides  something  sweet 
And  mine,  shall  make  earth  more  complete. 
Sharlol  M.  Hall  [1870- 


INTERLUDE 

The  days  grow  shorter,  the  nights  grow  longer, 
The  headstones  thicken  along  the  way; 

And  life  grows  sadder,  but  love  grows  stronger 
For  those  who  walk  with  us,  day  by  day. 

The  tear  comes  quicker,  the  laugh  comes  slower, 
The  courage  is  lesser  to  do  and  dare; 

And  the  tide  of  joy  in  the  heart  runs  lower 
And  seldom  covers  the  reefs  of  care. 

But  all  true  things  in  the  world  seem  truer, 
And  the  better  things  of  the  earth  seem  best; 


The   Lamp  in   the  West  3473 

And  friends  are  dearer  as  friends  are  fewer, 
And  love  is  all  as  our  sun  dips  west. 

Then  let  us  clasp  hands  as  we  walk  together, 
And  let  us  speak  softly,  in  love's  sweet  tone. 

For  no  man  knows,  on  the  morrow,  whether 
We  two  pass  by,  or  but  one  alone. 

Ella  Wheeler  Wilcox  [1855- 

THE  ONE  HOPE 

When  vain  desire  at  last  and  vain  regret 
Go  hand  in  hand  to  death,  and  all  is  vain. 
What  shall  assuage  the  unforgotten  pain 

And  teach  the  unforgetful  to  forget? 

Shall  Peace  be  still  a  sunk  stream  long  unmet, — ■ 
Or  may  the  soul  at  once  in  a  green  plain 
Stoop  through  the  spray  of  some  sweet  life-fountain 

And  cull  the  dew-drenched  flowering  amulet? 

Ah !  when  the  wan  soul  in  that  golden  air 
Between  the  scriptured  petals  softly  blown 
Peers  breathless  for  the  gift  of  grace  unknown, — 

Ah!  let  none  other  alien  spell  soe'er 

But  only  the  one  Hope's  one  name  be  there, — • 
Not  less  nor  more,  but  even  that  word  alone. 

Dante  Gabriel  RosseUi  [1828-18821 

THE  LAAIP   IN  THE  WEST 

Venus  has  lit  her  sUver  lamp 

Low  in  the  purple  West, 
Casting  a  soft  and  mellow  light 

Upon  the  sea's  full  breast ; 
In  one  clear  path — as  if  to  guide 

Some  pale,  wayfaring  guest. 

Far  out,  far  out  the  restless  bar 

Starts  from  a  troubled  sleep. 
Where,  roaring  through  the  narrow  straits. 

The  meeting  waters  leap; 
But  still  that  shining  pathway  leads 

Across  the  lonely  deep. 


3474  Facing  the   Sunset 

When  I  sail  out  the  narrow  straits 
Where  unknown  dangers  be, 

And  cross  the  troubled,  moaning  bar 
To  the  mysterious  sea, 

Dear  God,  wilt  thou  not  set  a  lamp 
Low  in  the  West  for  me? 

Ella  Higginson  [1862 


THE  DYING  RESERVIST 

I  SHALL  not  see  the  faces  of  my  friends, 
Nor  hear  the  songs  the  rested  reapers  sing 
After  the  labors  of  the  harvesting. 
In  those  dark  nights  before  the  summer  ends; 
Nor  see  the  floods  of  spring,  the  melting  snow, 
Nor  in  the  autumn  twiUght  hear  the  stir 
Of  reedy  marshes,  when  the  wild  ducks  whir 
And  circle  black  against  the  afterglow. 
My  mother  died;  she  .shall  not  have  to  weep; 
My  wife  will  find  another  home;  my  child, 
Too  young,  will  never  grieve  or  know;  but  I 
Have  found  my  brother,  and  contentedly 
I'll  lay  my  head  upon  his  knees  and  sleep. 
O  brother  Death, — I  knew  you  when  you  smiled. 
Maurice  Baring  [1874-  191 6] 


"  IF   LOVE   WERE  JESTER   AT  THE   COURT 
OF  DEATH" 

If  Love  were  jester  at  the  court  of  Death, 
And  Death  the  king  of  all,  still  would  I  pray, 
"For  me  the  motley  and  the  bauble,  yea. 
Though  all  be  vanity,  as  the  Preacher  saith, 
The  mirth  of  love  be  mine  for  one  brief  breath!" 
Then  would  I  kneel  the  monarch  to  obey, 
And  kiss  that  pale  hand,  should  it  spare  or  slay; 
Since  I  have  tasted  love,  what  mattereth! 
But  if,  dear  God,  this  heart  be  dry  as  sand. 
And  cold  as  Charon's  palm  holding  Hell's  toll, 


The  Wild   Ride 


3475 


How  worse!  how  worse!     Scorch  it  with  sorrow's  brand! 
Haply,  though  dead  to  joy,  'twould  feel  that  coal; 
Better  a  cross,  and  nails  through  either  hand, 
Than  Pilate's  palace  and  a  frozen  soul! 

Frederic  Lawrence  Knowles  [1869-1905] 


CONSTANCY 

"Dear  as  remembered  kisses  after  death" — 
We  read  and  pause,  toying  the  pliant  page 
With  absent  fingers  while  we  question  slow, 
By  whom  remembered?     Not  by  those  that  live, 
And  love  again,  and  wed,  and  know  fresh  joys. 
Forgetting  the  pale  past.     Ah,  no!  for  them, 
The  sudden  stirring  of  such  long-whelmed  thought 
Means  shock  and  pain,  and  swift  reburial. 
But  it  may  be,  that  with  the  dreaming  dead, 
Who  sank  away  quick  pierced  by  despair, 
It  may  be  that  their  stillness  is  aglow 
Through  soft  recalling  of  each  loved  caress; 
Perchance  it  is  of  them  the  poet  saith 
"Dear  as  remembered  kisses  after  death." 

Minor  Watson  [18    - 

THE  WILD   RIDE 

/  hear  in  my  heart,  I  hear  in  its  ominous  pulses 
All  day,  on  the  road,  the  hoofs  of  invisible  horses, 
All  night,  from  their  stalls,  the  importunate  pawing  and  neigh- 
ing. 

Let  cowards  and  laggards  fall  back!  but  alert  to  the  saddle 
Weatherworn  and  abreast,  go  men  of  our  galloping  legion. 
With  a  stirrup-cup  each  to  the  lily  of  women  that  loves  him. 

The  trail  is  through  dolor  and  dread,  over  crags  and  mo- 
rasses ; 

There  are  shapes  by  the  way,  there  are  things  that  appal  or 
entice  us: 

What  odds?  We  are  Knights  of  the  Grail,  we  are  vowed  to 
the  riding. 


347^  Facing  the  Sunset 

Thouglit's  self  is  a  vanishing  wing,  and  joy  is  a  cobweb^ 
And  friendship  a  flower  in  the  dust,  and  glory  a  sunbeam: 
Not  here  is  our  prize,  nor,  alas!  after  these  our  pursuing. 

A  dipping  of  plumes,  a  tear,  a  shake  of  the  Ijridle, 

A  passing  salute  to  this  world  and  her  pitiful  beauty: 

We  hurry  with  never  a^ird,  in  th^  track  of  our  fathers. 

X  -J/li^  1.  f:'.fjyj-j 

I  hear  in  my  heart,  I  hear  in  its  ominous  pulses 
All  day,  on  the  road,  the  hoofs  of  invisible  horses, 
All  night,^from  their  stalls,  the  importunate  pawing  and  neigh- 
ing. ' 

We  spur  to  a  land  of  no  name,  outracing  the  storm-wind; 
We  leap  to  the  infinite  dark  like  sparks  from  the  anvil. 
Thou  leadest,  O  God!    All's  well  with  Thy  troopers  that 
follow. 

Louise  Imogen  Giiiiiey  [1861- 


"  I  WOULD   NOT  LIVE  .\LWAY  " 

I  WOULD  not  live  alway — live  alway  belov\'! 

Oh  no,  I'll  not  linger  when  bidden  to  go: 

The  days  of  our  pilgrimage  granted  us  here 

Are  enough  for  life's  woes,  full  enough  for  its  cheer: 

Would  I  shrink  from  the  path  which  the  prophets  of  God, 

Apostles,  and  martyrs,  so  joyfully  trod? 

Like  a  spirit  unblest,  o'er  the  earth  would  I  roam, 

While  brethren  and  friends  are  all  hastening  home? 

Twould  not  live  alway:  I  ask  not  to  stay 
Where  storm  after  storm  rises  dark  o'er  the  way; 
Where  seeking  for  rest  we  but  hover  around, 
Like  the  patriarch's  bird,  and  no  resting  is  found; 
Whqre  Hope,  when  she  paints  her  gay  bow  in  the  air, 
Leaves  its  brilliance  to  fade  in  the  night  of  despair, 
And  joy's  fleeting  angel  ne'er  sheds  a  glad  ray, 
Save  the  gleam  of  the  plumage  that  bears  him  away. 


"1   Would   Not   Live  Alway"      ^^4^7 

I  would  not  live  alway— ihus  fettered  by  sin, 
Temptation  without  and  corruption  within; 
In  a  moment  of  strength  if  I  sever  the  chain, 
Scarce  the  victory's  mine,  ere  I'm  captive  again; 
E'en  the  rapture  of  pardon  is  mingled  with  fears, 
And  the  cup  of  thanksgiving  with  penitent  tears: 
The  festival  trump  calls  for  jubilant  songs, 
But  my  spirit  her  own  miserere  prolongs. 

I  would  not  live  alway — no,  welcome  the  tomb, 
Since  Jesus  hath  lain  there  I  dread  not  its  gloom; 
Where  He  deigned  to  sleep,  I'll  too  bow  my  head, 
All  peaceful  to  slumber  on  that  hallowed  bed. 
Then  the  glorious  daybreak,  to  follow  that  night, 
The  orient  gleam  of  the  angels  of  light. 
With  their  clarion  call  for  the  sleepers  to  rise    , 
And  chant  forth  their  matins,  away  to  the  skies. 

Who.  who  would  live  alway?  away  from  his  God, 

Away  from  yon  heaven,  that  blissful  abode, 

Where  the  rivers  of  pleasure  flow  o'er  the  bright  plains, 

And  the  noontide  of  glory  eternally  reigns; 

Where  the  saints  of  all  ages  in  harmony  meet, 

Their  Saviour  and  brethren  transported  to  greet, 

While  the  songs  of  salvation  exultingly  roll 

And  the  smile  of  the  Lord  is  the  feast  of  the  soul. 

That  heavenly  music!  what  is  it  I  hear? 

The  notes  of  the  harpers  ring  sweet  in  mine  ear! 

And  see,  soft  unfolding  those  portals  of  gold. 

The  King  all  arrayed  in  His  beauty  behold! 

Oh  give  me,  oh  give  me,  the  wings  of  a  dove. 

To  adore  Him — be  near  Him — enwrapped  with  his  love; 

I  but  wait  for  the  summons,  I  list  for  the  word — 

Alleluia — Amen — evermore  with  the  Lord! 

William  Augustus  Muhlenberg  [1796-1877] 


347^  Facing  the  Sunset 


TRAVELLER'S  HOPE 

Lay  me  to  rest  in  some  fair  spot 

Where  sound  of  waters  near, 
And  songs  of  sailors  in  their  ships 

Shall  reach  my  waiting  ear: 

Where  I  shall  catch  the  Captain's  call: 

"All  hands  again  to  sea!" 
When  swift  embarking,  I  may  fare 

To  founts  of  life  to  be; 

Fare  to  the  dreamed-of  lands  that  lie 

Beyond  the  Port  of  Death; 
Fare  to  the  Dawn  of  whose  glad  realms 

God  sometimes  whispereth; 

With  hope  of  flowers  that  lift  their  heads 

After  the  night  is  past, 
And  joy  of  sailors  in  their  ships 

When  home's  in  sight  at  last. 

Charles  Granville  fiS 


,2fUfil(I 


SEALED  ORDERS 


We  bear  sealed  orders  o'er  Life's  weltered  sea, 

Our  haven  dim  and  far; 
We  can  but  man  the  helm  right  cheerily, 

Steer  by  the  brightest  star. 

And  hope  that  when  at  last  the  Great  Command 

Is  read,  we  then  may  hear 
Our  anchor  song,  and  see  the  longed-for  land 

Lie,  known  and  very  near. 

Richard  Burton  [1859- 

SONG 

I  MAKE  my  shroud  but  no  one  knows, 
So  shimmering  fine  it  is  and  fair, 
With  stitches  set  in  even  rows. 
I  make  my  shroud  but  no  one  knows. 


Compensation  3479 

In  door-way  where  the  hlac  blows, 
Humming  a  little  wandering  air, 
I  make  my  shroud  and  no  one  knows, 
So  shimmering  fine  it  is  and  fair. 

Adelaide  Crapscy  [1878-1014] 

A  SONG  OF  LIVING 

Because  I  have  loved  life,  I  shall  have  no  sorrow  to  die. 
I  have  sent  up  my  gladness  on  wings,  to  be  lost  in  the  blue 

of  the  sky. 
I  have  run  and  leaped  with  the  rain,  I  have  taken  the  wind 

to  my  breast. 
My  cheek  like  a  drowsy  child  to  the  face  of  the  earth  I  have 

pressed. 
Because  I  have  loved  life,  I  shall  have  no  sorrow  to  die. 
I  have  kissed  young  Love  on  the  lips,  I  have  heard  his  song 

to  the  end. 
I  have  struck  my  hand  like  a  seal  in  the  loyal  hand  of  a 

friend.  il  gy/jj.  Iiar;  -ijilyiri  -jrd  -r 

I  have  known  the  peace  of  heaven,  the  comfort  of  work 

done  well. 
I  have  longed  for  death  in  the  darkness  and  risen  alive  out  of 

heU. 
Because  I  have  loved  life,  I  shall  have  no  sorrow  to  die. 
I  give  a  share  of  my  soul  to  the  world  where  my  course  is 

run. 
I  know  that  another  shall  finish  the  task  I  must  leave  undone. 
I  know  that  no  flower,  no  flint  was  in  vain  on  the  path  I  trod. 
As  one  looks  on  a  face  through  a  window,  through  life  I  have 

looked  on  God. 
Because  I  have  loved  life,  I  shall  have  no  sorrow  to  die. 
Amelia  Josephine  Burr  [1878- 

COMPENSATION 

Because  I  had  loved  so  deeply, 
Because  I  had  loved  so  long, 

"God  in  His  great  compassion 
Gave  me  the  gift  of  song. 


3480  Facing  the  Sunset 

Because  I  have  loved  so  valtily, ' 
And  sung  with  such  faltering  breath, 

The  Master,  in  infinite  mercy, 
Offers  the  boon  of  Death. 

Paul  Laurence  Dunbar  [1872-1906] 


THE  RECESSIONAL 

Now  along  the  solemn  heights 
Fade  the  Autumn's  altar-hghts; 

Down  the  great  earth's  glimmering  chancel 
Glide  the  days  and  nights. 

Little  kindred  of  the  grass, 
Like  a  shadow  in  a  glass 

Falls  the  dark  and  falls  the  stillness; 
We  must  rise  and  pass. 

We  must  rise  and  follow,  wending 

Where  the  nights  and  days  have  ending, — 

Pass  in  order  pale  and  slow 
Unto  sleep  extending. 

Little  brothers  of  the  clod. 
Soul  of  fire  and  seed  of  sod, 

We  must  fare  into  the  silence 
At  the  knees  of  God. 

Little  comrades  of  the  sky, 
Wing  to  wing  we  wander  by, 
Going,  going,  going,  going, 
Softly  as  a  sigh. 

Hark,  the  moving  shapes  confer, 
Globe  of  dew  and  gossamer, 

Fading  and  ephemeral  spirits 
In  the  dusk  astir. 

Moth  and  blossom,  blade  and  bee, 
Worlds  must  go  as  well  as  we. 

In  the  long  procession  joining 
Mount  and  star  and  sea. 


Mountain   Song  34^1 

Toward  the  shadowy  brink  we  climb 
Where  the  round  year  rolls  sublime, 
Rolls,  and  drops,  and  falls  forever 
In  the  vast  of  time. 

Like  a  plummet  plunging  deep 
Past  the  utmost  reach  of  sleep, 

Till  remembrance  has  no  longer 
Care  to  laugh  or  weep. 

Charles  G.  D.  Roberts  [1860- 


MOUNTAIN  SONG 

I  HAVE  not  where  to  lay  my  head : 
Upon  my  breast  no  child  shall  lie; 

For  me  no  marriage  feast  is  spread: 
I  walk  alone  under  the  sky. 

My  staff  and  scrip  I  cast  away — 

Light-burdened  to  the  mountain  height! 

Climbing  the  rocky  steep  by  day. 
Kindling  my  fire  against  the  night. 

The  bitter  hail  shall  flower  the  peak, 
The  icy  wind  shall  dry  my  tears. 

Strong  shall  I  be,  who  am  but  weak, 
When  bright  Orion  spears  my  fears 

Under  the  horned  moon  I  shall  rise 
Up-swinging  on  the  scarf  of  dawn. 

The  sun,  searching  with  level  eyes. 
Shall  take  my  hand  and  lead  me  on 

Wide  flaming  pinions  veil  the  West — 
Ah,  shall  I  find?  and  shall  I  know? 
My  feet  are  bound  upon  the  Quest — 
ji'  Over  the  Great  Divide  I  go. 

Harriet  Monroe  [i860- 


34^2  Facing  the   Sunset 

TO  M.  E.  W. 

Words,  for  alas  my  trade  is  words,  a  barren  burst  of  rhyme, 
Rubbed  by  a  hundred   rhymesters,  battered  a  thousand 
times, 
Take  them,  you,  that  smile  on  strings,  those  nobler  sounds' 
than  mine. 
The  words  that  never  lie,  or  brag,  or  flatter,  or  malign. 

I  give  a  hand  to  my  lady,  another  to  my  friend, 

To  whom  you  too  have  given  a  hand;  and  so  before  the 
end 
We  four  may  pray,  for  all  the  years,  whatever  suns  be  set. 
The  sole  two  prayers  worth  praying — to  live  and  not 
forget. 

The  pale  leaf  falls  in  pallor,  but  the  green  leaf  turns  to  gold; 
We  that  have  found  it  good  to  be  young  shall  find  it  good 
to  be  old ; 
Life  that  bringeth  the  marriage  bell,  the  cradle  and  the 
grave. 
Life  that  is  mean  to  the,  mean  of  heart,  and  only  brave 
to  the  brave.    uJn:O0m.3ri|oJ  bafabtud-ifla' 

In  the  calm  of  the  last  white  winter,  when  all  the  past  is 
ours, 
Old  tears  are  frozen  as  jewels,  old  storms  frosted  as 
flowers. 
Dear  Lady,  may  we  meet  again,  stand  up  again,  we  four. 
Beneath  the  burden  of  the  years,  and  praise  the  earth 
once  more. 

Gilbert  Keith  Chesterton  [1874- 

RETURNING 

Never  sings  a  city-robin  on  the  gray-stone  window-ledges 
But  I  dream  the  long,  cool  meadows  where  the  yellow 
cowslips  be; 
To  his  call  I  guess  an  answer  from  the  grass  and  tangled 
hedges^ 
There's  a  thrill  of  other  springtimes  in  the  country  soul 
of  me ! 


"O   World,   Be   Not  So   Fair"     3483 

Never  falls  light  rain  above  me  but  I  hear  its  gentle  patter 

On  a  lonely  roof  at  even,  as  I  heard  it  years  ago; 
Through  the  music,  warmth,  and  fragrance,  past  the  sound 
of  careless  chatter, 
Throbs  the  silence  of  far  places  where  the  pines  and 
birches  grow. 

I  shall  see  a  few  more  springtimes,  then  shall  heed  no  an- 
swer lilted 
To  that  first  full-throated  robin,  hear  no  rain  above  my 
head  .  .  . 
Give   me,    God,    the   meadow-blossoms   when   my   formal 
wreaths  have  wilted — 
Let  me  lie  till  Thine  Own  Springtime  with  the  pines  be- 
side my  bed! 

Ruth  Guthrie  Harding  [1S82- 


"O  WORLD,  BE  NOT  SO  FAIR" 

O  MOON,  O  hide  thy  golden  light, 

0  night,  be  not  so  fair; 

O  ye  dear  stars,  shine  not  so  bright: 

1  would  for  sleep  prepare. 
Mine  eyes  are  closing  wearily 

That  watched  the  slow  day's  flight, 
And  yet  there  is  no  rest  for  me 
In  this  enchanted  night. 

O  fellow-men,  be  not  too  good! 

0  world,  be  not  too  fair! 

Wake  no  new  life-glow  in  my  blood — 

1  would  for  sleep  prepare. 

My  day  is  dim;  there  beckons  clear 

A  star  of  other  air; 
And  yet,  and  yet,  my  heart  is  here! 

O  world,  be  not  so  fair. 

From  the  German  of  Maria  J'ager  by 

Grace  Fallow  Norton  [18    - 


T-.Mnn  ".fin-, 


"ONE  FIGHT  MORE",,    / 

"J til  edo": 
PROSPICE 

Fear  death? — to  feel  the  fog  in  my  throat, 

The  mist  in  my  face, 
When  the  snows  begin,  and  the  blasts  denote 

I  am  nearing  the  place. 
The  power  of  the  night,  the  press  of  the  storm, 

The  post  of  the  foe; 
Where  he  stands,  the  Arch  Fear  in  a  visible  form, 

Yet  the  strong  man  must  go: 
For  the  journey  is  done  and  the  summit  attained, 

And  the  barriers  fall, 
Though  a  battle's  to  fight  ere  the  guerdon  be  gained, 

The  reward  of  it  all. 
I  was  ever  a  fighter,  so — one  fight  more. 

The  best  and  the  last! 
I  would  hate  that  death  bandaged  my  eyes,  and  forbore, 

And  bade  me  creep  past. 
No!  let  me  taste  the  whole  of  it,  fare  Hke  my  peers 

The  heroes  of  old, 
Bear  the  brunt,  in  a  minute  pay  glad  life's  arrears 

Of  pain,  darkness  and  cold. 
For  sudden  the  worst  turns  the  best  to  the  brave, 

The  black  minute's  at  end. 
And  the  elements'  rage,  the  fiend-voices  that  rave, 

Shall  dwindle,  shall  blend, 
Shall  change,  shall  become  first  a  peace  out  of  pain. 

Then  a  light,  then  thy  breast, 
O  thou  soul  of  my  soul!     I  shall  clasp  thee  again, 

And  with  God  be  the  rest! 

Robert  Browning  [i8i2-i88q] 


3484 


"Oh  May  1  Join  the  Choir  Invisible"     3485 


REQUIEM 

Under  the  wide  and  starry  sky 
Dig  the  ^rave  and  let  me  He. 
Glad  did!  hve  and  gladly  die. 
And  I  laid  me  down  with  a  will. 

This  be  the  verse  you  grave  for  me: 
Here  he  lies  where  he  longed  to  he; 
Home  is  the  sailor,  home  from  sea, 
And  the  hunter  home  from  the  hill. 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1894] 


"  OH    MAY   I   JOIN   THE    CHOIR   INVISIBLE " 

Longum  illud  tempus,  quum  non  ero,  magis  me  movet,  quam  hoc  exiguum. 
Cicero,  ad  AU.,  xii.  18. 

Oh  may  I  join  the  choir  invisible 

Of  those  immortal  dead  who  live  again 

In  minds  made  better  by  their  presence :  live 

In  pulses  stirred  to  generosity, 

In  deeds  of  daring  rectitude,  in  scorn 

For  miserable  aims  that  end  with  self, 

In  thoughts  sublime  that  pierce- the  night  like  stars, 

And  with  their  mild  persistence  urge  man's  search 

To  vaster  issues. 

So  to  live  is  heaven: 
To  make  undying  music  in  the  world, 
Breathing  as  beauteous  order  that  controls 
With  growing  sway  the  growing  life  of  man. 
So  we  inherit  thai  sweet  purity 
For  which  we  struggled,  failed,  and  agonized. 
With  widening  retrospect  that  bred  despair. 
Rebellious  flesh  that  would  not  be  subdued, 
A  vicious  parent  shaming  still  its  child, 
Poor«n.xious  penitence,  is  quick  dissolved; 
Its  discords,  quenched  by  meeting  harmonies, 
Die  in  the  large  and  charitable  air. 
And  all  our  rarer,  better,  truer  self^ 


3486  "One   Fight   More"  :  vrM  rlO 

That  sobbed  religiously  in  yearning  song, 
That  watched  to  ease  the  burden  of  the  world, 
Laboriously  tracing  what  must  be, 
And  what  may  yet  be  better, — saw  within 
A  worthier  image  for  the  sanctuary,     '"■',," 
And  shaped  it  forth  before  the  multitude. 
Divinely  human,  raising  worship  so 
To  higher  reverence  more  mixed  with  love, — 
That  better  self  shall  live  till  human  Time 
Shall  fold  its  eyelids,  and  the  human  sky' 
Be  gathered  like  a  scroll  within  the  tomb 
Unread  forever. 

This  is  life  to  come, 
Which  martyred  men  have  made  more  glorious 
For  us  who  strive  to  follow.     May  I  reach 
That  purest  heaven,  be  to  other  souls 
The  cup  of  strength  in  some  great  agony, 
Enkindle  generous  ardor,  feed  pure  love. 
Beget  the  smiles  that  have  no  cruelty,  -    -■- 

Be  the  sweet  presence  of  a  good  diffused,  ■  ^orf-f  lO 
And  in  diffusion  ever  more  intense. 
So  shall  I  join  the  choir  invisible 
Whose  music  is  the  gladness  of  the  world. 

George  Eliot  [i8ig-i88o] 


LAST  LINES 

No  coward  soul  is  mine, 
No  trembler  in  the  world's  storm-troubled  sphere: 

I  see  Heaven's  glories  shine. 
And  faith  shines  equal,  arming  me  from  fear. 

O  God  within  my  breast, 
Almighty,  ever-present  Deity! 

Life— that  in  me  has  rest, 
As  I — undying  Life — have  power  in  Thee! 


.    U  J  I  vv 


Vain  are  the  thousand  creeds  •        i 

That  move  men's  hearts:  unutterably  vain;3ib  ail 

Worthless  as  withered  weeds,  n'l  aiQ 

Or  idlest  froth  amid  the  boundless  main,     ib  briA 


Laus  Mortis  3487 


To  waken  doubt  in  one  '     ■ "'  ''  • 

Holding  so  fast  by  Thine  infinity;  ''' 

So  surely  anchored  on 

The  steadfast  rock  of  immortality. 

■•  ii 

With  wide-embracing  love 
Thy  Spirit  animates  eternal  years, 

Pervades  and  broods  above, 
Changes,  sustains,  dissolves,  creates,  and  rears. 

■  1 
Though  earth  and  man  were  gone, 
And  suns  and  universes  cease  to  be, 

And  Thou  were  left  alone,  ':>o 

Every  existence  would  exist  in  Thee. 
.oaoi 

There  is  not  room  for  Death, 
Nor  atom  that  his  might  could  render  void : 

Thou — Thou  art  Being  and  Breath, 
And  what  Thou  art  may  never  be  destroyed. 

Emily  Br onfd  [1818-1848] 


LAUS  MORTIS 

Nay,  why  should  I  fear  Death, 
Who  gives  us  life,  and  in  exchange  takes  breath? 

He  is  like  cordial  Spring 
That  lifts  above  the  soil  each  buried  thing; —         '\ 

Like  Autumn,  kind  and  brief — ■ 
The  frost  that  chills  the  branches  frees  the  leaf; — ' 

Like  Winter's  stormy  hours 
That  spread  their  fleece  of  snow  to  save  the  flowers. 

The  lordliest  of  all  things, — 
Life  lends  us  only  feet,  Death  gives  us  wings! 

Fearing  no  covert  thrust, 
Let  me  walk  onward,  armed  with  valiant  trust. 


3488  "One  Fight   More" 

Dreading  no  unseen  knife, 
Across  Death's  threshold  step  from  Kfe  to  life!  i  j 

O  all  ye  frightened  folk, 
Whether  ye  wear  a  crown  or  bear  a  yoke, 

Laid  in  one  equal  bed. 
When  once  your  coverlet  of  grass  is  spread, 

What  daybreak  need  you  fear? 
The  Love  will  rule  you  there  which  guides  you  here! 

Where  Life,  the  Sower,  stands, 
Scattering  the  ages  from  his  swinging  hand 

Thou  waitest,  Reaper  lone, 
Until  the  multitudinous  grain  hath  grown 

Scythe-bearer,  when  thy  blade 
Harvests  my  flesh,  let  me  be  unafraid! 

God's  husbandman  thou  art! — 
In  His  unwithering  sheaves,  O'bind  my  heart! 

Frederic  Lawrence  Knowles  [1869- 1905] 

"WHEN  I   HAVE   FEARS" 

When  I  have  fears  that  I  may  cease  to  be 
Before  my  pen  has  gleaned  my  teeming  brain, 
Before  high-piled  books,  in  charact'ry 
Hold  like  rich  garners  the  full-ripened  grain; 
When  I  behold,  upon  the  night's  starred  face. 
Huge  cloudy  symbols  of  a  high  romance. 
And  think  that  I  may  never  live  to  trace 
Their  shadows,  with  the  magic  hand  of  chance; 
And  when  I  feel,  fair  creature  of  an  hour! 
That  I  shall  never  look  upon  thee  more, 
Never  have  relish  in  the  fairy  power 
Of  unreflecting  love! — then  on  the  shore 
Of  the  wide  world  I  stand  alone,  and  think 
Till  Love  and  Fame  to  nothingness  do  sink. 

John  Keats  [i 795-1 821] 


The   Dying  Christian  to   His   Soul     3489 


LAST  SONNET 

Bright  Star!  would  I  were  steadfast  as  thou  art — 
Not  in  lone  splendor  hung  aloft  the  night, 
And  watching,  with  eternal  lids  apart. 
Like  Nature's  patient,  sleepless  Eremite, 
The  moving  waters  at  their  priest-like  task 
Of  pure  ablution  round  earth's  human  shores, 
Or  gazing  on  the  new  soft-fallen  mask 
Of  snow  upon  the  mountains  and  the  moors- 
No — yet  still  steadfast,  still  unchangeable, 
Pillowed  upon  my  fair  love's  ripening  breast. 
To  feel  for  ever  its  soft  fall  and  swell. 
Awake  for  ever  in  a  sweet  unrest. 

Still,  still  to  hear  her  tender-taken  breath. 
And  so  live  ever — or  else  swoon  to  death. 

JohnKcals  [1795-1821] 

THE  DYING   CHRISTIAN  TO  HIS   SOUL 

Animula,  vagula,  hlandula, 
Uospes  Comesque  Corporis, 
QucB  nunc  ahihh  in  loca, 
Pallidula,  rigida,  ntidula? 
Nee,  ul  soles,  dabis  joca. 

ADRIANI    MORIENTIS,    AD    ANIMAM    SOAM 

Vital  spark  of  heavenly  flame. 

Quit,  O  quit  this  mortal  frame! 

Trembling,  hoping,  lingering,  flying, 

0  the  pain,  the  bhss  of  dying! 
Cease,  fond  Nature,  cease  thy  strife, 
And  let  me  languish  into  life. 

Hark!  they  whisper;  angels  say, 

Sister  Spirit,  come  away! 

What  is  this  absorbs  me  quite. 

Steals  my  senses,  shuts  my  sight, 
Drowns  my  spirits,  draws  my  breath? 
Tell  me,  my  soul,  can  this  be  death? 

The  world  recedes;  it  disappears! 
Heaven  opens  on  my  eyes;  my  ears 


3490  "One   Fight   More".^Q   ^^^ 

With  sounds  seraphic  ring! 
Lend,  lend  your  wings!     I  mount!     I  fly! 
O  Grave!  where  is  thy  victory? 

O  Death!  where  is  thy  sting? 

Alexander  Pope  [1688-1744] 


"BEYOND  THE  SMILING  AND  THE  WEEPING" 

Beyond  the  smihng  and  the  weeping 

I  shall  be  soon; 
Beyond  the  waking  and  the  sleeping, 
Beyond  the  sowing  and  the  reaping, 
I  shall  be  soon. 
Love,  rest,  and  home! 
Sweet  hope! 
Lord,  tarry  not,  but  come. 

Beyond  the  blooming  and  the  fading 

I  shall  be  soon; 
Beyond  the  shining  and  the  shading,      ■  y 
Beyond  the  hoping  and  the  dreading, 

I  shall  be  soon. 

Beyond  the  rising  and  the  setting 

I  shall  be  soon; 
Beyond  the  calming  and  the  fretting, 
Beyond  remembering  and  forgetting, 

I  shall  be  soon. 

Beyond  the  gathering  and  the  strowing 

I  shall  be  soon; 
Beyond  the  ebbing  and  the  flowing. 
Beyond  the  coming  and  the  going, 

I  shall  be  soon. 

Beyond  the  parting  and  the  meeting 

I  shall  be  soon; 
Beyond  the  farewell  and  the  greeting, 
Beyond  this  pulse's  fever  beating, 

I  shall  be  soon. 


Life  3491 

Beyond  the  frost  chain  and  the  fever 

I  shall  be  soon; 
Beyond  the  rock  waste  and  the  river, 
Beyond  the  ever  and  the  never, 
I  shall  be  soon. 
Love,  rest,  and  home! 
Sweet  hope! 
Lord,  tarry  not,  but  come. 

Horatius  Boiiar  [i8o8-i88q1 


"I   STRO\TE  WITH  NONE" 

I  STROVE  with  none;  for  none  was  worth  my  strife. 
Nature  I  loved  and,  next  to  Nature,  Art; 
I  warmed  both  hands  before  the  fire  of  life; 
It  sinks,  and  I  am  ready  to  depart. 

Walter  Savage  Lander  [1775-1864] 


DEATH 

Death  stands  above  me,  whispering  low 

I  know  not  what  into  my  car; 
Of  his  strange  language  all  I  know 

Is,  there  is  not  a  word  of  fear. 

Walter  Savage  Lander  [1775-1864] 


LIFE 

Life!  I  know  not  what  thou  art. 
But  know  that  thou  and  I  must  part; 
And  when,  or  how,  or  where  we  met, 
I  own  to  me's  a  secret  yet. 
But  this  I  know,  when  thou  art  fled. 
Where'er  they  lay  these  limbs,  this  head, 
No  clod  so  valueless  shall  be 
As  all  that  then  remains  of  me. 


3492  "One   Fight   More" 

O  whither,  whither  dost  thou  fly? 
Where  bend  unseen  thy  trackless  course? 

And  in  this  strange  divorce, 
Ah,  tell  where  I  must  seek  this  compound  I? 
To  the  vast  ocean  of  empyreal  flame 

From  whence  thy  essence  came 
Dost  thou  thy  flight  pursue,  when  freed 
From  matter's  base  encumbering  weed? 

Or  dost  thou,  hid  from  sight,       * 

Wait,  like  some  speU-bound  knight, 
Through  blank  oblivious  years  the  appointed  hour 
To  break  thy  trance  and  reassume  thy  power? 
Yet  canst  thou  without  thought  or  feeling  be? 
O  say,  what  art  thou,  when  no  more  thou'rt  thee? 

Life!  we  have  been  long  together. 
Through  pleasant  and  through  cloudy  weather; 
'Tis  hard  to  part  when  friends  are  dear; 
Perhaps  'tw'iU  cost  a  sigh,  a  tear; — 
Then  steal  away,  give  little  warning, 
Choose  thine  own  time; 
Say  not  Good-night,  but  in  some  brighter  clime 
Bid  me  Good-morning! 

Anna  Letitia  Barbaidd  [1743-1825] 

DYING  HYMN 

Earth,  with  its  dark  and  dreadful  Uls, 

Recedes,  and  fades  away; 
Lift  up  your  heads,  ye  heavenly  hiUs; 

Ye  gates  of  death,  give  way! 

My  soul  is  full  of  whispered  song, 
My  blindness  is  my  sight;  .,  .   „ 

The  shadows  that  I  feared  so  long.  ,     . 
Are  all  alive  with  light.  -„  ,  ^ 

The  while  my  pulses  faintly  beat, 

My  faith  doth  so  abound, 
I  feel  grow  firm  beneath  my  feet 

The  green  immortal  ground. 


In   Harbor  3493 

That  faith  to  me  a  courage  gives 

Low  as  the  grave,  to  go: 
I  know  that  my  Redeemer  Hves: 

That  I  shall  Hve,  I  know. 

The  palace  walls  I  almost  see, 
Where  dwells  my  Lord  and  King; 

O  grave,  where  is  thy  victory! 
0  death,  where  is  thy  sting! 

Alice  Cary  [1820-1871] 


IN  HARBOR 

I  THINK  it  is  over,  over, 

I  think  it  is  over  at  last; 
Voices  of  foeman  and  lover. 

The  sweet  and  the  bitter,  have  passed: 
Life,  like  a  tempest  of  ocean. 
Hath  outblown  its  ultimate  blast: 
There's  but  a  faint  sobbing  seaward 
While  the  calm  of  the  tide  deepens  leeward, 
And  behold!  like  the  welcoming  quiver 
Of  heart-pulses  throbbed  through  the  river, 

Those  lights  in  the  harbor  at  last. 

The  heavenly  harbor  at  last! 

I  feel  it  is  over!  over! 

For  the  winds  and  the  waters  surcease; 
Ah,  few  were  the  days  of  the  rover 

That  smiled  in  the  beauty  of  peace! 
And  distant  and  dim  was  the  omeij/- 1  i^  ■  • 
That  hinted  redress  or  release: — 
From  the  rav^age  of  life,  and  its  riot, 
What  marvel  I  yearn  for  the  quiet 

Which  bides  in  the  harbor  at  last, — 
For  the  lights,  with  their  welcoming  quiver, 
That  throb  through  the  sanctified  river, 

Which  girdle  the  harbor  at  last. 

This  heavenly  harbor  at  last? 


3494  "One   Fight   More" 

I  know  it  is  over,  over, 

I  know  it  is  over  at  last! 
Down  sail!  the  sheathed  anchor  uncover, 

For  the  stress  of  the  voyage  has  passed: 
Life,  like  a  tempest  of  ocean, 

Hath  outbreathed  its  ultimate  blast: 
There's  but  a  faint  sobbing  to  seaward. 
While  the  calm  of  the  tide  deepens  leeward; 
And  behold!  like  the  welcoming  quiver 
Of  heart-pulses  throbbed  through  the  river, 

Those  hghts  in  the  harbor  at  last. 

The  heavenly  harbor  at  last! 

Paid  Hamilton  Haync  [1830-1 


THE  LAST  INVOCATION 

At  the  last,  tenderly. 

From  the  walls  of  the  powerful,  fortressed  house. 

From  the  clasp  of  the  knitted  locks,  from  the  keep  of  the 

well-closed  doors. 
Let  me  be  wafted. 

Let  me  glide  noiselessly  forth; 

With  the  key  of  softness  unlock  the  locks — with  a  whisper 

Set  ope  the  doors,  O  soul! 

Tenderly — be  not  impatient! 
(Strong  is  your  hold,  O  mortal  flesh! 
Strong  is  your  hold,  O  love!) 

Walt  Whitman  [1819-1892] 


"BAREST  THOU  NOW,   O  SOUL" 

Barest  thou  now,  O  soul. 

Walk  out  with  me  toward  the  unknown  region, 

Where  neither  ground  is  for  the  feet  nor  any  path  to  follow? 

No  map  there,  nor  guide. 
Nor  voice  sounding,  nor  touch  of  human  hand, 
Nor  face  with  blooming  flesh,  nor  lips,  nor  eyes,  are  in  that 
land. 


Waiting  3495 


I  know  it  not,  O  soul, 

Nor  dost  thou,  all  is  a  blank  before  us, — 

All  waits  undreamed  of  in  that  region,  that  inaccessible  land. 

Till  when  the  ties  loosen. 
All  but  the  tics  eternal,  Time  and  Space,    . 
Nor  darkness,  gravitation,  sense,  nor  any  bounds  bounding 
us. 

Then  we  burst  forth,  we  float. 
In  Time  and  Space,  O  soul!  prepared  for  them. 
Equal,  equipped  at  last  (O  joy!  O  fruit  of  all!),  them  to  fulfill, 
O  soul! 

Walt  Whitman  [181Q-1892] 


WAITING 

Serene,  I  fold  my  hands  and  wait. 
Nor  care  for  wind,  nor  tide,  nor  sea; 

I  rave  no  more  'gainst  time  or  fate. 
For,  lo!  my  own  shall  come  to  me. 

I  stay  my  haste,  I  make  delays, 
For  what  avails  this  eager  pace? 

I  stand  amid  the  eternal  ways, 

And  what  is  mine  shall  know  my  face. 

Asleep,  awake,  by  night  or  day. 
The  friends  I  seek  are  seeking  me; 

No  wind  can  drive  my  bark  astray, 
Nor  change  the  tide  of  destiny. 

What  matter  if  I  stand  alone? 

I  wait  with  joy  the  coming  years; 
My  heart  shall  reap  where  it  hath  sown, 

And  garner  up  its  fruit  of  tears. 

The  waters  know  their  own  and  draw 

The  brook  that  springs  in  yonder  heights; 

So  flows  the  good  with  equal  law 
Unto  the  soul  of  pure  delights. 


349^  "One   Fight   More" 

The  stars  come  nightly  to  the  sky; 
The  tidal  wave  comes  to  the  sea; 
.ijM   :  Nor  time,  nor  space,  nor  deep,  nor  high. 

Can  keep  my  own  away  from  me. 

John  Burroughs  [1837- 


IN  THE  DARK 

All  moveless  stand  the  ancient  cedar-trees 
Along  the  drifted  sand-hills  where  they  grow; 

And  from  the  dark  west  comes  a  wandering  breeze, 
And  waves  them  to  and  fro. 


III! 


A  murky  darkness  lies  along  the  sand, 

Where  bright  the  sunbeams  of  the  morning  shone, 
And  the  eye  vainly  seeks,  by  sea  and  land. 

Some  light  to  rest  upon. 

No  large,  pale  star  its  glimmering  vigil  keeps; 

An  inky  sea  reflects  an  inky  sky; 
And  the  dark  river,  like  a  serpent,  creeps 

To  where  its  black  piers  lie. 

Strange  salty  odors  through  the  darkness  steal. 
And  through  the  dark,  the  ocean-thunders  roll; 

Thick  darkness  gathers,  stifling,  till  I  feel 
Its  weight  upon  my  soul. 

I  stretch  my  hands  out  in  the  empty  air; 

I  strain  my  eyes  into  the  heavy  night; 
Blackness  of  darkness! — Father,  hear  my  prayer! 

Grant  me  to  see  the  light! 

George  Arnold  [1834-1865] 

LAST  VERSES 

When  I  beneath  the  cold  red  earth  am  sleeping, 

Life's  fever  o'er. 
Will  there  for  me  be  any  bright  eye  weeping 

That  I'm  no  more? 
Will  there  be  any  heart  still  memory  keeping 

Of  heretofore? 


The   Rubicon  3497 


When  the  great  winds  through  leafless  forests  rushing 

Sad  music  make; 
When  the  swollen  streams,  o'er  crag  and  gully  gushing, 

Like  fuU  hearts  break, — 
Will  there  then  one,  whose  heart  despair  is  crushing, 

IMourn  for  my  sake? 

When  the  bright  sun  upon  that  spot  is  shining, 

With  purest  ray, 
And  tlie  small  flowers,  their  buds  and  blossoms  twining. 

Burst  through  that  clay, — 
Will  there  be  one  still  on  that  spot  repining 

Lost  hopes  all  day? 

When  no  star  twinkles  with  its  eye  of  glory 

On  that  low  mound. 
And  wintry  storms  have,  with  their  ruins  hoary, 

Its  loneness  crowned, — 
Will  there  be  then  one,  versed  in  misery's  story. 

Pacing  it  round? 

It  may  be  so, — but  this  is  selfish  sorrow 

To  ask  such  meed, — 
A  weakness  and  a  wickedness  to  borrow, 

From  hearts  that  bleed. 
The  waitings  of  to-day  for  what  to-morrow 

Shall  never  need. 

Lay  me  then  gently  in  my  narrow  dwelling, 

Thou  gentle  heart; 
And  though  thy  bosom  should  with  grief  be  swelhng, 

Let  no  tear  start: 
It  were  in  vain, — for  Time  hath  long  been  knelling, — 

"Sad  one,  depart!" 

William  Motherwell  [179 7-1 83 5] 

THE   RUBICON 

One  other  bitter  drop  to  drink. 

And  then — no  more! 
One  little  pause  upon  the  brink, 

And  then — go  o'er! 


349^  "One   Fight   More" 

One  sigh— and  then  the  Ub'rant  morn 

Of  perfect  day, 
When  my  free  spirit,  newly  born, 

Will  soar  away ! 

One  pang— and  I  shall  rend  the  thrall 

Where  grief  abides, 
And  generous  Death  will  show  me  all 

That  now  he  hides; 
And,  lucid  in  that  second  birth, 

I  shall  discern 
What  all  the  sages  of  the  earth 

Have  died  to  learn. 

One  motion — and  the  stream  is  crossed, 

So  dark,  so  deep! 
And  I  shall  triumph,  or  be  lost 

In  endless  sleep. 
Then,  onward!    Whatsoe'er  my  fate, 

I  shall  not  care! 
Nor  Sin  nor  Sorrow,  Love  nor  Hate 

Can  touch  me  there. 

William  Winter  [1836- 

WHEN  I  HAVE  GONE  WEIRD  WAYS 

When  I  have  finished  with  this  episode. 

Left  the  hard,  uphill  road. 

And  gone  weird  ways  to  seek  another  load, 

O  Friend,  regret  me  not,  nor  weep  for  me — 

Child  of  Infinity! 

Nor  dig  a  grave,  nor  rear  for  me  a  tomb 
To  say  with  lying  writ:  "Here  in  the  gloom 
He  who  loved  bigness  takes  a  narrow  room. 

Content  to  pillow  here  his  weary  head — 

For  he  is  dead." 

But  give  my  body  to  the  funeral  pyre. 

And  bid  the  laughing  fire, 

Eager  and  strong  and  swift  as  my  desire. 

Scatter  my  subtle  essence  into  Space — 

Free  me  of  Time  and  Place. 


Thalatta  !  Thalatta !  3499 

Sweep  up  the  bitter  ashes  from  the  hearth! 
Fling  back  the  dust  I  borrowed  from  the  Earth 
Unto  the  chemic  broil  of  Death  and  Birth — 

The  vast  Alembic  of  the  cryptic  Scheme, 

Warm  with  the  Master-Dream. 

And  thus,  O  little  House  that  sheltered  me, 
Dissolve  again  in  wind  and  rain,  to  be 
Part  of  the  cosmic  weird  Economy : 

And  Oh,  how  oft  with  new  life  shalt  thou  lift 

Out  of  the  atom-drift! 

John  G.  Ncihardt  [1881- 


A  RHYME  OF  LIFE 

If  life  be  as  a  flame  that  death  doth  kill, 
Burn,  little  candle,  lit  for  me, 
With  a  pure  flame,  that  I  may  rightly  see 
To  word  my  song,  and  utterly 
God's  plan  fulfil. 

If  life  be  as  a  flower  that  blooms  and  dies, 
Forbid  the  cunning  frost  that  slays 
With  Judas  kiss,  and  trusting  love  betrays; 
Forever  may  my  song  of  praise 
Untainted  rise. 

If  life  be  as  a  voyage,  foul  or  fair. 
Oh,  bid  me  not  my  banners  furl 
For  adverse  gale,  or  wave  in  angry  whirl, 
Till  I  have  found  the  gates  of  pearl. 
And  anchored  there. 

Charles  Warren  Stoddard  [1843-1909] 


"THALATTA!   THALATTA!" 

CRY  OF  THE  TEN  THOUSAND 

I  STAND  upon  the  summit  of  my  years; 
Behind,  the  toil,  the  camp,  the  march,  the  strife, 
The  wandering  and  the  desert;  vast,  afar, 
Beyond  this  weary  way,  behold!  the  Sea! 


3500  "One   Fight  More" 

The  sea  o'erswept  by  clouds  and  winds  and  wings, 

By  thoughts  and  wishes  manifold,  whose  breath 

Is  freshness  and  whose  mighty  pulse  is  peace. 

Palter  no  question  of  the  dim  Beyond; 

Cut  loose  the  bark;  such  voyage  itself  is  rest, 

Majestic  motion,  unimpeded  scope, 

A  widening  heaven,  a  current  without  care. 

Eternity! — Deliverance,  Promise,  Course! 

Time-tired  souls  salute  thee  from  the  shore. 

Joseph  Broic'iilcc  Brown  [1824-188 


REQUIEM 

Hush  your  prayers,  'tis  no  saintly  soul 
Comes  fainting  back  from  the  foughtcu  field; 
Carry  me  forth  on  my  broken  shield ; 
Trumpet  and  drum  shall  my  rcciuiem  yield — 
Silence  the  bells  that  toll. 

Dig  no  hole  in  the  ground  for  me: 
Though  my  body  be  made  of  mold  and  must. 
Ne'er  in  the  earth  shall  my  dead  bones  rust; 
Give  my  corse  to  the  flame's  white  lust. 
And  sink  my  ashes  at  sea. 

Reeking  still  with  the  sweat  of  the  strife, 
Never  a  prayer  have  I  to  say 
(My  lips  long  since  have  forgotten  the  way) 
Save  this:  "I  have  sorrowed  sore  in  my  day— 
But  I  thank  Thee,  God,  for  my  life!" 

F.  Norreys  Connell  [18 


INVICTUS 

Out  of  the  night  that  covers  me. 
Black  as  the  pit  from  pole  to  pole, 

I  thank  whatever  gods  may  be 
For  my  unconquerable  soul. 


"A   Late   Lark  Twitters"  3501 

In  the  fell  clutch  of  cucumstance 

I  have  not  winced  nor  cried  aloud. 
Under  the  bludgeonings  of  chance 

My  head  is  bloody,  but  unbowed. 

i-  ( 
Beyond  this  place  of  wrath  and  tears 

Looms  but  the  Horror  of  the  shade, 
And  3'ct  the  menace  of  the  years 

Finds  and  shall  find  me  unafraid. 

It  matters  not  how  strait  the  gate, 

How  charged  with  punishments  the  scroll, 

I  am  the  master  of  my  fate: 
I  am  the  captain  of  my  soul. 

William  Ernest  Ilcnley  [1849-1903] 


^'A  LATE  LARK  TWITTERS   FROM   THE 
QUIET  SKIES" 

A  LATE  lark  twitters  from  the  quiet  skies; 

And  from  the  west, 

Where  the  sun,  his  day's  work  ended, 

Lingers  as  in  content, 

There  falls  on  the  old,  gray  city 

An  influence  luminous  and  serene, 

A  shining  peace. 

The  smoke  ascends 

In  a  rosy-and-goldcn  haze.    The  spires 

Shine,  and  are  changed.    In  the  valley 

Shadows  rise.    The  lark  sings  on.    The  sun, 

Closing  his  benediction,  n  j.iaO 

Sinks,  and  the  darkerung  air 

Thrills  with  a  sense  of  the  triumphing  night — 

Night  with  her  train  of  stars 

And  her  great  gift  of  sleep. 

So  be  my  passing! 

My  task  accomplished  and  the  long  day  done, 


3502  "One   Fight  More" 

My  wages  taken,  and  in  my  heart 

Some  late  lark  singing, 

Let  me  be  gathered  to  the  quiet  west, 

The  sundown  splendid  and  serene, 

Death. 

William  Ernest  Henley  [1849-1903] 


"IN  AFTER  DAYS" 

In  after  days  when  grasses  high 
O'er-top  the  stone  where  I  shall  lie. 
Though  ill  or  well  the  world  adjust 
My  slender  claim  to  honored  dust, 
I  shall  not  question  or  reply. 

I  shall  not  see  the  morning  sky; 
I  shall  not  hear  the  night-wind  sigh; 
I  shall  be  mute,  as  all  men  must 
In  after  days! 

But  yet,  now  living,  fain  were  I 
That  some  one  then  should  testify. 
Saying — "He  held  his  pen  in  trust 
To  Art,  not  serving  shame  or  lust." 
Will  none? — Then  let  my  memory  die 
In  after  days! 

Austin  Dobson  [1840- 


"CALL  ME  NOT  DEAD" 

Call  me  not  dead  when  I,  indeed,  have  gone 
Into  the  company  of  the  everliving 
High  and  most  glorious  poets!    Let  thanksgiving 
Rather  be  made.    Say:  "He  at  last  hath  won 
Rest  and  release,  converse  supremic  and  wise, 
Music  and  song  and  light  of  immortal  faces; 
To-day,  perhaps,  wandering  in  starry  places. 
He  hath  met  Keats,  and  known  him  by  his  eyes. 


Epilogue  3  503 

To-morrow  (who  can  say?)  Shakespeare  may  pass, 
And  our  lost  friend  just  catch  one  syllable 
Of  that  three-centuried  wit  that  kept  so  well; 
Or  Milton;  or  Dante,  looking  on  the  grass 
Thinking  of  Beatrice,  and  hstening  still 
To  chanted  hymns  that  sound  from  the  heavenly  hill." 
Rich.ard  Walsoii  Gilder  [1844-1009] 


EPILOGUE 

From  "  Asolando  " 

At  the  midnight  in  the  silence  of  the  sleep-time, 

When  you  set  your  fancies  free. 
Will  they  pass   to  where — by  death,  fools  think,  impris- 
oned— 
Low  he  lies  who  once  so  loved  you,  whom  you  loved  so, 
— Pity  me? 

3h  to  love  so,  be  so  loved,  yet  so  mistaken! 

What  had  I  on  earth  to  do 
IVith  the  slothful,  with  the  mawkish,  the  unmanly? 
Like  the  aimless,  helpless,  hopeless,  did  I  drivel 
— Being — who? 

Dne  who  never  turned  his  back  but  marched  breast  for- 
ward. 
Never  doubted  clouds  would  break, 
Never  dreamed,  though  right  were  worsted,  wrong  would 

triumph, 
Held  we  fall  to  rise,  are  baffled  to  tight  better. 
Sleep  to  wake. 

STo,  at  noonday  in  the  bustle  of  man's  work-time 

Greet  the  unseen  with  a  cheer! 
Bid  him  forward,  breast  and  back  as  either  should  be, 
'Strive  and  thrive!"  cry  "Speed, — fight  on,  fare  ever 
There  as  here!" 

Robert  Browning  [  1 8 1 2- 1 889] 


3 504  "One   Fight   More" 


CROSSING  THE  BAR 

Sunset  and  evening  star, 

And  one  clear  call  for  me! 
And  may  there  be  no  moaning  of  the  bar, 
/When  I  put  out  to  sea, 

But  such  a  tide  as  moving  seems  asleep, 

Too  full  for  sound  and  foam, 
When  that  which  drew  from  out  the  boundless  deep 

Turns  again  home. 

Twilight  and  evening  bell, 

And  after  that  the  dark! 
And  m.ay  there  be  no  sadness  of  farewell, 

When  I  embark; 

For  though  from  out  our  bourne  of  Time  and  Place 

The  flood  may  bear  me  far, 
I  hope  to  see  my  Pilot  face  to  face 

When  I  have  crossed  the  bar. 

:  ,  J  . . 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892] 


L'ENVOI 

When  Earth's  last  picture  is  painted,  and  the  tubes  are 

twisted  and  dried, 
When  the  oldest  colors  have  faded,  and  the  youngest  critic 

has  died. 
We  shall  rest,  and,  faith,  we  shall  need  it — lie  down  for  an 

eon  or  two. 
Till  the  Master  of  All  Good  Workmen  shall  set  us  to  work 

anew! 

And  those  that  were  good  shall  be  happy:  they  .sh,^U  sit  in  a 
golden  chair;  '^  f,^^  ., 

They  shall  splash  at  a  ten-league  canvas  with  brushes  of 
comets'  hair; 


Envoi         '^  '*  35^5 

rhey  shall  find  real  saints  to  draw  from — Magdalene,  Peter, 

and  Paul; 
rhey  shall  work  for  an  age  at  a  sitting  and  never  be  tired  at 

all! 

\nd  only  the  INIaster  shall  praise  us,  and  only  the  Master 
shall  blame; 

\nd  no  one  shall  work  for  money,  and  no  one  shall  work 
for  fame; 

jut  each  for  the  joy  of  the  working,  and  each,  in  his  sepa- 
rate star 

shall  draw  the  Thing  as  he  sees  It  for  the  God  of  Things  as 
They  Are! 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 
■  .fft  (j-jo//  Jon     ■ 

ENVOI 

Oh  seek  me  not  within  a  tomb; 
Thou  shalt  not  find  me  in  the  clay! 
I  pierce  a  little  wall  of  gloom 
To  mingle  with  the  Day! 

I  brothered  with  the  things  that  pass, 
Poor  giddy  Joy  and  puckered  Grief; 
I  go  to  brother  with  the  Grass 
And  with  the  sunning  Leaf. 

Not  Death  can  sheathe  me  in  a  shroud; 
A  joy-sword  whetted  keen  with  pain, 
I  join  the  armies  of  the  Cloud, 
The  Lightning  and  the  Rain. 

Oh  subtle  in  the  sap  athrill, 
Athletic  in  the  glad  uplift, 
A  portion  of  the  Cosmic  Will, 
I  pierce  the  planet-drift. 

My  God  and  I  shall  interknit 
As  rain  and  Ocean,  breath  and  Air; 
And  Oh,  the  luring  thought  of  it  '^' 

Is  prayer!  ■    '"  -'.'^'-IH'    ••  '  // 

John  G.  Neihardt  [1881- 


35o6  "One   Fight   More" 


GREEK  FOLK  SONG 

Under  dusky  laurel  leaf, 

Scarlet  leaf  of  rose, 
I  lie  prone,  who  have  known 

All  a  woman  knows. 

Love  and  grief  and  motherhood, 
Fame  and  mirth  and  scorn — 

These  are  all  shall  befall 
Any  woman  born. 

Jewel-laden  are  my  hands, 

Tall  my  stone  above — 
Do  not  weep  that  I  sleep, 

Who  was  wise  in  love. 

Where  I  walk,  a  shadow  gray 

Through  gray  asphodel, 
I  am  glad,  who  have  had 

All  that  Hfe  can  tell. 

Margaret  Widdemer  [if 


"WHEN  I  AM  DEAD  AND  SISTER  TO  THE  DUST" 

When  I  am  dead  and  sister  to  the  dust; 

When  no  more  avidly  I  drink  the  wine 

Of  human  love;  when  the  pale  Proserpine 
Has  covered  me  with  poppies,  and  cold  rust 
Has  cut  my  lyre-strings,  and  the  sun  has  thrust 

Me  underground  to  nourish  the  world-vine. 

Men  shall  discover  these  old  songs  of  mine, 
And  say:  This  woman  lived — as  poets  must! 
This  woman  lived  and  wore  life  as  a  sword 

To  conquer  wisdom;  this  dead  woman  read 
In  the  sealed  Book  of  Love  and  underscored 

The  meanings.    Then  the  sails  of  faith  she  spread, 
And  faring  out  for  regions  unexplored. 

Went  singing  down  the  River  of  the  Dead. 

Els  a  Barker  [i8 


The  Stirrup  Cup  3507 


A  PARTING  GUEST 

What  delightful  hosts  are  they — 

Life  and  Love! 
Lingeringly  I  turn  away, 

This  late  hour,  yet  glad  enough 
They  have  not  withheld  from  me 

Their  high  hospitality. 
So,  with  face  lit  with  delight 

And  all  gratitude,  I  stay 

Yet  to  press  their  hands  and  say, 
"Thanks.— So  fine  a  time!    Good  night." 

James  Whitcomb  Riley  [1857-1916] 


THE  STIRRUP  CUP 

My  short  and  happy  day  is  done. 
The  long  and  dreary  night  comes  on; 
And  at  my  door  the  Pale  Horse  stands, 
To  carry  me  to  unknown  lands. 

His  whinny  shrill,  his  pawing  hoof, 
Sound  dreadful  as  a  gathering  storm; 
And  I  must  leave  this  sheltering  roof. 
And  joys  of  life  so  soft  and  warm. 

Tender  and  warm  the  joys  of  life, — 
Good  friends,  the  faithful  and  the  true; 
My  rosy  children  and  my  wife, 
So  sweet  to  kiss,  so  fair  to  view. 

So  sweet  to  kiss,  so  fair  to  view, — 
The  night  comes  down,  the  lights  burn  blue; 
And  at  my  door  the  Pale  Horse  stands. 
To  bear  me  forth  to  unknown  lands. 

John  Hav  [i  838-1905] 


1^ 


•■Qilah  tah7/ 

"THEY  ARE  ALL  GONE" 

FRIENDS  DEPARTED 

They  are  all  gone  into  the  world  of  lights 

And  I  alone  sit  lingering  here ; 
Their  very  memory  is  fair  and  bright, 
And  my  sad  thoughts  doth  clear. 

It  glows  and  glitters  in  my  cloudy  breast, 

Like  stars  upon  some  gloomy  grove, 
Or  those  faint  beams  in  which  this  hill  is  dressed 
After  the  sun's  remove.HIT3  3HT 

I  see  them  walking  in  an  air  of  glory,  M 

Whose  light  doth  trample  on  my  days:  ' ' 

My  days,  which  are  at  best  but  dull  and  hoary,    - 
Mere  glimmering  and  decays.  ■ ' '' 

0  holy  Hope!  and  high  Humility,  '  i 

High  as  the  heavens  above! 
These  are  your  walks,  and  you  have  showed  them  me, 
To  kindle  my  cold  love. 

Dear,  beauteous  Death!  the  jewel  of  the  Just! 

Shining  nowhere,  but  in  the  dark; 

What  mysteries  do  lie  beyond  thy  dust. 

Could  man  outlook  that  mark! 

He  that  hath  found  some  fledged  bird's  nest  may  know. 

At  first  sight,  if  the  bird  be  flown; 
But  what  fair  dell  or  grove  he  sings  in  now. 
That  is  to  him  unknown. 

And  yet,  as  Angels  in  some  brighter  dreams 

Call  to  the  soul,  when  man  doth  sleep, 
So  some  strange  thoughts  transcend  our  wonted  themes. 
And  into  glory  peep. 

3508 


Over  the   River 


3509 


If  a  star  were  confined  into  a  tomb, 

Her  captive  flames  must  needs  bum  there; 
But  when  the  hand  that  locked  her  up  gives  room. 
She'll  shine  through  all  the  sphere. 

0  Father  of  eternal  life,  and  all 

Created  glories  under  Thee ! 
Resume  Thy  spirit  from  this  world  of  thrall 
Into  true  liberty. 

Either  disperse  these  mists,  which  blot  and  fill 

My  perspective  still  as  they  pass: 
Or  else  remove  me  hence  unto  that  hiU, 
WTiere  I  shall  need  no  glass. 

Henry  Vaughan  [1622-1695] 


"0\TR  THE  RRTR" 

Over  the  river  they  beckon  to  me, — 

Loved  ones  who've  crossed  to  the  farther  side; 
The  gleam  of  their  snowy  robes  I  see. 

But  their  voices  are  drowned  in  the  rushing  tide. 
There's  one  with  ringlets  of  sunny  gold, 

And  eyes  the  reflection  of  heaven's  own  blue; 
He  crossed  in  the  twilight  gray  and  cold. 

And  the  pale  mist  hid  him  from  mortal  view. 
We  saw  not  the  angels  who  met  him  there. 

The  gates  of  the  city  we  could  not  see: 
Over  the  river,  over  the  river, 

My  brother  stands  waiting  to  welcome  me. 

0\Tr  the  river  the  boatman  pale 

Carried  another,  the  household  pet ; 
Her  brown  curls  waved  in  the  gentle  gale, — 

Darling  Minnie !  I  see  her  yet. 
She  crossed  on  her  bosom  her  dimpled  hands. 

And  fearlessly  entered  the  phantom  bark; 
We  watched  it  glide  from  the  silver  sands. 

And  all  our  sunshine  grew  strangely  dark. 


35  lo  "They  Are  All   Gone  ' 

Wc  know  she  is  safe  on  the  farlhcr  side, 
Where  uU  the  ransomed  and  angels  be: 

Over  the  river,  the  mystic  river, 

My  childhood's  idol  is  waiting  for  nie. 

For  none  return  from  those  quiet  shores, 

Who  cross  with  the  boatman  cokl  and  pale; 
We  hear  the  (Up  of  the  golden  oars, 

And  catch  a  gleam  of  the  snowy  sail; 
And  lo!  they  have  passed  from  our  yearning  hearts. 

They  cross  the  stream  and  are  gone  for  aye. 
We  may  not  sunder  the  veil  apart 

That  hides  from  our  vision  the  gates  of  day; 
We  o^ily  know  that  their  barks  no  more 

May  sail  with  us  o'er  life's  stormy  sea; 
Yet  somewhere,  1  know,  on  the  unseen  shore. 

They  watch,  and  beckon,  and  wait  for  me. 

And  I  sit  and  think,  when  the  sunset's  gold 

Is  Hushing  river  and  hill  iind  shore, 
I  shall  one  day  stand  by  the  water  cold. 

And  list  for  the  sound  of  the  boatman's  oar; 
I  shall  watch  for  a  gleam  of  the  flapping  sail, 

I  shall  hear  the  boat  as  it  gains  the  strand, 
I  shall  pass  from  sight  with  the  boatman  i)ale. 

To  the  better  shore  of  the  spirit  land. 
I  .shall  know  the  loved  who  have  gone  before, 

And  joyfully  sweet  will  the  meeting  be. 
When  over  the  river,  the  [)eaceful  river. 

The  angel  of  death  shall  carry  me. 

Nancy  Woodbury  J'riest  [18,10-1870] 


RKSKiNAIION 

Therf.  is  no  llock,  however  watched  and  tended. 

But  one  dead  lamb  is  there! 
There  is  no  fireside,  howsoe'er  defended. 

But  has  one  vacant  chair! 


Resignation  3S^^ 


The  air  is  full  of  farewells  to  the  dyiiifi, 

Ami  niovirnings  for  the  dead; 
The  heart  of  Rachel,  for  her  i  hildren  crying, 

Will  not  be  comforted! 

Let  us  be  patient!     These  severe  afflictions 

Not  from  the  ground  arise, 
But  oftentimes  celestial  benedictions 

Assume  this  dark  disguise. 

Wc  sec  but  dimly  through  the  mists  and  vapors; 

Amid  these  earthly  damps 
What  seem  to  us  but  sad,  funereal  tapers 

May  be  heaven's  distant  lamps. 

There  is  no  Death!     What  seems  so  is  transition; 

This  life  of  mortal  breath 
Is  but  a  suburb  of  the  life  elysian 

Wliost'  jjorlal  we  call  Death. 

She  is  not  dead,     the  child  of  our  affection, — 

Hut  gone  unto  that  school 
Where  she  no  longer  needs  our  poor  protection. 

And  Christ  himself  doth  rule. 

In  that  great  cloister's  stillness  and  seclusion, 

By  guardian  angels  led, 
Safe  from  temptation,  safe  from  sin's  pollution, 

She  lives,  whom  wc  call  di'ad. 

Day  after  day  we  think  what  slu-  is  doing 

In  those  i)rigiil  realms  of  air; 
Year  after  year,  her  tender  steps  pursuing. 

Behold  her  grown  more  fair. 

Thus  do  we  walk  with  her  and  keej)  unbroken 

The  bond  which  nature  gives, 
'i'hinking  that  our  remembrance,  though  uns|)(;ken, 

May  reach  her  where  she  lives. 


3512  "They  Are  All   Gone' 

Not  as  a  child  shall  we  again  behold  her;' 

For  when  with  raptures  wild 
In  our  embraces  we  again  enfold  her, 

She  will  not  be  a  child; 

But  a  fair  maiden,  in  her  Father's  mansion, 

Clothed  with  celestial  grace; 
And  beautiful  with  all  the  soul's  expansion 

Shall  we  behold  her  face. 

And  though  at  times  impetuous  with  emotion 

And  anguish  long  suppressed, 
The  swelling  heart  heaves  moaning  like  the  ocean, 

That  cannot  be  at  rest, — 

We  will  be  patient,  and  assuage  the  feeling 

We  may  not  wholly  stay; 
By  silence  sanctifying,  not  concealing. 

The  grief  that  must  have  way. 

Henry  Wadsivorth  Longfdloiv  [1807-1882] 


AFTERWARD 

There  is  no  vacant  chair.     The  loving  meet, 
A  group  unbroken — smitten,  who  knows  how? 

One  sitteth  silent  only,  in  his  usual  seat ; 

We  gave  him  once  that  freedom.     Why  not  now? 

Perhaps  he  is  too  weary,  and  needs  rest; 

He  needed  it  so  often,  nor  could  we 
Bestow.     God  gave  it,  knowing  how  to  do  so  best. 

Which  of  us  would  disturb  him?     Let  him  be. 

There  is  no  vacant  chair.     If  he  will  take 

The  mood  to  listen  mutely,  be  it  done. 
By  his  least  mood  we  crossed,  for  which  the  heart  must 
ache. 

Plead  not  nor  question!     Let  him  have  this  one. 


Sometime  35^3 

Death  is  a  mood  of  life.     Il  is  no  whim 

By  which  Hfe's  Giver  mocks  a  broken  heart. 

Death  is  Hfe's  reticence.     Still  audible  to  Him, 
The  hushed  voice,  happy,  speaketh  on,  apart. 

There  is  no  vacant  chair.     To  love  is  still  / 

To  have.     Nearer  to  memory  than  to  eye. 

And  dearer  yet  to  anguish  than  to  comfort,  will 
We  hold  by  our  love,  that  shall  not  die. 

For  while  it  doth  not,  thus  he  cannot.     Try! 

Who  can  put  out  the  motion  or  the  smile? 
The  old  ways  of  being  noble  all  with  him  laid  by? 

Because  we  love,*  he  is.    Then  trust  awhile. 

Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps  Ward  [1844-1911] 


SOMETIME 

Sometime,  when  all  life's  lessons  have  been  learned, 

And  sun  and  stars  forevermore  have  set. 
The  things  which  our  weak  judgments  here  have  spurned, 

The  things  o'er  which  we  grieved  with  lashes  wet, 
Will  flash  before  us  out  of  life's  dark  night. 

As  stars  shine  most  in  deeper  tints  of  blue; 
And  we  shall  see  how  all  God's  plans  are  right, 

And  how  what  seemed  reproof  was  love  most  true. 

And  we  shall  see  how,  while  we  frown  and  sigh, 

God's  plans  go  on  as  best  for  you  and  me; 
How,  w'hen  we  called.  He  heeded  not  our  cry, 

Because  His  wisdom  to  the  end  could  see. 
And  e'en  as  prudent  parents  disallow 

Too  much  of  sweet  to  craving  babyhood, 
So  God,  perhaps,  is  keeping  from  us  now 

Life's  sweetest  things,  because  it  seemeth  good. 

And  if,  sometimes,  commingled  with  life's  wine. 
We  find  the  wormwood,  and  rebel  and  shrink, 

Be  sure  a  wiser  hand  than  yours  or  mine 
Pours  out  the  potion  for  our  lips  to  drink; 


3514  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

And  if  some  friend  you  love  is  lying  low, 
Where  human  kisses  cannot  reach  his  face, 

Oh,  do  not  blame  the  loving  Father  so, 
But  wear  your  sorrow  with  obedient  grace! 

And  you  shall  shortly  know  that  lengthened  breath 

Is  not  the  sweetest  gift  God  sends  His  friend, 
And  that,  sometimes,  the  sable  pall  of  death 

Conceals  the  fairest  boon  His  love  can  send. 
If  we  could  push  ajar  the  gates  of  life. 

And  stand  within  and  all  God's  workings  see, 
We  could  interpret  all  this  doubt  and  strife 

And  for  each  mystery  could  find  a  key. 

But  not  to-day.    Then  be  content,  poor  heart; 

God's  plans,  like  lilies  pure  and  white,  unfold; 
We  must  not  tear  the  close-shut  leaves  apart, — • 

Time  will  reveal  the  chalices  of  gold. 
And  if,  through  .patient  toil,  we  reach  the  land 

Where  tired  feet,  with  sandals  loosed,  may  rest, 
When  we  shall  clearly  see  and  understand, 

I  think  that  we  will  say,  "God  knew  the  best!" 
May  Riley  Smith  [1842- 


"THE  MOURNERS  CAME  AT  BREAK  OF 
DAY" 

The  mourners  came  at  break  of  day 

Unto  the  garden-sepulcher; 
With  darkened  hearts  to  weep  and  pray, 
For  Him,  the  loved  one  buried  there. 
What  radiant  light  dispels  the  gloom? 
An  angel  sits  beside  the  tomb. 

The  earth  doth  mourn  her  treasures  lost, 

All  sepulchered  beneath  the  snow; 

When  wintry  winds,  and  chilling  frost 

Have  laid  her  summer  glories  low; 

The  spring  returns,  the  flowerets  bloom — 
An  angel  sits  beside  the  tomb. 


A  Sea   Uirge  3S^5 

Then  mourn  we  not  beloved  dead, 

E'en  while  we  come  to  weep  and  pray; 
The  happy  spirit  far  hath  fled 

To  brighter  realms  of  endless  day: 
Immortal  Hope  dispels  the  gloom! 
An  angel  sits  beside  the  tomb. 

Sarah  Flower  Adams  [1805-1848] 


WHAT  OF  THE  DARKNESS? 

TO  THE  HAPPY  DEAD  PEOPLE 

What  of  the  darkness?     Is  it  very  fair? 

Are  there  great  calms?  and  find  we  silence  there? 

Like  soft-shut  liHes,  all  your  faces  glow 

With  some  strange  peace  our  faces  never  know, 

With  some  strange  faith  our  faces  never  dare, — 

Dwells  it  in  Darkness?     Do  you  find  it  there? 

Is  it  a  Bosom  where  tired  heads  ma^'  he? 

Is  it  a  Mouth  to  kiss  our  weeping  dry? 

Is  it  a  Hand  to  still  the  pulse's  leap? 

Is  it  a  Voice  that  holds  the  runes  of  sleep? 

Day  shows  us  not  such  comfort  anywhere — 

Dwells  it  in  Darkness?     Do  you  find  it  there? 

Out  of  the  Day's  deceiving  light  we  call — 

Day  that  shows  man  so  great,  and  God  so  small, 

That  hides  the  stars,  and  magnifies  the  grass — 

O  is  the  Darkness  too  a  lying  glass! 

Or  undistracted,  do  you  find  truth  there? 

What  of  the  Darkness?     Is  it  very  fair? 

Richard  Le  Gallienne  [1866- 

A  SEA  DIRGE 

From  "  The  Tempest  " 

Full  fathom  five  thy  father  lies: 
Of  his  bones  are  coral  made; 

Those  are  pearls  that  were  his  eyes: 
Nothing  of  him  that  doth  fade, 


35 1 6  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

But  doth  suffer  a  sea-change 
Into  something  rich  and  strange. 
Sea-nymphs  hourly  ring  his  knell: 
Ha!rk!  now  I  hear  them, — 
Ding,  dong,  BelL 

Willidm  Shakespeare  [1564-1616] 

EPITAPHS 

I — ON  ELIZABETH   L.  H. 

WouLDST  thou  hear  what  Man  can  say 

In  a  little?    Reader,  stay. 

Underneath  this  stone  doth  lie 

As  much  Beauty  as  could  die: 

Which  in  life  did  harbor  give 

To  more  Virtue  than  doth  live. 

If  at  all  she  had  a  fault , 

Leave  it  buried  in  this  vault. 

One  name  was  Elizabeth, 

The  other,  let  it  sleep  with  death: 

Fitter,  where  it  died,  to  tell 

Than  that  it  lived  at  all.    Farewell. 

II — ON    SALATHIEL    PAVY,    A    CHILD    OF    QUEEN    ELIZABETH'S 
CHAPEL 

Weep  with  me,  all  you  that  read 

This  little  story; 
•'''^'''And  know,  for  whom  a  tear  you  shed 

Death's  self  is  sorry. 
'Twas  a  child  that  so  did  thrive 

In  grace  and  feature, 
As  Heaven  and  Nature  seemed  to  strive 

Which  owned  the  creature. 
Years  he  numbered  scarce  thirteen 

When  Fates  turned  cruel. 
Yet  three  filled  zodiacs  had  he  been 

The  stage's  jewel ; 
And  did  act  (what  now  we  moan) 

Old  men  so  duly, 
As  sooth  the  Parcae  thought  him  one, 

He  played  so  truly. 


On  the   Tombs  in   Westminster     3517 

So,  by  error,  to  his  fate 

They  all  consented; 
But,  viewing  him  since,  alas,  too  late! 

They  have  repented; 
And  have  sought,  to  give  new  birth. 

In  baths  to  steep  him; 
But,  being  so  much  too  good  for  earth. 

Heaven  vows  to  keep  him. 

Ben  Jonson  [i573?-i637] 

SONG 

From  "The  Devil's  Law  Case  " 

All  the  flowers  of  the  spring 

Meet  to  perfume  our  burying; 

These  have  but  their  growing  prime, 

And  man  does  flourish  but  his  time: 

Survey  our  progress  from  our  birth — 

We  are  set,  we  grow,  we  turn  to  earth. 

Courts  adieu,  and  all  delights. 

All  bewitching  appetites! 

Sweetest  breath  and  clearest  eye 

Like  perfumes  go  out  and  die; 

And  consequently  this  is  done 

As  shadows  wait  upon  the  sun. 

Vain  the  ambition  of  kings 

Who  seek  by  trophies  and  dead  things 

To  leave  a  living  name  behind. 

And  weave  but  nets  to  catch  the  wind. 

John  Webster  [is8o?-i625?] 

ON  THE  TOMBS   IN  WESTMINSTER 

Mortality,  behold  and  fear! 

What  a  change  of  flesh  is  here! 

Think  how  many  royal  bones 

Sleep  within  this  heap  of  stones; 

Here  they  lie  had  realms  and  lands. 

Who  now  want  strength  to  stir  their  hands; 

Where  from  their  pulpits  sealed  with  dust 

They  preach,  "In  greatness  is  no  trust." 


35i8  "They -Are  All   Gone"" 

Here's  an  acre  sown  indeed 

With  the  richest  royal'st  seed 

That  the  earth  did  e'er  suck  in, 

Since  the  first  man  died  for  sin; 

Here  the  bones  of  birth  have  cried, 

"Though  gods  they  were,  as  men  they  died." 

Here  are  sands,  ignoble  things, 

Dropped  from  the  ruined  sides  of  kings. 

Here's  a  world  of  pomp  and  state, 

Buried  in  dust,  once  dead  by  fate. 

Francis  Beaumont  [1584-1616] 

EPITAPH  ON  THE   COUNTESS  DOWAGER 
OF  PEMBROKE 

Undeeneath  this  sable  hearse 
Lies  the  subject  of  all  verse : 
Sidney's  sister,  Pembroke's  mother: 
Death,  ere  thou  hast  slain  another, 
Fair,  and  learned,  and  good  as  she, 
Time  shall  throw  a  dart  at  thee. 

Marble  piles  let  no  man  raise 
To  her  name:  in  after  days, 
Some  kind  woman  born  as  she, 
Reading  this,  like  Niobe 
Shall  turn  marble,  and  become 
Both  her  mourner  and  her  tomb. 

William  Browne  [1591-1643?] 

AN  EPITAPH  INTENDED   FOR  HIMSELF 

Like  thee  I  once  have  stemmed  the  sea  of  life. 
Like  thee  have  languished  after  empty  joys, 

Like  thee  have  labored  in  the  stormy  strife, 
Been  grieved  for  trifles,  and  amused  with  toys. 

Forget  my  frailties;  thou  art  also  frail: 
Forgive  my  lapses;  for  thyself  may'st  fall: 

Nor  read  unmoved  my  artless  tender  tale— 
I  was  a  friend,  O  man,  to  thee,  to  all. 

James  Beatlie  [1735-1803] 


Lycidas  35^9 


LYCIDAS 

A   LAMENT   FOR   A   FRIEND   DROWNED   IN   HIS   PASSAGE 
FROM   CHESTER    ON   THE   IRISH   SEAS,    1 63  7 

Yet  once  more,  O  ye  Laurels,  and  once  more 
Ye  Myrtles  brown,  with  Ivy  never  sere, 
I  come  to  pluck  your  Berries  harsh  and  crude, 
And  with  forced  fingers  rude, 
Shatter  your  leaves  before  the  mellowing  year. 
Bitter  constraint,  and  sad  occasion  dear, 
Compels  me  to  disturb  your  season  due: 
For  Lycidas  is  dead,  dead  ere  his  prime. 
Young  Lycidas,  and  hath  not  left  his  peer: 
Who  would  not  sing  for  Lycidas?  he  knew 
Himself  to  sing,  and  build  the  lofty  rhyme. 
He  must  not  float  upon  his  watery  bier 
Unwept,  and  welter  to  the  parching  wind, 
Without  the  meed  of  some  melodious  tear. 

Begin,  then,  Sisters  of  the  sacred  well. 
That  from  beneath  the  seat  of  Jove  doth  spring; 
Begin,  and  somewhat  loudly  sweep  the  string. 
Hence  with  denial  vain,  and  coy  excuse, 
So  may  some  gentle  Muse 
With  lucky  words  favor  my  destined  Urn, 
And  as  he  passes  turn, 
And  bid  fair  peace  be  to  my  sable  shroud. 
For  we  were  nursed  upon  the  self-same  hill, 
Fed  the  same  flock,  by  fountain,  shade,  and  rill; 
Together  both,  ere  the  high  Lawns  appeared 
Under  the  opening  e3'e-lids  of  the  Morn, 
We  drove  a-field,  and  both  together  heard 
What  time  the  Gray-fly  winds  her  sultry  horn, 
Battening  our  flocks  with  the  fresh  dews  of  night,, 
Oft  till  the  Star  that  rose,  at  Evening,  bright 
Toward  Heaven's  descent  had  sloped  his  westering  wheel. 
Meanwhile  the  Rural  ditties  were  not  mute, 
Tempered  to  the  Oaten  Flute; 
Rough  Satyrs  danced,  and  Fauns  with  cloven  heel. 


3520  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

From  the  glad  sound  would  not  be  absent  long, 
And  old  Damaetas  loved  to  hear  our  song. 

But  O  the  heavy  change,  now  thou  art  gone. 
Now  thou  art  gone,  and  never  must  return ! 
Thee,  Shepherd,  thee  the  Woods,  and  desert  Caves, 
With  wild  Thyme  and  the  gadding  Vine  o'ergrown, 
And  all  their  echoes  mourn. 
The  Willows,  and  the  Hazel  Copses  green, 
Shall  now  no  more  be  seen. 
Fanning  their  joyous  Leaves  to  thy  soft  lays. 
As  killing  as  the  Canker  to  the  Rose, 
Or  Taint-worm  to  the  weanling  Herds  that  graze. 
Or  Frost  to  Flowers,  that  their  gay  wardrobe  wear, 
Wlien  first  the  White-thorn  blows; 
Such,  Lycidas,  thy  loss  to  Shepherd's  ear. 

Where  were  ye,  Nymphs,  when  the  remorseless  deep 
Closed  o'er  the  head  of  your  loved  Lycidas? 
For  neither  were  ye  playing  on  the  steep. 
Where  your  old  Bards,  the  famous  Druids,  lie. 
Nor  on  the  shaggy  top  of  Mona  high, 
Nor  yet  where  Deva  spreads  her  wizard  stream: 
Aye  me,  I  fondly  dream ! 

Had  ye  been  there — for  what  could  that  have  done? 
What  could  the  Muse  herself  that  Orpheus  bore. 
The  Muse  herself,  for  her  enchanting  son 
Whom  Universal  nature  did  lament, 
When,  by  the  rout  that  made  the  hideous  roar. 
His  gory  visage  down  the  stream  was  sent, 
Down  the  swift  Hebrus  to  the  Lesbian  shore? 

Alas!    What  boots  it  with  uncessant  care 
To  tend  the  homely  slighted  Shepherd's  trade, 
And  strictly  meditate  the  thankless  Muse, 
Were  it  not  better  done,  as  others  use, 
To  sport  with  Amaryllis  in  the  shade, 
Or  with  the  tangles  of  Neaera's  hair? 
Fame  is  the  spur  that  the  clear  spirit  doth  raise 
(That  last  infirmity  of  Noble  mind) 
To  scorn  delights,  and  live  laborious  days; 
But  the  fair  Guerdon  when  we  hope  to  find, 
And  think  to  burst  out  into  sudden  blaze. 


Lycidas  35^^ 

Comes  the  blind  Fury  with  the  abhorred  shears, 

And  shts  the  thin-spun  life.    "But  not  the  praise," 

Pha-bus  rephcd,  and  touched  my  trembhng  ears; 

"  Fame  is  no  plant  that  grows  on  mortal  soil, 

Nor  in  the  ghstering  foil 

Set  off  to  the  world,  nor  in  broad  rumor  lies. 

But  lives  and  spreads  aloft  by  those  pure  eyes, 

And  perfect  witness  of  all-judging  Jove; 

As  he  pronounces  lastly  on  each  deed, 

Of  so  much  fame  in  Heaven  expect  thy  meed." 

O  fountain  Arethuse,  and  thou  honored  flood, 
Smooth-sliding  INIincius.  crowned  with  vocal  reeds, 
That  strain  I  heard  was  of  a  higher  mood: 
But  now  niy  Oat  proceeds. 
And  listens  to  the  Herald  of  the  Sea 
That  came  in  Neptune's  plea. 
He  asked  the  Waves,  and  asked  the  Felon  winds, 
What  hard  mishap  hath  doomed  this  gentle  swain? 
And  questioned  every  gust  of  rugged  wings 
That  blows  from  off  each  beaked  Promontory. 
They  knew  not  of  his  story, 
And  sage  Hippotades  their  answer  brings, 
That  not  a  blast  was  from  his  dungeon  strayed, 
The  Air  was  calm,  and  on  the  level  brine. 
Sleek  Panope  with  all  her  sisters  played. 
It  was  that  fatal  and  perfidious  Bark 
Built  in  the  eclipse,  and  rigged  with  curses  dark, 
That  sunk  so  low  that  sacred  head  of  thine. 

Next  Camus,  reverend  Sire,  went  footing  slow. 
His  INIantle  hairy,  and  his  Bonnet  sedge, 
Inwrought  with  figures  dim,  and  on  the  edge 
Like  to  that  sanguine  flower  inscribed  with  woe. 
"Ah,  who  hath  reft."  (quoth  he)  "my  dearest  pledge?" 
Last  come,  and  last  did  go, 
The  Pilot  of  the  Galilean  Lake. 
Two  massy  Keys  he  bore  of  metals  twain, 
(The  Golden  opes,  the  Iron  shuts  amain). 
He  shook  his  Mitered  locks,  and  stern  bespake, 
"How  well  could  I  have  spared  for  thee,  young  swain. 
Enow  of  such  as,  for  their  bellies'  sake. 


3522  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

Creep  and  intrude,  and  climb  into  the  fold! 

Of  other  care  they  little  reckoning  make, 

Than  how  to  scramble  at  the  shearers'  feast. 

And  shove  away  the  worthy  bidden  guest. 

Blind  mouths!  that  scarce  themselves  know  how  to  hold 

A  Sheep-hook,  or  have  learned  aught  else  the  least 

That  to  the  faithful  Herdman's  art  belongs! 

What  recks  it  them?    What  need  they?    They  are  sped; 

And  when  they  list,  their  lean  and  flashy  songs 

Grate  on  their  scrannel  Pipes  of  wretched  straw, 

The  hungry  Sheep  look  up,  and  are  not  fed, 

But  swoln  with  wind,  and  the  rank  mist  they  draw, 

Rot  inwardly,  and  foul  contagion  spread: 

Besides  what  the  grim  Wolf  with  privy  paw» 

Daily  devours  apace,  and  nothing  said. 

But  that  two-handed  engine  at  the  door, 

Stands  ready  to  smite  once,  and  smite  no  more." 

Return  Alpheus,  the  dread  voice  is  past, 
That  shrunk  thy  streams;  return  Sicilian  Muse, 
And  call  the  Vales,  and  bid  them  hither  cast 
Their  Bells,  and  Flowerets  of  a  thousand  hues. 
Ye  valleys  low,  where  the  mild  whispers  use, 
Of  shades  and  wanton  winds,  and  gushing  brooks. 
On  whose  fresh  lap  the  swart  Star  sparely  looks, 
Throw  hither  all  your  quaint  enameled  eyes, 
That  on  the  green  turf  suck  the  honied  showers. 
And  purple  all  the  ground  with  vernal  flowers. 
Bring  the  rathe  Primrose  that  forsaken  dies. 
The  tufted  Crow-toe,  and  pale  Jessamine, 
The  white  Pink,  and  the  Pansy  freaked  with  jet. 
The  glowing  Violet, 

The  Musk-rose,  and  the  well-attired  Woodbine, 
With  Cowslips  wan  that  hang  the  pensive  head, 
And  every  flower  that  sad  embroidery  wears: 
Bid  Amaranthus  all  his  beauty  shed. 
And  Daffadiilies  fill  their  cups  with  tears. 
To  strew  the  Laureate  Hearse  where  Lycid  hes. 
For  so  to  interpose  a  little  ease. 
Let  our  frail  thoughts  dally  with  false  surmise. 
Ay  me!     Whilst  thee  the  shores,  and  sounding  Seas 


Lycidas  35-3 

Wash  far  away,  where  e'er  thy  bones  are  hurled, 
Whether  beyond  the  stormy  Hebrides, 
Where  thou  perhaps  under  the  whelming  tide 
Visit'st  the  bottom  of  the  monstrous  world; 
Or  whether  thou,  to  our  moist  vows  denied, 
Sleep'st  by  the  fable  of  Bellerus  old. 
Where  the  great  vision  of  the  guarded  Mount 
Looks  toward  Namancos  and  Bayona's  hold; 
Look  homeward,  Angel,  now,  and  melt  with  ruth: 
And,  O  ye  Dolphins,  waft  the  hapless  youth. 

Weep  no  more,  woful  Shepherds,  weep  no  more. 
For  Lycidas  your  sorrow  is  not  dead. 
Sunk  though  he  be  beneath  the  watery  floor. 
So  sinks  the  day-star  in  the  Ocean  bed. 
And  yet  anon  repairs  his  drooping  head. 
And  tricks  his  beams,  and  with  new-spangled  Ore, 
Flames  in  the  forehead  of  the  morning  sky: 
So  Lycidas  sunk  low,  but  mounted  high. 
Through  the  dear  might  of  Him  that  walked  the  waves 
Where,  other  groves  and  other  streams  along, 
With  Nectar  pure  his  oozy  Locks  he  laves, 
And  hears  the  unexprcssive  nuptial  Song, 
In  the  blest  Kingdoms  meek  of  joy  and  love. 
There  entertain  him  all  the  Saints  above. 
In  solemn  troops,  and  sweet  Societies, 
That  sing,  and  singing  in  their  glory  move, 
And  wipe  the  tears  for  ever  from  his  eyes. 
Now,  Lycidas,  the  Shepherds  weep  no  more; 
Henceforth  thou  art  the  Genius  of  the  shore. 
In  thy  large  recompense,  and  shalt  be  good 
To  all  that  wander  in  that  perilous  flood. 

Thus  sang  the  uncout?i  Swain  to  the  Oaks  and  rills, 
While  the  still  morn  went  out  with  Sandals  gray, 
He  touched  the  tender  stops  of  various  Quills, 
With  eager  thought  warbling  his  Doric  lay: 
And  now  the  Sun  had  stretched  out  all  the  hills, 
And  now  was  dropt  into  the  Western  bay; 
At  last  he  rose,  and  twitched  his  Mantle  blue: 
To-morrow  to  fresh  Woods,  and  Pastures  new. 

John  Milton  [1608-1674] 


35^4  "They  Are  All  Gone 


TO  THE  PIOUS  MEMORY  OF  THE  ACCOMPLISHED 
YOUNG  LADY,  MRS.  ANNE  KILLIGREW,  EX- 
CELLENT IN  THE  TWO  SISTER-ARTS  OF 
POESIE  AND  PAINTING 


Thou  youngest  Virgin-Daughter  of  the  skies, 

Made  in  the  last  promotion  of  the  blest; 
Whose  palms,  new  plucked  from  Paradise, 
In  spreading  branches  more  sublimely  rise, 

Rich  with  immortal  green  above  the  rest: 
Whether,  adopted  to  some  neighboring  star, 
Thou  roU'st  above  us  in  thy  wandering  race, 

Or,  in  procession  fixed  and  regular. 
Moved  with  the  heavens'  majestic  pace; 

Or,  called  to  more  superior  bliss, 
Thou  tread'st,  with  seraphims,  the  vast  abyss: 
Whatever  happy  region  is  thy  place. 
Cease  thy  celestial  song  a  little  space; 
(Thou  wilt  have  time  enough  for  hymns  divine. 
Since  Heaven's  eternal  year  is  thine.) 
Hear  then  a  mortal  muse  thy  praise  rehearse 

In  no  ignoble  verse; 
But  such  as  thy  own  voice  did  practice  here. 
When  thy  first  fruits  of  poesie  were  given, 
To  make  thyself  a  welcome  inmate  there; 
While  yet  a  young  probationer, 
And  candidate  of  Heaven. 


If  by  traduction  came  thy  mind. 

Our  wonder  is  the  less  to  find 
A  soul  so  charming  from  a  stock  so  good; 
Thy  father  was  transfused  into  thy  blood: 
So  wert  thou  born  into  the  tuneful  strain, 
(An  early,  rich,  and  inexhausted  vein.) 

But  if  thy  pre-existing  soul 
Was  formed,  at  first,  with  myriads  more, 

It  did  through  all  the  mighty  poets  roll 


To  the   Memory  of  Mrs.    Killigrevv     3525 

Who  Greek  or  Latin  laurels  wore, 

And  was  that  Sappho  last,  which  once  it  was  before. 

If  so,  then  cease  thy  flight,  O  Heaven-born  mind!.;,/  -^^H 

Thou  hast  no  dross  to  purge  from  thy  rich  ore: 
Nor  can  thy  soul  a  fairer  mansion  find 
Than  was  the  beauteous  frame  she  left  behind: 

Return,  to  fill  or  mend  the  choir  of  thy  celestial  kind. 

May  we  presume  to  say,  that  at  thy  birth 
New  joy  was  sprung  in  Heaven  as  well  as  here  on  earth? 
For  sure  the  milder  planets  did  combine 
On  thy  auspicious  horoscope  to  shine,  , , 

And  even  the  most  malicious  were  in  trine. 
Thy  brother-angels  at  thy  birth 

Strung  each  his  lyre,  and  tuned  it  high, 

That  all  the  people  of  the  sky 
Might  know  a  poetess  was  born  on  earth. 

And  then  if  ever,  mortal  ears 

Had  heard  the  music  of  the  spheres! 

And  if  no  clustering  swarm  of  bees 
On  thy  sweet  mouth  distilled  their  golden  dew, 

'Twas  that,  such  vulgar  miracles 

Heaven  had  not  leisure  to  renew: 
For  all  the  blest  fraternity  of  love 
Solemnized  there  thy  birth,  and  kept  thy  holyday  above. 

IV 

O  gracious  God!  How  far  have  we 
Profaned  thy  Heavenly  gift  of  poesy! 
Made  prostitute  and  profligate  the  muse. 
Debased  to  each  obscene  and  impious  use, 
Whose  harmony  was  first  ordained  above. 
For  tongues  of  angels  and  for  hymns  of  love! 
Oh  wretched  we!  why  were  we  hurried  down 
This  lubrique  and  adulterate  age, 
(Nay,  added  fat  pollutions  of  our  own) 
To  increase  the  steaming  ordures  of  the  stage? 
What  can  we  say  to  excuse  our  second  fall? 
Let  this  thy  vestal,  Heaven,  atone  for  all : 


2S^^  .     w'^^'^'They  Are  All   Gone"     arii  o 

Her  Arethusian  stream  remains  unsoiled,        'i^rO  ,. 
Unmixed  with  foreign  filth  and  undefiled, 
Her  wit  was  more  than  man,  her  innocence  a  child. 


Art  she  had  none,  yet  wanted  none,  ,'         '       „ 

„  ,. ,   /  ,  ■?  oJ  .misisyl 

For  nature  did  that  want  supply: 

So  rich  in  treasures  of  her  own. 

She  might  our  boasted  stores  defy: 
Such  noble  vigor  did  her  verse  adorn. 
That  it  seemed  borrowed,  where  'twas  only  born. 
Her  morals  too  were  in  her  bosom  bred 

By  great  examples  daily  fed. 
What  in  the  best  of  books,  her  father's  life,  she  read. 

And  to  be  read  her  self  she  need  not  fear; 

Each  test,  and  every  light,  her  muse  will  bear,       '  -*■ 

Though  Epictetus  with  his  lamp  were  there.  irJilL 

Even  love  (for  love  sometimes  her  muse  expressed), 
Was  but  a  lambent-flame  which  played  about  her  breast: 
Light  as  the  vapors  of  a  morning  dream, 

So  cold  herself,  whilst  she  such  warmth  expressed, 
'Twas  Cupid  bathing  in  Diana's  stream. 

VI 

Born  to  the  spacious  empire  of  the  Nine, 

One  would  have  thought,  she  should  have  been  content 

To  manage  well  that  mighty  government; 

But  what  can  young  ambitious  souls  confine?  '•  ■  ' 

To  the  next  realm  she  stretched  her  sway. 

For  painting  near  adjoining  lay, 
A  plenteous  province,  and  alluring  prey.  . 

A  chamber  of  dependences  was  framed,  ■  oaodW 

(As  conquerors  will  never  want  pretence,  -^ '  -  'T 

When  armed,  to  justify  the  offence). 
And  the  whole  fief,  in  right  of  poetry  she  claimed,  u  culT 

The  country  open  lay  without  defence;  :  .ybM) 

For  poets  frequent  inroads  there  had  made,  rmi  oT 

And  perfectly  could  represent  "    '■' 

The  shape,  the  face,  with  every  lineament; 


To  the   Memory  of  Mrs.    Killigrew     3527 

And  all  the  large  domains  which  the  dumb-sister  swayed; 

All  bowed  beneath  her  government, 

Received  in  triumph  wheresoe'er  she  went. 
Her  pencil  drew  whate'er  her  soul  designed 
And  oft  the  happy  draught  surpassed  the  image  in  her  mind. 

The  sylvan  scenes  of  herds  and  flocks 

And  fruitfid  plains  and  barren  rocks, 

Of  shallow  brooks  that  flowed  so  clear. 

The  bottom  did  the  top  appear; 

Of  deeper  too  and  ampler  floods 

Which  as  in  mirrors,  showed  the  woods; 

Of  lofty  trees,  with  sacred  shades 

And  perspectives  of  pleasant  glades. 

Where  nymphs  of  brightest  form  appear, 

And  shaggy  satyrs  standing  near. 

Which  them  at  once  admire  and  fear. 

The  ruins  too  of  some  majestic  piece, 

Boasting  the  power  of  ancient  Rome  or  Greece, 

Whose  statues,  friezes,  columns,  broken  lie, 

And,  though  defaced,  the  wonder  of  the  eye; 

W^hat  nature,  art,  bold  fiction,  e'er  durst  frame, 

Her  forming  hand  gave  feature  to  the  name. 

So  strange  a  concourse  ne'er  was  seen  before, 
But  when  the  peopled  ark  the  whole  creation  bore. 


vn 

The  scene  then  changed;  with  bold  erected  look 
Our  martial  King  the  sight  with  reverence  slrook: 
For,  not  content  to  express  his  outward  part. 
Her  hand  called  out  the  image  of  his  heart, 
His  warlike  mind,  his  soul  devoid  of  fear. 
His  high-designing  thoughts  were  figured  there. 
As  when,  by  magic,  ghosts  are  made  appear. 
Our  phoenix  Queen  was  portrayed  too  so  bright. 
Beauty  alone  could  beauty  take  so  right  : 
Her  dress,  her  shape,  her  matchless  grace, 
Were  all  observed,  as  well  as  heavenly  face. 
With  such  a  peerless  majesty  she  stands, 
As  in  that  day  she  took  the  crown  from  sacred  hands: 


^528-     ■.'.-'«  They   Are  All   Gone",    arli  o 

Before  a  train  of  heroines  was  seen,  '  ^'''  "■ 

In  beauty  foremost,  as  in  rank,  the  Queen! 

Thus  nothing  to  her  genius  was  denied. 
But  hke  a  ball  of  fire,  the  farther  thrown, 
Still  with  a  greater  blaze  she  shone, 

And  her  bright  soul  broke  out  on  every  side.     ;    ,11  i 
What  next  she  had  designed,  Heaven  only  knowsd  firiA 
To  such  immoderate  growth  her  conquest  rose 
That  Fate  alone  its  progress  could  oppose. 

VIII 

Nov/  all  those  charms,  that  blooming  grace, 
The  well-proportioned  shape  and  beauteous  face. 
Shall  never  more  be  seen  by  mortal  eyes; 
In  earth  the  much-lamented  virgin  lies! 

Not  wit  nor  piety  could  Fate  prevent; 

Nor  was  the  cruel  destiny  content 

To  finish  all  the  murder  at  a  blow, 

To  sweep  at  once  her  life  and  beauty  too; 
But,  like  a  hardened  felon,  took  a  pride 

To  work  more  mischievously  slow, 
And  plundered  first,  and  then  destroyed. 
O  double  sacrilege  on  things  divine. 
To  rob  the  relique,  and  deface  the  shrine! 

But  thus  Orinda  died: 
Heaven,  by  the  same  disease,  did  both  translate, 
As  equal  were  their  souls,  so  equal  was  their  fate. 


Mean  time,  her  warlike  brother  on  the  seas 
His  waving  streamers  to  the  winds  displays. 
And  vows  for  his  return,  with  vain  devotion,  pays. 
Ah,  generous  youth!  that  wish  forbear, 

The  winds  too  soon  will  waft  thee  here! 

Slack  all  thy  sails,  and  fear  to  come, 
Alas,  thou  know'st  not,  thou  art  wrecked  at  home! 
No  more  shalt  thou  behold  thy  sister's  face. 
Thou  hast  already  had  her  last  embrace.  m  i : ;  r  // 

But  look  aloft,  and  if  thou  ken'st  from  far,       jjHJ  ni  a/. 


Heraclitus  35-9 

Among  the  Pleiades,  a  new-kindled  star, 
If  any  sparkles,  than  the  rest,  more  bright, 
'Tis  she  that  shines  in  that  propitious  light. 


When  in  mid-air  the  golden  trump  shall  sound, 
-  To  raise  the  nations  under  ground; 

When  in  the  valley  of  Jchosaphat 
The  judging  God  shall  dose  the  book  of  Fate; 

And  there  the  last  assizes  keep 

For  those  who  wake  and  those  who  sleep; 

When  rattling  bones  together  fly 

From  the  four  corners  of  the  sky. 
When  sinews  o'er  the  skeletons  are  spread. 
Those  clothed  with  flesh,  and  life  inspires  the  dead; 
The  sacred  poets  first  shall  hear  the  sound. 
And  foremost  from  the  tomb  shall  bound: 
For  they  are  covered  with  the  lightest  ground; 
And  straight,  with  in-born  vigor,  on  the  wing, 
Like  mounting  larks  to  the  New  jVIorning  sing. 
There  thou,  sweet  Saint,  before  the  choir  shalt  go. 
As  harbinger  of  Heaven,  the  way  to  show. 
The  way  which  thou  so  well  hast  learned  below. 

John  Dryden  [1631-1700] 


HERACLITUS 

They  told  me,  Heraclitus,  they  told  me  you  were  dead, 
They  brought  me  bitter  news  to  hear  and  bitter  tears  to  shed. 
I  wept  as  I  remembered  how^often  you  and  I 
Had  tired  the  sun  with  talking  and  sent  him  down  the  sky. 

And  now  that  thou  art  lying,  my  dear  old  Carian  guest, 
A  handful  of  gray  ashes,  long,  long  ago  at  rest, 
Still  are  thy  pleasant  voices,  thy  nightingales,  awake; 
For  Death,  he  taketh  all  away,  but  them  he  cannot  take. 
William  Johnson-Cory  [1823-1892] 


3530  "  Ihey  Are  All  Gone" 

ELEGY 

TO   THE   MEMORY   OF   AN    UNFORTUNATE   LADY 

What  beckoning  ghost  along  the  moonlight  shade 

Invites  my  steps,  and  points  to  yonder  glade? 

'Tis  she! — but  why  that  bleeding  bosom  gored?  >' 

Why  dimly  gleams  the  visionary  sword? 

O  ever  beauteous,  ever  friendly!  tell, 

Is  it  in  heaven  a  crime  to  love  too  well, 

To  bear  too  tender  or  too  firm  a  heart, 

To  act  a  lover's  or  a  Roman's  part? 

Is  there  no  bright  reversion  in  the  sky, 

For  those  who  greatly  think  or  bravely  die? 

Why  bade  ye  else,  ye  Powers!  her  soul  aspire    ' 
Above  the  vulgar  flight  of  low  desire? 
Ambition  first  sprung  from  your  blest  abodes, 
The  glorious  fault  of  angels  and  of  gods; 
Thence  to  their  images  on  earth  it  flows. 
And  in  the  breasts  of  kings  and  heroes  glows. 
Most  souls,  'tis  true,  but  peep  out  once  an  age, 
Dull  sullen  prisoners  in  the  body's  cage: 
Dim  lights  of  life,  that  burn  a  length  of  years, 
Useless,  unseen,  as  lamps  in  sepulchres; 
Like  Eastern  kings  a  lazy  state  they  keep, 
And,  close  confined  to  their  own  palace,  sleep. 

From  these  perhaps  (ere  Nature  bade  her  die), 
Fate  snatched  her  early  to  the  pitying  sky. 
As  into  air  the  purer  spirits  flow, 
And  separate  from  their  kindred  dregs  below, 
So  flew  the  soul  to  its  congenial  place. 
Nor  left  one  virtue  to  redeem  her  race. 

But  thou,  false  guardian  of  a  charge  too  goodl 
Thou,  mean  deserter  of  thy  brother's  blood! 
See  on  these  ruby  lips  the  trembling  breath. 
These  cheeks  now  fading  at  the  blast  of  Death. 
Cold  is  that  breast  which  warmed  the  world  before, 
And  those  love-darting  eyes  must  roll  no  more. 
Thus,  if  eternal  Justice  rules  the  ball, 
Thus  shall  your  wives,  and  thus  your  children  fall; 


Elec 


;y  353^ 


On  all  the  line  a  sudden  vengeance  waits, 
And  frequent  hearses  shall  besiege  your  gates. 
There  passengers  shall  stand,  and  pointing  say 
(While  the  long  funerals  blacken  all  the  way), 
"Lo!  these  were  they  whose  souls  the  Furies  steeled, 
And  cursed  with  hearts  unknowing  how  to  yield." 
Thus  unlamented  pass  the  proud  away, 
The  gaze  of  fools,  and  pageant  of  a  day! 
So  perish  all  whose  breast  ne'er  learned  to  glow 
For  others'  good,  or  melt  at  others'  woe! 

What  can  atone  (O  ever-injured  shade!) 
Thy  fate  unpitied,  and  thy  rites  unpaid? 
No  friend's  complaint,  no  kind  domestic  tear 
Pleased  thy  pale  ghost,  or  graced  thy  mournful  bier. 
By  foreign  hands  thy  dying  eyes  were  closed. 
By  foreign  hands  thy  decent  limbs  composed, 
By  foreign  hands  thy  humble  grave  adorned. 
By  strangers  honored,  and  by  strangers  mourned! 
What  though  no  friends  in  sable  weeds  appear, 
Grieve  for  an  hour,  perhaps,  then  mourn  a  year, 
And  bear  about  the  mockery  of  woe 
To  midnight  dances,  and  the  public  show? 
What  though  no  weeping  Loves  thy  ashes  grace, 
Nor  polished  marble  emulate  thy  face? 
What  though  no  sacred  earth  aUow  thee  room, 
Nor  hallowed  dirge  be  muttered  o'er  thy  tomb? 
Yet  shall  thy  grave  with  rising  flowers  be  dressed. 
And  the  green  turf  lie  lightly  on  thy  breast : 
There  shall  the  morn  her  earliest  tears  bestow. 
There  the  first  roses  of  the  year  shall  blow ; 
While  angels  with  their  silver  wings  o'ershade 
The  ground  now  sacred  by  thy  reiiques  made. 

So  peaceful  rests,  without  a  stone,  a  name. 
What  once  had  beauty,  titles,  wealth,  and  fame. 
How  loved,  how  honored  once,  avails  thee  not. 
To  whom  related,  or  by  whom  begot; 
A  heap  of  dust  alone  remains  of  thee, 
'Tis  all  thou  art,  and  aU  the  proud  shall  be! 

Poets  themselves  must  fall,  like  those  they  sung. 
Deaf  the  praised  ear,  and  mute  the  tuneful  tongue. 


3S3^  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

Even  he  whose  soul  no^v  melts  in  mournful  lays 
Shall  shortly  want  the  generous  tear  he  pays; 
Then  from  his  closing  eyes  thy  form  shall  part, 
And  the  last  pang  shall  tear  thee  from  his  heart: 
Life's  idle  business  at  one  gasp  be  o'er, 
The  Muse  forgot,  and  thou  beloved  no  more! 

Alexander  Pope  [i 688-1 744] 


ELEGY  WRITTEN   IN  A   COUNTRY 
CHURCHYARD  '    ' 'i '' 

3iii1  yrJT 
The  curfew  tolls  the  knell  of  parting  day, 

The  lowing  herd  winds  slowly  o'er  the  lea. 
The  plowman  homeward  plods  his  weary  way, 
And  leaves  the  world  to  darkness  and  to  me. 

Now  fades  the  glimmering  landscape  on  the  sight, 
And  all  the  air  a  solemn  stillness  holds, 

Save  where  the  beetle  wheels  his  droning  flight, 
And  drowsy  tinklings  lull  the  distant  folds: 

Save  that  from  yonder  ivy-mantled  tower 
The  moping  owl  does  to  the  moon  complain 

Of  such  as,  wandering  near  her  secret  bower. 
Molest  her  ancient  solitary  reign. 

Beneath  those  rugged  elms,  that  yew-tree's  shade, 
Where  heaves  the  turf  in  many  a  moldering  heap. 

Each  in  his  narrow  cell  for  ever  laid. 

The  rude  forefathers  of  the  hamlet  sleep. 

The  breezy  call  of  incense-breathing  morn. 

The  swallow  twittering  from  the  straw-built  shed, 

The  cock's  shrill  clarion,  or  the  echoing  horn,. 
No  more  shall  rouse  them  from  their  lowly  bed. 

For  them  no  more  the  blazing  hearth  shall  burn, 
Or  busy  housewife  ply  her  evening  care: 

No  children  run  to  lisp  their  sire's  return, 
Or  climb  his  knees  the  envied  kiss  to  share. 


Llegy  Written  in  a  Country  Churchyard     3S33 

Oft  (lid  the  harvest  to  their  sickle  yield, 

Their  furrow  oft  the  stubborn  glebe  has  broke: 

How  jocund  did  the>  drive  their  team  afield! 

How  bowed  the  woods  beneath  their  sturdy  stroke! 

Let  not  Ambition  mock  their  useful  toil, 
Their  homely  joys,  and  destiny  obscure; 

Nor  Grandeur  hear  with  a  disdainful  smile 
The  short  and  simple  annals  of  the  poor. 

The  boast  of  heraldry,  the  pomp  of  power, 
And  all  that  beauty,  all  that  wealth  e'er  ga^'e, 

Await  alike  the  inevitable  hour: 

The  paths  of  glory  lead  but  to  the  grave. 

Nor  you,  ye  proud,  impute  to  these  the  fault 
If  Memory  o'er  their  tomb  no  trophies  raise. 

Where  through  the  long-drawn  aisle  and  fretted  vault 
The  pealing  anthem  swells  the  note  of  praise. 

Can  storied  urn  or  animated  bust 

Back  to  its  mansion  call  the  fleeting  breath? 

Can  Honor's  voice  provoke  the  silent  dust, 
Or  Flattery  soothe  the  dull  cold  ear  of  death? 

Perhaps  in  this  neglected  spot  is  laid 

Some  heart  once  pregnant  with  celestial  fire; 

Hands,  that  the  rod  of  empire  might  have  swayed, 
Or  waked  to  ecstasy  the  living  l>Te. 

But  Knowledge  to  their  eyes  her  ample  page 
Rich  with  the  spoils  of  time  did  ne'er  unroll; 

Chill  Penury  repressed  their  noble  rage, 
And  froze  the  genial  current  of  the  soul. 


Full  many  a  gem  of  purest  ray  serene 
The  dark  unfathomed  caves  of  ocean  bear? '' '  '^ 

Full  many  a  flower  is  born  to  blush  unseen, 
And  waste  its  sweetness  on  the  desert  air. 


3^j4  "They  Are  AH   Gone" 

Some  village  Hampden  that,  with  dauntless  breast, 
The  little  tyrant  of  his  fields  withstood, 

Some  mute  inglorious  Milton  here  may  rest. 
Some  Cromwell  guiltless  of  his  country's  blood. 

The  applause  of  listening  senates  to  command, 
The  threats  of  pain  and  ruin  to  despise. 

To  scatter  plenty  o'er  a  smiling  land. 
And  read  their  history  in  a  nation's  eyes, 

Their  lot  forbade :  nor  circumscribed  alone 

Their  growing  virtues,  but  their  crimes  confined; 

Forbade  to  wade  through  slaughter  to  a  throne, 
And  shut  the  gates  of  mercy  on  mankind; 

The  struggling  pangs  of  conscious  truth  to  hide, 
To  quench  the  blushes  of  ingenuous  shame, 

Or  heap  the  shrine  of  Luxury  and  Pride 
With  incense  kindled  at  the  Muse's  flame. 

Far  from  the  madding  crowd's  ignoble  strife. 
Their  sober  wishes  never  learned  to  stray; 

Along  the  cool,  sequestered  vale  of  hfe 

They  kept  the  noiseless  tenor  of  their  way. 

Yet  even  these  bones  from  insult  to  protect 

Some  frail  memorial  still  erected  nigh. 
With  uncouth  rhymes  and  shapeless  sculpture  decked, 

Implores  the  passing  tribute  of  a  sigh. 

Their  name,  their  years,  spelt  by  the  unlettered  Muse, 

The  place  of  fame  and  elegy  supply: 
And  many  a  hol}^  text  around  she  strews. 

That  teach  the  rustic  moralist  to  die. 

For  who,  to  dumb  Forgetfulness  a  prey, 
This  pleasing  anxious  being  e'er  resigned, 

Left  the  warm  precincts  of  the  cheerful  day. 
Nor  cast  one  longing  lingering  look  bt;hind? 


Elegy  Written  in  a  Country  Churchyard    3^^^ 

On  some  fond  breast  the  parting  soul  relics, 
Some  pious  drops  the  closing  eye  requires; 

E'en  from  the  tomb  the  voice  of  Nature  cries, 
E'en  in  our  ashes  live  their  wonted  fires. 

For  thee,  who,  mindful  of  the  unhonored  dead, 
Dost  in  these  lines  their  artless  talc  relate; 

If  chance,  by  lonely  contemplation  led, 

Some  kindred  spirit  shall  inquire  thy  fate, — 

Haply  some  hoary-headed  swain  may  say, 
"Oft  have  we  seen  him  at  the  peep  of  dawn 

Brushing  with  hasty  steps  the  devv-s  away 
To  meet  the  sun  upon  the  upland  lawn. 

"There  at  the  foot  of  yonder  nodding  beech 
That  wreathes  its  old  fantastic  roots  so  high, 

His  listless  length  at  noontide  would  he  stretch. 
And  pore  upon  the  brook  that  babbles  by. 

"Hard  by  yon  wood,  now  smiling  as  in  scorn. 
Muttering  his  wayward  fancies  he  would  rove. 

Now  drooping,  woeful-wan,  like  one  forlorn, 
Or  crazed  with  care,  or  crossed  in  hopeless  love. 

"One  morn  I  missed  him  on  the  'customed  hill. 
Along  the  heath,  and  near  his  favorite  tree; 

Another  came;  nor  yet  beside  the  rill, 

Nor  up  the  lawn,  nor  at  the  wood  was  he: 

"The  next,  with  dirges  due  in  sad  array. 

Slow  through  the  church-way  path  we  saw  him  borne. 
Approach  and  read  (for  thou  canst  read)  the  lay 

Graved  on  the  stone  beneath  yon  aged  thorn:" 

THE   EPITAPH 

Here  rests  his  head  upon  the  lap  of  Earth 
A  Youth,  to  Fortune  and  to  Fame  unknown. 

Fair  Science  frowned  not  on  his  humble  birth, 
And  Melancholy  marked  him  for  her  own. 


353^  "They   Are  Ali   Gone" 

Large  was  his  boiinly,  and  his  soul  sincere, 
Heaven  did  a  recompense  as  largely  send: 

He  gave  to  Misery  {all  he  had)  a  tear, 

He  gained  from  Heaven  {'tzvas  all  he  wished)  a  friend. 

No  farther  seek  his  merits  to  disclose, 

Or  draw  his  frailties  from  their  dread  abode, 

{There  they  alike  in  trembling  hope  repose,) 
The  bosom  of  his  Father  and  his  God. 

Thomas  Gray  [1716-1771] 

THE  SETTLERS 

How  green  the  earth,  how  blue  the  sky, 
How  pleasant  all  the  days  that  pass, 

Here  where  the  British  settlers  lie 
Beneath  their  cloaks  of  grass! 

Here  ancient  peace  resumes  her  round, 
And  rich  from  toil  stand  hill  and  plain; 

Men  reap  and  store;  but  they  sleep  sound, 
The  men  who  sowed  the  grain. 

Hard  to  the  plough  their  hands  they  put, 
And  wheresoe'er  the  soil  had  need 

The  furrow  drave,  and  underfoot 
They  sowed  themselves  for  seed. 

Ah!  not  like  him  whose  hand  made  yield 
The  brazen  kine  with  fiery  breath, 

And  over  all  the  Colchian  field 
Strewed  far  the  seeds  of  death; 

Till,  as  day  sank,  awoke  to  war 
The  seedlings  of  the  dragon's  teeth, 

And  death  ran  multiplied  once  more 
Across  the  hideous  heath. 

But  rich  in  flocks  be  all  these  farms, 
And  fruitful  be  the  fields  which  hide 

Brave  eyes  that  loved  the  light,  and  arms 
That  never  clasped  a  bride! 


He  Bringeth  Them  to  Their  Haven"    3537 

0  willing  hearts  turned  quick  to  clay, 
Glad  lovers  holding  death  in  scorn, 

Out  of  the  lives  ye  cast  away 
The  coming  race  is  born. 

Laurence  Housmaii  [1867- 

"HE   BRINGETH  THEM   UNTO  THEIR  DESIRED 
HAVEN" 

1  KNEW  a  much-loved  mariner, 
Who  lies  a  fathom  underground; 

Above  him  now  the  grasses  stir, 
Two  rose-trees  set  a  bound. 

From  a  high  hill  his  grave  looks  out 
Through  sighing  larches  to  the  sea; 

Now  for  the  ocean's  raucous  rout 
All  June  the  bumblebee 

Drones  round  him  on  the  lonely  steeps. 
And  shy  wood-creatures  come  and  gq 

Above  the  green  mound  where  he  keeps 
His  silent  watch  below. 

An  elemental  man  was  he — 

Loved  God,  his  wife,  his  children  dear, 

And  fared  through  dangers  of  the  sea 
Without  a  sense  of  fear. 

And,  loving  nature,  he  was  wise 

In  aU  the  moods  of  wave  and  cloud; 

Before  the  pageant  of  the  skies 
Nightly  his  spirit  bowed; 

Yet  reckoned  shrewdly  with  the  gale, 
And  felt  the  viking's  fierce  delight 

To  face  the  north  wind's  icy  hail, 
Unmoved  to  thought  of  flight. 

But  wheresoe'er  his  prow  was  turned, 
His  thoughts,  like  homing  pigeons,  came 

Back  where  his  casement  candle  burned 
Through  many  a  league  its  flame. 


3S3^  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

Exiled  from  all  he  loved,  at  last 

The  summer  gale  has  brought  him  home, 

Where  on  the  hillsides  thickly  massed 
The  elders  break  in  foam. 

The  lonely  highways  that  he  knew 
No  longer  hold  him,  nor  the  gale, 

Sweeping  the  desolated  blue, 
Roars  in  his  slanting  sail. 

.    For  he  has  grown  a  part  of  all 
The  winter  silence  of  the  hills; 
For  him  the  stately  twilights  fall, 
The  hemlock  softly  shrills 

In  mimicry  of  gales  that  woke 
His  vigilance  off  many  a  shore 

Whereon  the  vibrant  billows  broke. 
Now  he  awakes  no  more. 

He  wakes  no  more!    Ah,  me!  his  grief 
Was  ever  that  the  sea  had  power 

To  hold  from  him  the  budding  leaf, 
The  opening  of  the  flower. 

And  so  he  hungered  for  the  spring — ^ 
The  hissing,  furrow-turning  plow, 

The  first  thin  notes  the  bluebirds  sing. 
The  reddening  of  the  bough. 

Wave-deafened,  many  a  night  he  stood 
Upon  his  watery  deck,  and  dreamed 

Of  thrushes  singing  in  the  wood. 

And  murmurous  brooks  that  streamed 

Through  silver  shallows,  and  of  bees 
Lulling  the  summer  afternoon 

With  mellow  trumpetings  of  ease, 
Of  drowsiness  the  boon. 

And  dreamed  of  growing  old  at  home, 
The  wise  Ulysses  of  his  crew 


In  the   Lilac-Rain  3539 

Of  children's  children,  who  would  roam 
With  him  the  lands  he  knew; 

And,  wide-eyed,  face  with  him  the  gale, 

And  hear  the  slanting  billows  roar  .  , 
Their  diapason  round  his  rail^ 

All  safe  beside  his  door. 

Now  he  has  come  into  his  own,— .^^,- ) 
Sunshine  and  bird-song  round  the  spot. 

And  scents  from  spicy  woodlands  blown, — 
Yet  haply  knows  it  not. 

But  round  the  grave  where  he  doth  keep, 

Unsolaced  by  regret  or  woe, 
His  narrowed  heritage  in  sleep. 

The  little  chiklren  go. 

They  shyly  go  without  a  sound, 

And  read  in  reverent  awe  his  name,        ,,^  ^,^,   , 
Until  for  them  the  very  ground  .bn^b 

Doth  blossom  with  his  fame.  , 

L.  Frank  Tookcr  [1855- 


IN  THE  LILAC -RAIN 

All  in  the  lilac-rain, 

Tender  and  sweet. 
Brushing  the  window-pane 

Sudden — and  fleet! 
Came  the  dear  wraith  of  her 

Out  of  lost  Mays — 
(Ah,  but  the  faith  of  her, 

True  to  old  ways!) 

Scarcely  her  face  I  knew 

Dim  in  the  wet; 
Only  her  eyes  of  blue 

Who  could  forget ! 
Hands  full  of  lilacs  too — 

Lilac  crowned,  yet! 


3540  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

These  were  the  flowers  she  loved 

In  the  far  years; 
These  were  the  showers  she  loved — 

Light  as  her  tears! 
These  were  the  hours  she  loved—'" 

Hope  chasing  fears! 

Veiled  in  the  lilac-rain 

Comes  she — and  goes.  .  .  . 
Sun  through  the  clouds  again, 

Fresh  the  wind  blows. 
Mine,  a  swift  pleasure-pain 

None  other  knows. 

Edith  M.  Thomas  [1854- 

A  DEAD   MARCH 

Play  me  a  march,  low-toned  and  slow — a  march  for  a  silent 
tread, 

Fit  for  the  wandering  feet  of  one  who  dreams,  of  the  silent 
dead,  him)yu_^  x  •  iJ  -lo'l  UinU 

Lonely,  between  the  bones'  below  and  the  soiils  that  are  over- 
head. 

Here  for  a  while  they  smiled  and  sang,  alive  in  the  interspace. 
Here  with  the  grass  beneath  the  foot,  and  the  stars  above 

the  face. 
Now  are  their  feet  beneath  the  grass,  and  whither  has  flown 

their  grace?  , 

Who  shall  assure  us  whence  they  come,  or  tell  us  the  way 

they  go? 
Verily,  life  with  them  was  joy,  and,  now  they  have  left  us, 

woe. 
Once  they  were  not,  and  now  they  are  not,  and  this  is  the 

sum  we  know. 

Orderly  range  the  seasons  due,  and  orderly  roll  the  stars. 

How  shall  we  deem  the  soldier  brave  who  frets  of  his  wounds 
and  scars? 

Are  we  as  senseless  brutes  that  we  should  dash  at  the  well- 
seen  bars? 


A   Dead   March 


3541 


No,  we  are  here,  with  feet  unfixed,  but  ever  as  if  with  lead, 
Drawn  from  the  orbs  which  shine  above  to  the  orb  on  which 

we  tread, 
Down  to  the  dust  from  which  we  came  and  with  which  we 

shall  mingle  dead. 

No,  we  arc  here  to  wait,  and  work,  and  strain  our  banished 
eyes  r^  rjvjii  iii  // 

Weary  and  sick  of  ^oil  and  toil,  arid  hUxh'grf  knd  fain  for 

skies, 
Far  from  the  reach  of  wingless  men,  and  not  to  be  scaled 

with  cries. 

No,  we  are  here  to  bend  our  necks  to  the  yoke  of  tyrant 

Time, 
Welcoming  all  the  gifts  he  gives  us — glories  of  youth  and 

prime. 
Patiently  watching  them  all  depart  as  our  heads  grow  white 

as  rime. 

Why  do  we  mourn  the  days  that  go — for  the  same  sun  shines 

each  day, 
Ever  a  spring  her  primrose  hath,  and  ever  a  May  her  may; 
Sweet  as  the  rose  that  died  last  year  is  the  rose  that  is  born 

to-day. 

Do  we  not  too  return,  we  men,  as  ever  the  round  earth 

whirls? 
Never  a  head  is  dimmed  with  gray  but  another  is  sunned  with 

curls; 
She  was  a  girl  and  he  was  a  boy,  but  yet  there  arc  boys  and 

girls. 

Ah,  but  alas  for  the  smile  of  smiles  that  never  but  one  face 
wore ; 

Ah,  for  the  voice  that  has  flown  away  like  a  bird  to  an  un- 
seen shore; 

Ah,  for  the  face — the  flower  of  flowers— that  blossoms  on 
earth  no  more. 

Cosmo  Monklwusc  [1840-1 901] 


3542  "They  Are  All   Gone" 


TOMMY'S  DEAD 

You  may  give  over  plow,  boys, 
You  may  take  the  gear  to  the  stead, 

i[,grfgirr':rf  ■    All  the  sweat  o' your  l)row,  boys,  r-,  o- 

Will  never  get  beer  and  bread. 
The  seed's  waste,  I  know,  boys. 
There's  not  a  blade  will  grow,  boys, 

bsl jbj£  id     'Tis  cropped  out,  I  trow,  boys, 
And  Tommy's  dead. 

Send  the  colt  to  fair,  boys, 

He's  going  blind,  as  I  said. 

My  old  eyes  can't  bear,  boys, 

To  see  him  in  the  shed; 

The  cow's  dry  and  spare,  boys. 

She's  neither  here  nor  there,  boys, 

I  doubt  she's  badly  bred ; 

Stop  the  mill  to-morn,  boys. 

There'll  be  no  more  corn,  boys. 

Neither  white  nor  red; 

There's  no  sign  of  grass,  boys, 

You  may  sell  the  goat  and  the  ass,  boys, 

The  land's  not  what  it  was,  boys. 

And  the  beasts  must  be  fed: 

You  may  turn  Peg  away,  boys. 

You  may  pay  off  old  Ned, 

We've  had  a  dull  day,  boys, 

And  Tommy's  dead. 

Move  my  chair  on  the  floor,  boys, 

Let  me  turn  my  head: 

She's  standing  there  in  the  door,  boys. 

Your  sister  Winifred! 

Take  her  away  from  me,  boys. 

Your  sister  Winifred! 

Move  me  round  in  my  place,  boys,;  o.   axih 

Let  me  turn  my  head. 


Tommy's   Dead  3543 

Take  her  away  from  me,  boys, 
As  she  lay  on  her  death-bed, 
The  bones  of  her  thin  face,  boys. 
As  she  lay  on  her  death-bed ! 
I  don't  know  how  it  be,  boys, 
When  all's  done  and  said,   '  '  '• 

But  I  see  her  looking  at  me,  boys;^ 
Wherever  I  turn  my  head ;  '  ! 

Out  of  the  big  oak-tree,  boys,  ' 

Out  of  the  garden-bed, 
And  the  lily  as  pale  as  she,  boys, 

And  the  rose  that  used  to  be  red. 

.  i 
There's  something  not  right,  boys,;[ 
But  I  think  it's  not  in  my  head,  .|/^ 
I've  kept  my  precious  sight,  boys—' 
The  Lord  be  hallowed ! 
Outside  and  in  ^  j 

The  ground  is  cold  to  my  tread,       ; 
The  hills  are  wizen  and  thin. 
The  sky  is  shriveled  and  shred, 
The  hedges  down  by  the  loan 
I  can  count  them  bone  by  bone. 
The  leaves  are  open  and  spread, 
But  I  see  the  teeth  of  the  land, 
And  hands  like  a  dead  man's  hand. 
And  the  eyes  of  a  dead  man's  head. 
There's  nothing  but  cinders  and  sand. 
The  rat  and  the  mouse  have  fed, 
And  the  summer's  empty  and  cold; 
Over  valley  and  wold 
Wherever  I  turn  my  head 
There's  a  mildew  and  a  mold, 
The  sun's  going  out  overhead, 
And  I'm  very  old,  "  ornij  ai'l ' 

And  Tommy's  dead. 

What  am  I  staying  for,  boys? 
You're  all  born  and  bred, 
'Tis  fifty  years  and  more,  boys, 
Since  wife  and  I  were  wed. 


3544  "They   Are  All   Gone" 

And  she's  gone  before,  boys, 
And  Tommy's  dead. 

She  was  always  sweet,  boys, 
Upon  his  curly  head. 
She  kneW  she'd  never  see't,  boys^j ;, 
And  she  stole  off  to  bed ;  j.j 

I've  been  sitting  up  alone,  boys, ;.: // 
For  he'd  come  home,  he  said, 
But  it's  time  I  was  gone,  boys, 
For  Tommy's  dead. 

Put  the  shutters  up,  boys. 
Bring  out  the  beer  and  bread. 
Make  haste  and  sup,  boys,  '  " '^ 

For  my  eyes  are  heavy  as  lead; 
There's  something  wrong  i'  the  cup,  boys, 
There's  something  ill  wi'  the  bread, 
I  don't  care  to  sup,  boys, 
And  Tommy's  dead. 

I'm  not  right,  I  doubt,  boys, 

I've  such  a  sleepy  head, 

I  shall  never  more  be  stout,  boys, 

You  may  carry  me  to  bed. 

What  are  you  about,  boys? 

The  prayers  are  all  said. 

The  fire's  raked  out,  boys,  i  1 

And  Tommy's  dead.  .' ! 

The  stairs  are  too  steep,  boys, 
You  may  carry  me  to  the  head. 
The  night's  dark  and  deep,  boys,     . 
Your  mother's  long  in  bed, 
'Tis  time  to  go  to  sleep,  boys, 
And  Tommy's  dead. 

I'm  not  used  to  kiss,  boys. 

You  may  shake  my  hand  instead. 

All  things  go  amiss,  boys, 

You  may  lay  me  where  she  is,  boys, 


Her  Epitaph  3545 

'      And  I'll  rest  my  old  head: 
'Tis  a  poor  world,  this,  boys, 
And  Tommy's  dead. 

Sydney  Dobell  [1824-1874] 

di  ]zh\uodP. 

IN  MEMORIAM 

'Tis  right  for  her  to  sleep  between 

Some  of  those  old  Cathedral  walls, 
And  right  too  that  her  grave  is  green 

With  all  the  dew  and  rain  that  falls! 

•  J 

'Tis  well  the  organ's  solemn  sighs 
Should  soar  and  sink  around  her  rest. 

And  almost  in  her  ear  should  rise 

The  prayers  of  those  she  loved  the  best. 

'Tis  also  well  this  air  is  stirred 

By  Nature's  voices  loud  and  low. 
By  thunder  and  the  chirping  bird, 

And  grasses  whispering  as  they  grow. 

For  all  her  spirit's  earthly  course 

Was  as  a  lesson  and  a  sign 
How  to  o'errule  the  hard  divorce 

That  parts  things  natural  and  divine. 

Undaunted  by  the  clouds  of  fear, 

Undazzled  by  a  happy  day, 
She  made  a  Heaven  about  her  here. 

And  took  how  much!  with  her  away. 

Richard  Monckton  Milues  [1809-1885] 


HER   EPITAPH 

The  handful  here,  that  once  was  Mary's  earth. 
Held,  while  it  breathed,  so  beautiful  a  soul. 

That,  when  she  died,  all  recognized  her  birth. 
And  had  their  sorrow  in  serene  control. 


3546  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

"Not  here!  not  here!"  to  every  mourner's  heart 
The  wintry  wind  seemed  whispering  round  her  bier; 

And  when  the  tomb-door  opened,  with  a  start 
We  heard  it  echoed  from  within, — "Not  here!" 

Shouldst  thou,  sad  pilgrim,  who  mayst  hither  pass, 

Note  in  these  flowers  a  dehcater  hue, 
Should  spring. come  earlier  to  this  hallowed  grass, 

Or  the  bee  later  linger  on  the  dew, — 

Know  that  her  spirit  to  her  body  lent 

Such  sweetness,  grace,  as  only  goodness  can; 

That  even  her  dust,  and  this  her  monument, 
Have  yet  a  spell  to  stay  one  lonely  man, —    j. 

Lonely  through  life,  but  looking  for  the  day 
When  what  is  mortal  of  himself  shall  sleep,    ■' 

When  human  passion  shall  have  passed  away. 
And  Love  no  longer  be  a  thing  to  weep. 

Thomas  William  Parsons  [1819-1892] 

THE  DEATH-BED 

We  watched  her  breathing  through  the  night. 

Her  breathing  soft  and  low, 
As  in  her  breast  the  wave  of  life 

Kept  heaving  to  and  fro.  ' 

So  silently  we  seemed  to  speak, 

So  slowly  moved  about. 
As  we  had  lent  her  half  our  powers 

To  eke  her  living  out. 

Our  very  hopes  belied  our  fears. 

Our  fears  our  hopes  belied — 
We  thought  her  dying  when  she  slept. 

And  sleeping  when  she  died. 

For  when  the  morn  came  dim  and  sad, 
^' '  "  And  chill  with  early  showers, 
Her  quiet  eyelids  closed — she  had 
Another  morn  than  ours. 

Thomas  Hood  [1799-1S45] 


Hester  3547 


HESTER 

When  maidens  such  as  Hester  die, 
Their  place  ye  may  not  well  supply, 
Though  ye  among  a  thousand  trj'^, 

With  vain  endeavor. 
A  month  or  more  hath  she  been  dead, 
Yet  cannot  I  by  force  be  led 
To  think  upon  the  wormy  bed, 

And  her  together. 

A  springy  motion  in  her  gait, 

A  rising  step,  did  indicate 

Of  pride  and  joy  no  common  rate. 

That  flushed  her  spirit: 
I  know  not  by  what  name  beside 
I  shall  it  call; — if  'twas  not  pride, 
It  was  a  joy  to  that  allied. 

She  did  inherit. 

Her  parents  held  the  Quaker  rule, 
Which  doth  the  human  feeling  cool; 
But  she  was  trained  in  Nature's  school, 

Nature  had  blessed  her. 
A  waking  eye,  a  prying  mind, 
A  heart  that  stirs,  is  hard  to  bind; 
A  hawk's  keen  sight  ye  cannot  blind, — 

Ye  could  not  Hester. 

My  sprightly  neighbor,  gone  before 
To  that  unknown  and  silent  shore. 
Shall  we  not  meet,  as  heretofore. 

Some  summer  morning, 
When  from  thy  cheerful  eyes  a  ray 
Hath  struck  a  bliss  upon  the  day,— 
A  bliss  that  would  not  go  away, — 

A  sweet  forewarning? 

Charles  Lamb  [1775-1834] 


3548  "They  Are  All  Gone" 


"SOFTLY  WOO  AWAY  HER  BREATH" 

Softly  woo  away  her  breath, 

Gentle  Death! 
Let  her  leave  thee  with  no  strife, 

Tender,  mournful,  murmuring  Life! 
She  hath  seen  her  happy  day: — 

She  hath  had  her  bud  and  blossom: 
Now  she  pales  and  shrinks  away, 

Earth,  into  thy  gentle  bosom! 

She  hath  done  her  bidding  here, 

Angels  dear! 
Bear  her  perfect  soul  above, 

Seraph  of  the  skies, — sweet  Lovel.n  A 
Good  she  was,  and  fair  in  youth,         '"^' 

And  her  mind  was  seen  to  soar. 
And  her  heart  was  wed  to  truth: 

Take  her,  then,  for  evermore, — 
For  ever — evermore. 

Bryan  Waller  Procter  [i 787-1 874] 

A  DEATH-BED 

Her  suffering  ended  with  the  day. 

Yet  lived  she  at  its  close, 
And  breathed  the  long,  long  night  away 

In  statue-like  repose. 

But  when  the  sun  in  all  his  state 

Illumed  the  eastern  skies. 
She  passed  through  Glory's  morning  gate 

And  walked  in  Paradise. 

James  A  Jdrich  [1810-1856] 

"SHE  DIED   IN  BEAUTY" 

She  died  in  beauty, — like  a  rose 

Blown  from  its  parent  stem; 
She  died  in  beauty, — like  a  pearl 

Dropped  from  some  diadem. 


The  White  Jessamine  3549 

She  died  in  beauty, — like  a  lay 

Along  a  moonlit  lake; 
She  died  in  beauty,— like  the  song 

Of  birds  amid  the  brake. 

She  died  in  beauty, — like  the  snow 

On  flowers  dissolved  away; 
She  died  in  beauty, — Uke  a  star 

Lost  on  the  brow  of  day. 

She  lives  in  glory, — like  night's  gems 

Set  round  the  silver  moon; 
She  lives  ini^lory, — like  the  sun 

Amid  the  blue  of  June, 

Charles  Doyne  Sillery  [1807- 183 7] 


THE  WHITE  JESSAMINE 

I  KNEW  she  lay  above  me, 

Where  the  casement  all  the  night 

Shone,  softened  with  a  phosphor  glow 
Of  sympathetic  light. 

And  that  her  fledgling  spirit  pure 
Was  pluming  fast  for  flight. 

Each  tendril  throbbed  and  quickened 

As  I  nightly  climbed  apace, 
And  could  scarce  restrain  the  blossoms 

When,  anear  the  destined  place, 
Her  gentle  whisper  thrilled  me 

Ere  I  gazed  upon  her  face. 

I  waited,  darkling,  till  the  dawn 

Should  touch  me  into  bloom. 
While  all  my  being  panted 

To  outpour  its  first  perfume. 
When,  lo!  a  paler  flower  than  mine 

Had  blossomed  in  the  gloom! 

John  Baidslir  Tahb  [iS.js-iqoq] 


3550  "They  Are  All  Gone" 


EARLY  DEATH 

She  passed  away  like  morning  dew 

Before  the  sun  was  high; 
So  brief  her  time,  she  scarcely  knew 

The  meaning  of  a  sigh. 

As  round  the  rose  its  soft  perfume, 
Sweet  love  around  her  floated; 

Admired  she  grew — while  mortal  doom 
Crept  on,  unfeared,  unnoted. 

Love  was  her  guardian  Angel  here, 
But  Love  to  Death  resigned  her; 

Though  Love  was  kind,  why  should  we  fear 
But  holy  Death  is  kinder? 

Hartley  Coleridge  [1796-15 


THE  MOSS-ROSE 

Walking  to-day  in  your  garden,  O  gracious  lady. 

Little  you  thought,  as  you  turned  in  that  alley  remote  and 

shady 
And  gave  me  a  rose,  and  asked  if  I  knew  its  savor — 
The  old-world  scent  of  the  moss-rose,  flower  of  a  bygone 
,     favor — 

Little  you  thought,  as  you  waited  the  word  of  appraisement, 
Laughing  at  first,  and  then  amazed  at  my  amazement. 
That  the  rose  you  gave  was  a  gift  already  cherished. 
And   the  garden   whence  you  plucked   it  a  garden  long 
perished. 

But  I — I  saw  that  garden,  with  its  one  treasure 
The  tiny  moss-rose,  tiny  even  by  childhood's  measure. 
And  the  long  morning  shadow  of  the  rusty  laurel. 
And  a  boy  and  a  girl  beneath  it,  flushed  with  a  childish 
quarrel. 

She  wept  for  her  one  little  bud;  but  be,  outreaching 
The  hand  of  brotherly  right,  would  take  it  for  all  her  be- 
seeching; 


•^nor  ■>      Dirge 


355^ 


And  she  flung  her  arms  about  him,  and  gave  hke  a  sister, 
And  laughed  at  her  own  tears,  and  wept  again  when  he 
kissed  her.  "  ^ 

So  the  rose  is  mine  since,  and  whenever  I  find  it 
And  drink  again  the  sharp  sweet  scent  of  the  moss  behind  it, 
I  remember  the  tears  of  a  child,  and  her  love  and  her  laugh- 
ter, 
And  the  morning  shadows  of  youth,  and  the  night  that  fell 
thereafter. 

Henry  Newbolt  [1862- 

A   REQUIEM 

Thou  hast  lived  in  pain  and  woe. 

Thou  hast  lived  in  grief  and  fear; 

Now  thine  heart  can  dread  no  blow,  , 

Now  thine  eyes  can  shed  no  tear: 

Storms  round  us  shall  beat  and  rave; 

Thou  art  sheltered  in  the  grave. 

Thou  for  long,  long  years  hast  borne, 
Bleeding  through  Life's  wilderness. 
Heavy  loss  and  wounding  scorn;  '"^ 

Now  thine  heart  is  burdenless:'  -f 

Vainly  rest  for  ours  we  crave; 

Thine  is  quiet  in  the  grave. 

We  must  toil  with  pain  and  care,       ^'  •''■''p'"'  • 
We  must  front  tremendous  Fate, 
We  must  fight  with  dark  Despair:  ■ 

Thou  dost  dwell  in  solemn  state,  '  ' 

.|.|,  Couched  triumphant,  calm  and  brave,     :p 
In  the  ever-holy  grave. 

James  Thomson  [1834-1S82] 


DIRGE 

Calm  on  the  bosom  of  thy  God, 

Fair  spirit,  rest  thee  now ! 
E'en  while  with  ours  thy  footsteps  trod. 

His  seal  was  on  thy  brow. 


355^  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

,Tjj,  ■.  .Dust,  to  its  narrow  house  beneathj,  gnuft  ode  bnA 
'.rf  narfw  n.  Soul,  .to  its  place  on  high!       ,{  j£  baxf^ur.I  bnA 
They  that  have  seen  thy  look  in  death    ..,,  ,  i 
No  more  may  fear  to  die. 

Lone  are  the  paths,  and  sad  the  bowers,    ;iib  bnA 
Whence  thy  meek  smile  is  gone;  'nacnai  I 

But  oh!  a  brighter  home  than  ours  79} 

Hoi  iRdi  jn  In  heaven,  is  now  thine  own.,  i^aimora  srfl  bnA 

Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans  [1793-1835] 

THE  LAMP  OF  POOR  SOULS 

Above  my  head  the  shields  are  stained  with  rust, 

The  wind  has  taken  his  spoil,  the  moth  his  part; 

Dust  of  dead  men  beneath  my  knees,  and  dtist, 

Lord,  in  my  heart'."  ■      - 
;I  on  bsii 

Lay  Thou  the  hand' of  faith  upon  my  fears; 

The  priest  has  prayed,  the  silver  bell  has  rung. 

But  not  for  him.    O  unforgotten  tears. 

He  was  so  young! 

Shine,  little  lamp,  nor  let  thy  light  grow  dim. 
Into  what  vast,. dread  dreams,  what  lonely  lands, 
Into  what  griefs  hath  death  delivered  him. 
Far  from  my  hands? 

Cradled  is  he,  with  half  his  prayers  forgot. 
I  cannot  learn  the  level  way  he  goes. 
He  whom  the  harvest  hath  remembered  not 
Sleeps  with  the  rose. 

Shine,  little  lamp,  fed  with  sweet  oil  of  prayers. 
Shine,  little  lamp,  as  God's  own  eyes  may  shine, 
When  He  treads  softly  down  His  starry  stairs 
And  whispers,  "Thou  art  Mine." 

Shine,  little  lamp,  for  love  hath  fed  thy  gleam. 
Sleep,  little  soul,  by  God's  own  hands  set  free. 
Cling  to  His  arms  and  sleep,  and  sleeping,  dream, 
And  dreaming,  look  for  me. 

Marjorie  L.  C.  Picklhall  [1883- 


The  Sleeper  3553 

SENTENCE 

Shall  I  say  that  what  heaven  gave 

Earth  has  taken? — 
Or  that  sleepers  in  the  grave 

Reawaken? 

One  sole  sentence  can  1  know, 

Can  I  say: 
You,  my  comrade,  had  to  go, 

I  to  stay. 

Witter  Bymicr  [1881- 

RESURRECTION 

I  HOPE  there  is  a  resurrection  day 

For  bodies,  as  the  ancient  prophets  say, 

When  Helen's  naked  limbs  again  will  gleam 

Regathcred  from  the  dust  of  death's  long  dream, — 

When  those  who  thrilled  the  ages,  being  fair, 

Will  take  the  singing  angels  unaware 

And  make  God's  perfect  meadows  doubly  sweet 

With  rosy  vagrancy  of  little  feet. 

Harry  Kemp  [1883- 

THE  SLEEPER 

Above  the  cloistral  valley, 

Above  the  druid  rill, 
There  lies  a  quiet  sleeper 

Upon  a  lonely  hill. 

All  the  long  days  of  summer 

The  low  winds  whisper  by. 
And  the  soft  voices  of  the  leaves 

Make  murmurous  reply. 

All  the  long  eves  of  autumn  ' 

The  loving  shadows  mass 
Round  this  sequestered  slum  be  ring-place 

Beneath  the  cool  hill  grass. 


3554  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

All  the  long  nights  of  winter 
The  white  drifts  heap  and  heap 

To  form  a  fleecy  coverlet 
Above  the  dreamer's  sleep. 

All  the  long  morns  of  springtime 
The  tear-drops  of  the  dew 

Gleam  in  the  violets'  tender  eyes 
As  if  the  blossoms  knew. 

Ah,  who  would  break  the  rapture 
Brooding  and  sweet  and  still, 

The  great  peace  of  the  sleeper 
Upon  the  lonely  hill! 

Clinton  Scollard  [1860- 


THE   WIDOW'S  MITE  ,jjX 

A  WIDOW — she  had  only  one! 
A  puny  and  decrepit  son; 

But,  day  and  night. 
Though  fretful  oft,  and  weak  and  small, 
A  loving  child,  he  was  her  all — 

The  Widow's  Mite. 

The  Widow's  Mite!  ay,  so  sustained, 
She  battled  onward,  nor  complained, 

Though  friends  were  fewer: 
And  while  she  toiled  for  daily  fare, 
A  little  crutch  upon  the  stair 

Was  music  to  her. 

I  saw  her  then, — and  now  I  see 

That,  though  resigned  and  cheerful,  she 

Has  sorrowed  much: 
She  has,  He  gave  it  tenderly, 
Much  faith;  and,  carefully  laid  by, 

A  little  crutch. 

Frederick  Locker-Lanipson  [1821-1895] 


Mother  and    Poet  3555 

MOTHER   AND   POET 

TURIN,  AFTER  NEWS  FROM  GAETA,   1861 

Dead!    One  of  them  shot  by  the  sea  in  the  east, 
And  one  of  them  shot  in  the  west  by  the  sea. 

Dead!  both  my  boys!    When  you  sit  at  the  feast 
And  are  wanting  a  great  song  for  Italy  free, 
Let  none  look  at  me  ! 

Yet  I  was  a  poetess  only  last  year; 

And  good  at  my  art,  for  a  woman,  men  said; 
But  this  woman,  this,  who  is  agonized  here, 

— The  east  sea  and  west  sea  rhyme  on  in  her  head 
For  ever  instead. 

What  art  can  a  woman  be  good  at?    Oh,  vain! 

What  art  is  she  good  at,  but  hurting  her  breast 
With  the  milk-teeth  of  babes,  and  a  smile  at  the  pain? 

Ah  boys,  how  you  hurt!  you  were  strong  as  you  pressed. 
And  I  proud,  by  that  test. 

What  art's  for  a  woman!    To  hold  on  her  knees 

Both  darlings!. to  feel  all  their  arms  round  her  throat 

Cling,  strangle  a  little!  to  sew  b)'  degrees 
And  'broider  the  long-clothes  and  neat  little  coat; 
To  dream  and  to  dote. 

To  teach  them.  .  .  It  stings  there  !     /  made  them  indeed 
Speak  plain  the  word  "  country."     /  taught  them,  no 
doubt, 
That  a  country's  a  thing  men  should  die  for  at  need. 
/  prated  of  liberty,  rights,  and  about 
The  tyrant  cast  out. 

And  when  their  eyes  flashed  .  .  .  O  my  beautiful  eyes!  .  .  . 

7  exulted;  nay,  let  them  go  forth  at  the  wheels 
Of  the  guns,  and  denied  not.    But  then  the  surprise 

When  one  sits  quite  alone!    Then  one  weeps,  then  one 
kneels! 
God!  how  the  house  feels! 


3556  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

At  first,  happy  news  came,  in  gay  letters  moiled 
With  m}'  kisses, — of  camp-life  and  glory,  and  how 

They  both  loved  me;  and,  soon  coming  home  to  be  spoiled, 
In  return  would  fan  off  every  fly  from  my  brow 

With  their  green  laurel-bough.  >    iuAiiij 

Then  was  triumph  at  Turin:  "Ancona  was  free!" 

And  some  one  came  out  of  the  cheers  in  the  stre^J.^!,;,^ 

With  a  face  pale  as  stone,  to  say  something  to  me.j  (.•,  y 
My  Guido  was  dead!    I  fell  down  at  his  feet, 

While  they  cheered  in  the  street.  '   '  ■  ' 

I  bore  it;  friends  soothed  me;  my  grief  looked  sublime 
As  the  ransom  of  Italy.    One  boy  remained         ,     j-n 

To  be  "leant  on  and  walked  with,  recalling  the  time 

When  the  first  grew  immortal,  while  both  of  us  strained 
To  the  height  he  had  gained. 

And  letters  still  came,  shorter,  sadder,  more  strong. 
Writ  now  but  in  one  hand,  "I  was  not  to  faint, — 

One  loved  me  for  two  .  .  .  would  be  with  me  erelong: 
And  Viva  Vltalia  ! — lie  died  for,  our  saint, 
Who  forbids  our  complaint." 

My  Nanni  would  add,  "he  was  safe,  and  aware 

Of  a  presence  that  turned  off  the  balls  .  .  .  was  impressed 

It  was  Guido  himself,  who  knew  what  I  could  bear, 
And  how  'twas  impossible,  quite  dispossessed. 
To  live  on  for  the  rest." 

On  which,  without  pause,  up  the  telegraph-line 

Swept  smoothly  the  next  news  from  Gaeta: — SlioL 
Tell  his   mother.     Ah,   ah,    "his,"    "their"   mother; — not 
"mine," 
No  voice  says  "My  mother"  again  to  me.    What! 
You  think  Guido  forgot?  r ,   .    - 

Are  souls  straight  so  happy  that,  dizzy  with  Hdaveh,"' 
They  drop  earth's  affections,  conceive  not  of  woe? 

I  think  not.    Themselves  were  too  latel}^  forgiven 
Through  that  Love  and  Sorrow  which  reconciled  so 
The  Above  and  Below. 


"•'•  Mother  and   Poet  3557 

O  Christ  of  the  five  wounds,  who  look'dst  through  the  dark 
To  the  face  of  thy  mother!  consider,  I  pray. 

How  we  common  mothers  stand  desolate,  mark. 

Whose  sons,  not  being  Christs,  die  with  eyes  turned  away, 
And  no  last  v/ord  to  sayl 

Both  boys  dead?  but  that's  out  of  nature.    We  all 

Have  been  patriots,  yet  each  house  must  always  keep  one. 

"Fwcrc  imbecile,  hewing  out  roads  to  a  vv^all; 
And  when  Italy's  made,  for  what  end  is  it  done 
If  we  have  not  a  son? 

Ah,  ah,  ah!  when  Gaeta's  taken,  what  then? 

When  the  fair  wicked  queen  sits  no  more  at  her  sport 
Of  the  fire-balls  of  death  crashing  souls  out  of  men? 

When  the  guns  of  Cavalli  with  final  retort 
Have  cut  the  game  short? 

When  Venice  and  Rome  keep  their  new  jubilee. 

When  your  flag  takes  all  heaven  for  its  white,  green  and 
red. 
When  you  have  your  country  from  mountain  to  sea, 
When  King  Victor  has  Italy's  crown  on  his  head, 
(And  I  have  my  Dead) — 

What  then?    Do  not  mock  me.    Ah,  ring  your  bells  low, 
And  bum  your  lights  faintly !    My  country  is  there, 

Above  the  star  pricked  by  the  last  peak  of  snow: 
My  Italy's  there,  with  my  brave  civic  Pair, 
To  disfranchise  de.spair! 

Forgive  me.    Some  women  bear  children  in  strength. 
And  bite  back  the  cry  of  their  pain  in  self-scorn;  ' 

But  the  birth-pangs  of  nations  will  wring  us  at  length 
Into  wail  such  as  this— and  we  sit  on  forlorn 
When  the  man-child  is  born. 

Dead!     One  of  them  shot  by  the  sea  in  the  east, 

And  one  of  them  shot  in  the  west  by  the  sea. 
Both!  both  my  boys!    If  in  keeping  the  feast 
JOiiyQ^  -want  a  great  song  for  your  Italy  free. 
Let  none  look  at  me  ! 

El'zabelh  Barntt  Browning  [i 806-1861] 


3558  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

A  MOTHER  IN  EGYPT  'T^'i^' 

■mi  oT 
"  About  midnight  will  I  go  out  into  the  midst  of  Egypt;  and  all  the  first-born 
in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  die.  from  the  first-bom  of  Pharaoh  that  sitteth  upon 
his  throne,  even  unto  the  first-born  of  the  maid-servant  that  is  behind  the  mill." 

Is  the  noise  of  grief  in  the  palace  over  the  river 

For  this  silent  one  at  my  side? 

There  came  a  hush  in  the  night,  and  he  rose  with  his  hands 

a-quiver      [j..,,,  j.  ^, 
Like  lotus  petals  adrift  on  the  swing  of  the  tide. 
O  small  cold  hands,  the  day  groweth  old  for  sleeping! 

0  small  still  feet,  rise  up,  for  the  hour  is  late! 

Rise  up,  my  son,  for  I  hear  them  mourning  and  weeping 
In  the  temple  down  by  the  gate! 

Hushed  is  the  face  that  was  wont  to  brighten  with  laughter 

When  I  sang  at  the  mill; 

And  silence  unbroken  shall  greet  the  sorrowful  dawns  here- 
after,— 

The  house  shall  be  still. 

Voice  after  voice  takes  up  the  burden  of  wailing— 

Do  you  heed,  do  you  hear?— in  the  high  priest's  house  by  the 
wall. 

But  mine  is  the  grief,  and  their  sorrow  is  all  unavailing. 

Will  he  wake  at  their  call? 

Something  I  saw  of  the  broad  dim  wings  half  folding 

The  passionless  brow. 

Something  I  saw  of  the  sword  that  the  shadowy  hands  were 

holding,—  !-rif.cp3b 

What  matters  it  now? 

1  held  you  close,  dear  face,  as  I  knelt  and  barkened 
To  the  wind  that  cried  last  night  like  a  soul  in  sin, 

When  the  broad  bright  stars  dropped  down  and  the  soft  sky 

darkened 
And  the  Presence  moved  therein. 

I  have  heard  men  speak  in  the  market-place  of  the  city^. 
Low^-voiced,  in  a  breath,  ,  •; 

Of  a  God  who  is  stronger  than  ours,  and  who  knows  not 

changing  nor  pity, 
Whose  anger  is  death. 


The   Dark   Road 


3559 


Nothing  I  know  of  the  lords  of  the  outland  races, 
But  Amun  is  gentle  and  Hathor  the  mother  is  mild, 
And  who  would  descend  from  the  light  of  the  Peaceful  Places 
To  war  on  a  child? 

Yet  here  he  lies,  with  a  scarlet  pomegranate  petal 

Blown  down  on  his  cheek.  ,,/, 

The  slow  sun  sinks  to  the  sand  like  a  shield  of  some  burnished 

metal, 
But  he  does  not  speak. 

I  have  called,  I  have  sung,  but  he  neither  will  hear  nor  waken; 
So  lightly,  so  whitely,  he  lies  in  the  curve  of  my  arm, 
Like  a  feather  let  fall  from  the  bird  that  the  arrow  hath 

taken, — - 
Who  could  see  him,  and  harm? 

"The  swallow  flies  home  to  her  sleep  in  the  eaves  of  the  altar, 

And  the  crane  to  her  nest." — 

So  do  we  sing  o'er  the  mill,  and  why,  ah,  why  should  I  falter, 

Since  he  goes  to  his  rest? 

Does  he  play  in  their  flowers  as  he  played  among  these  with 

his  mother? 
Do  the  gods  smile  downward  and  love  him  and  give  him 

their  care? 
Guard  him  well,  O  ye  gods,  till  I  come;  lest  the  wrath  of  that 

Other 
Should  reach  to  him  there. 

Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthail  [1883- 


THE  DARK   ROAD 

There  is  no  light  in  any  path  of  Heaven, 

Every  star  is  folded  in  dark  sleep; 
The  clouds  hang  heavily,  the  moon  is  hidden, 

How  will  she  know  the  road  her  soul  must  keep? 

She  did  not  ask  for  heavenly  palaces, 
A  little  human  home  was  her  desire; 

The  intimate,  close  touch  of  human  hands — 
To  love  and  watch  beside  a  human  fire. 


356o  ''They  Are  All   Gone" 

As  tears  will  be  remembrance  in  her  heart 
If  she  recall  her  lamp's  familiar  light, 

And  as  a  sword  vain  pity  in  her  heart 

If  she  should  hear  her  children's  cry  to-night. 

Ah  Mary,  Mother,  stand  by  Heaven's  gate 
And  watch  the  road  for  one  who  comes  to  find 

In  loneliness  and  fear  what  Heaven  holds 
To  comfort  her  who  leaves  the  earth  behind. 
Ethel  Clijford  [i8    - 


OUT  OF  HEARING  . 

No  need  to  hush  the  children  for  her  sake, 

Or  fear  their  play:  >"iM  bne  ,mif] 

She  will  not  wake,  mavrone,  she  will  not  wake. 

'Tis  the  long  sleep,  the  deep  long  sleep  she'll  take, 

Betide  what  may. 
.lyil/' 

'No  need  to  hush  the  children  for  her  sake; 

Even  if  their  glee  could  yet  again  outbreak  '' 

So  loud  and  gay. 
She  will  not  wake,  mavrone,  she  will  not  wake. 
But  sorrow  a  thought  have  they  of  merry-make 

This  many  a  day: 
No  need  to  hush  the  children.    For  her  sake 
So  still  they  bide  and  sad,  her  heart  would  ache 

At  their  dismay. 
She  will  not  wake,  mavrone,  she  will  not  wake 
To  bid  them  laugh,  and  if  some  angel  spake 

Small  heed  they'd  pay. 
No  need  to  hush  the  children  for  her  sake: 
She  will  not  wake,  mavrone,  she  will  not  wake. 

Jane  Barlow  [i8    -1917I 

"JOHN  ANDERSON,   MY  jb^'"'^^ 

"John  Anderson,  my  jo,  John," 
How  cold  you  are,  and  still; 

You  hear  me  not,  nor  see  m(. 
Ah,  no,  and  never  w''' 


The  Graves  of  a   Hoiiselujid       3561 

Your  hands  are  resting  now,  JoJni; 

The  heart  that  loved  me  so 
Against  my  breast  shall  beat  no  more, 

"John  Anderson,  my  jo." 

"John  y\.nderson,  my  jo,  John," 

I'll  tarry  but  a  while; 
I've  still  some  work  to  do,  John, 

To  go  a  weary  mile; 
And  then  I'll  take  your  path,  John, 

And  win  you  soon,  I  know, 
For  you  will  wait  for  your  old  wife, 

"John  Anderson,  my  jo." 

Charles  G.  Blanden  [1857- 


THE  SPRING  OF  THE  YEAR 

Gone  were  but  the  winter  cold. 

And  gone  were  but  the  snow, 
I  could  sleep  in  the  wild  woods 

Where  primroses  blow. 

Cold's  the  snow  at  my  head. 

And  cold  at  my  feet; 
And  the  finger  of  death's  at  my  e'en, 

Closing  them  to  sleep. 

Let  none  tell  my  father 

Or  my  mother  so  dear,— 
I'll  meet  them  both  in  heaven 

At  the  spring  of  the  year. 

Allan  Cunningham  [1784-1842] 


THE   GRAVES  OF  A  HOUSEHOLD 

They  grew  in  beauty,  side  by  side. 
They  filled  one  home  with  glee; 

Their  graves  are  severed  far  and  wide 
By  mount,  and  stream,  and  sea. 


35^2  "They   Are  All   Gone" 

The  same  fond  mother  bent  at  night 
O'er  each  fair  sleeping  brow ; 

She  had  each  folded  flower  in  sight- 
Where  are  those  dreamers  now? 

One  'mid  the  forests  of  the  West, 

By  a  dark  stream  is  laid; 
The  Indian  knows  his  place  of  rest, 

Far  in  the  cedar  shade. 
The  sea,  the  blue  lone  sea,  hath  one — 

He  lies  where  pearls  lie  deep; 
He  was  the  loved  of  all,  yet  none 

O'er  his  low  bed  may  weep. 

One  sleeps  where  southern  vines  are  dressed 

Above  the  noble  slain ; 
He  wrapped  his  colors  round  his  breast 

On  a  blood-red  field  of  Spain. 
And  one — o'er  her  the  myrtle  showers 

Its  leaves,  by  soft  winds  fanned; 
She  faded  'mid  Italian  flowers. 

The  last  of  that  bright  band. 

And,  parted  thus,  they  rest  who  played 

Beneath  the  same  green  tree. 
Whose  voices  mingled  as  they  prayed 

Around  one  parent-knee! 
They  that  with  smiles  lit  up  the  hall, 

And  cheered  with  song  the  hearth; 
Alas  for  love,  if  thou  wert  all, 

And  naught  beyond,  O  Earth! 

Felicia  Dorothea  Hemans  [1793- 1835] 


THE  FAMILY  MEETING 

We  are  all  herej,,^„r>     ,,  • 

Father,  mother, 

Sister,  brother, 
All  who  hold  each  other  dear. 
Each  chair  is  filled,  v/e  are  all  at  home! 
To-night  let  no  cold  stranger  come; 


The   Famiiy   Meeting  35^3 

It  is  not  often  thus  around 
Our  old  familiar  hearth  we're  found. 
Bless,  then,  the  meeting  and  the  spot, 
For  once  be  every  care  forgot;  • 
Let  gentle  peace  assert  her  pov/er, 
And  kind  affection  rule  the  hour. 
We're  all — all  here. 

We're  not  all  here! 
Some  are  away, — the  dead  ones  dear, 
Who  thronged  with  us  this  ancient  hearth, 
And  gave  the  hour  to  guileless  mirth. 
Fate,  with  a  stern,  relentless  hand. 
Looked  in  and  thinned  our  httle  band; 
Some  like  a  night-flash  passed  away, 
And  some  sank  lingering  day  by  day; 
The  quiet  grave-yard — some  lie  there, — 
And  cruel  ocean  has  his  share. 

We're  not  all  here! 

We  are  all  here. 
Even  they — the  dead — though  dead,  so  dear, 
Fond  memory,  to  her  duty  true. 
Brings  back  their  faded  forms  to  view. 
How  life-like,  through  the  mist  of  years, 
Each  well-remcmbercd  face  appears! 
We  see  them,  as  in  times  long  past; 
From  each  to  each  kind  looks  are  cast ; 
We  hear  their  words,  their  smiles  behold, 
They're  'round  us  as  they  were  of  old. 

We  are  ail  here! 

We  are  all  here: 

Father,  mother. 

Sister,  brother, 
You  that  I  love  with  love  so  dear. 
This  may  not  long  of  us  be  said ; 
Soon  must  we  join  the  gathered  dead,  ' 
And  by  the  liearth  we  now  sit  'round 
Some  other  circle  will  be  found. 


3564  "They   Are  All   Gone" 


Oh,  then,  that  wisdom  may  we  know 
Which  yields  a  life  of  peace  below; 
So,  in  the  world  to  follow  this, 
May  each  repeat,  in  words  of  bliss, 
We're  all — all  here. 

Charles  Sprague  [1791-1875] 


THE  TWO  APRIL  MORNINGS 

We  walked  along,  while  bright  and  red 

Uprose  the  morning  sun ; 
And  Matthew  stopped,  he  looked,  and  said, 

"The  will  of  God  be  done!" 

A  village  schoolmaster  was  he. 

With  hair  of  glittering  gray; 
As  blithe  a  man  as  you  could  see 

On  a  spring  holiday. 

And  on  that  morning,  through  the  grass, 
•'     And  by  the  steaming  rills, 
We  traveled  merrily,  to  pass 
A  day  among  the  hills. 

"Our  work,"  said  I,  "was  well  begun; 

Then,  from  thy  breast  what  thought, 
Beneath  so  beautiful  a  sun, 

So  sad  a  sigh  has  brought?" 

A  second  time  did  Matthew  stop; 

And  fixing  still  his  eye 
Upon  the  eastern  mountain-top, 

To  me  he  made  reply: 

"Yon  cloud  with  that  long  purple  cleft 

Brings  fresh  into  my  mind 
A  day  like  this  which  I  have  left 

Full  thirty  years  behind. 


The  Two  April    Mornings         35^^ 

"And  just  above  yon  slope  of  corn 

Such  colors,  and  no  other, 
Were  in  the  sky,  that  April  morn, 

Of  this  the  very  brother. 

"With  rod  and  line  I  sued  the  sport 

Which  that  sweet  season  gave. 
And,  to  the  church-yard  come,  stopped  short 

Beside  my  daughter's  grave. 

"Nine  summers  had  she  scarcely  seen. 

The  pride  of  all  the  vale; 
And  then  she  sang; — she  would  have  been 

A  very  nightingale. 

"Six  feet  in  earth  my  Emma  lay; 

And  yet  I  loved  her  more. 
For  so  it  seemed,  than  till  that  day 

I  e'er  had  loved  before. 

"And,  turning  from  her  grave,  I  met, 

Beside  the  church-yard  yew, 
A  blooming  girl,  whose  hair  was  wet 

With  points  of  morning  dew. 

"A  basket  on  her  head  she  bare; 

Her  brow  was  smooth  and  white: 
To  see  a  child  so  very  fair 

It  was  a  pure  delight! 

"No  fountain  from  its  rocky  cave 

E'er  tripped  with  foot  so  free; 
She  seemed  as  happy  as  a  wave 

That  dances  on  the  sea. 

"There  came  from  me  a  sigh  of  pain 

Which  I  could  ill  confine; 
I  looked  at  her,  and  looked  again, 

And  did  not  wish  her  mine!" 


:566  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

Matthew  is  in  his  grave,  yet  now, 

Methinks,  I  see  him  stand, 
As  at  that  moment,  with  a  bough 

Of  wilding  in  his  hand. 

William  Wordszvorlh  [1770-1850] 


"SURPRISED   BY  JOY" 

Surprised  by  joy — impatient  as  the  Wind — 

I  turned  to  share  the  transport — O!  with  whom 

But  Thee,  deep  buried  in  the  silent  tomb, 

That  spot  which  no  vicissitude  can  find? 

Love,  faithful  love,  recalled  thee  to  my  mind — 

But  how  could  I  forget  thee?     Through  what  power, 

Even  for  the  least  division  of  an  hour. 

Have  I  been  so  beguiled  as  to  be  blind 

To  my  most  grievous  loss? — That  thought's  return 

Was  the  worst  pang  that  sorrow  ever  bore. 

Save  one,  one  only,  when  I  stood  forlorn. 

Knowing  my  heart's  best  treasure  was  no  more; 

That  neither  present  time,  nor  years  unborn 

Could  to  my  sight  that  heavenly  face  restore. 

William  Wordsworth  [1770-1850] 

THE  REVEL 

EAST   INDIA 

We  meet  'neath  the  sounding  rafter, 

And  the  walls  around  are  bare; 
As  they  shout  back  our  peals  of  laughter 

It  seems  that  the  dead  are  there. 
Then  stand  to  your  glasses,  steady! 

We  drink  in  our  comrades'  eyes: 
One  cup  to  the  dead  already — 

Hurrah  for  the  next  that  dies! 

Not  here  are  the  goblets  glowing. 

Not  here  is  the  vintage  sweet; 
'Tis  cold,  as  our  hearts  are  growing, 

And  dark  as  the  doom  we  meet. 


The   Revel  3567 


But  stand  to  your  glasses,  steady! 

And  soon  shall  our  pulses  rise: 
A  cup  to  the  dead  already — 

Hurrah  for  the  next  that  dies! 

There's  many  a  hand  that's  shaking, 

And  many  a  cheek  that's  sunk; 
But  soon,  though  our  hearts  are  breaking, 

They'll  burn  with  the  wine  we've  drunk. 
Then  stand  to  your  glasses,  steady! 

'Tis  here  the  revival  lies: 
Quaff  a  cup  to  the  dead  already — 

Hurrah  for  the  next  that  dies! 

Time  was  when  we  laughed  at  others; 

We  thought  we  were  wiser  then; 
Ha!  ha!  let  them  think  of  their  mothers, 

Who  hope  to  see  them  again. 
No!  stand  to  your  glasses,  steady! 

The  thoughtless  is  here  the  wise: 
One  cup  to  the  dead  already — 

Hurrah  for  the  next  that  dies! 

Not  a  sigh  for  the  lot  that  darkles, 

Not  a  tear  for  the  friends  that  sink; 
We'll  fall,  'midst  the  wine-cup's  sparkles, 

As  mute  as  the  wine  we  drink. 
Come,  stand  to  your  glasses,  steady! 

'Tis  this  that  the  respite  buys: 
A  cup  to  the  dead  already — 

Hurrah  for  the  next  that  dies! 

There's  a  mist  on  the  glass  congealing, 

'Tis  the  hurricane's  sultry  breath; 
And  thus  does  the  warmth  of  feeling 

Turn  ice  in  the  grasp  of  Death. 
But  stand  to  your  glasses,  steady! 

For  a  moment  the  vapor  flies: 
Quaff  a  cup  to  the  dead  already — 

Hurrah  for  the  next  that  dies' 


3568  "They  Are  All   Gone"     . 

Who  dreads  to  the  dust  returning? 

Who  shrinks  from  the  sable  shore, 
Where  the  high  and  haughty  yearning 

Of  the  soul  can  sting  no  more? 
No,  stand  to  your  glasses,  steady! 

The  world  is  a  world  of  lies: 
A  cup  to  the  dead  already — 

And  hurrah  for  the  next  that  dies! 

Cut  off  from  the  land  that  bore  us, 

Betrayed  by  the  land  we  find, 
When  the  brightest  have  gone  before  us, 

And  the  dullest  are  most  behind — 
Stand,  stand  to  your  glasses,  steady! 

'Tis  all  we  have  left  to  prize : 
One  cup  to  the  dead  already — • 

Hurrah  for  the  next  that  dies! 

Bartholomew  Dowling  [i 823-1 86.3I 


THE   CHOICE 

From  "  The  House  of  Life  " 


Eat  thou  and  drink;  to-morrow  thou  shalt  die. 

Surely  the  earth,  that's  wise  being  very  old. 

Needs  not  our  help.     Then  loose  me,  love,  and  hold 

Thy  sultry  hair  up  from  my  face;  that  I 

May  pour  for  thee  this  golden  wine,  brim-high. 

Till  round  the  glass  thy  fingers  glow  like  gold. 

We'll  drown  all  hours:  thy  song,  while  hours  are  tolled. 

Shall  leap,  as  fountains  veil  the  changing  sky. 

Now  kiss,  and  think  that  there  are  really  those, 

My  own  high-bosomed  beauty,  who  increase 

Vain  gold,  vain  lore,  and  yet  might  choose  our  way! 

Through  many  years  they  toil ;  then  on  a  day 

The}'  die  not, — for  their  life  was  death, — but  cease; 

And  round  their  narrow  lips  the  mold  falls  close. 


The  Choice  3569 


Watch  thou  and  fear;  to-morrow  thou  shalt  die. 

Or  art  thou  sure  thou  shalt  have  time  for  death? 

Is  not  the  day  which  God's  word  promiseth 

To  come  man  knows  not  when?     In  yonder  sky,- 

Now  while  we  speak,  the  sun  speeds  forth:  can  I 

Or  thou  assure  him  of  his  goal?     God's  breath 

Even  at  this  moment  haply  quickeneth 

The  air  to  a  flame;  till  spirits,  always  nigh 

Though  screened  and  hid,  shall  walk  the  daylight  here. 

And  dost  thou  prate  of  all  that  man  shall  do? 

Canst  thou,  who  hast  but  plagues,  presume  to  be 

Glad  in  his  gladness  that  comes  after  thee? 

Will  his  strength  slay  thy  worm  in  HeU?     Go  to: 

Cover  thy  countenance,  and  watch,  and  fear. 

Ill 

Think  thou  and  act;  to-morrow  thou  shalt  die. 

Outstretched  in  the  sun's  warmth  upon  the  shore, 

Thou  sa3''st :   "  Man's  measured  path  is  all  gone  o'er; 

Up  all  his  years,  steeply,  with  strain  and  sigh,    . 

Man  clomb  until  he  touched  the  truth;  and  I, 

Even  I,  am  he  whom  it  was  destined  for." 

How  should  this  be?     Art  thou  then  so  much  miore 

Than  they  who  sowed,  that  thou   shouldst  reap  thereby? 

Nay,  come  up  hither.     From  this  wave-washed  mound 

Unto  the  furthest  flood-brim  look  with  me; 

Then  reach  on  with  thy  thought  till  it  be  drowned. 

Miles  and  miles  distant  though  the  last  line  be, 

And  though  thy  soul  sail  leagues  and  leagues  beyond, — 

Still,  leagues  beyond  those  leagues,  there  is  more  sea. 

Danic  Gabriel  Rosseili  [1828-1882] 


read£n  ov  a  head-stwone 

fia  .  As  I  wer  readen  ov  a  stwone 

In  Grenley  church-yard  all  alwone, 

■Hi:  A  Uttle  maid  ran  up,  wi'  pride 

To  zee  me  there,  an'  pushed  a-zide 


357^  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

A  bunch  o'  bennets  that  did  hide 
A  verse  her  father,  as  she  zaid, 
Put  up  above  her  mother's  head, 
To  tell  how  much  he  loved  her. 

The  verse  wer  short,  but  very  good, 
I  stood  an'  larned  en  where  I  stood: — 
"Mid  God,  dear  Meary,  gi'e  me  greace, 
To  vind,  lik'  thee,  a  better  pleace. 
Where  I  woonce  mwore  mid  zee  thy  feace; 
An'  bring  thy  children  up  to  know 
His  word,  that  they  mid  come  an'  show 
Thy  soul  how  much  I  loved  thee." 

"Where's  father,  then,"  I  zaid,  "my  chile?" 
"Dead  too,"  she  answered  wi'  a  smile; 
"An'  I  an'  brother  Jim  do  bide 
At  Betty  White's,  o'  t'other  side 
O'  road."     "Mid  He,  my  chile,"  I  cried, 
"That's  father  to  the  fatherless, 
Become  thy  father  now,  an'  bless, 
•  An'  keep,  an'  lead,  an'  love  thee." 

Though  she've  a-lost,  I  thought,  so  much. 
Still  He  don't  let  the  thoughts  o't  touch 
Her  litsome  heart  by  day  or  night; 
An'  zoo,  if  we  could  teake  it  right. 
Do  show  He'll  meiike  His  burdens  light 
To  weaker  souls,  an'  that  His  smile 
Is  sweet  upon  a  harmless  chile, 
When  they  be  dead  that  loved  it. 

William  Barnes  [1801-18S 


THE  TWO   MYSTERIES 

We  know  not  what  it  is,  dear,  this  sleep  so  deep  and  still; 
The  folded  hands,  the  awful  calm,  the  cheek  so  pale  and 

chill; 
The  hds  that  will  not  lift  again,  though  we  may  call  and  call; 
The  strange,  white  solitude  of  peace  that  settles  over  all. 


Forever  3571 

We  know  not  what  it  means,  dear,  this  desolate  heart-pain; 
This  dread  to  take  our  daily  way,  and  walk  in  it  again; 
We  know  not  to  what  other  sphere  the  loved  who  leave  us 

Nor  why  we're  left  to  wonder  stiU,  nor  why  we  do  not  know. 

But  this  we  know:  Our  loved  and  dead,  if  they  should  come 

this  day — 
Should  come  and  ask  us,  "What  is  hfe?  "  not  one  of  us  could 

say. 
Life  is  a  mystery  as  deep  as  ever  death  can  be; 
Yet,  oh,  how  dear  it  is  to  us,  this  life  we  live  and  see! 

Then  might  they  say— these  vanished  ones — and  blessed 

is  the  thought, 
"So  death  is  sweet  to  us,  beloved!  though  we  may  show  you 

naught; 
We  may  not  to  the  quick  reveal  the  mystery  of  death — 
Ye  cannot  tell  us,  if  ye  would,  the  mystery  of  breath." 

The  child  who  enters  life  comes  not  with  knowledge  or  in- 
tent, 
So  those  who  enter  death  must  go  as  little  children  sent. 
Nothing  is  known.     But  I  believe  that  God  is  overhead; 
And  as  life  is  to  the  living,  so  death  is  to  the  dead. 

Mary  Mapes  Dodge  [1838-1905] 


FOREVER 

Those  we  love  truly  never  die. 
Though  year  by  year  the  sad  memorial  wreath, 
A  ring  and  flowers,  types  of  life  and  death. 

Are  laid  upon  their  graves. 

For  death  the  pure  hfe  saves. 
And  life  all  pure  is  love;  and  love  can  reach 
From  heaven  to  earth,  and  nobler  lessons  teach 

Than  those  by  mortals  read. 


357^  "They  Are  All  Gone" 

Well  blest  is  he  who  has  a  dear  one  dead: 
A  friend  he  has  whose  face  will  never  change — 
A  dear  communion  that  will  not  grow  strange; 

The  anchor  of  a  love  is  death. 

The  blessed  sweetness  of  a  loving  breath 
Will  reach  our  cheek  all  fresh  through  weary  years. 
For  her  who  died  long  since,  ah!  waste  not  tears, 

She's  thine  unto  the  end.  ''  ^'"-^ 

Thank  God  for  one  dear  friend, 
With  face  still  radiant  with  the  light  of  truth, 
Whose  love  comes  laden  with  the  scent  of  youth, 

Through  twenty  years  of  death. 

John  Boyle  O'Reilly  [1844- 1890] 


NOW  AND   AFTERWARDS 

'Two  hands  upon  the  breast,  and  labor  is  past  " — Russian  Proverb 

Two  hands  upon  the  breast, 

And  labor's  done; 
Two  pale  feet  crossed  in  rest, — 

The  race  is  won; 
Two  eyes  with  coin-weights  shut, 

And  all  tears  cease, 
Two  lips  where  grief  is  mute, 

Anger  at  peace; — 
So  pray  we  oftentimes,  mourning  our  lot; 
God  in  His  kindness  answereth  not. 

Two  hands  to  work  addressed 

Aye  for  His  praise; 
Tv/o  feet  that  never  rest 

Walking  His  ways; 
Two  eyes  that  look  above 

Through  all  their  tears; 
Two  lips  still  breathing  love. 

Not  wrath,  nor  fears; — 
So  pray  we  afterwards,  low  on  our  knees; 
Pardon  those  erring  prayers!     Father,  hear  these  1 
Dinah  Maria  Midock  Craik  [1826-1887] 


"Now  the   Laborer's  Task  is   O'er" 


3573 


"NOW  THE  LABORER'S   TASK  IS  O'ER" 

Now  the  laborer's  task  is  o'er; 

Now  the  battle  day  is  past; 
Now  upon  the  farther  shore 

Lands  the  voyager  at  last. 
Father,  in  Thy  gracious  keeping 
Lea\'e  we  now  Thy  servant  sleeping. 

There  the  tears  of  earth  are  dried; 

There  its  hidden  things  are  clear; 
There  the  work  of  life  is  tried 

By  a  juster  Judge  than  here. 
Father,  in  Thy  gracious  keeping 
Leave  we  now  Thy  servant  sleeping. 

There  the  penitents,  that  turn 
To  the  cross  their  dying  eyes, 

All  the  love  of  Jesus  learn 
At  His  feet  in  Paradise. 

Father,  in  Thy  gracious  keeping 

Leave  we  now  Thy  servant  sleeping. 

There  no  more  the  powers  of  hell 
Can  prevail  to  mar  their  peace; 

Christ  the  Lord  shall  guard  them  well, 
He  who  died  for  their  release. 

Father,  in  Thy  gracious  keeping 

Leave  we  now  Thy  servant  sleeping. 

"Earth  to  earth,  and  dust  to  dust," 
Calmly  now  the  words  we  say, 

Left  behind,  we  wait  in  trust 
For  the  resurrection  day. 

Father,  in  Thy  gracious  keeping 

Leave  we  now  Thy  servant  sleeping. 

Jo/m  Lodge  Elh'rion  [i  801-1873] 


3574  "They   Are  All   Gone" 

LOVE  AND  DEATH 

Alas!  that  men  must  see 

Love,  before  Death! 
Else  they  content  might  be 

With  their  short  breath; 
Aye,  glad,  when  the  pale  sun 
Showed  restless  day  was  done, 
And  endless  Rest  begun. 

Glad,  when  with  strong,  cool  hand 

Death  clasped  their  own, 
And  with  a  strange  command 

Hushed  every  moan; 
Glad  to  have  finished  pain, 
And  labor  wrought  in  vain, 
Blurred  by  Sin's  deepening  stain. 

But  Love's  insistent  voice 

Bids  self  to  flee — • 
"Live  that  I  may  rejoice, 

Live  on,  for  me!" 
So,  for  Love's  cruel  mind. 
Men  fear  this  Rest  to  find, 
Nor  know  great  Death  is  kind! 

Margaret  Dcland  [1857- 

VAN  ELSEN 

God  spake  three  times  and  saved  Van  Elsen's  soul; 
He  spake  by  sickness  first  and  made  him  whole; 

Van  Elsen  heard  him  not, 

Or  soon  forgot. 

God  spake  to  him  by  wealth,  the  world  outpoured 
Its  treasures  at  his  feet,  and  called  him  Lord; 

Van  Elsen's  heart  grew  fat 

And  proud  thereat. 

God  spake  the  third  time  when  the  great  World  smiled. 
And  in  the  sunshine  slew  his  little  child; 

Van  Elsen  like  a  tree 

Fell  hopelessly. 


Ripe  Grain  357 '^ 


Then  in  the  darkness  came  a  voice  which  said, 
"As  thy  heart  bleedeth,  so  my  heart  hath  bled, 

As  I  have  need  of  thee, 

Thou  needest  me." 

That  night  Van  Elscn  kissed  the  baby  feet, 
And,  kneehng  by  the  narrow  winding-sheet, 

Praised  Him  with  fervent  breath 

Who  conquered  death. 

Frederick  George  Scott  [1861- 

THE  FLIGHT 

Upon  a  cloud  among  the  stars  we  stood: 
The  angel  raised  his  hand,  and  looked,  and  said, 
"Which  world,  of  all  yon  starry  myriad 
Shall  we  make  wing  to?"    The  still  solitude 
Became  a  harp  whereon  his  voice  and  mood 
Made  spheral  music  round  his  haloed  head. 
I  spake — for  then  I  had  not  long  been  dead — 
"Let  me  look  round  upon  the  vasts,  and  brood 
A  moment  on  these  orbs  ere  I  decide.  .  .  . 
What  is  yon  lower  star  that  beauteous  shines 
And  with  soft  splendor  now  incarnadines 
Our  wings? — There  would  I  go  and  there  abide." 
Then  he,  as  one  who  some  child's  thought  divines: 
"That  is  the  world  where  yesternight  you  died." 
Lloyd  Mifflin  [1846- 

RIPE  GRAIN 

O  STILL,  white  face  of  perfect  peace. 

Untouched  by  passion,  freed  from  pain, — 

He  who  ordained  that  work  should  cease 
Took  to  Himself  the  ripened  grain. 

O  noble  face!  your  beauty  bears 

The  glory  that  is  wrung  from  pain, — 

The  high,  celestial  beauty  wears 
Of  finished  work,  of  ripened  grain. 


3576  "They  Are  AllGone" 

Of  human  care  you  left  no  trace, 
No  lightest  trace  of  grief  or  pain, — 

On  earth  an  empty  form  and  face — 
In  Heaven  stands  the  ripened  grain. 

Dora  Reed  Good  ale  [1866- 


'THE  LAND   WHICH  NO  ONE  KNOWS" 

Dark,  deep,  and  cold  the  current  flows 
Unto  the  sea  where  no  wind  blows, 
Seeking  the  land  which  no  one  knows. 

O'er  its  sad  gloom  still  comes  and  goes 
The  mingled  wail  of  friends  and  foes, 
Borne  to  the  land  v/hich  no  one  knows. 

Why  shrieks  for  help  yon  wretch,  who  goes 
With  millions,  from  a  world  of  woes. 
Unto  the  land  which  no  one  knows? 

Though  myriads  go  with  him  who  goes. 
Alone  he  goes  where  no  wind  blows. 
Unto  the  land  which  no  one  knows. 

For  all  must  go  where  no  wind  blows, 
And  none  can  go  for  him  who  goes; 
None,  none  return  whence  no  one  knows. 

Yet  why  should  he  who  shrieking  goes 
With  millions,  from  a  world  of  woes. 
Reunion  seek  with  it  or  those? 

Alone  with  God,  where  no  wind  blows. 
And  Death,  his  shadow — doomed,  he  goes: 
That  God  is  there  the  shadow  shows. 

O  shoreless  Deep,  where  no  wind  blows! 
And  thou,  O  Land,  which  no  one  knows! 
That  God  is  all.  His  shadow  shows. 

Ebenezer  Elliott  [  1 7 8 1- 1 849] 


At  the    lop  of  the   Road         3577 


THE  HILLS   OF  REST 

Beyond  the  last  horizon's  rim, 

Beyond  adventure's  farthest  quest, 

Somewhere  they  rise,  serene  and  dim, 
The  happy,  happy  Hills  of  Rest. 

Upon  their  sunlit  slopes  uplift 

The  castles  we  have  built  in  Spain- 
While  fair  amid  the  summer  drift 
Our  faded  gardens  flower  again. 

Sweet  hours  we  did  not  live  go  by 
To  soothing  note,  on  scented  wing; 

In  golden-lettered  volumes  lie 
The  songs  we  tried  in  vain  to  sing. 

They  all  are  there:  the  days  of  dream 
That  build  the  inner  lives  of  men; 

The  silent,  sacred  years  we  deem 

The  might  be,  and  the  might  have  been. 

Some  evening  when  the  sky  is  gold 

I'll  follow  day  into  the  west; 
Nor  pause,  nor  heed,  till  I  behold 

The  happy,  happy  Hills  of  Rest. 

Albert  Bigeloio  Paine  [1861- 


AT  THE  TOP  OF  THE   ROAD 

"But,  Lord,"  she  said,  "my  shoulders  still  are  strong- 
I  have  been  used  to  bear  the  load  so  long; 

"And  see,  the  hill  is  passed,  and  smooth  the  road  .  .  , 
"Yet,"  said  the  Stranger,  "yield  me  now  thy  load." 

Gently  he  took  it  from  her,  and  she  stood 
Straight-limbed  and  lithe,  in  new-found  maidenhood, 


3578  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

Amid  long,  sunlit  fields;  around  them  sprang 
A  tender  breeze,  and  birds  and  rivers  sang. 

"My  Lord,"  she  said,  "the  land  is  very  fair!" 
Smiling,  he  answered:  "  Was  it  not  so  there?" 

"There?"    In  her  voice  a  wondering  question  lay: 
"Was  I  not  always  here,  then,  as  to-day?" 

He  turned  to  her  with  strange,  deep  eyes  aflame: 
"Knowest  thou  not  this  kingdom,  nor  my  name?" 

"Nay,"  she  replied:  "but  this  I  understand — 
That  thou  art  Lord  of  Life  in  this  dear  land!" 

"Yea,  child,"  he  murmured,  scarce  above  his  breath: 
"Lord  of  the  Land!  but  men  have  named  me  Death." 
Charles  Buxton  Going  [1863- 


SHEMUEL 

Shemuel,  the  Bethlehemite, 
Watched  a  fevered   guest  at  night; 
All  his  fellows  fared  afield 
Saw  the  angel  host  revealed; 
He  nor  caught  the  mystic  story. 
Heard  the  song,  nor  saw  the  glory. 

Through  the  night  they  gazing  stood, 
Heard  the  holy  multitude; 
Back  they  came  in  wonder  home. 
Knew  the  Christmas  kingdom  come, 
Eyes  aflame  and  hearts  elated; 
Shemuel  sat  alone,  and  waited. 

Works  of  mercy  now,  as  then, 
Hide  the  angel  host  from  men; 
Hearts  attuned  to  earthly  love 
Miss  the  angel  notes  above; 
Deeds  at  which  the  world  rejoices, 
Quench  the  sound  of  angel  voices. 


She  and   He  3579 

So  they  thought,  nor  deemed  from  whence 

His  celestial  recompense. 

Shemuel,  by  the  fever  bed, 

Touched  by  beckoning  hands  that  led, 

Died,  and  saw  the  Uncreated; 

All  his  fellows  lived,  and  waited. 

Edward  Ernest  Bowen  [i 836-1901] 


SHE   AND   HE 

"She  is  dead!"  they  said  to  him.    "Come  away; 
Kiss  her  and  leave  her! — thy  love  is  clay!" 

They  smoothed  her  tresses  of  dark  brown  hair; 
On  her  forehead  of  marble  they  laid  it  fair; 

Over  her  eyes,  that  gazed  too  much, 
They  drew  the  lids  with  a  gentle  touch; 

With  a  tender  touch  they  closed  up  well 
The  sweet  thin  lips  that  had  secrets  to  tell: 

About  her  brows,  and  her  dear,  pale  face,. 
They  tied  her  veil  and  her  marriage-lace* 

And  drew  on  her  white  feet  her  white  silk  shoes; — 
Which  were  the  whiter  no  eye  could  choose! 

And  over  her  bosom  they  crossed  her  hands; 
"Come  away,"  they  said, — "God  understands!" 

And  then  there  was  Silence; — and  nothing  there 
But  the  Silence — and  scents  of  eglantere. 

And  jasmine,  and  roses,  and  rosemary; 

And  they  said,  "As  a  lady  should  lie,  lies  she!" 

And  they  held  their  breath  till  they  left  the  room. 
With  a  shudder  to  glance  at  its  stillness  and  gloom. 


3580  "They  Are  All   Gone" 

But  he— who  loved  her  too  well  to  dread 
The  sweet,  the  stately,  the  beautiful  dead, — 

He  lit  his  lamp,  and  took  the  key. 

And  turned  it! — Alone  again — he  and  she! 

He  and  she;  but  she  would  not  speak. 

Though  he  kissed,  in  the  old  place,  the  quiet  cheek; 

He  and  she;  yet  she  would  not  smile, 

Though  he  called  her  the  name  that  was  fondest  erewhile. 

He  and  she;  and  she  did  not  move 
To  any  one  passionate  whisper  of  love! 

Then  he  said,  "Cold  lips!  and  breast  without  breath! 
Is  there  no  voice? — no  language  of  death 

"Dumb  to  the  ear  and  still  to  the  sense. 
But  to  heart  and  to  soul  distinct, — intense? 

"See,  now, — I  Usten  with  soul,  not  ear, — 
What  was  the  secret  of  dying.  Dear? 

"Was  it  the  infinite  wonder  of  all 

That  you  ever  could  let  life's  flower  fall? 

"Or  was  it  a  greater  marvel  to  feel 
The  perfect  calm  o'er  the  agony  steal? 

"Was  the  miracle  greatest  to  find  how  deep, 
Beyond  all  dreams,  sank  downward  tha.t  sleep? 

"Did  life  roll  backward  its  record,  Dear, 

And  show,  as  they  say  it  does,  past  things  clear? 

"  And  was  it  the  innermost  heart  of  the  bliss 
To  find  out  so  what  a  wisdom  love  is? 

"Oh.  perfect  Dead!    Oh,  Dead  most  dear, 
I  hold  the  breath  of  my  soul  to  hear; 


She  and   He  3581 

"I  listen^ — as  deep  as  to  horrible  hell, 

As  high  as  to  heaven! — and  you  do  not  tell! 

"There  must  be  pleasures  in  dying,  Sweet, 
To  make  you  so  placid  from  head  to  feet! 

"I  would  tell  you,  Darling,  if  I  were  dead, 
And  'twere  your  hot  tears  upon  my  brow  shed. 

"I  would  say,  though  the  angel  of  death  had  laid 
His  sword  on  my  lips  to  keep  it  unsaid. 

"  You  should  not  ask,  vainly,  with  streaming  eyes. 
Which  in  Death's  touch  was  the  chief  est  surprise; 

"The  very  strangest  and  suddenest  thing 
Of  all  the  surprises  that  dying  must  bring." 


Ah!  foolish  world!    Oh!  most  kind  Dead! 
Though  he  told  me,  who  will  believe  it  was  said? 

Who  will  believe  that  he  heard  her  say, 

With  the  soft  rich  voice,  in  the  dear  old  way: — 

"The  utmost  wonder  is  this, — I  hear, 

And  see  you,  and  love  you,  and  kiss  you.  Dear; 

"I  can  speak,  now  you  listen  with  soul  alone; 
If  your  soul  could  see,  it  would  all  be  shown 

"What  a  strange  delicious  amazement  is  Death, 
To  be  without  body  and  breathe  without  breath. 

"I  should  laugh  for  joy  if  you  did  not  cry; 
Oh,  listen!    Love  lasts! — Love  never  will  die. 

"I  am  only  your  Angel,  who  was  your  Bride; 
And  I  know,  that  though  dead,  I  have  never  died." 

Kdii'iti  Arnold  [1S32-1Q04] 


3582  "They  Are  Al'l   Gone'" 

AFTER  DEATH  IN  ARABIA 

He  who  died  at  Azan  sends 
This  to  comfort  all  his  friends: 

Faithful  friends!    It  lies,  I  know, 
Pale  and  white  and  cold  as  snow: 
And  ye  say,  "Abdallah's  dead!" 
Wfeeping  at  the  feet  and  head. 
I  can  see  your  falling  tears, 
I  can  hear  your  sighs  and  prayers; 
Yet  I  smile  and  whisper  this: 
"/  am  not  the  thing  you  kiss; 
Cease  your  tears,  and  let  it  he; 
It  was  mine — it  is  not  I." 

Sweet  friends!  what  the  women  lave 

For  its  last  bed  of  the  grave, 

Is  a  tent  which  I  am  quitting, 

Is  a  garment  no  more  fitting, 

Is  a  cage  from  which,  at  last, 

Like  a  hawk  my  soul  hath  passed. 

Love  the  inmate,  not  the  room, — 

The  wearer,  not  the  garb; — the  plume 

Of  the  falcon,  not  the  bars 

That  kept  him  from  these  splendid  stars! 

Loving  friends!  be  wise,  and  dry 
Straightway  every  weeping  eye. 
What  ye  lift  upon  the  bier 
Is  not  worth  a  wistful  tear. 
'Tis  an  empty  sea-shell, — one 
Out  of  which  the  pearl  is  gone. 
The  shell  is  broken,  it  hes  there; 
The  pearl,  the  all,  the  soul,  is  here. 
'Tis  an  earthen  jar,  whose  lid 
Allah  sealed,  the  while  it  hid 
That  treasure  of  his  treasury, 
A  mind  that  loved  him.:  let  it  lie! 
Let  the  shard  be  earth's  once  more. 
Since  the  gold  shines  in  his  store! 


After   Death  in  Arabia  35^3 

Allah  glorious!    Allah  good! 
Now  Thy  world  is  understood; 
Now  the  long,  long  wonder  ends! 
Yet  ye  weep,  my  erring  friends, 
While  the  man  whom  ye  call  dead, 
In  unspoken  bliss,  instead. 
Lives  and  loves  you;  lost,  'tis  true, 
By  such  light  as  shines  for  you; 
But  in  light  ye  cannot  see 
Of  unfulfilled  felicity, — 
In  enlarging  paradise. 
Lives  a  life  that  never  dies. 

Farewell,  friends!  yet  not  farewell; — 
Where  I  am,  ye,  too,  shall  dwell. 
I  am  gone  before  your  face, 
A  moment's  time,  a  little  space. 
When  ye  come  where  I  have  stepped, 
Ye  will  wonder  why  ye  wept; 
Ye  will  know,  by  wise  love  taught, 
That  here  is  all,  and  there  is  naught. 
Weep  awhile,  if  ye  are  fain, — 
Sunshine  still  must  follow  rain; 
Only  not  at  death, — for  death, 
Now  I  know,  is  that  first  breath 
Which  our  souls  draw  when  we  enter 
Life,  which  is  of  all  life  center. 

Be  ye  certain  all  seems  love, 

Viewed  from  Allah's  throne  above; 

Be  ye  stout  of  heart,  and  come 

Bravely  onward  to  your  home! 

La  Allah  ilia  Allah  I  yea! 

Thou  love  divine!    Thou  Love  alway! 

He  that  died  at  Azan  gave 

This  to  those  who  made  his  grave. 

Edwin  Ar)wld  [1832-1904] 


SENTINEL   SONGS 

TO  THE  EARL  OF  WARWICK,  ON  THE 
DEATH  OF  MR.  ADDISON 

[1672-1719] 

If,  dumb  too  long,  the  drooping  Muse  hath  stayed, 
And  left  her  debt  to  Addison  unpaid, 
Blame  not  her  silence,  Warwick,  but  bemoan, 
And  judge,  O,  judge  my  bosom  by  your  own. 
What  mourner  ever  felt  poetic  fires? 
Slow  comes  the  verse  that  real  woe  inspires: 
Grief  unaffected  suits  but  ill  with  art, 
Or  flowing  numbers  with  a  bleeding  heart. 

Can  I  forget  the  dismal  night  that  gave 
My  soul's  best  part  forever  to  the  grave? 
How  silent  did  his  old  companions  tread. 
By  midnight  lamps,  the  mansions  of  the  dead. 
Through  breathing  statues,  then  unheeded  things. 
Through  rows  of  warriors  and  through  walks  of  kings! 
What  awe  did  the  slow,  solemn  knell  inspire; 
The  pealing  organ,  and  the  pausing  choir; 
The  duties  by  the  lawn-robed  prelate  paid ; 
And  the  last  words,  that  dust  to  dust  conveyed! 
While  speechless  o'er  thy  closing  grave  we  bend, 
Accept  these  tears,  thou  dear,  departed  friend. 
0,  gone  forever!  take  this  long  adieu; 
And  sleep  in  peace  next  thy  loved  Montague. 
To  strew  fresh  laurels  let  the  task  be  mine, 
A  frequent  pilgrim  at  thy  sacred  shrine; 
Mine  with  true  sighs  ihy  absence  to  bemoan, 
And  grave  with  faithful  epitaphs  thy  stone. 
If  e'er  from  me  thy  loved  memorial  part, 
May  shame  afflict  this  alienated  heart; 
Of  thee  forgetful,  if  I  form  a  song. 
My  lyre  be  broken,  and  untuned  my  tongue^ ; 
My  grief  be  doubled,  from  thy  image  free. 
And  mirth  a  torment,  unchastised  by  thee! 

Oft  let  me  range  the  gloomy  aisles  alone 
3584 


To  the   Earl   of  Warwick  3S^5 

Sad  luxury!  to  vulgar  minds  unknown; 
Along  the  walls  where  speaking  marbles  show 
What  worthies  form  the  hallowed  mold  below; 
Proud  names,  who  once  the  reins  of  empire  held; 
In  arms  who  triumphed,  or  in  arts  excelled; 
Chiefs,  graced  with  scars,  and  prodigal  of  blood; 
Stern  patriots,  who  for  sacred  freedom  stood; 
Just  men,  by  whom  impartial  laws  were  given; 
And  saints,  who  taught  and  led  the  way  to  heaven; 
Ne'er  to  these  chambers,  where  the  mighty  rest. 
Since  their  foundation  came  a  nobler  guest ; 
Nor  e'er  was  to  the  bowers  of  bliss  conveyed 
A  fairer  spirit  or  more  welcome  shade. 

In  what  new  region,  to  the  just  assigned, 
What  new  employments  please  the  unbodied  mind? 
A  winged  Virtue,  through  the  ethereal  sky, 
From  world  to  world  unwearied  does  he  fly? 
Or  curious  trace  the  long  laborious  maze 
Of  Heaven's  decrees,  where  wondering  angels  gaze? 
Does  he  delight  to  hear  bold  seraphs  tell 
How  Michael  battled  and  the  dragon  fell; 
Or,  mixed  with  milder  cherubim,  to  glow 
In  hymns  of  love,  not  ill-essayed  below? 
Or  dost  thou  warn  poor  mortals  left  behind, — 
A  task  well  suited  to  thy  gentle  mind? 
O,  if  sometimes  thy  spotless  form  descend. 
To  me  thy  aid,  thou  guardian  genius,  lend! 
When  rage  misguides  me,  or  when  fear  alarms. 
When  pain  distresses,  or  when  pleasure  charms. 
In  silent  whisperings  purer  thoughts  impart. 
And  turn  from  ill  a  frail  and  feeble  heart; 
Lead  through  the  paths  thy  virtue  trod  before, 
Till  bliss  shall  join,  nor  death  can  part  us  more. 

That  awful  form  which,  so  the  heavens  decree, 
Must  still  be  loved  and  still  deplored  by  me, 
In  nightly  visions  seldom  fails  to  rise. 
Or,  roused  by  fancy,  meets  my  waking  eyes. 
If  business  calls,  or  crowded  courts  invite. 
The  unblemished  statesman  seems  to  strike  my  sight; 
If  in  the  stage  I  seek  to  soothe  my  care, 
I  meet  his  soul  which  breathes  in  Cato  there.; 


3S^^  Sentinel  Songs 

If  pensive  to  the  rural  shades  I  rove, 

His  shape  o'ertakes  me  in  the  lonely  grove; 

'Twas  there  of  just  and  good  he  reasoned  strong, 

Cleared  some  great  truth,  or  raised  some  serious  song: 

There  patient  showed  us  the  wise  course  to  steer, 

A  candid  censor  and  a  friend  severe; 

There  taught  us  how  to  live,  and  (O,  too  high 

The  price  for  knowledge!)  taught  us  how  to  die. 

Thou  Hill,  whose  brow  the  antique  structures  grace, 
Reared  by  bold  chiefs  of  Warwick's  noble  race. 
Why,  once  so  loved,  whene'er  thy  bower  appears. 
O'er  my  dim  eyeballs  glance  the  sudden  tears? 
How  sweet  were  once  thy  prospects  fresh  and  fair, 
Thy  sloping  walks,  and  unpolluted  air! 
How  sweet  the  glooms  beneath  thy  aged  trees, 
Thy  noontide  shadow,  and  thy  evening  breeze! 
His  image  thy  forsaken  bowers  restore; 
Thy  walks  and  airy  prospects  charm  no  more; 
No  more  the  summer  in  thy  glooms  allayed. 
Thy  evening  breezes,  and  thy  noonday  shade. 

From  other  hills,  however  fortune  frowned. 
Some  refuge  in  the  Muse's  art  I  found; 
Reluctant  now  I  touch  the  trembling  string, 
Bereft  of  him  who  taught  me  how  to  sing; 
And  these  sad  accents,  murmured  o'er  his  urn. 
Betray  that  absence  they  attempt  to  mourn. 
O,  must  I  then  (now  fresh  my  bosom  bleeds. 
And  Craggs  in  death  to  Addison  succeeds) 
The  verse,  begun  to  one  lost  friend,  prolong. 
And  weep  a  second  in  the  unfinished  song! 

These  works  divine,  which,  on  his  death-bed  laid, 
To  thee,  O  Craggs  I  the  expiring  sage  conveyed, 
Great,  but  ill-omened,  monument  of  fame. 
Nor  he  survived  to  give,  nor  thou  to  claim. 
Swift  after  him  thy  social  spirit  flies, 
And  close  to  his,  how  soon !  thy  coffin  lies. 
Blest  pair!  whose  union  future  bards  shall  tell 
In  future  tongues:  each  other's  boast!  farewell! 
Farewell!  whom,  joined  in  fame,  in  friendship  tried, 
No  chance  could  sever,  nor  the  grave  divide. 

Thomas  Tickcll  [1686-1740] 


Elegiac  Stanzas  35^7 

THE  EAGLE  THAT  IS  FORGOTTEN 

[jOHN   P.    ALTGELD,    1847-I902J 

Sleep  softly  .  .  .  eagle  forgotten  .  .  .  under  the  stone. 
Time  has  its  way  with  you  there,  and  the  clay  has  its  own. 
"We  have  buried  him  now,"  thought  your  foes,  and  in 

secret  rejoiced. 
They  made  a  brave  show  of  their  mourning,  their  hatred 

unvoiced. 
They  had  snarled  at  you,  barked  at  you,  foamed  at  you, 

day  after  day, 
Now  you  were  ended.     They  praised  you  .  .  .  and  laid 

you  away. 
The  others,  that  mourned  you  in  silence  and  terror  and  truth, 
The  widow  bereft  of  her  crust,  and  the  boy  without  youth. 
The  mocked  and  the  scorned  and  the  wounded,  the  lame  and 

the  poor, 
That  should  have  remembered  forever,  .  .  .  remember  no 

more. 
Where  are  those  lovers  of  yours,  on  what  name  do  the}^  call. 
The  lost,  that  in  armies  wept  over  your  funeral  pall? 
They  call  on  the  names  of  a  hundred  high- valiant  ones, 
A  hundred  white  eagles  have  risen,  the  sons  of  your  sons. 
The  zeal  in  their  wings  is  a  zeal  that  your  dreaming  began, 
The  valor  that  wore  out  your  soul  in  the  service  of  man. 
Sleep  softly  .  .  .  eagle  forgotten  .  .  .  under  the  stone. 
Time  has  its  way  with  you  there,  and  the  clay  has  its  own. 
Sleep  on,  O  brave-hearted,  O  wise  man  that  kindled  the 

flame — 
To  live  in  mankind  is  far  more  than  to  live  in  a  name. 
To  live  in  mankind,  far,  far  more  than  to  live  in  a  name! — 

Vachcl  Lindsay  [1879- 

ELEGIAC  STANZAS 

SUGGESTED   BY  A   PICTURE    OF   PEELE   CASTLE  IN   A   STORM, 
PAINTED    BY    SIR    GEORGE    BEAUMONT 

[1753-1827] 

I  WAS  thy  neighbor  once,  thou  rugged  Pile! 
Four  summer  weeks  I  dwelt  in  sight  of  thee: 
I  saw  thee  every  day;  and  all  the  while 
Thy  Form  was  sleeping  on  a  glassy  sea. 


358S  Sentinel   Songs 

So  pure  the  sky,  so  quiet  was  the  air! 
So  like,  so  very  like,  was  day  to  day! 
Whene'er  I  looked,  thy  image  still  was  there; 
It  trembled,  but  it  never  passed  away. 

How  perfect  was  the  calm!    It  seemed  no  sleep, 
No  mood,  which  season  takes  away,  or  brings: 
I  could  have  fancied  that  the  mighty  Deep 
Was  even  the  gentlest  of  all  gentle  things. 

Ah!  THEN — if  mine  had  been  the  Painter's  hand 
To  express  what  then  I  saw;  and  add  the  gleam, 
The  light  that  never  was,  on  sea  or  land, 
The  consecration,  and  the  Poet's  dream,— 

I  would  have  planted  thee,  thou  hoary  Pile, 
Amid  a  world  how  different  from  this! 
Beside  a  sea  that  could  not  cease  to  smile; 
On  tranquil  land,  beneath  a  sky  of  bhss. 

Thou  shouldst  have  seemed  a  treasure-house  divine 
Of  peaceful  years;  a  chronicle  of  heaven; — 
Of  all  the  sunbeams  that  did  ever  shine 
The  very  sweetest  had  to  thee  been  given. 

A  Picture  had  it  been  of  lasting  ease, 
Elysian  quiet,  without  toil  or  strife; 
No  motion  but  the  moving  tide,  a  breeze. 
Or  merely  silent  Nature's  breathing  life. 

Such,  in  the  fond  illusion  of  my  heart. 

Such  Picture  would  I  at  that  time  have  made; 

And  seen  the  soul  of  truth  in  every  part, 

A  steadfast  peace  that  might  not  be  betrayed. 

So  once  it  would  have  been, — 'tis  so  no  more; 
I  have  submitted  to  a  new  control: 
A  power  is  gone,  which  nothing  can  restore; 
A  deep  distress  hath  humanized  my  soul. 


William    Blake  3  5^9 

Not  for  a  moment  could  I  now  behold 
A  smiling  sea,  and  be  what  I  have  been: 
The  feeling  of  my  loss  will  ne'er  be  old; 
This,  which  I  know,  I  speak  with  mind  serene. 

Then,  Beaumont,  Friend!  who  would  have  been  the  friend 

If  he  had  lived,  of  Him  whom  I  deplore, 

This  work  of  thine  I  blame  not,  but  commend; 

This  sea  in  anger,  and  that  dismal  shore. 

0  'tis  a  passionate  Work!— yet  wise  and  well. 
Well  chosen  is  the  spirit  that  is  here; 

That  Hulk  which  labors  in  the  deadly  swell, 
This  rueful  sky,  this  pageantry  of  fear! 

And  this  huge  Castle,  standing  here  sublime, 

1  love  to  see  the  look  with  which  it  braves, 
— Cased  in  the  unfeeling  armor  of  old  time — 

The  lightning,  the  fierce  wind,  and  trampling  waves. 

— Farewell,  farewell  the  heart  that  lives  alone, 
Housed  in  a  dream,  at  distance  from  the  Kind! 
Such  happiness,  wherever  it  be  known. 
Is  to  be  pitied;  for  'tis  surely  bhnd. 

But  welcome  fortitude,  and  patient  cheer, 
And  frequent  sights  of  what  is  to  be  borne! 
Such  sights,  or  worse,  as  are  before  me  here: — 
Not  without  hope  v/e  suffer  and  we  mourn. 

William  Wordsworth  [i77o-i!5so] 


WILLIAM   BLAKE 

[1757-1827] 

He  came  to  the  desert  of  London  town, 

Gray  miles  long; 
He  wandered  up  and  he  wandered  down, 

Singing  a  quiet  song. 


3S9^  Sentinel  Songs 

He  came  to  the  desert  of  London  town, 

Mirk  miles  broad; 
He  wandered  up  and  he  wandered  down, 

Ever  alone  with  God. 

There  were  thousands  and  thousands  of  human  kind 

In  that  desert  of  brick  and  stone: 
But  some  were  deaf  and  some  were  blind. 

And  he  was  there  alone. 

At  length  the  good  hour  came;  he  died 

As  he  had  lived,  alone: 
He  was  not  missed  from  the  desert  wide, 

Perhaps  he  was  found  at  the  Throne. 

James  Thomson  [1834-1882] 

EDWIN  BOOTH 

[1833-1893] 

"  Ay,  every  inch  a  king  " 

Now  is  the  night,  foreshadowed  of  our  fears; 
The  curtain  falls,  the  lights  fade,  one  by  one. 
Darkness  and  silence  from  the  widowed  stage 
Proclaim  the  great  and  final  act  is  done. 
Vain  are  the  thundered  plaudits  of  the  house. 
The  laurel  wreath,  the  players'  loud  acclaim; 
Thou  art  grown  dumb  to  clamoring  for  response. 
Deaf  to  the  ringing  of  thy  jewelled  name. 
Thy  crystal  soul  hath  traversed  back  the  pathway  whence 
it  came. 

They  who  the  virtues  of  the  mighty  dead 
Enwrap  in  majesty  of  broidered  verse, 
Call  upon  Nature,  in  her  solitude. 
His  beauties  and  her  sorrow  to  rehearse. 
The  forest  and  the  field,  the  fitful  wind 
They  challenge,  and  the  ever-sounding  wave, 
To  seek  his  spirit  in  the  vast  afar, 
And  drop  their  dews  on  his  enriched  grave. 
Crowning  the  poet's  lyric  woe  with  some  forlorner  stave. 


Edwin   Booth  359^ 

Greater  than  all  the  universe  of  space 
The  mimic  world  thou  didst  thyself  create: 
The  subtile  sphere,  compact  of  passion's  breath, 
Where  Nature  bade  thee  hold  imperial  state. 
There  shall  the  mourning  garments  be  outworn; 
There  shall  the  desolate  their  dirges  sing; 
No  princeling  may  ascend  the  vacant  throne. 
Laying  new  triumph's  gall  to  sorrow's  sting. 
"The  King  is  dead!"  we  cry,  but  nevermore,  "Long  live 
the  King!" 

Of  all  the  stops  of  mortal  harmony 
Master  thou  art  forever,  though  in  death. 
The  melancholy  of  the  Dane  is  thine, 
The  poisonous  blighting  of  lago's  breath. 
Thou  didst  take  on  foul  Richard's  humpbacked  soul, 
And  clasp  it  close,  yet  do  thine  own  no  wrong: 
As  'twere  the  mantle  of  Sir  Caradoc, 
Unerring  witness  sung  in  ancient  song. 
Destined  to  prove  the  pure  of  heart  more  pure,  the  strong 
more  strong. 

Slave  of  self-conjured  evil,  Cawdor's  thane! 
The  jester,  bitter-hearted,  striking  home! 
The  fox-robed  cardinal,  creating  France, 
And  launching  forth  the  curse  of  sovereign  Rome! 
Gallant  Don  Cesar,  lord  of  ragged  lace! 
These  wert  thou  in  their  turn,  and  sorrow-blind, 
Alas!  thou  wert  the  doited  father,  too, 
Pelted  by  heaven,  and  stabbed  by  human  kind: 
Heartbreakingly  confessed,  "I  am  not  in  my  perfect  mind!" 

Such  was  thy  Protean  fonn,  but  what  wert  thou? 
A  changing  cloud,  content  to  borrow  hue 
From  lordly  sun-rays  that  o'errule  it  quite, 
And  thus  with  color  and  with  form  endue? 
Nay,  rather  let  the  time's  rcmembrancing, 
When  it  doth  con  anew  thy  mortal  span, 
Ignore  thine  art,  if  such  despite  may  be, 
But  bow  in  awe  before  thy  nature's  plan. 
Crying  with  trumpet  tone,  to  alien  ears,  "This  was  a  man!" 


359^  Sentinel  Songs 

Thine  was  the  guilt  of  filching  heavenly  fire; 
Wherefore  Jove's  eagle  fed  upon  thy  heart. 
Yet  never  word  nor  strangled  cry  betrayed 
Responsive  agony  beneath  the  smart. 
A  thousand  hovering  spectres  menaced  thee 
Bound,  by  eternal  fiat,  on  the  rock 
Of  mortal  languishment:  yet  unappalled 
As  gallant  bird  beneath  the  tempest  shock; 
For  still  thy  soul  soared  free,  thy  silence  met  each  hideous 
mock. 

And  can  such  glory  pass?    Nay,  thus  thou  art, 
Where'er  in  world  diviner  thou  dost  walk, 
Mated  with  love  celestial,  that  doth  spring, 
Fragrant  and  fair,  from  life's  divided  stalk. 
But  we  who  knew  thee  may  not  cease  to  mourn 
The  moment's  grief,  the  time's  perpetual  loss. 
Not  ours  to  pluck  from  thine  engraved  name 
Oblivion's  cold  and  memory-choking  moss: 
Blest  are  we  for  so  noble  sake  to  bear  affliction's  cross. 

Henceforward  nevermore  may  Denmark's  Prince 
Pace  through  his  tragic  hour  in  sabled  pride. 
But  thou,  the  sceptre's  rightful  heir,  wilt  walk. 
Eclipsing  all  his  grandeur,  by  his  side. 
And  dally  as  we  may  with  pageantry 
Wherein  some  newer  actor  plays  a  part, 
The  scene  will  fade,  while  thine  enshadowed  form 
Doth  from  the  slumbrous  aisles  of  memory  start, — 
Again  the  lost  but  ever-reigning  monarch  of  the  heart. 

Farewell!  farewell  indeed!    But  take  with  thee 
Our  true  allegiance  to  that  orient  land, — 
The  laurels  and  the  rosemary  of  life 
Lying  unnoted  in  thy  nerveless  hand. 
Take  with  thee,  too,  our  bond  of  gratitude, 
That  in  a  cynic  and  a  tattling  age 
Thou  didst  consent  to  write,  in  missal  script. 
Thy  name  on  the  poor  players'  slandered  page. 
And  teach  the  lords  of  empty  birth  a  king  may  walk  the 

stage. 

Alice  Brown  [1857- 


General  William  Booth  Enters  Heaven    3593 

GENERAL    WILLIAM    BOOTH    ENTERS    INTO 
HEAVEN 

[1829-1912] 

To  be  sung  to  the  tune  of  "  The  Blood  of  the  Lamb"  with  indicated  instruments 

Booth  led  boldly  with  his  big  bass  drum. 

Are  you  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb? 
The  saints  smiled  gravely,  and  they  said,  "He's 
come." 

Are  you  washed  in  the  blood  of  I  he  Lamb?  Bass  drums 

Walking  lepers  followed,  rank  on  rank. 
Lurching  bravos  from  the  ditches  dank, 
Drabs  from  the  alleyways  and  drug-fiends  pale — 
Minds  still  passion-ridden,  soul-powers  frail! 
Vermin-eaten  saints  with  mouldy  breath 
Unwashed  legions  with  the  ways  of  death — 

Are  you  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb? 

Every  slum  had  sent  its  half-a-scorc 

The  round  world  over — Booth  had  groaned  for 

more. 
Every  banner  that  the  wide  world  flies 
Bloomed  with  glory  and  transcendent  dyes. 
Big- voiced  lasses  made  their  banjos  bang!  Banjos 

Tranced,  fanatical,  they  shrieked  and  sang. 

Are  you  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb? 
Hallelujah!    It  was  queer  to  see 
Bull-necked  convicts  with  that  land  make  free! 
Loons  with  bazoos  blowing  blare,  blare,  blare — 
On,  on,  upward  through  the  golden  air. 

Are  you  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb? 

Booth  died  blind,  and  still  by  faith  he  trod. 

Eyes  still  dazzled  by  the  ways  of  God.  Bass  drums 

Booth  led  boldly  and  he  looked  the  chief:  slower  and 

Eagle  countenance  in  sharp  relief,  softer 

Beard  a-ilying,  air  of  high  command 

Unabated  in  that  holy  land. 

Jesus  came  from  out  the  Court-House  door. 

Stretched  his  hands  above  the  passing  poor. 


3594 


Sentinel   Songs 


Booth  saw  not,  but  led  his  queer  ones  there        Flutes 
Round  and  round  the  mighty  Court-House 

square. 
Yet  in  an  instant  all  that  blear  revie^v 
Marched  on  spotless,  clad  in  raiment  new. 
The  lame  were  straightened,  withered  limbs 

uncurled 
And  blind  eyes  opened  on  a  new  sweet  world. 

Drabs  and  vixens  in  a  flash  made  whole!  Bass  drums 

Gone  was  the  weasel-head,  the  snout,  the  jowl;  louder  and 
Sages  and  sibyls  now,  and  athletes  clean,  faster 

Rulers  of  empires,  and  of  forests  green! 
The  hosts  were  sandalled  and  their  wings  were  fire — 

Are  you  washed  in  the  blood  of  llie  Lamb? 
But  their  noise  played  havoc  with  the  angel-choir. 


Grand 
chorus  tam- 
bourines-all 
instruments 
in  full  blast 


Are  you  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb? 
Oh,  shout  Salvation!  it  was  good  to  see 
Kings  and  princes  by  the  Lamb  set  free. 
The  banjos  rattled  and  the  tambourines 
Jing-jing-jingled  in  the  hands  of  queens! 

And  when  Booth  halted  by  the  curb  for  prayer 
He  saw  his  Master  through  the  flag-filled  air. 
Christ  came  gently  with  a  robe  and  crown 
For  Booth  the  soldier  while  the  throng  knelt 

down; 

He  saw  King  Jesus — they  were  face  to  face. 
And  he  knelt  a-weeping  in  that  holy  place. 
Are  you  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb? 

Vachel  Lindsay  [1879- 


Reverently 

sung-no 

instruments 


E.   B.  B. 

[1806-1861] 

The  white-rose  garland  at  her  feet, 
The  crown  of  laurel  at  her  head, 

Her  noble  hfe  on  earth  complete, 
Lay  her  in  the  last  low  bed 

For  the  slumber  calm  and  deep: 

"He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep." 


inB2£3l 


Robert  Burns  359S 

Soldiers  find  their  fittest  grave 

In  the  field  whereon  they  died; 
So  her  spirit  pure  and  brave 

Leaves  the  clay  it  glorified 
To  the  land  for  which  she  fought 
With  such  grand  impassioned  thought. 

Keats  and  Shelley  sleep  at  Rome, 

She  in  wcll-lovcd  Tuscan  earth; 
Finding  all  their  death's  long  home 

Far  from  their  old  home  of  birth. 
Italy,  you  hold  in  trust 
Very  sacred  English  dust. 

Therefore  this  one  prayer  I  breathe, — 

That  you  yet  may  worthy  prove 
Of  the  heirlooms  they  bequeath 

Who  have  loved  you  with  such  love: 
Fairest  land  while  land  of  slaves 
Yields  their  free  souls  no  fit  graves. 

James  Thomson  [1834-1S82] 


ROBERT  BURNS 

[1759-1796] 

All  Scottish  legends  did  his  fancy  fashion, 

All  airs  that  richly  flow, 
Laughing  with  frolic,  tremulous,  with  passion, 

Broken  with  love-lorn  woe; 

Ballads  whose  beauties  years  have  long  been  stealing 

And  left  few  links  of  gold. 
Under  his  quaint  and  subtle  touch  of  healing 

Grew  fairer,  not  less  old. 

Gray  Cluden,  and  the  vestal's  choral  cadence. 

His  spell  awoke  therewith ; 
Till  boatmen  hung  their  oars  to  hear  the  maidens 

Upon  the  banks  of  Nith. 


3  59^  Sentinel  Songs 

His,  too,  the  strains  of  battle  nobly  coming 

From  Bruce,  or  Wallace  wight, 
Such  as  the  Highlander  shall  oft  be  humming 

Before  some  famous  fight. 

Nor  only  these — for  him  the  hawthorn  hoary 

Was  with  new  wreaths  enwrought. 
The  "crimson-tipped  daisy"  wore  fresh  glory, 

Born  of  poetic  thought. 

From  the  "wee  cowering  beastie"  he  could  borrow 
A  moral  strain  sublime,  ; 

A  noble  tenderness  of  human  sorrow. 
In  wondrous  wealth  of  rhyme. 

Oh,  but  the  mountain  breeze  must  have  been  pleasant 

Upon  the  sunburnt  brow 
Of  that  poetic  and  triumphant  peasant 

Driving  his  laureled  plow! 

William  Alexander  [1824-191 1] 

ON  A  FLY-LEAF  OF  BURNS'S  SONGS 

These  are  the  best  of  him, 
Pathos  and  jest  of  him; 
Earth  holds  the  rest  of  him. 

Passions  were  strong  in  him, — 
Pardon  the  wrong  in  him; 
Hark  to  the' song  in  him! — 

Each  little  lyrical 
Grave  or  satirical 
Musical  miracle!  Iw  abcUfiS 

Frederic  Lawrence  Knowles  tr'seg'-igos] 

ON  THE  DEATHS  OF  THOMAS  CARLYLE 
AND  GEORGE  ELIOT 

Two  souls  diverse  out  of  our  human  sight 
Pass,  followed  one  with  love  and  each  with  wonder: 
The  stormy  sophist  with  his  mouth  of  thunder, 
Clothed  with  loud  words  and  mantled  in  the  might 


Opening  of  the  Tomb  of  Charlemagne    3597 

Of  darkness  and  magnificence  of  nighl; 
And  one  whose  eye  could  smite  the  night  in  sunder, 
Searching  if  Hght  or  no  Hght  were  thereunder, 
And  found  in  love  of  loving-kindness  light. 
Duty  divine  and  Thought  with  eyes  of  fire 
Still  following  Righteousness  with  deep  desire 
Shone  sole  and  stern  before  her  and  above, 
Sure  stars  and  sole  to  steer  by;  but  more  sweet 
Shone  lower  the  loveliest  lamp  for  earthly  feet. 
The  light  of  little  children,  and  their  love. 
[j;.i.-   ■  Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1909] 


AT  THE  GRAVE  OF  CHAMPERNOWNE 

[1614-1687] 

Here  poise,  like  flowers  on  flowers,  the  butterflies; 

The  grasshopper  on  crooked  crutch  leaps  up, 

The  wild  bees  hum  above  the  clover  cup, 
The  fox-grape  wreathes  the  fence  in  green  disguise 

Of  ruin;  and  antique  plants  set  out  in  tears, 
Pink,  guelder-rose,  and  myrtle's  purple  bells 

Struggle  'mid  grass  and  their  own  wasting  years 
To  show  the  grave  that  no  inscription  tells. 
Here  rest  the  bones  of  Francis  Champernowne; 

The  blazonry  of  Norman  kings  he  bore; 
His  fathers  builded  many  a  tower  and  town. 

And  after  Senlac  England's  lords.    Now  o'er 
His  island  cairn  the  lonesome  forests  frown. 

And  sailless  seas  beat  the  untrodden  shore. 

John  Albcc  [1833-1915] 

THE  OPENING  OF  THE  TOMB  OF 
CHARLEMAGNE 

[742-814] 

Amid  the  cloistered  gloom  of  Aachen's  aisle 
Stood  Otho,  Germany's  imperial  lord. 
Regarding,  with  a  melancholy  smile, 
A  simple  stone,  where,  fitly  to  record 


359^  Sentinel   Songs 

A  world  of  action  by  a  single  word,  '■     ' 

Was  graven  "Carlo-Magno."  Regal  style 

Was  needed  none;  that  name  such  thoughts  restored 

As  sadden,  yet  make  nobler,  men  the  while. 

They  rolled  the  marble  back.     With  sudden  gasp, 

A  moment  o'er  the  vault  the  Kaiser  bent. 

Where  still  a  mortal  monarch  seemed  to  reign. 

Crowned  on  his  throne,  a  scepter  in  his  grasp, 

Perfect  in  each  gigantic  lineament, 

Otho  looked  face  to  face  on  Charlemagne. 

Aubrey  Dc  Vcrc  [i 788-1846 


BY  THE  STATUE  OF  KING  CHARLES  AT 
CHARING  CROSS 

[1600- 1 649] 

Sombre  and  rich,  the  skies; 
Great  glooms,  and  starry  plains. 
Gently  the  night  wind  sighs; 
Else  a  vast  silence  reigns. 

The  splendid  silence  clings 
Around  me:  and  around 
The  saddest  of  all  kings 
Crowned,  and  again  discrowned. 

Comely  and  calm,  he  rides 
Hard  by  his  own  Whitehall:  [ 

Only  the  night  wind  glides:  :^j, ,-, 

No  crowds,  nor  rebels,  brawl. 

Gone,  too,  his  Court:  and  yet, 
The  stars  his  courtiers  are: 
Stars  in  their  stations  set; 
And  every  wandering  star. 

Alone  he  rides,  alone,  .,  .-.^^  nrv/. 

The  fair  and  fatal  king: 
Dark  night  is  all  his  own, 
That  strange  and  solemn  thing. 


By   the  Statue  of  King  Charles      3599 


Which  arc  more  full  of  fate: 
The  stars;  or  those  sad  eyes? 
Which  are  more  still  and  great: 
Those  brows;  or  the  dark  skies? 

Although  his  whole  heart  yearn 
In  passionate  tragedy: 
Never  was  face  so  stern 
With  sweet  austerity. 

Vanquished  in  life,  his  death 
By  beauty  made  amends: 
The  passing  of  his  breath 
Won  his  defeated  ends. 

Brief  life,  and  hapless?    Nay: 
Through  death,  life  grew  sublime. 
Speak  after  sentence?    Yea: 
And  to  the  end  of  time. 

Armored  he  rides, 'his  head 
Bare  to  the  stars  of  doom: 
He  triumphs  now,  the  dead, 
Beholding  London's  gloom. 

Our  wearier  spirit  faints, 
Vexed  in  the  world's  employ: 
His  soul  was  of  the  saints; 
And  art  to  him  was  joy. 

King,  tried  in  fires  of  woe! 
Men  hunger  for  thy  grace:  '^ 

.331  And  through  the  night  I  go, 

Loving  thy  mournful  face. 

•  '"nii.Tnrr'Tf  o? 
Yet,  when  the  city  sleeps; 
When  all  the  cries  are  still: 
The  stars  and  heavenly  deeps 
Work  out  a  perfect  will. 

Lionet  Johnson  [1SO7-1902] 


3600  Sentinel   Songs 

CHAVEZ 

(Georges  Chavez,  after  crossing  the  Alps  in  his  aeroplane,  fell  and  was  killed 
Sept.  23,  1910.) 

So  hath  he  fallen,  the  Endymion  of  the  air, 

And  so  lies  down  in  slumber  lapped  for  aye. 
Diana,  passing,  found  his  youth  too  fair, 
His  soul  too  fleet  and  willing  to  obey. 
She  swung  her  golden  moon  before  his  eyes — • 
Dreaming,  he  rose  to  follow — and  ran — and  was  away. 

His  foot  was  winged  as  the  mounting  sun. 

Earth  he  disdained — the  dusty  ways  of  men 
Not  yet  had  learned.    His  spirit  longed  to  run 

With  the  bright  clouds,  his  brothers,  to  answer  when 
The  airs  were  fleetest  and  could  give  him  hand 
Into  the  starry  fields  beyond  our  plodding  ken. 

All  wittingly  that  glorious  way  he  chose. 

And  loved  the  peril  when  it  was  most  bright. 

He  tried  anew  the  long-forbidden  snows 

And  like  an  eagle  topped  the  dropping  height 

Of  Nagenhorn,  and  still  toward  Italy 
Past  peak  and  elift"  pressed  on,  in  glad,  unerring  flight. 

Oh  when  the  bird  lies  low  with  golden  wing 
Bruised  past  healing  by  some  bitter  chance, 

Still  must  its  tireless  spirit  mount  and  sing 
Of  meadows  green  with  morning,  of  the  dance 

On  windy  trees,  the  darting  flight  away. 
And  of  that  last,  most  blue,  triumphant  downward  glance. 

So  murmuring  of  the  snow:  ^'The  snow,  and  more, 
0  God,  more  snow  "  on  that  last  field  he  lay. 

Despair  and  wonder  spent  their  passionate  store 
In  his  great  heart,  through  heaven  gone  astray. 

And  earl}^  lost.    Too  far  the  golden  moon 
Had  swung  upon  that  bright,  that  long,  untraversed  way. 


Cowper's  Grave  3601, 

Now  to  lie  ended  on  the  murmuring  plain — 
Tjrl  Ah,  this  for  his  bold  heart  was  not  the  loss,  { 

But  that  those  windy  fields  he  ne'er  again 

Might  try,  nor  fleet  and  shimmering  mountains  cross, 
UnfoUowed,  by  a  path  none  other  knew: 
His  bitter  woe  had  here  its  deep  and  piteous  cause. 

Dear  toils  of  youth  unfinished!    And  songs  unwritten  left 
hv,  ^y  young  and  passionate  hearts!    O  melodies 
Unheard,  whereof  we  ever  stand  bereft! 

Clear-singuig  Schubert,  boyish  Keats — with  these 
He  roams  henceforth,  one  with  the  starry  band, 

Still  paying  to  fairy  call  and  far  command 
His  spirit  heed,  still  winged  with  golden  prophecies. 
Mildred  McNeal  Sweeney  [1871- 

COLERIDGE 
[17  7  2-1 834] 

I  SEE  thee  pine  like  her  in  golden  story 
Who,  in  her  prison,  woke  and  saw,  one  day, 
The  gates  thrown  open — eaw  the  sunbeams  play, 
With  only  a  web  'tween  her  and  summer's  glory; 
Who,  when  that  web — so  frail,  so  transitory 
It  broke  before  her  breath — had  fallen  away, 
Saw  other  webs  and  others  rise  for  aye 
Which  kept  her  prisoned  till  her  hair  was  hoary. 
Those  songs  half-sung  that  yet  were  all  divine- 
That  woke  Romance,  the  queen,  to  reign  afresh — 
Had  been  but  preludes  from  that  lyre  of  thine, 
Could  thy  rare  spirit's  wings  have  pierced  the  mesh 
Spun  by  the  wizard  who  compels  the  flesh, 
But  lets  the  poet  see  how  heaven  can  shine. 

Theodore  Watls-Diinton  [1836-1914) 

COWPER'S  GRAVE 

[1731-1800] 

It  is  a  place  where  poets  crowned  may  feel  the  heart's  de- 
caying; 

It  is  a  place  where  happy  saints  may  weep  amid  their  pray- 
ing; 


3602  Sentinel  Songs 

Yet  let  the  grief  and  humbleness  as  low  as  silence  languish: 
Earth  surely  now  may  give  her  calm  to  whom  she  gave  her 
anguish. 

O  poets,  from  a  maniac's  tongue  was  poured  the  deathless 
singing! 

O  Christians,  at  your  cross  of  hope  a  hopeless  hand  was 
clinging! 

O  men,  this  man  in  brotherhood  your  weary  paths  beguil- 
ing, 

Groaned  inly  while  he  taught  you  peace,  and  died  while  ye 
were  smiling! 

And  now,  what  time  ye  all  may  read  through  dimming  tears 

his  story, 
How  discord  on  the  music  fell  and  darkness  on  the  glory, 
And  how  when,  one  by  one,  sweet  sounds  and  wandering 

lights  departed, 
He  wore  no  less  a  loving  face,  because  so  broken-hearted. 

He  shall  be- strong  to  sanctify  the  poet's  high  vocation. 
And  bow  the  meekest  Christian  down  in  meeker  adoration; 
Nor  ever  shall  he  be,  in  praise,  by  wise  or  good  forsaken, 
Named  softly  as  the  household  name  of  one  whom  God  hath 
taken.  "  'io^-^^ 

With  quiet  sadness  and  no  gloom,  I  learn  to  think  upon  him, 
With  meekness  that  is  gratefulness  to  God  whose  heaven 

hath  won  him. 
Who  suffered  once  the  madness-cloud  to  his  own  love  to 

blind  him, 
But  gently  led  the  blind  along  where  breath  and  bird  could 

find  him; 

And  wrought  within  his  shattered  brain  such  quick  poetic 
senses 

As  hills  have  language  for,  and  stars,  harmonious  influences; 

The  pulse  of  dew  upon  the  grass  kept  his  within  its  number, 

And  silent  shadows  from  the  trees  refreshed  him  like  a  slum- 
ber. 


Cowper's  Grave  3603 

Wild  timid  hares  were  drawn  from  woods  to  share  his  home- 
caresses, 

Uplooking  to  his  human  eyes  with  sylvan  tendernesses: 

The  very  world,  by  God's  constraint,  from  falsehood's  ways 
removing, 

Its  women  and  its  men  became,  beside  him,  true  and  lov- 
ing. 

And  though,  in  blindness,  he  remained  unconscious  of  that 
guiding, 

x^nd  things  provided  came  without  the  sweet  sense  of  pro- 
viding. 

He  testified  this  solemn  truth,  while  frenzy  desolated, 

— Nor  man  nor  nature  satisfies,  whom  only  God  created. 

Like  a  sick  child   that   knoweth  not   his  mother  while  she 

blesses 
And   drops  upon    his   burning   brow  the  coolness  of  her 

kisses, —  'i-ia'si  jndT 

That  turns  his  fevered  eyes  around, — "My  mother!  where's 

my  mother?" — 
As  if  such  tender  words  and  deeds  could  come  from  any 

other! — 

The  fever  gone,  with  leaps  of  heart,  he  sees  her  bending  o'er 

him. 
Her  face  all  pale  from  watchful  love,  the  unweary  love  she 

bore  him! 
Thus  woke  the  poet  from  the  dream  his  life's  long  fever  gave 

him, 
Beneath  those  deep,  pathetic  Eyes  which  closed  in  death  to 

save  him! 

Thus?  oh,  not  thus!  no  type  of  earth  can  image  that  awak- 
ing, 

Wherein  he  scarcely  heard  the  chant  of  seraphs,  round  him 
breaking, 

Or  felt  the  new  immortal  throb  of  soul  from  body  parted, 

But  felt  those  eyes  alone,  and  knew — "My  Saviour!  not  de- 
serted!" 


3604  Sentinel  Songs 

Deserted!   Who  hath  dreamt  that  when  the  cross  in  darkness 

rested, 
Upon  the  Victim's  hidden  face  no  love  was  manifested? 
What  frantic.hands  outstretched  have  e'er  the  atoning  drops 

averted? 
What  tears  have  washed  them  from  the  soul,  that  one  should 

be  deserted?  .,, 

Deserted!  God  could  separate  from  His  own  essence  rather; 
And  Adam's  sins  have  swept  between  the  righteous  Son  and 

Father: 
Yea,   once,   Immanuel's  orphaned    cry   his  universe  hath 

shaken — 
It  went  up  single,  echoless,  "My  God,  I  am  forsaken!" 

It  went  up  from  the  Ploly's  lips  amid  His  lost  creation. 

That,  of  the  lost,  no  son  should  use  those  words  of  desola- 
tion! 

That  Earth's  worst  frenzies,  marring  hope,  should  mar  not 
hope's  fruition, 

And  I,  on  Cowper's  grave,  should  see  his  rapture  in  a  vision. 
Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [1806-1861] 


ON  A  BUST  OF  DANTE 

[1265-1321] 

See,  from  this  counterfeit  of  him 
Whom  Arno  shall  remember  long, 
How  stern  of  lineament,  how  grim, 
The  father  was  of  Tuscan  song: 
There  but  the  burning  sense  of  wrong, 
Perpetual  care,  and  scorn,  abide — 
Small  friendship  for  the  lordly  throng; 
Distrust  of  all  the  world  beside. 

Faithful  if  this  wan  image  be, 
No  dream  his  Hfe  was — but  a  fight; 
Could  any  Beatrice  see 
A  lover  in  that  anchorite? 


On  a   Bust  of  Dante  3605 

To  that  cold  Ghibelline's  gloomy  sight 
Who  could  have  guessed  the  \nsions  came 
Of  Beauty,  veiled  with  heavenly  light, 
In  circles  of  eternal  flame? 

The  lips  as  Cuma.^'s  cavern  close, 
The  cheeks  with  fast  and  sorrow  thin, 
The  rigid  front,  almost  morose. 
But  for  the  patient  hope  within, 
Declare  a  life  whose  course  hath  been 
Unsullied  still,  though  still  severe. 
Which,  through  the  wavering  days  of  sin, 
Kept  itself  icy-chaste  and  clear. 

Not  wholly  such  his  haggard  look 
When  wandering  once,  forlorn,  he  strayed, 
With  no  companion  save  his  book, 
To  Corvo's  hushed  monastic  shade; 
Where,  as  the  Benedictine  laid 
His  palm  upon  the  convent's  guest, 
The  single  boon  for  which  he  prayed 
Was  peace,  that  pilgrim's  one  request. 

Peace  dwells  not  here — this  rugged  face 

Betrays  no  spirit  of  repose; 

The  sullen  warrior  sole  we  trace. 

The  marble  man  of  many  woes. 

Such  was  his  mien  when  first  arose 

The  thought  of  that  strange  tale  divine — 

When  hell  he  peopled  with  his  foes. 

Dread  scourge  of  many  a  guilty  line. 

War  to  the  last  he  waged  with  all 
The  tyrant  canker-worms  of  earth; 
Baron  and  duke,  m  hold  and  hall, 
Cursed  the  dark  hour  that  gave  him  birth; 
He  used  Rome's  harlot  for  his  mirth; 
Plucked  bare  hypocrisy  and  crime; 
But  vahant  souls  of  knightly  worth 
Transmitted  to  the  rolls  of  Time. 


3606  Sentinel  Songs 

O  Time !  whose  verdicts  mock  our  own, 
The  only  righteous  judge  art  thou ; 
That  poor,  old  exile,  sad  and  lone, 
Is  Latium's  other  Virgil  now. 
Before  his  name  the  nations  bow; 
riis  words  are  parcel  of  mankind. 
Deep  in  whose  hearts,  as  on  his  brow. 
The  marks  have  sunk  of  Dante's  mind. 

Thomas  Williatn  Parsons  [i Si 9-1 J 


DICKENS  IN   CAMP 

[1812-1870] 

Above  the  pines  the  moon  was  slowly  drifting. 

The  river  sang  below ; 
The  dim  Sierras,  far  be3'ond,  uplifting 

Their  minarets  of  snow. 

The  roaring  camp-fire,  with  rude  humor,  painted 

The  ruddy  tints  of  health 
On  haggard  face  and  form  that  drooped  and  fainted 

In  the  fierce  race  for  wealth; 

Till  one  arose,  and  from  his  pack's  scant  treasure 

A  hoarded  volume  drew, 
And  cards  were  dropped  from  hands  of  listless  leisure, 

To  hear  the  tale  anew. 

And  then,  while  round  them  shadows  gathered  faster, 

And  as  the  firelight  fell, 
He  read  aloud  the  book  wherein  the  Master 

Had  writ  of  "Little  Nell." 

Perhaps  'twas  boyish  fancy, — for  the  reader 

Was  youngest  of  them  all, — 
But,  as  he  read,  from  clustering  pine  and  cedar 

A  silence  seemed  to  fall; 

The  fir-trees,  gathering  closer  in  the  shadows. 
Listened  in  every  spray, 


Drake's   Drum  3607 

While  the  whole  camp,  with  "Nell,"  on  Enghsh  meadows 
Wandered  and  lost  their  way. 

And  so  in  mountain  solitudes — o'ertaken 

As  by  some  spell  divine— 
Their  cares  dropped  from  them  like  the  needles  shaken 

From  out  the  gusty  pine. 

Lost  is  that  camp,  and  wasted  aU  its  fire: 

And  he  who  wrought  that  spell? — 
Ah,  towering  pine  and  stately  Kentish  spire, 

Ye  have  one  tale  to  tell! 

Lost  is  that  camp,  but  let  its  fragrant  story 

Blend  with  the  breath  that  thrills 
With  hop-vine's  incense  all  the  pensive  glory 

That  fiUs  the  Kentish  hills. 

And  on  that  grave  where  English  oak  and  holly 

And  laurel  wreaths  entwine, 
Deem  it  not  all  a  too  presumptuous  folly — 

This  spray  of  Western  pine ! 

Brel  Hartc  [1839- 1902] 

DRAKE'S  DRUM 

[sir  FliANCIS  DRAKE,    1540?-!  596] 

Drake  he's  in  his  hammock  an'  a  thousand  mile  away, 

(Capten,  art  tha  sleepin'  there  below?). 
Slung  atween  the  round  shot  in  Nombre  Dios  Bay, 

An'  dreamin'  arl  the  time  o'  Plymouth  Hoe. 
Yarnder  lumes  the  Island,  yarnder  he  the  ships, 

Wi'  sailor  lads  a-dancin'  heel-an'-toe, 
An'  the  shore-lights  flashin',  an'  the  night-tide  dashin', 

He  sees  et  arl  so  plainly  as  he  saw  et  long  ago. 

Drake  he  was  a  Devon  man,  an'  ruled  the  Devon  seas, 

(Capten,  art  tha  sleepin'  there  below?), 
Rovin'  though  his  death  fell,  he  went  wi'  heart  at  ease. 

An'  dreamin'  arl  the  time  o'  Plymouth  Hoe. 


3608  Sentinel   Songs 

"Take  my  drum  to  England,  hang  et  by  the  shore, 

Strike  et  when  your  powder's  runnin'  low; 
If  the  Dons  sight  Devon,  I'll  quit  the  port  o'  Heaven, 

An'  drum  them  up  the  Channel  as  we  drummed  them 
long  ago." 

Drake  he's  in  his  hammock  till  the  great  Armadas  come, 

(Capten,  art  tha  slccpin'  there  below?), 
Slung  atween  the  round  shot,  listenin'  for  the  drum, 

An'  dreamin'  arl  the  time  o'  Plymouth  Hoe. 
Call  him  on  the  deep  sea,  call  him  up  the  Sound, 

Call  him  when  ye  sail  to  meet  the  foe; 
Where  the  old  trade's  plyin'  an'  the  old  flag  flyin'. 

They  shall  find  him  ware  an'  wakin',  as  they  found  him 
long  ago! 

Henry  Newbolt  [1862- 


ON   THE   DEATH   OF   JOSEPH   RODMAN   DRAKE 

[1795-1820] 

Green  be  the  turf  above  thee. 

Friend  of  my  better  days! 
None  knew  thee  but  to  love  thee. 

Nor  named  thee  but  to  praise. 

Tears  fell,  when  thou  wert  dying, 

From  eyes  unused  to  weep. 
And  long  where  thou  art  lying, 

Will  tears  the  cold  turf  steep. 

When  hearts,  whose  truth  was  proven, 

Like  thine,  are  laid  in  earth. 
There  should  a  wreath  be  woven 

To  teU  the  world  their  worth; 

And  I,  who  woke  each  morrow 

To  clasp  thy  hand  in  mine, 
Who  shared  thy  joy  and  sorrow. 

Whose  weal  and  woe  were  thine: 


Vanquished  3609 

It  should  be  mine  to  braid  it 

Around  thy  faded  brow, 
But  I've  in  vain  essayed  it, 

And  feel  I  cannot  now. 

While  memory  bids  me  weep  thee, 

Nor  thoughts  nor  words  are  free, 
The  grief  is  fixed  too  deeply 

That  mourns  a  man  like  thee. 

Filz-Greene  Hallcck  [i 790-1 867] 


"OH,   BREATHE   NOT  HIS   NAME!" 

[ROBERT   EMMET,  1778-1803] 

Oh,  breathe  not  his  name!  let  it  sleep  in  the  shade, 

Where  cold  and  unhonored  his  relics  are  laid; 

Sad,  silent,  and  dark  be  the  tears  that  we  shed, 

As  the  night-dew  that  falls  on  the  grave  o'er  his  head. 

But  the  night-dew  that  falls,  though  in  silence  it  weeps, 
Shall  brighten  with  verdure  the  grave  where  he  sleeps; 
And  the  tear  that  we  shed,  though  in  secret  it  rolls. 
Shall  long  keep  his  memory  green  in  our  souls. 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 


VANQUISHED 

[ULYSSES    S.    GRANT,    1822-1885] 

Not  by  the  ball  or  brand 
Sped  by  a  mortal  hand, 
Not  by  the  lightning  stroke 
When  fiery  tempests  broke, — 
Not  mid  the  ranks  of  war 
Fell  the  great  Conqueror. 

Unmoved,  undismayed. 

In  the  crash  and  carnage  of  the  cannonade,- 

Eye  that  dimmed  not,  hand  that  failed  not. 


3610  Sentinel  Songs 

Brain  that  swerved  not,  heart  that  quailed  not, 

Steel  nerve,  iron  form, — 

The  dauntless  spirit  that  o'erruled  the  storm. 

While  the  Hero  peaceful  slept 
A  foeman  to  his  chamber  crept, 
Lightly  to  the  slumberer  came. 
Touched  his  brow  and  breathed  his  name: 
O'er  the  stricken  form  there  passed 
Suddenly  an  icy  blast. 

The  Hero  woke:  rose  undismayed: 
Saluted  Death,  and  sheathed  his  blade. 

The  Conqueror  of  a  hundred  fields 
To  a  mightier  Conqueror  yields; 
No  mortal  foeman's  blow 
Laid  the  great  Soldier  low; 
Victor  in  his  latest  breath — 
Vanquished  but  by  Death. 

Francis  Fisher  Browne  [1843-1913] 


O.  HENRY 

[WILLIAM    SIDNEY   PORTER,    1862-IQI0] 

"  He  could  not  forget  that  he  was  a  Sidney." 

Is  this  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  this  loud  clown, 
The  darling  of  the  glad  and  gaping  town? 

This  is  that  dubious  hero  of  the  press 
Whose  slangy  tongue  and  insolent  address 
Were  spiced  to  rouse  on  Sunday  afternoon 
The  man  with  yellow  journals  round  him  strewn. 
We  laughed  and  dozed,  then  roused  and  read  again 
And  vowed  O.  Henry  funniest  of  men. 
He  always  worked  a  triple-hinged  surprise 
To  end  the  scene  and  make  one  rub  his  eyes 


O.   Henry  361 1 

He  comes  with  vaudeville,  with  stare  and  leer. 

He  comes  with  megaphone  and  specious  cheer. 

His  troupe,  too  fat  or  short  or  long  or  lean, 

Step  from  the  pages  of  the  magazine 

With  slapstick  or  sombrero  or  with  cane, 

The  rube,  the  cowboy  or  the  masher  vain. 

They  overact  each  part.    But  at  the  height 

Of  revel  and  absurdity's  delight 

The  masks  fall  off  for  one  queer  instant  there 

And  show  real  faces:  faces  full  of  care 

And  desperate  longing;  love  that's  hot  or  cold; 

And  subtle  thoughts,  and  countenances  bold. 

The  masks  go  back.     'Tis  one  joke  more. 

Laugh  on! 

The  goodly  grown-up  company  is  gone. 

No  doubt,  had  he  occasion  to  address 

The  brilliant  court  of  purple-clad  Queen  Bess, 

He  would  have  wrought  for  them  the  best  he  knew 

And  led  more  loftily  his  actor-crew. 

How  coolly  he  misquoted.     'Twas  his  art: 

Slave-scholar,  who  misquoted — from  the  heart! 

So  when  he  slapped  his  back  with  friendly  roar 

.^sop  awaited  him,  without  the  door, — 

^sop  the  Greek,  who  made  dull  masters  laugh 

With  little  tales  of  fox  and  dog  and  calf. 

And,  be  it  said,  'mid  these  his  pranks  so  odd, 
With  something  nigh  to  chivalry  he  trod. 
And  oft  the  drear  and  driven  would  defend — 
The  Httle  shop-girl's  knight,  unto  the  end. 
Yea,  he  had  passed,  ere  we  could  understand 
The  blade  of  Sidney  glimmered  in  his  hand.  ^ 

Yea,  ere  we  knew,  Sir  Philip's  sword  was  drawn 
With  valiant  cut  and  thrust,  and  he  was  gone. 

Vachel  Lindsay  [1879- 


3^12  Sentinel   Songs 


ADONAIS 

[jOHN  KEATS,  1795-1821] 

I  WEEP  for  Adonais — he  is  dead! 
Oh,  weep  for  Adonais!  though  our  tears 
Thaw  not  the  frost  which  binds  so  dear  a  head ! 
And  thou,  sad  Hour,  selected  from  all  years 
To  mourn  our  loss,  rouse  thy  obscure  compeers, 
And  teach  them  thine  own  sorrow.     Say:  "With  me 
Died  Adonais;  till  the  Future  dares 
Forget  the  Past,  his  fate  and  fame  shall  be 
An  echo  and  a  light  unto  eternity!" 

Where  wert  thou,  mighty  Mother,  when  he  lay. 
When  thy  Son  lay,  pierced  by  the  shaft  which  flies 
In  darkness?  where  was  lorn  Urania 
When  Adonais  died?    With  veiled  eyes, 
'Mid  listening  Echoes,  in  her  Paradise 
She  sate,  while  one,  with  soft  enamored  breath, 
Rekindled  all  the  fading  melodies, 
With  which,  like  flowers  that  mock  the  corse  beneath, 
He  had  adorned  and  hid  the  coming  bulk  of  death. 

Oh,  weep  for  Adonais — he  is  dead! 
Wake,  melancholy  Mother,  wake  and  weep! 
Yet  wherefore?    Quench  within  their  burning  bed 
Thy  fiery  tears,  and  let  thy  loud  heart  keep 
Like  his,  a  mute  and  uncomplaining  sleep; 
For  he  is  gone  where  all  things  wise  and  fair 
Descend.    Oh,  dream  not  that  the  amorous  Deep 
Will  yet  restore  him  to  the  vital  air; 
Death  feeds  on  his  mute  voice,  and  laughs  at  our  despair. 

Most  musical  of  mourners,  weep  again! 
Lament  anew,  Urania! — He  died. 
Who  was  the  Sire  of  an  immortal  strain. 
Blind,  old,  and  lonely,  when  his  country's  pride 


Adonais  3613 

The  priest,  the  slave,  and  the  libcrticide 
Trampled  and  mocked  with  many  a  loathed  rite 
Of  lust  and  blood;  he  went,  unterrilied, 
Into  the  gulf  of  death ;  but  his  clear  Sprite 
Yet  reigns  o'er  earth,  the  third  among  the  sons  of  light. 

Most  musical  of  mourners,  weep  anew! 
Not  all  to  that  bright  station  dared  to  climb; 
And  happier  they  their  happiness  who  knew, 
Whose  tapers  yet  burn  through  that  night  of  time 
In  which  suns  perished;  others  more  sublime, 
Struck  by  the  envious  wrath  of  man  or  God, 
Have  sunk,  extinct  in  their  refulgent  prime; 
And  some  yet  live,  treading  the  thorny  road, 
Which  leads,  through  toil  and  hate,  to  Fame's  serene  abode. 

But  now,  thy  youngest,  dearest  one  has  perished, 
The  nurshng  of  thy  widowhood,  who  grew, 
Like  a  pale  flower  by  some  sad  maiden  cherished, 
And  fed  with  true-love  tears,  instead  of  dew; 
Most  musical  of  mourners,  weep  anew! 
Thy  extreme  hope,  the  loveliest  and  the  last, 
The  bloom,  whose  petals,  nipped  before  they  blew, 
Died  on  the  promise  of  the  fruit,  is  waste; 
The  broken  lily  lies — the  storm  is  overpast. 

To  that  high  Cai)ital,  where  kingly  Death 
Keeps  his  pale  court  in  beauty  and  decay. 
He  came;  and  bought,  with  price  of  purest  breath, 
A  grave  among  the  eternal. — Come  away! 
Haste,  while  the  vault  of  blue  Italian  day 
Is  yet  his  fitting  charnel-roof!  while  still 
He  hcs,  as  if  in  dewy  sleep  he  lay; 
Awake  him  not !  surely  he  takes  his  fill 
Of  deep  and  liquid  rest,  forgetful  of  all  ill. 

He  will  awake  no  more,  oh,  never  more! 
Within  the  twilight  chamber  spreads  apace 
The  shadow  of  white  Death,  and  at  the  door 
Invisible  Corruption  "waits  to  trace 


3614  Sentinel   Songs 

His  extreme  way  to  her  dim  dwelling-place; 
The  eternal  Hunger  sits,  but  pity  and  awe 
Soothe  her  pale  rage,  nor  dares  she  to  deface 
So  fair  a  prey,  till  darkness  and  the  law 
Of  change,  shall  o'er  his  sleep  the  mortal  curtain  draw. 

Oh,  weep  for  Adonais! — The  quick  Dreams, 

The  passion-winged  ministers  of  thought. 

Who  were  his  flocks,  whom  near  the  living  streams 

Of  his  young  spirit  he  fed,  and  whom  he  taught 

The  love  which  was  its  music,  wander  not, — 

Wander  no  more,  from  kindling  brain  to  brain. 

But  droop  there,  whence  they  sprung;  and  mourn  theii 

lot 
Round  the  cold  heart,  where,  after  their  sweet  pain. 
They  ne'er  will  gather  strength,  or  find  a  home  again. 

And  one  with  trembling  hands  clasps  his  cold  head. 
And  fans  him  with  her  moonlight  wings,  and  cries, 
"Our  love,  our  hope,  our  sorrow,  is  not  dead; 
See,  on  the  silken  fringe  of  his  faint  eyes, 
Like  dew  upon  a  sleeping  flower,  there  lies 
A  tear  some  Dream  has  loosened  from  his  brain." 
Lost  Angel  of  a  ruined  Paradise! 
She  knew  not  'twas  her  own ;  as  with  no  stain 
She  faded,  like  a  cloud  which  had  outwept  its  rain. 

One  from  a  lucid  urn  of  starry  dew 
Washed  his  light  limbs  as  if  embalming  them; 
Another  clipped  her  profuse  locks,  and  threw 
The  wreath  upon  him,  like  an  anadem, 
Which  frozen  tears  instead  of  pearls  begem; 
Another  in  her  wilful  grief  would  break 
Her  bow  and  winged  reeds,  as  if  to  stem 
A  greater  loss  \/ith  one  which  v/as  more  weak; 
And  dull  the  barbed  fire  against  his  frozen  cheek. 

Another  Splendor  en  his  mouth  aht. 
That  mouth,  whence  it  was  wont  to  draw  the  breath 
Which  gave  it  strength  to  pierce  the  guarded  wit. 
And  pass  into  the  panting  heart  beneath 


Adonais  3615 

With  lightning  and  with  music:  the  damp  death 
Quenched  its  caress  upon  his  icy  Hps; 
And,  as  a  dying  meteor  stains  a  wreath 
Of  moonhght  vapor,  which  the  cold  night  chps, 
It  flushed  through  his  pale  limbs,  and  passed  to  its  eclipse. 

And  others  came  .  .  .  Desires  and  Adorations, 
Winged  Persuasions  and  veiled  Destinies, 
Splendors,  and  Glooms,  and  glimmering  Incarnations 
Of  hopes  and  fears,  and  twilight  Fantasies; 
And  Sorrow,  with  her  family  of  Sighs, 
And  Pleasure,  blind  with  tears,  led  by  the  gleam 
Of  her  own  dying  smile  instead  of  eyes, 
Came  in  slow  pomp; — the  moving  pomp  might  seem 
Like  pageantry  of  mist  on  an  autumnal  stream. 

All  he  had  loved,  and  molded  into  thought. 
From  shape,  and  hue,  and  odor,  and  sweet  sound, 
Lamented  Adonais.    Morning  sought 
Her  eastern  watch-tower,  and  her  hair  unbound. 
Wet  with  the  tears  which  should  adorn  the  ground, 
Dimmed  the  aerial  eyes  that  kindle  day; 
Afar  the  melancholy  thunder  moaned. 
Pale  Ocean  in  unquiet  slumber  lay, 
And  the  wild  winds  flew  round,  sobbing  in  their  dismay. 

Lost  Echo  sits  amid  the  voiceless  mountains. 
And  feeds  her  grief  with  his  remembered  lay, 
And  will  no  more  reply  to  winds  or  fountains, 
Or  amorous  birds  perched  on  the  young  green  spray, 
Or  herdsman's  horn,  or  bell  at  closing  day; 
Since  she  can  mimic  not  his  lips,  more  dear 
Than  those  for  whose  disdain  she  pined  away 
Into  a  shadow  of  all  sounds: — a  drear 
Murmur,  between  their  songs,  is  all  the  woodmen  hear. 

Grief  made  the  young  Spring  wild,  and  she  threw  down 
Her  kindling  buds,  as  if  she  Autumn  were. 
Or  they  dead  leaves;  since  her  delight  is  flown. 
For  whom  should  she  have  waked  the  sullen  year? 


3616  Sentinel   Songs 

To  Phoebus  was  not  Hyacinth  so  dear, 
Nor  to  himself  Narcissus,  as  to  both 
Thou,  Adonais;  wan  they  stand  and  sere 
Amid  the  faint  companions  of  their  youth, 
With  dew  all  turned  to  tears;  odor,  to  sighing  rutho 

Thy  spirit's  sister,  the  lorn  nightingale, 
Mourns  not  her  mate  with  such  melodious  pain; 
Not  so  the  eagle,  who  like  thee  could  scale 
Heaven,  and  could  nourish  in  the  sun's  domain 
Her  mighty  youth  with  morning,  doth  complain, 
Soaring  and  screaming  round  her  empty  nest. 
As  Albion  wails  for  thee:  the  curse  of  Cain 
Light  on  his  head  who  pierced  thy  innocent  breast, 
And  scared  the  angel  soul  that  was  its  earthly  guest ! 

Ah  woe  is  me!    Winter  is  come  and  gone. 
But  grief  returns  with  the  revolving  year; 
The  airs  and  streams  renew  their  joyous  tone; 
The  ants,  the  bees,  the  swallows  reappear; 
Fresh  leaves  and  flowers  deck  the  dead  Seasons'  bier; 
The  amorous  birds  now  pair  in  every  brake. 
And  build  their  mossy  homes  in  field  and  brere; 
And  the  green  lizard  and  the  golden  snake, 
Like  unimprisoned  flames,  out  of  their  trance  awake. 

Through  wood  and  stream  and  field  and  hill  and  Ocean, 
A  quickening  life  from  the  Earth's  heart  has  burst, 
As  it  has  ever  done,  with  change  and  motion, 
From  the  great  morning  of  the  world  when  first 
God  dawned  on  Chaos;  in  its  stream  immersed 
The  lamps  of  Heaven  flash  with  a  softer  light; 
All  baser  things  pant  with  life's  sacred  thirst, 
Diffuse  themselves,  and  spend  in  love's  delight. 
The  beauty  and  the  joy  of  their  renewed  might. 

The  leprous  corpse,  touched  by  this  spirit  tender, 
Exhales  itself  in  flowers  of  gentle  breath; 
Like  incarnations  of  the  stars,  when  splendor 
Is  changed  to  fragrance,  they  illumine  death 


Adonais  3617 

And  mock  the  merry  worm  thai  wakes  beneath. 
Naught  we  know,  dies.    Shall  that  alone  which  knows 
Be  as  a  sword  consumed  before  the  sheath 
By  sightless  hghtning? — the  intense  atom  glows 
A  moment,  then  is  quenched  in  a  most  cold  repose. 

Alas!  that  all  we  loved  of  him  should  be. 
But  for  our  grief,  as  if  it  had  not  been. 
And  grief  itself  be  mortal!    Woe  is  me! 
Whence  are  we,  and  why  are  we?  of  what  scene 
The  actors  or  spectators?    Great  and  mean 
Meet  massed  in  death,  who  lends  what  life  must  borrow. 
As  long  as  skies  are  blue,  and  fields  are  green, 
Evening  must  usher  night,  night  urge  the  morrow. 
Month  follow  month  with  woe,  and  year  wake  year  to  sor- 
row. 

He  will  awake  no  more,  oh,  never  more! 
"Wake  thou,"  cried  Misery,  "childless  Mother,  rise 
Out  of  thy  sleep,  and  slake,  in  thy  heart's  core, 
A  wound  more  fierce  than  his  with  tears  and  sighs." 
And  all  the  Dreams  that  watched  Urania's  eyes, 
And  all  the  Echoes  whom  their  sister's  song 
Had  held  in  holy  silence,  cried,  "Arise!" 
Swift  as  a  Thought  by  the  snake  Memory  stung. 
From  her  ambrosial  rest  the  fading  Splendor  sprung. 

She  rose  like  an  autumnal  Night,  that  springs 
Out  of  the  East,  and  follows  wild  and  drear 
The  golden  Day,  which,  on  eternal  wings. 
Even  as  a  ghost  abandoning  a  bier. 
Had  left  the  Earth  a  corpse. — Sorrow  and  fear 
So  struck,  so  roused,  so  rapt  Urania; 
So  saddened  round  her  like  an  atmosphere 
Of  stormy  mist;  so  swept  her  on  her  way 
Even  to  the  mournful  place  where  Adonais  lay. 

Out  of  her  secret  Paradise  she  sped,  !  •' 

Through  camps  and  cities  rough  with  stone,  and  steely  ■ 
And  human  hearts  which,  to  her  airy  tread 


3618  Sentinel   Songs 

Yielding  not,  wounded  the  invisible 
Palms  of  her  tender  feet  where'er  they  fell; 
And  barbed  tongues,  and  thoughts  more  shaip  than  they, 
Rent  the  soft  Form  they  never  could  repel. 
Whose  sacred  blood,  Hke  the  young  tears  of  May, 
Paved  with  eternal  flowers  that  undeserving  way. 

In  the  death-chamber  for  a  moment  Death, 
Shamed  by  the  presence  of  that  living  Might, 
Blushed  to  annihilation,  and  the  breath 
Revisited  those  lips,  and  life's  pale  hght 
Flashed  through  those  limbs,  so  late  her  dear  delight.  [ 
"Leave  me  not  wild  and  drear  and  comfortless, 
As  silent  hghtning  leaves  the  starless  night! 
Leave  me  not!"  cried  Urania;  her  distress 
Roused  Death;  Death  rose  and  smiled,  and  met  her  vain 
caress. 

"Stay  yet  awhile!  speak  to  mc  once  again; 
Kiss  me,  so  long  but  as  a  kiss  may  live; 
And  in  my  heartless  breast  and  burning  brain 
That  word,  that  kiss,  shall  all  thoughts  else  survive,     ,. 
With  food  of  saddest  memory  kept  alive, 
Now  thou  art  dead,  as  if  it  were  a  part 
Of  thee,  my  Adonais!    I  would  give 
All  that  I  am  to  be  as  thou  now  art! 
But  I  am  chained  to  Time,  and  cannot  thence  depart! 

"O  gentle  child,  beautiful  as  thou  wert. 
Why  didst  thou  leave  the  trodden  paths  of  men 
Too  soon,  and  with  weak  hands  though  mighty  heart' '' 
Dare  the  unpastured  dragon  in  his  den? 
Defenseless  as  thou  wert,  oh,  where  was  then 
Wisdom  the  mirrored  shield,  or  scorn  the  spear? 
Or  hadst  thou  waited  the  full  cycle,  when 
Thy  spirit  should  have  filled  its  crescent  sphere. 
The  monsters  of  hfe's  waste  had  fled  from  thee  like  deer. 

"The  herded  wolves,  bold  only  to  pursue; 

The  obscene  ravens,  clamorous  o'er  the  dead; 

The  vultures,  to  the  conqueror's  banner  true,     i  ud  briA 


Adonais  3619 

Who  feed  where  Desolation  first  has  fed, 
And  whose  wings  rain  contagion; — how  they  fled, 
When,  like  Apollo,  from  his  golden  bow 
The  Pythian  of  the  age  one  arrow  sped 
And  smiled! — The  spoilers  tempt  no  second  blow. 
They  fawn  on  the  proud  feet  that  spurn  them  lying  low. 

"The  sun  comes  forth,  and  many  reptiles  spawn; 
He  sets,  and  each  ephemeral  insect  then 
Is  gathered  into  death  without  a  dawn, 
And  the  immortal  stars  awake  again; 
So  is  it  in  the  world  of  Uving  men : 
A  godlike  mind  soars  forth,  in  its  delight 
Making  earth  bare  and  veiling  heaven,  and  when 
It  sinks,  the  swarms  that  dimmed  or  shared  its  light 
Leave  to  its  kindred  lamps  the  spirit's  awful  night." 

Thus  ceased  she:  and  the  mountain  shepherds  came, 
Their  garlands  sere,  their  magic  mantles  rent; 
The  Pilgrim  of  Eternity,  whose  fame 
Over  his  living  head  like  Heaven  is  bent. 
An  early  but  enduring  monument, 
Came,  veiling  all  the  lightnings  of  his  song 
In  sorrow;  from  her  wilds  lerne  sent 
The  sweetest  lyrist  of  her  saddest  wrong. 
And  love  taught  grief  to  fall  like  music  from  his  tongue. 

Midst  others  of  less  note,  came  one  frail  Form, 
A  phantom  among  men;  companionless 
As  the  last  cloud  of  an  expiring  storm 
Whose  thunder  is  its  knell;  he,  as  I  guess, 
Had  gazed  on  Nature's  naked  loveliness, 
Actaeon-like,  and  now  he  fled  astray 
With  feeble  steps  o'er  the  world's  wilderness, 
And  his  own  thoughts,  along  that  rugged  way, 
Pursued,  like  raging  hounds,  their  father  and  their  prey.'  . 

A  pardlike  Spirit  beautiful  and  swift — 

A  Love  in  desolation  masked; — a  Power 

Girt  round  with  weakness; — it  can  scarce  uplift 


3620  Sentinel   Songs 

The  weight  of  the  superincumbent  hour; 
It  is  a  dying  lamp,  a  faUing  shower, 
A  breaking  billow; — even  whilst  we  speak 
Is  it  not  broken?    On  the  withering  flower 
The  killing  sun  smiles  brightly:  on  a  cheek 
The  hfe  can  burn  in  blood,  even  while  the  heart  may  break. 

His  head  was  bound  with  pansies  overblown. 
And  faded  violets,  white,  and  pied,  and  blue; 
And  a  light  spear  topped  with  a  cypress  cone, 
Round  whose  rude  shaft  dark  ivy  tresses  grew 
Yet  dripping  with  the  forest's  noonday  dew. 
Vibrated,  as  the  ever-beating  heart 
Shook  the  weak  hand  that  grasped  it;  of  that  crew 
He  came  the  last,  neglected  and  apart; 
A  herd-abandoned  deer  struck  by  the  hunter's  dart. 

All  stood  aloof,  and  at  his  partial  moan 
Smiled  through  their  tears;  well  knew  that  gentle  band 
Who  in  another's  fate  now  wept  his  own. 
As  in  the  accents  of  an  unknown  land 
He  sung  new  sorrow;  sad  Urania  scanned 
The  Stranger's  mien,  and  murmured:  "Who  art  thou?" 
He  answered  not,  but  with  a  sudden  hand 
Made  bare  his  branded  and  ensanguined  brow. 
Which  was  like  Cain's  or  Christ's — oh!  that  it  should  be  so! 

What  softer  voice  is  hushed  over  the  dead? 
Athwart  what  brow  is  that  dark  mantle  thrown? 
What  form  leans  sadly  o'er  the  white  death-bed, 
In  mockery  of  monumental  stone. 
The  heavy  heart  heaving  without  a  moan? 
If  it  be  He,  who,  gentlest  of  the  wise, 
Taught,  soothed,  loved,  honored  the  departed  one; 
Let  me  not  vex  with  inharmonious  sighs 
The  silence  of  that  heart's  accepted  sacrifice. 

Our  Adonais  has  drunk  poison — oh. 

What  deaf  and  viperous  murderer  could  crown 

Life's  early  cup  with  such  a  draught  of  woe? 


Adonals  3621 

The  nameless  worm  would  now  itself  disown; 
It  felt,  yet  could  escape  the  magic  tone 
Whose  prelude  held  all  envy,  hate  and  wrong, 
But  what  was  howhng  in  one  breast  alone, 
Silent  with  expectation  of  the  song, 
Whose  master's  hand  is  cold,  whose  silver  lyre  unstrung. 

Live  thou,  whose  infamy  is  not  thy  fame! 
Live!  fear  no  heavier  chastisement  from  me, 
Thou  noteless  blot  on  a  remembered  name! 
But  be  thyself,  and  know  thyself  to  be! 
And  ever  at  thy  season  be  thou  free 
To  spill  the  venom  when  thy  fangs  o'erflow; 
Remorse  and  Self-contempt  shall  cling  to  thee; 
Hot  Shame  shall  burn  upon  thy  secret  brow, 
And  like  a  beaten  hound  tremble  thou  shalt — as  now. 

Nor  let  us  weep  that  our  delight  is  fled 
Far  from  these  carrion  kites  that  scream  below;       '  [ 
He  wakes  or  sleeps  with  the  enduring  dead ; 
Thou  canst  not  soar  where  he  is  sitting  now. 
Dust  to  the  dust!  but  the  pure  spirit  shall  flow 
Back  to  the  burning  fountain  whence  it  came, 
A  portion  of  the  Eternal,  which  must  glow 
Through  time  and  change,  unquenchably  the  same, 
Whilst  thy  cold  embers  choke  the  sordid  hearth  of  shame. 

Peace,  peace!  he  is  not  dead,  he  doth  not  sleep- 
He  hath  awakened  from  the  dream  of  life — 
'Tis  we,  who,  lost  in  stormy  visions,  keep 
With  phantoms  an  unprofitable  strife, 
And  in  mad  trance,  strike  with  our  spirit's  knife 
Invulnerable  nothings.    We  decay 
Like  corpses  in  a  charnel;  fear  and  grief 
Convulse  us  and  consume  us  day  by  day, 
And  cold  hopes  swarm  like  worms  within  our  living  clay. 

He  has  outsoared  the  shadow  of  our  night; 
Envy  and  calumny  and  hate  and  pain. 
And  that  unrest  which  men  miscall  delight, 


3622  Sentinel  Songs 

Can  touch  him  not  and  torture  not  again; 
From  the  contagion  of  the  world's  slow  stain 
He  is  secure,  and  now  can  never  mourn 
A  heart  grown  cold,  a  head  grown  gray  in  vain; 
Nor,  when  the  spirit's  self  has  ceased  to  burn, 
With  sparkless  ashes  load  an  unlamented  urn. 

He  lives,  he  wakes — 'tis  Death  is  dead,  not  he; 
Mourn  not  for  Adonais. — Thou  young  Dawn, 
Turn  all  thy  dew  to  splendor,  for  from  thee 
The  spirit  thou  lamentest  is  not  gone; 
Ye  caverns  and  ye  forests,  cease  to  moan! 
Cease,  ye  faint  flowers  and  fountains,  and  thou  Air, 
Which  like  a  mourning  veil  thy  scarf  hadst  thrown 
O'er  the  abandoned  Earth,  now  leave  it  bare 
Even  to  the  joyous  stars  which  smile  on  its  despair! 

He  is  made  one  with  Nature:  there  is  heard 
His  voice  in  all  her  music,  from  the  moan 
Of  thunder,  to  the  song  of  night's  sweet  bird; 
He  is  a  presence  to  be  felt  and  known 
In  darkness  and  in  Hght,  from  herb  and  stone, 
Spreading  itself  where'er  that  Power  may  move 
Which  has  withdrawn  his  being  to  its  own; 
Which  wields  the  world  with  never- wearied  love, 
Sustains  it  from  beneath,  and  kindles  it  above. 

He  is  a  portion  of  the  loveliness 
Which  once  he  made  more  lovely:  he  doth  bear 
His  part,  while  the  one  Spirit's  plastic  stress 
Sweeps  through  the  dull  dense  world,  compelling  there, 
All  new  successions  to  the  forms  they  wear; 
Torturing  the  unwilling  dross  that  checks  its  flight 
To  its  own  likeness,  as  each  mass  may  bear, 
And  bursting  in  its  beauty  and  its  might 
From  trees  and  beasts  and  men  into  the  Heaven's  light. 

The  splendors  of  the  firmament  of  time 
May  be  eclipsed,  but  are  extinguished  not; 
Like  stars  to  their  appointed  height  they  climb, 


Adonais  3623 

And  death  is  a  low  mist  which  cannot  blot 
The  brightness  it  may  veil.    When  lofty  thought 
Lifts  a  young  heart  above  its  mortal  lair, 
And  love  and  life  contend  in  it,  for  what 
Shall  be  its  earthly  doom,  the  dead  live  there 
And  move  like  winds  of  light  on  dark  and  stormy  air. 

The  inheritors  of  unfulfilled  renown 
Rose  from  their  thrones,  built  beyond  mortal  thought, 
Far  in  the  Unapparcnt.    Chatterton 
Rose  pale, — his  solemn  agony  had  not 
Yet  faded  from  him ;  Sidney,  as  he  fought 
And  as  he  fell  and  as  he  lived  and  loved. 
Sublimely  mild,  a  Spirit  without  spot, 
Arose;  and  Lucan,  by  his  death  approved; 
Oblivion  as  they  rose  shrank  like  a  thing  reproved. 

And  many  more,  whose  names  on  Earth  are  dark, 
But  whose  transmitted  efHuence  cannot  die 
So  long  as  fire  outlives  the  parent  spark, 
Rose,  robed  in  dazzling  immortality. 
"Thou  art  l^ecome  as  one  of  us,"  they  cry; 
"It  was  for  thee  yon  kingless  sphere  has  long 
Swung  blind  in  unascended  majesty. 
Silent  alone  amid  an  Heaven  of  song. 
Assume  thy  winged  throne,  thou  Vesper  of  our  throng!" 

Who  mourns  for  Adonais?  oh,  come  forth. 
Fond  wretch!  and  know  thyself  and  him  aright. 
Clasp  with  thy  panting  soul  the  pendulous  Earth; 
As  from  a  center,  dart  thy  spirit's  light 
Beyond  all  worlds,  until  its  spacious  might 
Satiate  the  void  circumference;  then  shrink 
Even  to  a  point  within  our  day  and  night ; 
And  keep  thy  heart  light  lest  it  make  thee  sink 
When  hope  has  kindled  hope,  and  lured  thee  to  the  brink. 

Or  go  to  Rome,  which  is  the  sepulchre 
Oh,  not  of  him,  but  of  our  joy:  'tis  naught 
That  ages,  empires,  and  religions  there 
Lie  buried  in  the  ravage  they  have  wrought; 
For  such  as  he  can  lend, — they  borrow  not 


3624  Sentinel   Songs 

Glory  from  those  who  made  the  world  their  prey; 
And  he  is  gathered  to  the  kings  of  thought 
Who  waged  contention  with  their  time's  decay, 
And  of  the  past  are  all  that  cannot  pass  awa>". 

Go  thou  to  Rome, — at  once  the  Paradise, 
The  grave,  the  city,  and  the  wilderness; 
And  where  its  wrecks  hke  shattered  mountains  rise, 
And  flowering  weeds,  and  fragrant  copses  dress 
The  bones  of  Desolation's  nakedness. 
Pass,  till  the  Spirit  of  the  spot  shall  lead 
Thy  footsteps  to  a  slope  of  green  access. 
Where,  like  an  infant's  smile,  over  the  dead 
A  light  of  laughing  flowers  along  the  grass  is  spread. 

And  gray  walls  molder  round,  on  which  dull  Time 
Feeds,  like  slow  lire  upon  a  hoary  brand; 
And  one  keen  pyramid  with  wedge  sublime, 
Pavilioning  the  dust  of  him  who  planned 
This  refuge  for  his  memory,  doth  stand 
Like  flame  transformed  to  marble ;  and  beneath 
A  field  is  spread,  on  which  a  newer  band 
Have  pitched  in  Heaven's  smile  their  camp  of  death. 
Welcoming  him  we  lose  with  scarce  extinguished  breath. 

Here  pause:  these  graves  are  all  too  young  as  yet 
To  have  outgrown  the  sorrow  which  consigned 
Its  charge  to  each;  and  if  the  seal  is  set. 
Here,  on  one  fountain  of  a  mourning  mind. 
Break  it  not  thou!  too  surely  shalt  thou  find 
Thine  own  well  full,  if  thou  relurnest  home. 
Of  tears  and  gall.    From  the  world's  bitter  wind 
Seek  shelter  in  the  shadow  of  the  tomb. 
What  Adonais  is,  why  fear  we  to  become? 

The  One  remains,  the  many  change  and  pass; 

Heaven's  light  forever  shines.  Earth's  shadows  fly; 

Life,  like  a  dome  of  many-colored  glass. 

Stains  the  white  radiance  of  Eternity, 

Until  Death  tramples  it  to  fragments. — Die, 

If  thou  wouldst  be  with  that  which  thou  dost  seek! 

Follow  where  all  is  fled! — Rome's  azure  sky, 


To   the   Sister  of  Elia  3625 

Flowers,  ruins,  statues,  music,  words,  are  weak 
The  glory  they  transfuse  with  fitting  truth  to  speak. 

Why  linger,  why  turn  l^ack,  why  shrink,  my  Heart? 
Thy  hopes  are  gone  before;  from  all  things  here 
They  have  departed;  thou  shouldst  now  depart! 
A  light  is  passed  from  the  revolving  year, 
And  man,  and  woman;  and  what  still  is  dear 
Attracts  to  crush,  repels  to  make  thee  wither. 
The  soft  sky  smiles, — the  low  wind  whispers  near; 
'Tis  Adonais  calls!  oh,  hasten  thither, 
No  more  let  Life  divide  what  Death  can  join  together. 

That  Light  whose  smile  kindles  the  Universe, 
That  Beauty  in  which  all  things  work  and  move, 
That  Benediction  which  the  eclipsing  Curse 
Of  birth  can  quench  not,  that  sustaining  Love 
Which  through  the  web  of  being  blindly  wove 
By  man  and  boast  and  earth  and  air  and  sea, 
Burns  bright  or  dim,  as  each  are  mirrors  of 
The  fire  for  which  all  thirst,  now  beams  on  me. 
Consuming  the  last  clouds  of  cold  mortality. 

The  breath  whose  might  I  have  invoked  in  song 
Descends  on  me;  my  spirit's  bark  is  driven 
Far  from  the  shore,  far  from  the  trembling  throng 
Whose  saUs  were  never  to  the  tempest  given; 
The  massy  earth  and  sphered  skies  are  riven! 
I  am  borne  darkly,  fearfully,  afar; 
Whilst,  burning  through  the  inmost  veil  of  Heaven, 
The  soul  of  Adonais,  hke  a  star. 
Beacons  from  the  abode  where  the  Eternal  are. 

Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  [1792-1822] 


TO  THE   SISTER  OF  ELIA 

[CHARLES  LAMB,   1775-1834] 

Comfort  thee,  O  thou  mourner,  yet  awhile! 

Again  shall  Elia's  smile 
Refresh  th_v  heart,  where  heart  can  ache  no  more. 

What  is  it  we  deplore? 


,3626  Sentinel   Songs 

He  leaves  behind  him,  freed  from  griefs  and  years, 

Far  worthier  things  than  tears. 
The  iove  of  friends  without  a  single  foe: 

Unequal ed  lot  below! 

His  gentle  soul,  his  genius,  these  are  thine; 

For  these  dost  thou  repine? 
He  may  have  left  the  lowly  walks  of  men; 

Left  them  he  has;  what  then? 

Are  not  his  footsteps  followed  by  the  eyes 

Of  all  the  good  and  wise? 
Though  the  warm  day  is  over,  yet  they  seek 

Upon  the  lofty  peak 

Of  his  pure  mind  the  roseate  light  that  glows 

O'er  death's  perennial  snows. 
Behold  him!  from  the  region  of  the  blest 

He  speaks:  he  bids  thee  rest. 

Waller  Savage  Landor  [1775-1864] 


IN  MEMORY  OF  WALTER   SAVAGE  LANDOR 

[1775-1864] 

Back  to  the  Hower-town,  side  by  side, 
The  bright  months  bring,  ,       /' 

Nev*r-born,  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride, 
Freedom  and  spring. 

The  sweet  land  laughs  from  sea  to  sea. 

Filled  full  of  sun ; 
All  things  come  back  to  her,  being  free; 

All  things  but  one. 

In  many  a  tender  wheaten  plot 

Flowers  that  were  dead 
Live,  and  old  suns  revive;  but  not  1 

That  holier  head. 


In   Memory   of  Walter  Savage   Landor     3627 

By  this  white  wandering  waste  of  sea, 

Far  north,  I  hear 
One  face  shall  never  turn  to  me 

As  once  this  year: 

Shall  never  smile  and  turn  and  rest 

On  mine  as  there, 
Nor  one  most  sacred  hand  be  pressed 

Upon  my  hair. 

I  came  as  one  whose  thoughts  half  linger^ 

Half  run  before; 
The  youngest  to  the  eldest  singer 

That  England  bore. 

I  found  him  whom  I  shall  not  find 

Till  all  grief  end, 
In  holiest  age  our  mightiest  mind, 

Father  and  friend. 

But  thou,  if  anything  endure, 

If  hope  there  be, 
O  spirit  that  man's  life  left  pure, 

Man's  death  set  free. 

Not  with  disdain  of  days  that  were 

Look  earthward  now; 
Let  dreams  revive  the  reverend  hair, 

The  imperial  brow; 

Come  back  in  sleep,  for  in  the  life 

Where  thou  art  not 
We  find  none  like  thee.    Time  and  strife 

And  the  world's  lot 

Move  thee  no  more;  but  love  at  least 

And  reverent  heart 
May  move  thee,  royal  and  released 

Soul,  as  thou  art. 


3628  Sentinel  Songs         ^-oftJ, 

And  thou,  his  Florence,  to  thy  trust 

Receive  and  keep, 
Keep  safe  his  dedicated  dust, 

His  sacred  sleep. 

So  shall  thy  lovers,  come  from  far 

Mix  with  thy  name 
As  morning-star  with  evening-star 

His  faultless  fame. 

Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [183  7- 1909] 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MR.  ROBERT  LEVET,  A 
PRACTISER  IN  PHYSIC  | 

[1701-1782]  \ 

CoNDEMNFD  to  Hope's  delusivc  mine, 

As  on  we  toil  from  day  to  day, 
By  sudden  blasts  or  slow  decline 

Our  social  comforts  drop  away. 


Well  tried  through  many  a  varying  year, 
See  Levet  to  the  grave  descend, 

Officious,  innocent,  sincere, 

Of  every  friendless  name  the  friend. 

Yet  still  he  fills  afi'ection's  eye, 
Obscurely  wise  and  coarsely  kind; 

Nor,  lettered  Arrogance,  deny 
Thy  praise  to  merit  unrefined. 

When  fainting  nature  called  for  aid. 

And  hovering  death  prepared  the  blow,  > 

His  vigorous  remedy  displayed 

The  power  of  art  without  the  show. 


"O   Captain!    My   Captain!"       3629 

In  Misery's  darkest  cavern  known, 

His  useful  care  was  ever  nigh, 
Where  hopeless  Anguish  [)oured  his  groan, 

And  lonely  Want  retired  to  die. 

No  summons  mocked  by  chill  delay, 

No  petty  gain  disdained  by  pride; 
The  modest  wants  of  every  day 

The  toil  of  every  day  supplied.  . 

His  virtues  walked  their  narrow  round, 

Nor  made  a  pause,  nor  left  a  void; 
And  sure  the  Eternal  Master  found 

The  single  talent  well  employed. 

The  busy  day,  the  peaceful  night, 

Unfelt,  uncounted,  glided  by; 
His  frame  was  firm — his  powers  were  bright, 

Though  now  his  eightieth  year  was  nigh. 

Then  with  no  fiery  throbljing  pain, 

No  cold  gradations  of  decay 
Death  broke  at  once  the  vital  chain. 

And  freed  his  soul  the  nearest  way. 

Samuel  Johnson  [1709-1784] 


"0   CAPTAIN!   MY  CAPTAIN!" 

[ABRAHAM   LINCOLN,    1809-1865] 

O  Captain!  my  Captain!  our  fearful  trip  i-s  done, 

The  ship  has  weathered  every  rack,  the  prize  we  sought  is 

won, 
The  port  is  near,  the  bells  I  hear,  the  people  all  exulting. 
While  follow  eyes  the  steady  keel,  the  vessel  grim  and  daring; 
But  O  heart!  heart!  heart! 

O  the  bleeding  drops  of  red. 
Where  on  the  deck  my  Captain  lies, 
Fallen  cold  and  dead. 


J630  Sentinel   Songs 

O  Captain!  my  Captain!  rise  up  and  hear  the  bells; 
Rise  up — for  you  the  flag  is  flung — for  you  the  bugle  trills, 
For  you  bouquets  and  ribboned  wreaths — for  you  the  shores 

a-crowding, 
For  you  they  call,  the  swaying  mass,  their  eager  faces  turn- 
ing; 
Here  Captain!  dear  father! 

This  arm  beneath  your  head! 

It  is  some  dream  that  on  the  deck 

You've  fallen  cold  and  dead. 

My  Captain  does  not  answer,  his  lips  are  pale  and  still. 
My  father  does  not  feel  my  arm,  he  has  no  pulse  nor  will. 
The  ship  is  anchored  safe  and  sound,  its  voyage  closed  and 

done. 
From  fearful  trip  the  victor  ship  comes  in  with  object  won; 
Exult  O  shores,  and  ring  0  bells! 

But  I  with  mournful  tread, 
Walk  the  deck  my  Captain  lies, 
Fallen  cold  and  dead. 

Walt  Whitman  [1S19-1892] 


'WHEN  LILACS  LAST  IN  THE  DOOR  YARD 
BLOOMED" 


When  lilacs  last  in  the  dooryard  bloomed, 

And  the  great  star  early  drooped  in  the  western  sky  in  the 

night, 
I  mourned,  and  yet  shall  mourn  with  ever-returning  spring. 

Ever-returning  spring,  trinity  sure  to  me  you  bring. 
Lilac  blooming  perennial  and  drooping  star  in  the  west, 
And  thought  of  him  I  love. 


O  powerful  western  fallen  star! 
O  shades  of  night — O  moody,  tearful  night! 
O  great  star  disappeared — 0  the  black  murk  that  hides  the 
star  t 


"When   Lilacs   Last"  3631 

O  cruel  hands  that  hold  mc  powerless — O  helpless  soul  of  me! 
0  harsh  surrounding  cloud  that  will  not  free  my  soul! 

in 

In  the  dooryard  fronting  an  old  farmhouse,  near  the  white- 
washed palings, 

Stands  the  lilac-bush  tall-growing  with  heart-shaped  leaves 
of  rich  green, 

With  many  a  pointed  blossom  rising  delicate,  with  the  per- 

'        fume  strong  I  love, 

With  every  leaf  a  miracle — and  from  this  bush  in  the 
dooryard, 

With  delicate-colored  blossoms  and  heart-shaped  leaves  of 
rich  green, 

A  sprig  with  its  flower  I  break. 

IV 

In  the  swamp  in  secluded  recesses, 

A  shy  and  hidden  bird  is  warbling  a  song. 

Solitary  the  thrush, 

The  hermit  withdrawn  to  himself,  avoiding  the  settlements, 

Sings  by  himself  a  song. 

Song  of  the  bleeding  throat, 

Death's  outlet  song  of  life — (for  well,  dear  brother,  I  know 

If  thou  w-ast  not  gifted  to  sing  thou  wouldst  surely  die). 


Over  the  breast  of  the  spring,  the  land,  amid  cities, 

Amid  lanes  and  through  old  woods,  where  lately  the  violets 
peeped  from  the  ground,  spotting  the  gray  debris. 

Amid  the  grass  in  the  fields  each  side  of  the  lanes,  passing  the 
endless  grass. 

Passing  the  yellow-speared  wheat,  every  grain  from  its 
shroud  in  the  dark-brown  lields  uprisen, 

Passing  the  apple-tree  blows  of  white  and  pink  in  the  or- 
chards, 


']6']2  Sentinel  Songs  '  ' 

Carrying  a  corpse  to  where  it  shall  rest  in  the  grave, 
Night  and  day  journeys  a  coffin. 


Coffin  that  passes  through  lanes  and  streets, 

Through  day  and  night,  with  the  great  cloud  darkening  the 

land. 
With  the  pomp  of  the  inlooped  flags,  with  the  cities  draped 

in  black. 
With  the  show  of  the  States  themselves  as  of  crape-veiled 

women  standing. 
With  processions  long  and  winding  and  the  flambeaus  of  the 

night, 
With  the  countless  torches  lit,  with  the  silent  sea  of  faces  and 

the  unbared  heads. 
With  the  waiting  depot,  the  arriving  coffin,  and  the  somiber 

faces. 
With  dirges  through  the  night,  with  the  thousand  voices 

rising  strong  and  solemn. 
With  all  the  mournful  voices  of  the  dirges  poured  around 

the  coffin. 
The  dim-lit  churches  and  the  shuddering  organs — where  amid 

these  you  journey. 
With  the  tolling  tolling  bells'  perpetual  clang. 
Here,  coffin  that  slowly  passes, 
I  give  you  my  sprig  of  lilac. 

VII 

(Nor  for  you,  for  one  alone, 

Blossoms  and  branches  green  to  coffins  all  I  bring. 

For  fresh  as  the  morning,  thus  would  I  chant  a  song  for  you,  ' 

O  sane  and  sacred  death. 

All  over  bouquets  of  roses, 

O  death,  I  cover  you  over  with  roses  and  early  lilies, 

But  mostly  and  now  the  lilac  that  blooms  the  first. 

Copious  I  break,  I  break  the  sprigs  from  the  bushes, 

With  loaded  arms  I  come,  pouring  for  you, 

For  you  and  the  coffins  all  of  you,  O  death.) 


"When   Lilacs   Last"  3^33 


VIII 

0  western  orb  sailing  the  heaven, 

Now  I  know  what  you  must  have  meant  as  a  month  since  I 

walked. 

As  I  walked  in  silence  the  transparent  shadowy  night, 
As  I  saw  you  had  something  to  tell  as  you  bent  to  me  night 

after  night, 
As  you  drooped  from  the  sky  low  down  as  if  to  my  side, 

(while  the  other  stars  all  looked  on,) 
As  we  wandered  together  the  solemn  night,  (for  something, 

I  know  not  what,  kept  me  from  sleep,) 
As  the  night  advanced,  and  I  saw  on  the  rim  of  the  west  how 

full  you  were  of  woe. 
As  I  stood  on  the  rising  ground  in  the  breeze  in  the  cool 

transparent  night. 
As  I  watched  where  you  passed,  and  was  lost  in  the  nether- 
ward  black  of  the  night. 
As  my  soul  in  its  trouble  dissatisfied  sank,  as  where  yon  sad 

orb. 
Concluded,  dropped  in  the  night,  and  was  gone. 

IX 

Sing  on  there  in  the  swamp, 

0  singer  bashful  and  tender,  I  hear  your  notes,  I  hear  your 

call, 

1  hear,  I  come  presently,  I  understand  you, 

But  a  moment  I  linger,  for  the  lustrous  star  has  detained  me, 
The  star  my  departing  comrade  holds  and  detains  me. 


O  how  shall  I  warble  myself  for  the  dead  one  there  I  loved? 
And  how  shall  I  deck  my  song  for  the  large  sweet  soul  that 

has  gone? 
And  what  shall  my  perfume  be  for  the  grave  of  him  I  love? 

Sea-winds  blown  from  east  and  west, 

Blown  from  the  Eastern  sea  and  blown  from  the  Western 

sea,  till  there  on  the  prairies  meeting. 
These  and  with  these  and  the  breath  of  my  chant, 
I'll  perfume  the  grave  of  him  I  love. 


0634  Sentinel  Songs'/' 

XI 

O  what  shall  I  hang  on  the  chamber  walls? 

And  what  shall  the  pictures  be  that  I  hang  on  the  walls, 

To  adorn  the  burial-house  of  him  I  love? 

Pictures  of  growing  spring  and  farms  and  homes, 

With  the  Fourth-month  eve  at  sundown,  and' the  gray  smoke 

lucid  and  bright, 
With  floods  of  the  yellow  gold  of  the  gorgeous,  indolent, 

sinking  sun,  burning,  expanding  the  air. 
With  the  fresh  spring  herbage  under  foot,  and  the  pale 

green  leaves  of  the  trees  prolific. 
In  the  distance  the  flowing  glaze,  the  breast  of  the  river, 

with  a  wind-dapple  here  and  there. 
With  ranging  hills  on  the  banks,  with  many  a  line  against 

the  sky,  and  shadows. 
And  the  city  at  hand  with  dwellings  so  dense,  and  stacks  of 

chimneys, 
And  all  the  scenes  of  life  and  the  workshops,  and  the  work- 
men homeward  returning. 

XII 

Lo,  body  and  soul — this  land. 

My  own  Manhattan  with  spires,  and  the  sparkling  and 

hurrying  tides,  and  the  ships. 
The  varied  and  ample  land,  the  South  and  the  North  in  the 

light,  Ohio's  shores  and  flashing  Missouri, 
And  ever  the  far-spreading  prairies  covered  with  grass  and 

corn. 

Lo,  the  most  excellent  sun  so  calm  and  haughty, 

The  violet  and  purple  morn  with  just-felt  breezes, 

The  gentle  soft-born  measureless  light, 

The  miracle  spreading  bathing  all,  the  fulfilled  noon. 

The  coming  eve  delicious,  the  welcome  night  and  the  stars, 

Over  my  cities  shining  all,  enveloping  man  and  land. 

XIII 

Sing  on,  sing  on,  you  gray-brown  bird. 

Sing  from  the  swamps,  the  recesses,  pour  your  chant  from 

the  bushes, 
Limitless  out  of  the  dusk,  out  of  the  cedars  and  pines. 


"When   Lilacs   Last"  3^3 S 

Sing  on,  dearest  brother,  warble  your  reedy  song, 
Loud  human  song,  with  voice  of  uttermost  woe. 

O  liquid  and  free  and  tender! 
0  wild  and  loose  to  my  soul — O  wondrous  singer! 
You  only  I  hear — yet  the  star  holds  me,  (but  will  soon  de- 
part,) 
Yet  the  lilac  with  mastering  odor  holds  me. 


Now  while  I  sat  in  the  day  and  looked  forth, 

In  the  close  of  the  day  with  its  light  and  the  fields  of  spring, 

and  the  farmers  preparing  their  crops, 
In  the  large  unconscious  scenery  of  my  land  with  its  lakes 

and  forests, 
In  the  heavenly  aerial  beauty,  (after  the  perturbed  winds 

and  the  storms,) 
Under  the  arching  heavens  of  the  afternoon  swift  passing, 

and  the  voices  of  children  and  women, 
The  many-moving  sea-tides,  and  I  saw  the  ships  how  they 

sailed, 
And  the  summer  approaching  with  richness,  and  the  fields 

all  busy  with  labor, 
And  the  infinite  separate  houses,  how  they  all  went  on,  each 

with  its  meals  and  minutia  of  daily  usages. 
And  the  streets  how  their  throbbings  throbbed,  and  the 

cities  pent — lo,  then  and  there. 
Falling  upon  them  all  and  among  them  all,  enveloping  me 

with  the  rest. 
Appeared  the  cloud,  appeared  the  long  black  trail, 
And  I  knew  death,  its  thought,  and  the  sacred  knowledge  of 

death. 

Then  with  the  knowledge  of  death  as  walking  one  side  of  me. 
And  the  thought  of  death  close-walking  the  other  side  of  me, 
And  I  in  the  middle  as  with  companions,  and  as  holding  the 

hands  of  companions, 
I  fled  forth  to  the  hiding  receiving  night  that  talks  not, 
Down  to  the  shores  of  the  water,  the  path  by  the  swamp  in 

the  dimness, 
To  the  solemn  shadowy  cedars  and  ghostly  pines  so  still. 


3636  Sentinel  Songs 

And  the  singer  so  shy  to  the  rest  received  me, 

The  gray -brown  bird  I  know  received  us  comrades  three, 

And  he  sang  the  carol  of  death,  and  a  verse  for  him  I  love. 

From  deep  secluded  recesses, 

From  the  fragrant  cedars  and  the  ghostly  pines  so  still, 

Came  the  carol  of  the  bird. 

And  the  charm  of  the  carol  rapt  me. 

As  I  held  as  if  by  their  hands  my  comrades  in  the  night, 

And  the  voice  of  my  spirit  tallied  the  song  of  the  bird. 

Come,  lovely  and  soothing  death, 

Undulate  round  the  world,  serenely  arriving,  arriving, 

In  the  day,  in  the  night,  to  all,  to  each, 

Sooner  or  later  delicate  death. 

Praised  be  the  fathomless  universe, 
For  life  and  joy,  and  for  objects  and  knowledge  curious, 
And  for  love,  sweet  love — but  praise  !  praise  !  praise  ! 
For  the  sure-enwinding  arms  of  cool-enfolding  death. 

Dark  mother  always  gliding  near  with  soft  feet, 
Have  none  chanted  for  thee  a  chant  of  fullest  welcome  ? 
Then  I  chant  it  for  thee,  I  glorify  thee  above  all, 
bring  thee  a  song  that  when  thou  must  indeed  come,  come  un- 
falteringly. 

Approach,  strong  deliver  ess. 

When  it  is  so,  when  thou  hast  taken  them  I  joyously  sing  the 

dead. 
Lost  in  the  loving  floating  ocean  of  thee, 
Laved  in  the  flood  of  thy  bliss,  O  death. 

From  me  to  thee  glad  serenades,  ■' 

Dances  for  thee  I  propose,  saluting  thee,  adornments  and  f east- 
ings for  thee. 

And  the  sights  of  the  open  landscape  and  the  high-spread  sky 
are  fitting, 

And  life  and  the  fields,  and  the  huge  and  thoughtful  night. 


"When   Lilacs    Last"  3637 

The  night  in  silence  under  many  a  star, 

The  ocean  shore  and  the  husky  whispering  wave  whose  voice  I 

know, 

And  the  soul  turning  to  thee,  O  vast  and  well-veiled  death, 
And  the  body  gratefully  nestling  close  to  thee. 

Over  the  tree-lops  I  float  thee  a  song, 

Over  the  rising  and  sinking  waves,  over  the  myriad  fields  and  the 

prairies  wide, 
Over  the  dense-packed  cities  all  and  the  teeming  wharves  and 

ways, 
I  float  this  carol  with  joy,  with  joy  to  thee,  O  death. 

XV 

To  the  tally  of  my  soul, 

Loud  and  strong  kept  up  the  gray-brown  bird, 
With  pure  deliberate  notes  spreading  filling  the  night. 

Loud  in  the  pines  and  cedars  dim. 

Clear  in  the  freshness  moist  and  the  swamp-perfume, 

And  I  with  my  comrades  there  in  the  night. 

While  my  sight  that  was  bound  in  my  eyes  unclosed, 
As  to  long  panoramas  of  visions. 

And  I  saw  askant  the  armies, 

I  saw  as  in  noiseless  dreams  hundreds  of  battle-flags, 
Borne  through  the  smoke  of  the  battles  and  pierced,  with 
j-jii  missiles  I  saw  them,  .  ^\^y.f.T 

And  carried  hither  and  yon  through  the  smoke,  and  torn 

and  bloody, 
And  at  last  but  a  few  shreds  left  on  the  staffs,  (and  all  in 

silence,) 
And  the  staffs  all  splintered  and  broken. 

I  saw  battle-corpses,  myriads  of  them, 
And  the  white  skeletons  of  young  men,  I  saw  them, 
I  saw  the  debris  and  debris  of  all  the  slain  soldiers  of  the 
war. 


3638  Sentinel   Songs     ' 

But  I  saw  they  were  not  as  was  thought, 
They  themselves  were  fully  at  rest,  they  suffered  not, 
The  living  remained  and  suffered,  the  mother  suffered. 
And  the  wife  and  the  child  and  the  musing  comrade  suffered, 
And  the  armies  that  remained  suffered. 

XVI 

Passing  the  visions,  passing  the  night, 

Passing,  unloosing  the  hold  of  my  comrades'  hands. 

Passing  the  song  of  the  hermit  bird,  and  the  tallying  song  of 

my  soul. 
Victorious   song,   death's  outlet   song,   yet   varying   ever- 
altering  song, 
As  low  and  wailing,  yet  clear  the  notes,  rising  and  falling, 

flooding  the  night, 
Sadly  sinking  and  fainting,  as  warning  and  warning,  and  yet 

again  bursting  with  joy. 
Covering  the  earth  and  filling  the  spread  of  the  heaven. 
As  that  powerful  psalm  in  the  night  I  heard  from  recesses, 
Passing,  I  leave  thee  lilac  with  heart-shaped  leaves, 
I  leave  thee  there  in  the  dooryard,  blooming,  returning  with 
spring. 

I  cease  from  my  song  for  thee. 

From  my  gaze  on  thee  in  the  west,  fronting  the  west,  com- 
muning with  thee, 
O  comrade  lustrous  with  silver  face  in  the  night. 

Yet  each  to  keep  and  all,  retrievements  out  of  the  night. 
The  song,  the  wondrous  chant  of  the  gray-brown  bird. 
And  the  tallying  chant,  the  echo  aroused  in  my  soul, 
With  the  lustrous  and  drooping  star  with  the  countenance 

full  of  woe. 
With  the  holders  holding  my  hand  nearing  the  call  of  tlie 

bird,  '''^'  '''^■''^  ''■  ^'^"^ 

Comrades  mine  and  I  in  the  midst,  and  their  meindry  ever 

to  keep,  for  the  dead  I  loved  so  well. 
For  the  sweetest,  wisest  soul  of  all  my  days  and  lands — and 

this  for  his  dear  sake. 
Lilac  and  star  and  bird  twined  with  the  chant  of  my  soul. 
There  in  the  fragrant  pines  and  the  cedars  dusk  and  dim. 

Walt  WhUman  [1810-1892] 


Lincoln,  the   Man  of  the   People     3639 


LINCOLN,  THE  MAN  OF  THE  PEOPLE 

When  the  Norn  Mother  saw  the  Whirlwind  Hour 
Greatening  and  darkening  as  it  hurried  on, 
She  left  the  Heaven  of  Heroes  and  came  down 
To  make  a  man  to  meet  the  mortal  need. 
She  took  the  tried  clay  of  the  common  road — 
Clay  warm  yet  with  the  genial  heat  of  Earth, 
Dashed  through  it  all  a  strain  of  prophecy; 
Tempered  the  heap  with  thrill  of  human  tears; 
Then  mixed  a  laughter  with  the  serious  stuff. 
Into  the  shape  she  breathed  a  flame  to  light 
That  tender,  tragic,  ever-changing  face. 
Here  was  a  man  to  hold  against  the  world, 
A  man  to  match  the  mountains  and  the  sea. 

The  color  of  the  ground  was  in  him,  the  red  earth; 

The  smack  and  tang  of  elemental  things: 

The  rectitude  and  patience  of  the  chff; 

The  good- will  of  the  rain  that  loves  all  leaves; 

The  friendly  welcome  of  the  wayside  well; 

The  courage  of  the  bird  that  dares  the  sea; 

The  gladness  of  the  wind  that  shakes  the  corn; 

The  pity  of  the  snow  that  hides  all  scars; 

The  secrecy  of  streams  that  make  their  way 

Beneath  the  mountain  to  the  rifted  rock; 

The  tolerance  and  equity  of  light 

That  gives  as  freely  to  the  shrinking  flower 

As  to  the  great  oak  flaring  to  the  wind — 

To  the  grave's  low  hill  as  to  the  Matterhorn 

That  shoulders  out  the  sky. 

Sprung  from  the  West, 
The  strength  of  virgin  forests  braced  his  mind, 
The  hush  of  spacious  prairies  stilled  his  soul. 
Up  from  log  cabin  to  the  Capitol, 
One  fire  was  on  his  spirit,  one  resolve — 
To  send  the  keen  ax  to  the  root  of  wrong. 
Clearing  a  free  way  for  the  feet  of  God. 
And  evermore  he  burned  to  do  his  deed 


3640  Sentinel  Songs 

With  the  fine  stroke  and  gesture  of  a  king: 
He  built  the  rail-pile  as  he  built  the  State, 
Pouring  his  splendid  strength  through  every  blow, 
The  conscience  of  him  testing  every  stroke. 
To  make  his  deed  the  measure  of  a  man. 

So  came  the  Captain  with  the  mighty  heart; 
And  when  the  judgment  thunders  split  the  house, 
Wrenching  the  rafters  from  their  ancient  rest. 
He  held  the  ridgepole  up,  and  spiked  again 
The  rafters  of  the  Home.     He  held  his  place — 
Held  the  long  purpose  like  a  growing  tree — ■ 
Held  on  through  blame  and  faltered  not  at  praise. 
And  when  he  fell  in  whirlwind,  he  went  down 
As  when  a  lordly  cedar,  green  with  boughs, 
Goes  down  with  a  great  shout  upon  the  hills. 
And  leaves  a  lonesome  place  against  the  sky. 

Edwin  Markham  [1852- 


THE  MASTER 

Supposed  to  have  been  written  not  long  after  the  Civil  War 

A  FLYING  word  from  here  and  there 

Had  sown  the  name .  at  which  we  sneered. 

But  soon  the  name  was  everywhere, 

To  be  reviled  and  then  revered: 

A  presence  to  be  loved  and  feared. 

We  cannot  hide  it,  or  deny 

That  we,  the  gentlemen  who  jeered, 

May  be  forgotten  by  and  by. 

He  came  when  days  were  perilous 
And  hearts  of  men  were  sore  beguiled;  ' 
And  having  made  his  note  of  us, 
He  pondered  and  was  reconciled. 
Was  ever  master  yet  so  mild 
As  he,  and  so  untamable? 
We  doubted,  even  when  he  smiled. 
Not  knowing  what  he  knew  so  well. 


The  Master  3641 


He  knew  that  undeceiving  fate 

Would  shame  us  whom  he  served  unsought; 

He  knew  that  he  must  wince  and  wait — 

The  jest  of  those  for  whom  he  fought; 

He  knew  devoutly  what  he  thought 

Of  us  and  of  our  ridicule; 

He  knew  that  we  must  all  be  taught 

Like  little  children  in  a  school. 

We  gave  a  glamor  to  the  task 

That  he  encountered  and  saw  through, 

But  little  of  us  did  he  ask, 

And  little  did  we  ever  do. 

And  what  appears  if  we  review 

The  season  when  we  railed  and  chafifed? 

It  is  the  face  of  one  who  knew 

That  we  were  learning  while  we  laughed. 

The  face  that  in  our  vision  feels 
Again  the  venom  that  we  flung, 
Transfigured  to  the  world  reveals 
The  vigilance  to  which  we  clung. 
Shrewd,  hallowed,  harassed,  and  among 
The  mysteries  that  are  untold. 
The  face  we  see  w^as  never  young 
Nor  could  it  ever  have  been  old. 

For  he,  to  whom  we  had  applied 
Our  shopman's  test  of  age  and  worth, 
Was  elemental  when  he  died, 
As  he  was  ancient  at  his  birth : 
The  saddest  among  kings  of  earth, 
Bowed  with  a  galling  crown,  this  man 
Met  rancor  with  a  cryptic  mirth. 
Laconic — and  Olympian. 

The  love,  the  grandeur,  and  the  fame, 
Are  bounded  by  the  world  alone; 
The  calm,  the  smoldering,  and  the  flame 
Of  awful  patience  was  his  own: 


3642  Sentinel  Songs 


With  him  they  are  forever  flown 
Past  all  our  fond  self-shadowings. 
Wherewith  we  cumber  the  Unknown 
As  with  inept,  Icarian  wings. 

For  we  were  not  as  other  men: 

'Twas  ours  to  soar  and  his  to  see: 

But  we  are  coming  down  again. 

And  we  shall  come  down  pleasantly;-  I 

Nor  shall  we  longer  disagree 

On  what  it  is  to  be  sublime, 

But  flourish  in  our  perigee 

And  have  one  Titan  at  a  time. 

Eihi'iH  Arlington  Robinson  [i86g- 

ON  THE  LIFE-MASK  OF  ABRAHAIM  LINCOLN 

This  bronze  doth  keep  the  very  form  and  mold 

Of  our  great  martyr's  face.     Yes,  this  is  he: 

That  brow  all  wisdom,  all  benignity; 

That  human,  humorous  mouth;  those  cheeks  that  hold 

Like  some  harsh  landscape  all  the  summer's  gold; 

That  spirit  fit  for  sorrow,  as  the  sea 

For  storms  to  beat  on;  the  lone  agony 

Those  silent,  patient  lips  too  well  foretold. 

Yes,  this  is  he  who  ruled  a  world  of  men 

As  might  some  prophet  of  the  elder  day, — 

Brooding  above  the  tempest  and  the  fray 

With  deep-eyed  thought  and  more  than  mortal  ken. 

A  power  was  his  beyond  the  touch  of  art 

Or  armed  strength — his  pure  and  mighty  heart. 

Ric/iani  Watson  Gilder  [i 844-1909] 

ABRAHAM  LINCOLN 

(Written  by  the   editor  of  London  Punch,  as  that  journal's  apology  and 

atonemont] 

You  lay  a  wreath  on  murdered  Lincoln's  bier. 
You,  who,  with  mocking  pencil,  wont  to  trace, 

Broad  for  the  self-complaisant  British  sneer. 

His  length  of  shambling  limb,  his  furrowed  face, 


Abraham   Lincoln  3643 

His  gaunt,  gnarled  hands,  his  unkempt,  bristling  hair, 
His  gaib  uncouth,  his  bearing  ill  at  ease, 

His  lack  of  all  we  prize  as  debonair, 
Of  power  or  will  to  shine,  of  art  to  please; 

Yoii,  whose  smart  pen  backed  up  the  pencil's  laugh, 
Judging  each  step  as  though  the  way  were  plain; 

Reckless,  so  it  could  point  its  paragraph 
Of  chief's  perplexity,  or  people's  pain, — 

Beside  this  corpse,  that  bears  for  winding-sheet 
The  Stars  and  Stripes  he  lived  to  rear  anew, 

Between  the  mourners  at  his  head  and  feet. 
Say,  scurrile  jester,  is  there  room  for  you  ? 

Yes,  he  had  lived  to  shame  me  from  my  sneer, 
To  lame  my  pencil,  and  confute  my  pen; 

To  make  me  own  this  hind  of  Princes  peer. 
This  rail-splitter  a  true-bom  king  of  men. 

My  shallow  judgment  I  had  learned  to  rue, 

Noting  how  to  occasion's  height  he  rose, 
How  his  quaint  wit  made  home-truth  seem  more  true, 

How,  iron-like,  his  temper  grew  by  blows; 

How  humble,  yet  how  hopeful,  he  could  be; 

How,  in  good  fortune  and  in  ill,  the  same; 
Nor  bitter  in  success,  nor  boastful  he. 

Thirsty  for  gold,  nor  feverish  for  fame. 

He  went  about  his  work — such  work  as  few 
Ever  had  laid  on  head  and  heart  and  hand — 

.^s  one  who  knows,  where  there's  a  task  to  do, 
Man's  honest  will  must  Heaven's  good  grace  command; 

\\'ho  trusts  the  strength  will  with  the  burden  grow, 
That  God  makes  instruments  to  work  His  will, 

If  but  that  will  we  can  arrive  to  know, 
Nor  tamper  with  the  weights  of  good  and  ill. 


0644  Sentinel  Songs 

So  he  went  forth  to  battle,  on  the  side 
That  he  felt  clear  was  Liberty's  and  Right's^  ^jj^^ 

As  in  his  peasant  boyhood  he  had  plied  ■     ■  ■ 

His  warfare  with  rude  Nature's  thwarting  mights,- 

The  uncleared  forest,  the  unbroken  soil, 
The  iron  bark  that  turns  the  lumberer's  ax, 

The  rapid,  that  o'erbears  the  boatman's  toil, 

The  prairie,  hiding  the  mazed  wanderer's  tracks. 

The  ambushed  Indian,  and  the  prowling  bear, — 
Such  were  the  needs  that  helped  his  youth  to  train : 

Rough  culture — but  such  trees  large  fruit  may  bear, 
If  but  their  stocks  be  of  right  girth  and  grain. 

So  he  grew  up,  a  destined  work  to  do, 
And  lived  to  do  it :  four  long-suffering  years' 

Ill-fate,  ill-feeling,  ill-report,  lived  through, 
And  then  he  heard  the  hisses  change  to  cheers, 

The  taunts  to  tribute,  the  abuse  to  praise, 

And  took  both  with  the  same  unwavering  mood; 

Till,  as  he  came  on  light,  from  darkling  days, 

And  seemed  to  touch  the  goal  from  where  he  stood, 

A  felon  hand,  between  the  goal  and  him, 

Reached  from  behind  his  back,  a  trigger  pressed — 

And  those  perplexed  and  patient  eyes  were  dim, 
Those  gaunt,  long-laboring  limbs  were  laid  to  rest. 

The  words  of  mercy  were  upon  his  lips. 
Forgiveness  in  his  heart  and  on  his  pen. 

When  this  vile  murderer  brought  swift  eclipse 
To  thoughts  of  peace  on  earth,  good  will  to  men. 

The  Old  World  and  the  New,  from  sea  to  sea. 
Utter  one  voice  of  sympathy  and  shame. 

Sore  heart,  so  stopped  when  it  at  last  beat  high! 
Sad  life,  cut  short  just  as  its  triumph  came! 


Henry  Wadsworth   Longfellow     3645 

A  deed  accursed!     Strokes  have  been  struck  before 
By  the  assassin's  hand,  whereof  men  doubt 

If  more  of  horror  or  disgrace  they  bore; 

But  thy  foul  crime,  Hke  Cain's,  stands  darkly  out, 

Vile  hand,  that  brandest  murder  on  a  strife, 

Whate'er  its  grounds,  stoutly  and  nobly  striven. 
And  with  the  martyr's  crown,  crownest  a  life 
With  much  to  praise,  little  to  be  forgiven. 

Tom  Taylor  [1817-1880] 
or  Shirley  Brooks  (?)  [1816-1874] 


HENRY  WADSWORTH  LONGFELLOW 

[1807-1882] 

Nee  turpem  sencctam 
Degere,  nee  eithara  earentem. — Hor.  i.  31 

"Not  to  be  tuneless  in  old  age!" 
Ah !  surely  blest  his  pilgrimage, 

Who,  in  his  Winter's  snow, 
Still  sings  with  note  as  sweet  and  clear 
As  in  the  morning  of  the  year 

When  the  first  violets  blow. 

Blest! — but  more  blest,  whom  Summer's  heat, 
Whom  Spring's  impulsive  stir  and  beat, 

Have  taught  no  feverish  lure; 
Whose  Muse,  benignant  and  serene, 
Still  keeps  his  Autumn  chaplet  green 

Because  his  verse  is  pure! 

Lie  calm,  O  while  and  laureate  head! 
Lie  calm,  O  Dead,  that  art  not  dead, 

Since  from  the  voiceless  grave, 
Thy  voice  shall  speak  to  old  and  young 
While  song  yet  speaks  an  English  tongue 

By  Charles'  or  Thamis'  wave! 

Austin  DobsoH  [iS)o- 


J  646  Sentinel   Songs 

MARY  QUEEN  OF  SCOTS 

[1542-1587] 

When  the  young  hand  of  Darnley  locked  in  hers 
Had  knit  her  to  her  northern  doom — amid 
The  spousal  pomp  of  flags  and  trumpeters,        // 
Her  fate  looked  forth  and  was  no  longer  hid; 
A  jealous  brain  beneath  a  southern  crown 
Wrought  spells  upon  her;  from  afar  she  felt 
The  waxen  image  of  her  fortunes  melt 
Beneath  the  Tudor's  eye,  while  the  grim  frown 
Of  her  own  lords  o'crmastered  her  sweet  smiles. 
And  nipped  her  growing  gladness,  till  she  mourned, 
And  sank,  at  last,  beneath  their  cruel  wiles; 
But,  ever  since,  all  generous  hearts  have  burned 
To  clear  her  fame,  yea,  very  babes  have  yearned 
Over  this  saddest  story  of  the  isles. 

Charles  Tennyson  Turner  [1808-1879] 


THE  ANGELUS 

[jean   FRANCOIS   MILLET,    X814-1875] 

Not  far  from  Paris,  in  fair  Fontainebleau, 
A  lovely  memory-haunted  hamlet  lies. 
Whose  tender  spell  makes  captive,  and  defies 

Forgetfulness.     The  peasants  come  and  go — 

Their  backs  too  used  to  stoop,  and  patient  sow 
The  harvest  which  a  narrow  want  supplies — ■ 
Even  as  when.  Earth's  pathos  in  his  eyes, 

Millet  dwelt  here,  companion  of  their  woe. 

Ah,  Barbizon!     With  thorns,  not  laurels,  crowned, 
He  looked  thy  sorrows  in  the  face,  and  found— ^ 

Vital  as  seed  warm-nestled  in  the  sod — 
The  hidden  sweetness  at  the  heart  of  pain; 
Trusting  thy  sun  and  dew,  thy  wind  and  rain — 

At  home  with  Nature,  and  at  one  with  God! 
Florence  Earle  Coaies  [1850- 


In   Memory  of  "  Barry  Cornwall"     3647 

UNDER  THE   PORTRAIT  OF  MILTON        „y 
IN  tonson's  folio  edition  of  paradise  lost,  1688 
[1608- I 6 74] 

Three  Poets,  in  three  distant  ages  born, 
Greece,  Italy,  and  England  did  adorn. 
The  first  in  loftiness  of  thought  surpassed ; 
The  next  in  majesty;  in  both  the  last. 
The  force  of  Nature  could  no  further  go: 
To  make  a  third  she  joined  the  former  two. 

John  Dryden  [i 631- 1700] 

IN  MEMORY  OF   "BARRY  CORNWALL" 

[bRYAN   waller   PROCTER,    1787-1874] 

In  the  garden  of  death,  where  the  singers  whose  names  are 
deathless, 
One  with  another  make  music  unheard  of  men, 
Where  the  dead  sweet  roses  fade  not  of  lips  long  breathless, 
And  the  fair  eyes  shine  that  shall  weep  not  or  change 
again, 
Who  comes  now  crowned  with  the  blossom  of  snow-white 

years? 
What  music  is  this  that  the  world  of  the  dead  men  hears? 

Beloved  of  men,  whose  words  on  our  lips  were  honey, 
Whose  name  in  our  ears  and  our  fathers'  ears  was  sweet, 

Like  summer  gone  forth  of  the  land  his  songs  made  sunny, 
To  the  beautiful  veiled  bright  world  where  the  glad  ghosts 
meet, 

Child,  father,  bridegroom  and  bride,  and  anguish  and  rest, 

No  soul  shall  pass  of  a  singer  than  this  more  blest. 

Blest  for  the  years'  sweet  sake  that  were  filled  and  bright- 
ened. 
As  a  forest  with  birds,  with  the  fruit  and  the  flower  of  his 
song; 
For  the  souls'  sake  blest  that  heard,  and  their  cares  were 
lightened, 
For  the  hearts'  sake  blest  that  have  fostered  his  name  so 
long; 


3648  Sentinel   Songs  ,; 

By  the  living  and  dead  lips  blest  that  have  loved  his  name, 
And  clothed  with  their  praise  and  crowned  with  their  love 
for  fame. 

Ah,  fair  and  fragrant  his  fame  as  flowers  that  close  not, 
That  shrink  not  by  day  for  heat  or  for  cold  by  night. 

As  a  thought  in  the  heart  shall  increase  when  the  heart's 
self  knows  not, 
Shall  endure  in  our  ears  as  a  sound,  in  our  eyes  as  a  light; 

Shall  wax  with  the  years  that  wane  and  the  seasons'  chime, 

As  a  white  rose  thornless  that  grows  in  the  garden  of  time. 

The  same  year  calls,  and  one  goes  hence  with  another. 
And  men  sit  sad  that  were  glad  for  their  sweet  songs'  sake; 

The  same  year  beckons,  and  elder  with  younger  brother 
Takes  mutely  the  cup  from  his  hand  that  we  all  shall  take. 

They  pass  ere  the  leaves  be  past  or  the  snows  be  come ; 

And  the  birds  are  loud,  but  the  lips  that  outsang  them  dumb. 

Time  takes  them  home  that  we  loved,  fair  names  and  famous. 
To  the  soft  long  sleep,  to  the  broad  sweet  bosom  of  death; 
But  the  flower  of  their  souls  he  shall  take  not  away  to  shame 
us, 
Nor  the  lips  lack  song  forever  that  now  lack  breath. 
For  with  us  shall  the  music  and  perfume  that  die  not  dwell. 
Though  the  dead  to  our  dead  bid  welcome,  and  we  farewell. 
Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  [1837-1909] 


IN  MEMORIAM 

[lord   RAGLAN,    1788-1855] 

Ah,  not  because  our  Soldier  died  before  his  field  was  won; 
Ah,  not  because  life  would  not  last  till  life's  long  task  were 

done. 
Wreathe  one  less  leaf,  grieve  with  less  grief, — of  all  our  hosts 

that  led 
Not  last  in  work  and  worth  approved,  Lord  Raglan  lieth 

dead. 


In   Memoriam  3649 

His  nobleness  he  had  of  none,  War's  Master  taught  him 

And  prouder  praise  that  Master  gave  than  meaner  lips  can 

mar; 
Gone  to  his  grave,  his  duty  done;  if  farther  any  seek. 
He  left  his  Hfe  to  answer  them, — a  soldier's, — let  it  speak! 

'Twas  his  to  sway  a  blunted  sword, — to  fight  a  fated  field, 
While  idle  tongues  talked  victory,  to  struggle  not  to  yield; 
Light  task  for  placeman's  ready  pen   to  plan  a  field  for 

fight, 
Hard  work  and  hot  with  steel  and  shot  to  win  that  field 

aright. 

Tears  have  been  shed  for  the  brave  dead;  mourn  him  who 

mourned  for  all ! 
Praise  hath  been  given  for  strife  well  striven,  praise  him  who 

strove  o'er  all, 
Nor  count  that  conquest  Httle,  though  no  banner  flaunt  it 

far. 
That  under  him  our  EngHsh  hearts  beat  Pain  and  Plague 

and  War. 

And  if  he  held  those  EngHsh  hearts  too  good  to  pave  the 

path 
To  idle  victories,   shall  we  grudge  what   noble  palm   he 

hath? 
Like  ancient  Chief  he  fought  a-front,  and  'mid  his  soldiers 

seen. 
His  work  was  aye  as  stern  as  theirs;  oh!  make  his  grave  as 

green. 

They  know  him  well, — the  Dead  who  died  that  Russian 

wrong  should  cease. 
Where  Fortune  doth  not  measure  men, — their  souls  and  his 

have  peace; 
Aye!  as  well  spent  in  sad  sick  tent  as  they  in  bloody  strife, 
For  English  Homes  our  EngUsh  Chief  gave  what  he  had^ 

his  life. 

Edwin  Arnold  [1832-1004] 


3650  Sentinel   Songs 


TO  THE  MEMORY  OF  MY  BELOVED  MASTER 
WILLIAM  SHAKESPEARE,  AND  WHAT  HE 
HATH  LEFT   US 

[1564-1616] 

To  draw  no  envy,  Shakespeare,  on  thy  name, 
Am  I  thus  ample  to  thy  book  and  fame; 
While  I  confess  thy  writhigs  to  be  such 
As  neither  Man,  nor  Muse,  can  praise  too  much. 
'Tis  true,  and  all  men's  suffrage.    But  these  ways 
Were  not  the  paths  I  meant  unto  thy  praise; 
For  silliest  ignorance  on  these  may  light, 
Which,  when  it  sounds  at  best,  but  echoes  right; 
Or  blind  affection,  which  doth  ne'er  advance 
The  truth,  but  gropes,  and  urgeth  all  by  chance; 
Or  crafty  malice  might  pretend  this  praise, 
And  think  to  ruin,  where  it  seemed  to  raise. 
These  are,  as  some  infamous  bawd  or  whore 
Should  praise  a  matron.    What  could  hurt  her  more? 
But  thou  art  proof  against  them,  and,  indeed, 
Above  the  ill  fortune  of  them,  or  the  need. 
I  therefore  wiU  begin:    Soul  of  the  age! 
The  applause,  delight,  the  wonder  of  our  stage! 
My  Shakespeare,  rise!  I  will  not  lodge  thee  by 
Chaucer,  or  Spenser,  or  bid  Beaumont  lie 
A  little  further,  to  make  thee  a  room: 
Thou  art  a  monument  without  a  tomb. 
And  art  aHve  still  while  thy  book  doth  live 
^       And  we  have  wits  to  read  and  praise  to  give. 
That  I  not  mix  thee  so,  my  brain  excuses, 
I  mean  with  great,  but  disproportioned  Muses; 
For  if  I  thought  my  judgment  were  of  years, 
I  should  commit  thee  surely  with  thy  peers, 
And  tell  how  far  thou  didst  our  Lyly  outshine, 
Or  sporting  Kyd,  or  Marlowe's  mighty  line. 
And  though  thou  hadst  small  Latin  and  less  Greek, 
From  thence  to  honor  thee,  I  would  not  seek 
For  names;  but  call  forth  thundering  ^Eschylus,  ■- 
Euripides,  and  Sophocles  to  us; 


To  the  Memory  of  William  Shakespeare    3651 

Pacuvius,  Accius,  him  of  Cordova  dead, 

To  life  again,  to  hear  thy  buskin  tread. 

And  shake  a  stage;  or,  when  thy  socks  were  on, 

Leave  thee  alone  for  the  comparison 

Of  all  that  insolent  Greece  or  haughty  Rome 

Sent  forth,  or  since  did  from  their  ashes  come. 

Triumph,  my  Britain,  thou  hast  one  to  show 

To  whom  all  scenes  of  Europe  homage  owe. 

He  was  not  of  an  age,  but  for  all  time! 

And  all  the  Muses  still  were  in  their  prime, 

When,  like  Apollo,  he  came  forth  to  warm 

Our  ears,  or  like  a  Mercury  to  charm! 

Nature  herself  was  proud  of  his  designs 

And  joyed  to  wear  the  dressing  of  his  lines! 

Which  were  so  richly  spun,  and  woven  so  fit, 

As,  since,  she  will  vouchsafe  no  other  wit. 

The  merry  Greek,  tart  Aristophanes, 

Neat  Terence,  witty  Plautus,  now  not  please; 

But  antiquated  and  deserted  lie, 

As  they  were  not  of  Nature's  family. 

Yet  must  I  not  give  Nature  all;  thy  Art 

My  gentle  Shakespeare,  must  enjoy  a  part. 

For  though  the  poet's  matter  nature  be, 

His  art  doth  give  the  fashion;  and,  that  he 

Who  casts  to  write  a  living  line,  must  sweat, 

(Such  as  thine  are)  and  strike  the  second  heat 

Upon  the  Muses'  anvil;  turn  the  same 

(And  himself  with  it)  that  he  thinks  to  frame, 

Or,  for  the  laurel,  he  may  gain  a  scorn; 

For  a  good  poet's  made,  as  well  as  born. 

And  such  wert  thou!    Look  how  the  father's  face 

Lives  in  his  issue,  even  so  the  race 

Of  Shakespeare's  mind  and  manners  brightly  shines 

In  his  well-turned,  and  true-filed  lines; 

In  each  of  which  he  seems  to  shake  a  lance. 

As  brandished  at  the  eyes  of  ignorance. 

Sweet  Swan  of  Avon!  what  a  sight  it  were 

To  see  thee  in  our  waters  yet  appear. 

And  make  those  flights  upon  the  banks  of  Thames, 

That  so  did  take  EHza,  and  our  James! 


0652  Sentinel   Songs 

But  stay,  I  see  thee  in  the  hemisphere 

Advanced,  and  made  a  constellation  there! 

Shine  forth,  thou  Star  of  Poets,  and  with  rage 

Or  influence,  chide  or  cheer  the  drooping  stage, 

Which,  since  thy  flight  from  hence,  hath  mourned  like  night, 

And  despairs  day,  but  for  thy  volume's  hght. 

Ben  Joiison  [iS73?-i637] 


ON  THE  PORTRAIT  OF  SHAKESPEARE  PREFIXED 
TO  THE  FIRST  FOLIO  EDITION,   1623 

This  figure,  that  thou  here  seest  put, 
It  was  for  gentle  Shakespeare  cut; 
Wherein  the  Graver  had  a  strife 
With  Nature  to  outdo  the  life: 
O,  could  he  but  have  drawn  his  wit 
As  well  in  brass,  as  he  hath  hit 
His  face;  the  Print  would  then  surpass 
All  that  was  ever  writ  in  brass. 
But  since  he  cannot.  Reader,  look 
Not  at  his  picture,  but  his  book. 

Ben  Jonson  [i573?-i637] 

TO   SHAKESPEARE 

The  soul  of  man  is  larger  than  the  sky, 

Deeper  than  ocean,  or  the  abysmal  dark 

Of  the  unfathomed  center.    Like  that  ark, 

Which  in  its  sacred  hold  uplifted  high. 

O'er  the  drowned  hills,  the  human  family. 

And  stock  reserved  of  every  living  kind. 

So,  in  the  compass  of  the  single  mind, 

The  seeds  and  pregnant  forms  in  essence  lie. 

That  make  all  worlds.    Great  poet,  'twas  thy  art 

To  know  thyself,  and  in  thyself  to  be 

Whate'er  love,  hate,  'ambition,  destiny. 

Or  the  firm,  fatal  purpose  of  the  heart 

Can  make  of  Man.    Yet  thou  wert  still  the  same. 

Serene  of  thought,  unhurt  by  thy  own  flame. 

Hartley  Coleridge  [1796-1849] 


An   Epitaph  on   W.   Shakespeare    36 ^'j 


SHAKESPEARE 

Others  abide  our  question.    Thou  art  free. 

We  ask  and  ask — Thou  smilest  and  art  still, 

Out-topping  knowledge.    For  the  loftiest  hill, 

Who  to  the  stars  uncrowns  his  majesty. 

Planting  his  steadfast  footsteps  in  the  sea, 

Making  the  heaven  of  heavens  his  dwelling-place, 

Spares  but  the  cloudy  border  of  his  base 

To  the  foiled  searching  of  mortality ; 

And  thou,  who  didst  the  stars  and  sunbeams  know, 

Self -schooled,  self-scanned,  self -honored,  self-secure, 

Didst  tread  on  earth  unguessed  at. — Better  so! 

All  pains  the  immortal  spirit  must  endure. 

All  weakness  which  impairs,  all  griefs  which  bow, 

Find  their  sole  speech  in  that  victorious  brow. 

Matthe-iV  Arnold  [1822-1888 


AN  EPITAPH  ON  THE  ADMIRABLE  DRAMATIC 
POET,   W.   SHAKESPEARE 

What  needs  my  Shakespeare  for  his  honored  bones 

The  labor  of  an  age  in  piled  stones? 

Or  that  his  hallowed  relics  should  be  hid 

Under  a  star-ypointing  pyramid? 

Dear  son  of  memory,  great  heir  of  fame. 

What  need'st  thou  such  weak  witness  of  thy  name? 

Thou  in  our  wonder  and  astonishment 

Hast  built  thyself  a  livelong  monument. 

For  whilst,  to  the  shame  of  slow-endeavoring  art, 

Thy  easy  numbers  flow,  and  that  each  heart 

Hath  from  the  leaves  of  thy  unvalued  book 

Those  Delphic  lines  with  deep  impression  took. 

Then  thou,  our  fancy  of  itself  bereaving. 

Dost  make  zis  marble  with  too  much  conceiving; 

And  so  sepulchered  in  such  pomp  dost  lie. 

That  kings  for  such  a  tomb  would  wish  to  die. 

John  Milton  [1608-1674J 


3654  Sentinel  Songs 


Ol'j 


TO  WILLIAM   SHARP 

FIONA   MACLEOD 
[1856-1905] 

The  waves  about  lona  dirge, 

The  wild  winds  trumpet  over  Skye; 

Shrill  around  Arran's  cliff-bound  verge 
The  gray  gulls  cry. 

Spring  wraps  its  transient  scarf  of  green, 
Its  heathery  robe,  round  slope  and  scar; 

And  night,  the  scudding  wrack  between, 
Lights  its  lone  star. 

But  you  who  loved  these  outland  isles. 

Their  gleams,  their  glooms,  their  mysteries, 

Their  eldritch  lures,  their  druid  wiles, 
Their  tragic  seas, 

Will  heed  no  more,  in  mortal  guise. 
The  potent  witchery  of  their  call, 

If  dawn  be  regnant  in  the  skies, 
Or  evenfall. 

Yet,  though  where  suns  Sicilian  beam 
The  loving  earth  enfolds  your  form, 

I  can  but  deem  these  coasts  of  dream 
And  hovering  storm 

Still  thrall  your  spirit — that  it  bides 

By  far  Zona's  kelp-strewn  shore, 
There  lingering  till  time  and  tides 

Shall  surge  no  more. 

Clinton  Scollard  [i860- 


An  Ode  3655 


AN  ODE 

ON  THE  UNVEILING  OF  THE  SILA.W  MEMORIAL  ON  BOSTON 
COMMON,    MAY   THIRTY-FIRST,    1897 

[ROBERT    GOULD    SHAW,    1837-1863] 


Not  with  slow,  funereal  sound 
Come  we  to  this  sacred  ground; 
Not  with  wailing  fife  and  solemn  muffled  drum, 
Bringing  a  cypress  wreath 

To  lay,  with  bended  knee, 
On  the  cold  brows  of  Death — 
Not  so,  dear  God,  we  come, 
But  with  the  trumpets'  blare 
And  shot-torn  battle-banners  flung  to  air, 
As  for  a  victory! 

Hark  to  the  measured  tread  of  martial  feet. 
The  music  and  the  murmurs  of  the  street! 

No  bugle  breathes  this  day 

Disaster  and  retreat! — 

Hark,  how  the  iron  lips 

Of  the  great  battle-ships 
Salute  the  City  from  her  azure  Bay! 

n 

Time  was — time  was,  ah,  unforgotten  years! — 
We  paid  our  hero  tribute  of  our  tears. 

But  now  let  go 
All  sounds  and  signs  and  formulas  of  woe: 
'Tis  Life,  not  Death,  we  celebrate; 
To  Life,  not  Death,  we  dedicate 
This  storied  bronze,  whereon  is  wrought 
The  lithe  immortal  figure  of  our  thought, 
To  show  forever  to  men's  eyes. 
Our  children's  children's  children's  eyes, 
How  once  he  stood 
In  that  heroic  mood, 


3656  Sentinel  Songs 

He  and  his  dusky  braves 

So  fain  of  glorious  graves! — 

One  instant  stood,  and  then 
Drave  through  that  cloud  of  purple  steel  and  flame, 
Which  wrapped  him,  held  him,  gave  him  not  again, 
But  in  its  trampled  ashes  left  to  Fame 
An  everlasting  name! 


Ill 


That  was  indeed  to  live— 
At  one  bold  swoop  to  wrest 
From  darkling  death  the  best 
That  death  to  life  can  give. 
He  fell  as  Roland  fell 
That  day  at  Roncevaux, 

With  foot  upon  the  ramparts  of  the  foe! 
A  paean,  not  a  knell. 
For  heroes  dying  so ! 
No  need  for  sorrow  here, 
No  room  for  sigh  or  tear, 

Save  such  rich  tears  as  happy  eyelids  know. 
See  where  he  rides,  our  Knight! 
Within  his  eyes  the  light 

Of  battle,  and  youth's  gold  about  his  brow; 

Our  Paladin,  our  Soldier  of  the  Cross, 
Not  weighing  gain  with  loss — 
World-loser,  that  won  all 
Obeying  duty's  call! 
Not  his,  at  peril's  frown, 
A  pulse  of  quicker  beat; 
Not  his  to  hesitate 
And  parley  hold  with  Fate, 
But  proudly  to  fling  down 
His  gauntlet  at  her  feet. 

O  soul  of  loyal  valor  and  white  truth, 
Here,  by  this  iron  gate, 

Thy  serried  ranks  about  thee  as  of  yore, 
Stand  thou  for  evermore 
In  thy  undying  youth! 


Robert   I.ouis   Stevenson  3^S7 

The  tender  heart,  the  eagle  eye! 
Oh,  unto  him  belong 
The  homages  of  Song; 
Our  praises  and  the  praise 
Of  coming  days 
To  him  belong — 
To  him,  to  him,  the  dead  that  shall  not  die! 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich  [1837-1Q07] 


MEMORABILIA 

[1792-1822] 

Ah,  did  you  once  see  Shelley  plain. 
And  did  he  stop  and  speak  to  you, 

And  did  you  speak  to  him  again? 
How  strange  it  seems  and  new! 

But  you  were  living  before  that. 
And  also  you  were  living  after; 

And  the  memory  I  started  at — 
My  starting  moves  your  laughter! 

I  crossed  a  moor,  with  a  name  of  its  own 
And  a  certain  use  in  the  world  no  doubt. 

Yet  a  hand's-breadth  of  it  shines  alone 
'Mid  the  blank  miles  round  about: 

For  there  I  picked  up  on  the  heather 
And  there  I  put  inside  my  breast 

A  molted  feather,  an  eagle-feather! 
Well,  I  forget  the  rest. 

Robert  Browning  [iSi6-i8< 

ROBERT  LOUIS   STEVENSON 

[1850-1894] 

In  his  old  gusty  garden  of  the  North, 
He  heard  lark-time  the  uplifting  Voices  call; 
Smitten  through  with  Voices  was  the  evcnfall — 
At  last  they  drove  him  forth. 


3658  Sentinel   Songs 

.  Now  there  were  two  rang  silverly  and  long; 
And  of  Romance,  that  spirit  of  the  sun, 
And  of  Romance,  Spirit  of  Youth,  was  one; 
And  one  was  that  of  Song. 

Gold-belted  sailors,  bristling  buccaneers, 
The  flashing  soldier,  and  the  high,  slim  dame. 
These  were  the  Shapes  that  all  around  him  came,— 
That  we  let  go  with  tears. 

His  was  the  unstinted  English  of  the  Scot, 
Clear,  nimble,  with  the  scriptural  tang  of  Knox 
Thrust  through  it  like  the  far,  sweet  scent  of  box, 
To  keep  it  unforgot. 

No  frugal  Realist,  but  quick  to  laugh. 

To  see  appealing  things  in  all  he  knew, 

He  plucked  the  sun-sweet  corn  his  fathers  grew, 

And  would  have  naught  of  chaff. 

David  and  Keats,  and  all  good  singing  men. 
Take  to  your  heart  this  Covenanter's  son, 
Gone  in  mid-years,  leaving  our  years  undone, 
Where  you  do  sing  again! 

Lizdle  Woodworlh  Reese  [1856- 

BAYARD   TAYLOR 

[1825-1878] 

"And  where  now.  Bayard,  will  thy  footsteps  tend?" 
My  sister  asked  our  guest  one  winter's  day. 
Smiling  he  answered  in  the  Friends'  sweet  way 

Common  to  both:  "Wherever  thou  shalt  send! 

What  wouldst  thou  have  me  see  for  thee?"    She  laughed. 
Her  dark  eyes  dancing  in  the  wood-fire's  glow: 
."Loffoden  isles,  the  Kilpis,  and  the  low 
Unsetting  sun  on  Finmark's  fishing-craft." 
"All  these  and  more  I  soon  shall  see  for  thee!" 
He  answered  cheerily:  and  he  kept  his  pledge 
On  Lapland  snows,  the  North  Cape's  windy  wedge, 

And  Tromso  freezing  in  its  winter  sea. 

He  went  and  came.    But  no  man  knows  the  track 
Of  his  last  journey,  and  he  comes  not  back! 


I 


Lacrimfe   Musarum  3^59 

He  brought  us  wonders  of  the  new  and  old; 

We  shared  all  climes  with  him.    The  Arab's  tent 

To  him  its  story-telling  secret  lent, 
And,  pleased,  we  listened  to  the  tales  he  told. 
His  task,  beguiled  with  songs  that  shall  endure, 

In  manly,  honest  thoroughness  he  wrought; 

From  humble  home-lays  to  the  heights  of  thought 
Slowly  he  climbed,  but  every  step  was  sure. 
How,  with  the  generous  pride  that  friendship  hath, 

We,  who  so  loved  him,  saw  at  last  the  crown 

Of  civic  honor  on  his  brows  pressed  down, 
Rejoiced,  and  knew  not  that  the  gift  was  death. 

And  now  for  him,  whose  praise  in  deafened  ears 

Two  nations  speak,  we  answer  but  with  tears! 

O  Vale  of  Chester!  trod  by  him  so  oft, 

Green  as  thy  June  turf  keep  his  memory.    Let 
Nor  wood,  nor  dell,  nor  storied  stream  forget, 

Nor  winds  that  blow  round  lonely  Cedarcroft; 

Let  the  home  voices  greet  him  in  the  far. 

Strange  lands  that  hold  him;  let  the  messages 
Of  love  pursue  him  o'er  the  chartless  seas 

And  unmapped  vastness  of  his  unknown  star! 

Love's  language,  heard  beyond  the  loud  discourse 
Of  perishable  fame,  in  every  sphere 
Itself  interprets;  and  its  utterance  here 

Somewhere  in  God's  unfolding  universe 

Shall  reach  our  traveler,  softening  the  surprise 
Of  his  rapt  gaze  on  unfamiliar  skies! 

John  Grecidcaf  WhiUier  [1807- 189  2] 

LACRIM^  MUSARUM 

[ALFRED   TENNYSON,  1809-1892] 

Low,  like  another's,  lies  the  laureled  head: 
The  life  that  seemed  a  perfect  song  is  o'er: 
Carry  the  last  great  bard  to  his  last  bed. 
Land  that  he  loved,  thy  noblest  voice  is  mute. 
Land  that  he  loved,  that  loved  him!  nevermore 
Meadow  of  thine,  smooth  lawn  or  wild  sea-shore, 
Gardens  of  odorous  bloom  and  tremulous  fruit, 


3660  Sentinel  Songs 

Or  woodlands  old,  like  Druid  couches  spread, 
The  master's  feet  shall  tread. 
Death's  little  rift  hath  rent  the  faultless  lute; 
The  singer  of  undying  songs  is  dead. 

Lo,  in  this  season  pensive-hued  and  grave, 
While  fades  and  falls  the  doomed,  reluctant  leaf 
From  withered  Earth's  fantastic  coronal, 
With  wandering  sighs  of  forest  and  of  wave 
Mingles  the  murmur  of  a  people's  grief 
For  him  whose  leaf  shall  fade  not,  neither  fall. 
He  hath  fared  forth,  beyond  these  suns  and  showers 
For  us,  the  autumn  glow,  the  autumn  flame, 
And  soon  the  winter  silence  shall  be  ours: 
Him  the  eternal  spring  of  fadeless  fame 
Crowns  with  no  mortal  flowers. 

What  needs  his  laurel  our  ephemeral  tears, 

To  save  from  visitation  of  decay? 

Not  in  this  temporal  light  alone,  that  bay 

Blooms,  nor  to  perishable  mundane  ears 

Sings  he  with  lips  of  transitory  clay. 

Rapt  though  he  be  from  us, 

Virgil  salutes  him,  and  Theocritus; 

Catullus,  mightiest-brained  Lucretius,  each 

Greets  him,  their  brother,  on  the  Stygian  beach; 

Proudly  a  gaunt  right  hand  doth  Dante  reach; 

Milton  and  Wordsworth  bid  him  welcome  home; 

Keats,  on  his  lips  the  eternal  rose  of  youth, 

Doth  in  the  name  of  Beauty  that  is  Truth 

A  kinsman's  love  beseech ; 

Coleridge,  his  locks  aspersed  with  fairy  foam, 

Calm  Spenser,  Chaucer  suave. 

His  equal  friendship  crave; 

And  godlike  spirits  hail  him  guest,  in  speech 

Of  Athens,  Florence,  Weimar,  Stratford,  Rome- 
Nay,  he  returns  to  regions  whence  he  came. 

Him  doth  the  spirit  divine 


Lacrimre    Musarum  3661' 

Of  universal  loveliness  reclaim. 

All  nature  is  his  shrine. 

Seek  him  henceforward  in  the  wind  and  sea, 

In  earth's  and  air's  emotion  or  repose, 

In  every  star's  august  serenity, 

And  in  the  rapture  of  the  teaming  rose. 

There  seek  him  if  ye  would  not  seek  in  vain. 

There,  in  the  rhythm  and  music  of  the  Whole; 

Yea,  and  for  ever  in  the  human  soul 

Made  stronger  and  more  beauteous  by  his  strain. 

For  lo!  creation's  self  is  one  great  choir,  ''■  i 

And  what  is  nature's  order  but  the  rhyme  ■' 

Whereto  in  holiest  unanimity 
All  things  with  all  things  move  unfalteringly, 
Infolded  and  communal  from  their  prime? 
Who  shall  expound  the  mystery  of  the  lyre? 
In  far  retreats  of  elemental  mind 
Obscurely  comes  and  goes 

The  imperative  breath  of  song,  that  as  the  wind   • 
Is  trackless,  and  oblivious  whence  it  blows. 
Demand  of  lilies  wherefore  they  are  white. 
Extort  her  crimson  secret  from  the  rose. 
But  ask  not  of  the  Muse  that  she  disclose 
The  meaning  of  the  riddle  of  her  might :  ■  ' 

Somewhat  of  all  things  sealed  and  recondite, 
Save  the  enigma  of  herself,  she  knows. 
The  master  could  not  tell,  with  all  his  lore. 
Wherefore  he  sang,  or  whence  the  mandate  sped:  ' 
Even  as  the  linnet  sings,  so  I,  he  said: 
Ah,  rather  as  the  imperial  nightingale. 
That  held  in  trance  the  ancient  Attic  shore,  ' 

And  charms  the  ages  with  the  notes  that  o'er 
All  woodland  chants  immortally  prevail! 
And  now,  from  our  vain  plaudits  greatly  fled,       '  ^ 
He  with  diviner  silence  dwells  instead, 
And  on  no  earthly  sea  with  transient  roar. 
Unto  no  earthly  airs,  he  sets  his  sail. 
But  far  beyond  our  vision  and  our  hail 
Is  heard  for  ever  and  is  seen  no  more. 


3662  Sentinel  Songs 

No  more,  O  never  now, 
Lord  of  the  lofty  and  the  tranquil  brow. 
Shall  men  behold  those  wizard  locks  where, Time 
Let  fall  no  wintry  rime.  rl  liiis  nl 

Once,  in  his  youth  obscure. 
The  weaver  of  this  verse,  that  shall  endure 
By  splendor  of  its  theme  which  cannot  die. 
Beheld  thee  eye  to  eye, 
And  touched  through  thee  the  hand 
Of  every  hero  of  thy  race  divine,   . 
Even  to  the  sire  of  all  the  laureled  line, 
The  sightless  wanderer  on  the  Ionian  strand. 
Yea,  I  beheld  thee,  and  behold  thee  yet: 
Thou  hast  forgotten,  but  can  I  forget? 
Are  not  thy  words  all  goldenly  impressed 
On  memory's  palimpsest? 
I  hear  the  utterance  of  thy  sovereign  tongue, 
I  tread  the  floor  thy  hallowing  feet  have  trod; 
I  see  the  hands  a  nation's  lyre  that  strung, 
The  eyes  that  looked  through  hfe  and  gazed  on  God. 

The  seasons  change,  the  winds  they  shift  and  veer; 
The  grass  of  yesteryear 
Is  dead;  the  birds  depart,  the  groves  decay: 
Empires  dissolve  and  peoples  disappear: 
Song  passes  not  away. 
Captains  and  conquerors  leave  a  little  dust, 
And  kings  a  dubious  legend  of  their  reign; 
The  swords  of  Caesars,  they  are  less  than  rust: 
The  poet  doth  remain. 
Dead  is  Augustus,  Maro  is  alive; 
And  thou,  the  Mantuan  of  this  age  and  soil, 
With  Virgil  shalt  survive. 
Enriching  Time  with  no  less  honeyed  spoil, 
The  yielded  sweet  of  every  Muse's  hive; 
Heeding  no  more  the  sound  of  idle  praise 
In  that  great  calm  our  tumults  cannot  reach, — ■ 
Master  who  crown'st  our  immelodious  days 
With  flower  of  perfect  speech. 

William  Walson  1 185  871  g[ 


Tennyson  3663 


TENNYSON 

[WESTMINSTER   ABBEV:    OCTOBER   TWELFTH,    1892] 
GIB   DIESEN   TODTEN   MIR   HERAUS! 

{The  Minster  speaks^ 

Bring  me  my  dead! 

To  me  that  have  grown, 

Stone  laid  upon  stone, 

As  the  stormy  brood 

Of  Enghsh  blood 

Has  waxed  and  spread 

And  filled  the  world, 

With  sails  unfurled; 

With  men  that  may  not  lie; 

With  thoughts  that  cannot  die. 

Bring  me  my  dead! 

Into  the  storied  hall, 

Where  I  have  garnered  all 

My  harvest  without  weed; 

My  chosen  fruits  of  goodly  seed, 

And  lay  him  gently  down  among 

The  men  of  state,  the  men  of  song: 

The  men  that  would  not  suffer  wrong: 

The  thought-worn  chieftains  of  the  mind: 

Head-servants  of  the  human  kind. 

Bring  me  my  dead! 

The  autumn  sun  shall  shed 

Its  beams  athwart  the  bier's 

Heaped  blooms:  a  many  tears 

Shall  flow;  his  words,  in  cadence  sweet  and  strong. 

Shall  voice  the  full  hearts  of  the  silent  throng. 

Bring  me  my  dead! 

And  oh!  sad  wedded  mourner,  seeking  still 

For  vanished  hand-clasp:  drinking  in  thy  fill 

Of  holy  grief;  forgive,  that  pious  theft 

Robs  thee  of  all,  save  memories,  left: 


3664  Sentinel   Songs 

Not  thine  to  kneel  beside  the  grassy  mound 
While  dies  the  western  glow;  and  all  around 
Is  silence;  and  the  shadows  closer  creep 
And  whisper  softly:  All  must  fall  asleep. 

Thomas  Henry  Huxley  [1825-1895] 


FOR   A   COPY  OF  THEOCRITUS 

[C.    270  B.   c] 

O  SINGER  of  the  field  and  fold, 
Theocritus!  Pan's  pipe  was  thine, — 
Thine  was  the  happier  Age  of  Gold. 

For  thee  the  scent  of  new-turned  mold, 
The  bee-hives,  and  the  murmuring  pine, 
O  Singer  of  the  field  and  fold' 

Thou  sang'st  the  simple  feasts  of  old,; — 
The  beechen  bowl  made  glad  with  wine  . 
Thine  was  the  happier  Age  of  Gold. 

Thou  bad'st  the  rustic  loves  be  told,^ 
Thou  bad'st  the  tuneful  reeds  combine, 
O  Singer  of  the  field  and  fold ! 

And  round  thee,  ever-laughing,  rolled 
The  blithe  and  blue  Sicilian  brine  .  .  . 
Thine  was  the  happier  Age  of  Gold. 

Alas  for  us!     Our  songs  are  cold;  i 

Our  Northern  suns  too  sadly  shine:— 
O  Singer  of  the  field  and  fold. 
Thine  was  the  happier  Age  of  Gold!  i 

Auslin  Dobson  [1840^?;^ 


THEOCRITUS 

O  SINGER  of  Persephone! 

In  the  dim  meadows  desolate, 
Dost  thou  remember  Sicily? 


The   Ouiet   Singer  3^^S 

Still  through  the  ivy  flits  the  bee 
Where  Amaryllis  lies  in  state; 
O  Singer  of  Persephone! 

Sima^tha  calls  on  Hecate  ^,  ^^^-^ 

And  hears  the  wild  dogs  at  the  gate:  v  ^/ 

Dost  thou  remember  Sicily?  j* 

Still  by  the  light  and  laughing  sea 

Poor  Polypheme  bemoans  his  fate: 
O  Singer  of  Persephone!  '■''' 

And  still  in  boyish  rivalry  \i/yi<J -ih.''. 

Young  Daphnis  challenges  his  mate: 
Dost  thou  remember  Sicily? 

Slim  Lacon  keeps  a  goat  for  thee, 

For  thee  the  jocund  shepherds  wait, 
O  singer  of  Persephone! 
Dost  thou  remember  Sicily? 

Oscar  Wilde  [1856-1900] 


THE  QUIET  SINGER  ,1 


■J^'J|['T 

[aVE!    FRANCIS   THOMPSON,— 1859-I907]       '       ". 

He  had  been  singing — but  I  had  not  heard  his  voice; 

He  had  been  weaving  lovely  dreams  of  song, 

O  many  a  morning  long. 

But  I,  remote  and  far, 

Under  an  alien  star. 

Listened  to  other  singers,  other  birds. 

And  other  silver  words. 

But  does  the  skylark,  singing  sweet  and  clear,       ^ 

Beg  the  cold  world  to  hear? 

Rather  he  sings  for  very  rapture  of  singing, 

At  dawn,  or  in  the  blue,  mild  Summer  noon. 

Knowing  that,  late  or  soon, 

His  wealth  of  beauty,  and  his  high  notes,  ringing 

Above  the  earth,  will  make  some  heart  rejoice. 


3666  Sentinel   Songs 

He  sings,  albeit  alone, 

Spendthrift  of  each  pure  tone, 

Hoarding  no  single  song, 

No  cadence  wild  and  strong. 

But  one  day,  from  a  friend  far  overseas, 

As  if  upon  the  breeze, 

There  came  the  teeming  wonder  of  his  words — ■ 

A  golden  troop  of  birds. 

Caged  in  a  little  volume  made  to  love; 

Singing,  singing. 

Flinging,  flinging 

Their  breaking  hearts  on  mine,  and  swiftly  bringing 

Tears,  and  the  peace  thereof. 

How  the  world  woke  anew! 

How  the  days  broke  anew! 

Before  my  tear-blind  eyes  a  tapestry 

I  seemed  to  see, 

Woven  of  all  the  dreams  dead  or  to  be. 

Hills,  hills  of  song,  Springs  of  eternal  bloom, 

Autumns  of  golden  pomp  and  purple  gloom 

Were  hung  upon  his  loom. 

Winters  of  pain,  roses  with  awful  thorns. 

Yet  wondrous  faith  in  God's  dew-drenched  morns — 

These,  all  these  I  saw, 

With  that  ecstatic  awe 

Wherewith  one  looks  into  Eternity. 

And  then  I  knew  that,  though  I  had  not  heard 

His  voice  before. 

His  quiet  singing,  like  some  quiet  bird 

At  some  one's  distant  door. 

Had  made  my  own  more  sweet;  and  made  it  more 

Lovely,  in  one  of  God's  miraculous  ways. 

I  knew  then  why  the  days 

Had  seemed  more  perfect  to  me  when  the  Spring 

Came  with  old  burgeoning; 

For  somewhere  in  the  world  his  voice  was  raised, 

And  somewhere  in  the  world  his  heart  was  breaking; 

And  never  a  flower  but  knew  it,  sweetly  taking 


Thoreau's   Flute  3667 

Beauty  more  high  and  novel  for  his  sake, 
As  a  whole  wood  grows  lovelier  for  the  wail 
Of  one  sad  nightingale. 

Yet,  if  the  Springs  long  past 
Seemed  wonderful  before  I  heard  his  voice, 
I  tremble  at  the  beauty  I  shall  see 
In  seasons  still  to  be, 

Now  that  his  songs  are  mine  while  Life  shall  last. 
O  now  for  me 

New  floods  of  visions  open  suddenly.  .  .  . 
Rejoice,  my  heart !  Rejoice 
That  you  have  heard  the  Quiet  Singer's  voice! 
Charles  Hanson  Towne  [1877- 


THOREAU'S   FLUTE 

[henry   DAVID   THOREAU,    1817-1862] 

We,  sighing,  said,  "Our  Pan  is  dead; 

His  pipe  hangs  mute  beside  the  river; 

Around  it  wistful  sunbeams  quiver. 
But  Music's  airy  voice  is  fled. 
Spring  mourns  as  for  untimely  frost; 

The  bluebird  chants  a  requiem; 

The  willow-blossom  waits  for  him: — 
The  Genius  of  the  wood  is  lost." 

Then  from  the  flute,  untouched  by  hands. 
There  came  a  low,  harmonious  breath: 
"For  such  as  he  there  is  no  death; 

His  life  the  eternal  life  commands; 

Above  man's  aims  his  nature  rose: 
The  wisdom  of  a  just  content 
Made  one  small  spot  a  continent, 

And  turned  to  poetry  Life's  prose. 

"Haunting  the  hifls,  the  stream,  the  wild, 
Swallow  and  aster,  lake  and  pine. 
To  him  grew  human  or  divine,^ 

Fit  mates  for  this  large-hearted  child. 


3668  Sentinel   Songs 

Such  homage  Nature  ne'er  forgets, 

And.  yearly  on  the  coverHd 

'Neath  which  her  darhng  Ueth  hid  j^^^j  \() 
Will  write  his  name  in  violets. 

"To  him  no  vain  regrets  belong,  .,,^^. 

Whose  soul,  that  finer  instrument,  jrfig-jj  j 
Gave  to  the  world  no  poor  lament,  t 

But  wood-notes  ever  sweet  and  strong. 

O  lonely  friend!  he  still  will  be 

A  potent  presence,  though  unseen,— 
Steadfast,  sagacious,  and  serene: 

Seek  not  for  him, — he  is  with  thee." 

Louisa  May  Alcotl  [1832-iSS 


AVE  ATQUE  VALE 

IN   MEMORIAM   ARTHUR   UPSON 

[1877-1908] 

I 

You  found  the  green  before  the  Spring  was  sweet 

And  in  the  boughs  the  color  of  a  rose, 

The  haunting  fragrance  that  the  south-wind  knows 
When  May  has  wandered  far  on  questing  feet ; 
And  in  your  heart — a  wild  note,  full  and  fleet. 

The  first  cry  of  a  gladdened  bird  that  goes 

North  to  the  fields  of  winter-laden  snows, 
Joyous  against  the  blast  and  stinging  sleet. 

And  now  the  Spring  is  here,  the  snows  are  gone, 
The  apple-blossoms  fall  from  every  tree 

And  all  the  branches  throb  with  love  and  Spring; 
But  never  comes  one  note  to  greet  the  dawn, 
Never  again  a  wild-glad  melody — 

God  speed,  great  soul,  your  valiant  wandering! 


Ave  Atque  Vale  3669 


Your  hand  that  traced  these  Hnes,  and  now  is  dust! 
How  strange,  to-night,  this  thing  of  Ufa  and  death 
Where  my  low  candlc-ilame  o'crshadoweth 

What  once  knew  youth  in  its  first  joyous  trust; 

So  simple  and  so  near,  as  if  you  must 
luou-.  Still  Hnger  somewhere — yet  no  answer  saith 
Its  golden  word,  no  magic-freighted  breath, 

Only  a  heart-beat  stilled  in  rainbow-rust. 

Stilled  in  the  music  of  a  yester-year 
That  ever  echoes  its  sweet  instrument, 
And  richly  sings  across  an  unknown  sea; 
But  these  dim  lines — so  vital  they  appear, 
So  full  of  youth  and  joy  and  life's  intent. 
Ah,  this  it  is  that  seems  so  strange  to  me! 

How  quiet  are  their  voices  on  the  wind  :  [ 

As  they  toss  sadly  in  a  darkened  sky. 

And  yet,  mayhap,  to  you  old  words  imply  ' 

That  all  my  questing  days  I  shall  not  find; 
For  never  more  may  earthly  vestures  bind. 

But  stripped  away  from  things  that  needs  must  die, 

Deep  in  that  youth  where  death's  strange  secrets  lie 
And  whose  faint  whispers  fall  on  us  behind. 

Therefore  to  you  the  voices  harbor  peace, 

Their  ancient  patience  do  you  know  at  last, — 
Yet  more,  the  inmost  murmuring  of  these; 
And  in  that  mystic  lore  beyond  release. 
In  one  full  instant  from  a  treasured  past, 

Mayhap,  you  heard  the  Message  of  the  Trees! 

IV 

I  stood  to-day  upon  time's  border-land 
And  looked  far  off  across  each  rolling  year. 
Yet  scarcely  their  great  thunder  did  I  hear 

Nor  marked  the  wreckage  of  the  changing  sand; 


3670  Sentinel   Songs 

For  one  soft  note  persuasive  did  command 

All  other  tones  that  reached  my  quickened  ear, 
And  in  that  note  a  message  low  and  clear 

That  I  so  plainly  seemed  to  understand. 

As  in  the  saddened  passing  of  fair  things, 
The  sorrow  of  the  sunset  and  the  dawn, 

For  death  that  comes  when  life's  hour  least  shoulc 
fail- 
Ever  the  moment's  hush  of  lifted  wings, 

A  gleam  of  wonder  ere  the  flood  is  gone.  .  .  . 
The  host  uncovered  from  its  mortal  veil ! 


October  almost  holds  her  golden  sway 

Across  these  hills  and  through  the  slopes  between, 

As  if  for  you  some  sacrament  unseen 
Were  now  unfolded  in  a  silent  way, — 
As  if  for  you  pale  memory  astray 

Had  touched  each  spot  of  misted  summer  green, 

And  in  the  coolness  where  the  shadows  lean  '• 

Had  whispered  of  a  cherished  yesterday. 

For  one  to  whom  you  gave  your  youth's  full  praise 
Now  takes  you  back  into  her  hallowed  rest 
With  all  the  loveliness  that  is  your  due, 
Yielding  the  precious  beauty  of  her  days 

To  your  deep  sleep  upon  her  tranquil  breast, — 
Giving  you  back  her  deathless  love  of  you! 

Thomas  S.  Jones,  Jr.  [1882- 


THE  WARDEN  OF  THE   CINQUE  PORTS 

[the  duke   of  WELLINGTON,    1769-1852] 

A  MIST  was  driving  down  the  British  Channel, 

The  day  was  just  begun. 
And  through  the  window-panes,  on  floor  and  panel, 

Streamed  the  red  autumn  sun. 


The  Warden  of  the   Cinque   Ports      -2671 

It  glanced  on  flowing  flag  and  rippling  pennon, 
And  the  white  sails  of  ships;  i,j;f,  j,,.]^  ,-^,1  ;■ 

And,  from  the  frowning  rampart,  the  black  camion 
Hailed  it  with  feverish  lips. 

Sandwich  and  Romney,  Hastings,  Hithe,  and  Dover, 
Were  all  alert  that  day, 
aiJiTo  see  the  French  war-steamers  speeding  over 
When  the  fog  cleared  away. 

Sullen  and  silent,  and  like  couchant  lions. 

Their  cannon,  through  the  night, 
Holding  their  breath,  had  watched,  in  grim  defiance 

The  seacoast  opposite. 

And  now  they  roared  at  drum-beat  from  their  stations 

On  every  citadel; 
Each  answering  each,  with  morning  salutations, 

That  all  was  well. 

And  down  the  coast,  all  taking  up  the  burden, 

Replied  the  distant  forts, 
As  if  to  summon  from  his  sleep  the  Warden 

And  Lord  of  the  Cinque  Ports. 

Him  shall  no  sunshine  from  the  fields  of  azure. 

No  drum-beat  from  the  wall. 
No  morning  gun  from  the  black  fort's  embrasure. 

Awaken  with  its  call! 

No  more,  surveying  w'ith  an  eye  impartial 

The  long  line  of  the  coast,  '  "  ' 

Shall  the  gaunt  figure  of  the  old  Field  Marshal ' 
Be  seen  upon  his  post ! 

For  in  the  night,  unseen,  a  single  warrior, 

In  somber  harness  mailed. 
Dreaded  of  man,  and  surnamed  the  Destroyer, 

The  rampart  wall  had  scaled. 


3672  Sentinel  Songs    '''^^^'    ^r^T      ' 

He  pa'sseiJ'irito  the  chamber  of  the  sleeper, 

The  dark  and  silent  room ; 
And,  as  he  entered,  darker  grew,  and  deeper,  '"^ 

The  silence  and  the  gloom. 

He  did  not  pause  to  parley  or  dissemble, 

But  smote  the  Warden  hoar; 
Ah!  what  a  blow!  that  made  all  England  tremble 

And  groan  from  shore  to  shore. 

Meanwhile,  without,  the  surly  cannon  waited, 

The  sun  rose  bright  o'erhead ; 
Nothing  in  Nature's  aspect  intimated 

That  a  great  man  was  dead. 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow  [i  807-1 882] 


ODE  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  DUKE  OF 
WELLINGTON 


Bury  the  Great  Duke 

With  an  empire's  lamentation; 
Let  us  bury  the  Great  Duke 

To  the  noise  of  the  mourning  of  a  mighty  nation; 
Mourning  when  their  leaders  fall, 
Warriors  carry  the  warrior's  pall. 
And  sorrow  darkens  hamlet  and  hall. 

II 

Where  shall  we  lay  the  man  whom  we  deplore? 
Here,  in  streaming  London's  central  roar. 
Let  the  sound  of  those  he  wrought  for. 
And  the  feet  of  those  he  fought  for. 
Echo  round  his  bones  for  evermore. 

Ill 

Lead  out  the  pageant :  sad  and  slow. 
As  fits  an  universal  woe. 


rhe  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington    3673 

Let  the  long,  long  procession  go, 

And  let  the  sorrowing  crowd  about  it  grow, 

And  let  the  mournful  martial  music  blow;  qA 

The  last  great  Englishman  is  low.  • 

IV 

Mourn,  for  to  us  he  seems  the  last, 

Remembering  all  his  greatness  in  the  past. 

No  more  in  soldier  fashion  will  he  greet 

With  lifted  hand  the  gazer  in  the  street. 

0  friends,  our  chief  state-oracle  is  mute! 

Mourn  for  the  man  of  long-enduring  blood. 

The  statesman-warrior,  moderate,  resolute, 

Whole  in  himself,  a  common  good. 

Mourn  for  the  man  of  amplest  influence, 

Yet  clearest  of  ambitious  crime, 

Our  greatest  yet  with  least  pretence, 

Great  in  council  and  great  in  war, 

Foremost  captain  of  his  time, 

Rich  in  saving  common-sense, 

And,  as  the  greatest  only  are. 

In  his  simplicity  sublime. 

O  good  gray  head  which  all  men  knew, 

O  voice  from  which  their  omens  all  men  drew, 

O  iron  nerve  to  true  occasion  true, 

O  fallen  at  length  that  tower  of  strength 

Which  stood  four-square  to  all  the  winds  that  blew! 

Such  was  he  whom  we  deplore. 

The  long  self-sacrifice  of  life  is  o'er. 

The  great  World-victor's  victor  will  be  seen  no  more. 


All  is  over  and  done. 
Render  thanks  to  the  Giver, 
England,  for  thy  son. 
Let  the  bell  be  tolled. 
Render  thanks  to  the  Giver, 
And  render  him  to  the  mould. 
Under  the  cross  of  gold 


367^4     "■"''■'''■'!■!   Sentinel   Songs  "^n  diniG 

That  shines  over  city  and  river, 

There  he  shall  rest  for  ever 

Among  the  wise  and  the  bold. 

Let  the  bell  be  tolled, 

And  a  reverent  people  behold 

The  towering  car,  the  sable  steeds. 

Bright  let  it  be  with  its  blazoned  deeds, 

Dark  in  its  funeral  fold. 

Let  the  bell  be  tolled, 

And  a  deeper  knell  in  the  heart  be  knolled; 

And  the  sound  of  the  sorrowing  anthem  rolled 

Through  the  dome  of  the  golden  cross; 

And  the  volleying  cannon  thunder  his  loss; 

He  knew  their  voices  of  old. 

For  many  a  time  in  many  a  clime 

His  captain's  ear  has  heard  them  boom 

Bellowing  victory,  bellowing  doom. 

When  he  with  those  deep  voices  wrought, 

Guarding  realms  and  kings  from  shame. 

With  those  deep  voices  our  dead  captain  taught 

The  tyrant,  and  asserts  his  claim 

In  that  dread  sound  to  the  great  name 

Which  he  has  worn  so  pure  of  blame, 

In  praise  and  in  dispraise  the  same, 

A  man  of  well-attempered  frame. 

O  civic  muse,  to  such  a  name, 

To  such  a  name  for  ages  long, 

To  such  a  name. 

Preserve  a  broad  approach  of  fame. 

And  ever-echoing  avenues  of  song! 


VI 

"Who  is  he  that  cometh,  like  an  honored  guest. 

With  banner  and  with  music,  with  soldier  and  with  priest, 

With  a  nation  weeping,  and  breaking  on  my  rest?" —  * 

Mighty  Seaman,  this  is  he 

Was  great  by  land  as  thou  by  sea.  '^ 

Thine  island  loves  thee  well,  thou  famous  man,  ''• 

The  greatest  sailor  since  our  world  began.  ^ 


rhe  Death  of  the  Duke  of  WelHngton    3675 

Now,  to  the  roll  of  mufBed  drums, 

To  thee  the  greatest  soldier  comes; 

For  this  is  he 

Was  great  by  land  as  thou  by  sea. 

His  foes  were  thine;  he  kept  us  free; 

Oh,  give  him  welcome,  this  is  he 

Worthy  of  our  gorgeous  rites. 

And  worthy  to  be  laid  by  thee; 

For  this  is  England's  greatest  son. 

He  that  gained  a  hundred  fights, 

Nor  ever  lost  an  English  gun; 

This  is  he  that  far  away 

Against  the  myriads  of  Assaye 

Clashed  with  his  fiery  few  and  won; 

And  underneath  another  sun, 

Warring  on  a  later  day. 

Round  affrighted  Lisbon  drew 

The  treble  works,  the  vast  designs 

Of  his  labored  rampart-lines, 

Where  he  greatly  stood  at  bay,  [ 

Whence  he  issued  forth  anew. 

And  ever  great  and  greater  grew, 

Beating  from  the  wasted  vines 

Back  to  France  her  banded  swarms. 

Back  to  France  with  countless  blows, 

Till  o'er  the  hills  her  eagles  flew 

Beyond  the  Pyrenean  pines. 

Followed  up  in  valley  and  glen 

With  blare  of  bugle,  clamor  of  men, 

Roll  of  cannon  and  clash  of  arms. 

And  England  pouring  on  her  foes 

Such  a  war  had  such  a  close. 

Again  their  ravening  eagle  rose 

In  anger,  wheeled  on  Europe-shadowing  wings. 

And  barking  for  the  thrones  of  kings; 

Till  one  that  sought  but  Duty's  iron  crown 

On  that  loud  Sabbath  shook  the  spoiler  down; 

A  day  of  onsets  of  despair! 

Dashed  on  every  rocky  square, 


3676  Sentinel   Songs  .u.^q  oHT 

Their  surging  charges  foamed  themselves  away; 

Last,  the  Prussian  trumpet  blew;  ,- 

Through  the  long-tormented  air  ...       ~ 

Heaven  flashed  a  sudden  jubilant  ray,,  ,rr 

And  down  we  swept  and  charged  and  overthrew,  y 

So  great  a  soldier  taught  us  there  ..^ 

What  long-enduring  hearts  could  do  jj 

In  that  world-earthquake,  Waterloo! 

Mighty  Seaman,  tender  and  true,  , 

And  pure  as  he  from  taint  of  craven  guile,  ,  r 

O  saviour  of  the  silver-coasted  isle, 

O  shaker  of  the  Baltic  and  the  Nile, 

If  aught  of  things  that  here  befall 

Touch  a  spirit  among  things  divine. 

If  love  of  country  move  thee  there  at  all. 

Be  glad,  because  his  bones  are  laid  by  thine! 

And  through  the  centuries  let  a  people's  voice 

In  full  acclaim, 

A  people's  voice. 

The  proof  and  echo  of  all  human  fame, 

A  people's  voice,  when  they  rejoice 

At  civic  revel  and  pomp  and  game, 

Attest  their  great  commander's  claim 

With  honor,  honor,  honor,  honor  to  him. 

Eternal  honor  to  his  name. 


vu 


A  people's  voice!  we  are  a  people  yet. 
Though  all  men  else  their  nobler  dreams  forget, 
Confused  by  brainless  mobs  and  lawless  Powers, 
Thank  Him  who  isled  us  here,  and  roughly  set 
His  Briton  in  blown  seas  and  storming  showers, 
We  have  a  voice  with  which  to  pay  the  debt 
Of  boundless  love  and  reverence  and  regret 
To  those  great  men  who  fought,  and  kept  it  ours. 
And  keep  it  ours,  O  God,  from  brute  control! 
O  Statesmen,  guard  us,  guard  the  eye,  the  soul 
Of  Europe,  keep  our  noble  England  whole. 


The  Death  of  the  Duke  of  WelHngton    3677 

And  save  the  one  true  seed  of  freedom  sown 
Betwixt  a  people  and  their  ancient  throne,     ,/  niiH 
That  sober  freedom  out  of  which  there  springs       jj 
Our  loyal  passion  for  our  temperate  kings! 
For,  saving  that,  ye  help  to  save  mankind  r 

Till  public  wrong  be  crumbled  into  dust,  ]■ 

And  drill  the  raw  world  for  the  march  of  mind,       . 
Till  crowds  at  length  be  sane  and  crowns  be  just.  ^     ' 
But  wink  no  more  in  slothful  overtrust.  f 

Remember  him  who  led  your  hosts;  ! 

He  bade  you  guard  the  sacred  coasts. 
Your  cannons  moulder  on  the  seaward  wall; 
His  voice  is  silent  in  your  council-hall 
For  ever;  and  whatever  tempests  lour 
For  ever  silent;  even  if  they  broke 
In  thunder,  silent;  yet  remember  all 
He  spoke  among  you,  and  the  Man  who  spoke; 
Who  never  sold  the  truth  to  serve  the  hour, 
Nor  paltered  with  Eternal  God  for  power; 
Who  let  the  turbid  streams  of  rumor  flow 
Through  either  babbling  world  of  high  and  low; 
Whose  hfe  was  work,  whose  language  rife 
With  rugged  maxims  hewn  from  life; 
Who  never  spoke  against  a  foe; 
Whose  eighty  winters  freeze  with  one  rebuke 
All  great  self-seekers  trampling  on  the  right. 
Truth-teller  was  our  England's  Alfred  named; 
-jj Truth-lover  was  our  English  Duke; 
Whatever  record  leap  to  light 
He  never  shall  be  shamed. 


VIII 

Lo!  the  leader  in  these  glorious  wars 
Now  to  glorious  burial  slowly  borne 
Followed  by  the  brave  of  other  lands, 
He,  on  whom  from  both  her  open  hands 
Lavish  Honor  showered  all  her  stars, 
And  affluent  Fortune  emi)tied  all  her  horn. 


3678  Sentinel  Songs    '^o  dl^^Q  srH 

..  I..,  ,  f..       ....    r     . 

Yea,  let  all  good  things  await   ''"' '  '''''  '  '"' '  '''•''^^  '"• 

Him  who  cares  not  to  be  great 

But  as  he  saves  or  serves  the  state.  -'-'  ^ 

Not  once  or  twice  in  our  rough  island-story     ■'  ""'^ 

The  path  of  duty  was  the  way  to  glory. 

He  that  walks  it,  only  thirsting 

For  the  right,  and  learns  to  deaden 

Love  of  self,  before  his  journey  closes. 

He  shall  find  the  stubborn  thistle  bursting 

Into  glossy  purples,  which  outredden 

All  voluptuous  garden-roses. 

Not  once  or  twice  in  our  fair  island-story 

The  path  of  duty  was  the  way  to  glory. 

He,  that  ever  following  her  commands. 

On  with  toil  of  heart  and  knees  and  hands, 

Through  the  long  gorge  to  the  far  light  has  won 

His  path  upward,  and  prevailed, 

Shall  find  the  toppling  crags  of  Duty  scaled 

Are  close  upon  the  shining  table-lands 

To  which  our  God  Himself  is  moon  and  sun. 

Such  was  he:  his  work  is  done. 

But  while  the  races  of  mankind  endure 

Let  his  great  example  stand 

Colossal,  seen  of  every  land. 

And  keep  the  soldier  firm,  the  statesman  pure; 

Till  in  all  lands  and  through  all  human  story 

The  path  of  duty  be  the  way  to  glory. 

And  let  the  land  whose  hearths  he  saved  from  shame 

For  many  and  many  an  age  proclaim 

At  civic  revel  and  pomp  and  game, 

And  when  the  long-illumined  cities  flame, 

Their  ever-loyal  iron  leader's  fame, 

With  honor,  honor,  honor,  honor  to  him. 

Eternal  honor  to  his  name. 


IX 


Peace,  his  triumph  will  be  sung 
By  some  yet  unmoulded  tongue 


The  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington    3679 

Far  on  in  summers  that  we  shall  not  see. 

Peace,  it  is  a  day  of  pain 

For  one  about  whose  patriarchal  knee 

Late  the  little  children  clung. 

O  peace,  it  is  a  day  of  pain 

For  one  upon  whose  hand  and  heart  and  brain 

Once  the  weight  and  fate  of  Europe  hung. 

Ours  the  pain,  be  his  the  gain! 

More  than  is  of  man's  degree 

Must  be  with  us,  watching  here 

At  this,  our  great  solemnity. 

Whom  we  see  not  we  revere; 

We  revere,  and  we  refrain 

From  talk  of  battles  loud  and  vain, 

And  brawling  memories  all  too  free 

For  such  a  wise  humility 

As  befits  a  solemn  fane: 

We  revere,  and  while  we  hear 

The  tide  of  Music's  golden  sea 

Setting  toward  eternity, 

Uplifted  high  in  heart  and  hope  are  we, 

Until  we  doubt  not  that  for  one  so  true 

There  must  be  other  nobler  work  to  do 

Than  when  he  fought  at  Waterloo, 

And  Victor  he  must  ever  be. 

For  though  the  Giant  Ages  heave  the  hill 

And  break  the  shore,  and  evermore 

Make  and  break,  and  work  their  will. 

Though  world  on  world  in  myriad  myriads  roll 

Round  us,  each  with  different  powers. 

And  other  forms  of  life  than  ours. 

What  know  we  greater  than  the  soul? 

On  God  and  Godlike  men  we  build  our  trust. 

Hush,  the  Dead  March  wails  in  the  people's  ears; 

The  dark  crowd  moves,  and  there  are  sobs  and  tears; 

The  black  earth  yawns;  the  mortal  disappears; 

Ashes  to  ashes,  dust  to  dust; 

He  is  gone  who  seemed  so  great. — 

Gone,  but  nothing  can  bereave  him 

Of  the  force  he  made  his  own 


3680  Sentinel   Songs    •,,  cU,--,n    ti 

Being  here,  and  we  believe  him  -.r 

Something  far  advanced  in  State,  ,, 

And  that  he  wears  a  truer  crown 

Than  any  wreath  that  man  can  weave  him. 

Speak  no  more  of  his  renown, 

Lay  your  earthly  fancies  down,  ^ 

And  in  the  vast  cathedral  leave  him,  .■  ■■ 

God  accept  him,  Christ  receive  him! 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1892 


MEMORIAL  VERSES 

[WILLIAM  WORDSWORTH,    1770-1850] 

Goethe  in  Weimar  sleeps,  and  Greece, 
Long  since,  saw  Byron's  struggle  cease. 
But  one  such  death  remained  to  come; 
The  last  poetic  voice  is  dumb — 
We  stand  to-day  by  Wordsworth's  tomb. 

When  Byron's  eyes  were  shut  in  death, 

We  bowed  our  head  and  held  our  breath. 

He  taught  us  Httle;  but  our  soul 

Had  felt  him  like  the  thunder's  roll. 

With  shivering  heart  the  strife  we  saw 

Of  passion  with  eternal  law;  ''^o  bnA 

And  yet  with  reverential  awe  '  ^  "  ' 

We  watched  the  fount  of  fiery  life 

Which  served  for  that  Titanic  strife. 

When  Goethe's  death  was  told,  we  said: 
Sunk,  then,  is  Europe's  sagest  head. 
Physician  of  the  iron  age, 
Goethe  has  done  his  pilgrimage. 


Memorial  Verses  3681 

He  took  the  suffering  human  race, 

He  read  each  wound,  each  weakness  clear: 

And  struck  his  finger  on  the  place, 

And  said:  Thou  ailcst  here,  and  here  ! 

He  looked  on  Europe's  dying  hour 

Of  fitful  dream  and  feverish  power; 

His  eye  plunged  down  the  weltering  strife, 

The  turmoil  of  expiring  life — 

He  said:  The  end  is  everynvhere, 

Art  still  has  truth,  take  refuge  there  ! 

And  he  was  happy,  if  to  know 

Causes  of  things,  and  far  below 

His  feet  to  see  the  lurid  flow 

Of  terror,  and  insane  distress, 

And  headlong  fate,  be  happiness. 

And  Wordsworth! — Ah,  pale  ghosts,  rejoice! 

For  never  has  such  soothing  voice 

Been  to  your  shadowy  world  conveyed, 

Since  erst,  at  morn,  some  wandering  shade 

Heard  the  clear  song  of  Orpheus  come 

Through  Hades,  and  the  mournful  gloom. 

Wordsworth  has  gone  from  us — and  ye. 

Ah,  may  ye  feel  his  voice  as  we! 

He  too  upon  a  wintery  clime  rr 

Had  fallen — on  this  iron  time 

Of  doubts,  disputes,  distractions,  fears. 

He  found  us  when  the  age  had  bound 

Our  souls  in  its  benumbing  round ; 

He  spoke,  and  loosed  our  hearts  in  tears. 

He  laid  us  as  we  lay  at  birth 

On  the  cool  flowery  lap  of  earth,  r 

Smiles  broke  from  us,  and  we  had  ease; 

The  hills  were  round  us,  and  the  breeze 

Went  o'er  the  sun-lit  fields  again; 

Our  foreheads  felt  the  wind  and  rain. 

Our  youth  returned ;  for  there  was  shed 

On  spirits  that  had  long  been  dead, 

Spirits  dried  up  and  closely  furled. 

The  freshness  of  the  early  world. 


I-', 


3682  Sentinel  Songs 

Ah!  since  dark  days. still  bring  to  light 
Man's  prudence  and  man's  fierj'  might,  i 
Time  may  restore  us  in  his  course  j 

Goethe's  sage  mind  and  Byron's  force; , ,. 
But  where  wiU  Europe's  latter  hour 
Again  lind  Wordsworth's  healing  power? 
Others  ■wiU  teach  us  how  to  dare, 
And  against  fear  our  breast  to  steel; 
Others  will  strengthen  us  to  bear — 
But  who,  ah!  who,  wUl  malce  us  feel? 
The  cloud  of  mortal  destiny, 
Others  will  front  it  fearlessly — 
But  who,  Uke  him,  will  put  it  by?  , . 

Keep  fresh  the  grass  upon  his  grave, 
O  Rotha,  with  thy  living  wave! 
Sing  him  thy  best!  for  few  or  none 
Hears  thy  voice  right,  now  he  is  gone. 

Matthew  Arnold.  [i822-i{ 

WORDSWORTH'S   GRAVE 


The  old  rude  church,  with  bare,  bald  tower,  is  here; 

Beneath  its  shadow  high-born  Rotha  flov/s; 
Rotha,  remembering  well  who  slumbers  near, 

And  with  cool  murmur  lulling  his  repose. 

Rotha,  remembering  well  who  slumbers  near. 

His  hills,  his  lakes,  his  streams  are  with  him  yet. 
Surely  the  heart  that  reads  her  own  heart  clear 

Nature  forgets  not  soon:  'tis  we  forget.       :^i^ 

We  that  with  vagrant  soul  his  fixity  '" 

Have  slighted;  faithless,  done  his  deep  faith  wrong; 

Left  him  for  poorer  loves,  and  bowed  the  knee 
To  misbegotten  strange  new  gods  of  song. 

Yet,  led  by  hollow  ghost  or  beckoning  elf 
Far  from  her  homestead  to  the  desert  bourn, 

The  vagrant  soul  returning  to  herself 
Wearily  wise,  must  needs  to  him  return. 


Wordsworth's  Grave  3^^ 3 

To  him  and  to  the  powers  that  with  him  dweU: — 
Inflowings  that  divulged  not  whence  the}'  came; 

And  that  secluded  Spirit  unknowable, 

The  mystety  we  make  darker  with  a  name; 

The  Somewhat  which  we  name  but  cannot  know, 

Even  as  we  name  a  star  and  only  see 
His  quenchless  flashings  forth,  which  ever  show 

And  ever  hide  him,  and  which  are  not  he. 


Poet  who  sleepest  by  this  wandering  wave! 

When  thou  wast  bom,  what  birth-gift  hadst  thou  then? 
To  thee  what  wealth  was  that  the  Immortals  gave. 

The  wealth  thou  gavest  in  thy  turn  to  men? 

Not  Milton's  keen,  translunar  music  thine; 

Not  Shakespeare's  cloudless,  boundless  human  view; 
Not  Shelley's  flush  of  rose  on  peaks  divine; 

Nor  yet  the  wizard  twOight  Coleridge  knew. 

What  hadst  thou  that  could  make  so  large  amends 
For  all  thou  hadst  not  and  thy  peers  possessed, 

Motion  and  fire,  swift  means  to  radiant  ends? — 
Thou  hadst,  for  weary  feet,  the  gift  of  rest. 

From  Shelley's  dazzling  glow  or  thunderous  haze, 
From  Byron's  tempest-anger,  tempest-mirth, 

Men  turned  to  thee  and  found — not  blast  and  blaze, 
Tiunult  of  tottering  heavens,  but  peace  on  earth. 

Nor  peace  that  grows  by  Lethe,  scentless  flower. 
There  in  white  languors  to  decline  and  cease; 

But  peace  whose  names  are  also  rapture,  power, 
Clear  sight,  and  love:  for  these  are  parts  of  peace. 

ni 

I  hear  it  vowed  the  Muse  is  with  us  still; — 

If  less  divinely  frenzied  than  of  yore. 
In  lieu  of  feelings  she  has  wondrous  skUl 

To  simulate  emotion  felt  no  more. 


3684  -'■'Sentinel   Songs   '' 

Not  such  the  authentic  Presence  pure,  that  made 
This  vahcy  vocal  in  the  great  days  gone! —  ''*-*'^-'- 

In  his  great  days,  while  yet  the  spring-time  played    ''' 
About  him,  and  the  mighty  morning  shone. 

,,  ,  .         .^         ,  ino8  sril 

JNo  word-mosaic  artincer,  he  sang 

A  lofty  song  of  lowly  weal  and  dole. 

Right  from  the  heart,  right  to  the  heart  it  sprang, 

Or  from  the  soul  leapt  instant  to  the  soul. 

He  felt  the  charm  of  childhood,  grace  of  youth, 

Grandeur  of  age,  insisting  to  be  sung. 
The  impassioned  argument  was  simple  truth 

Half-wondering  at  its  own  melodious  tongue. 

Impassioned?  ay,  to  the  song's  ecstatic  core! 

But  far  removed  were  clangor,  storm,  and  feud ;    ,• 
For  plenteous  health  was  his,  exceeding  store 

Of  joy,  and  an  impassioned  quietude. 


IV 

A  hundred  years  ere  he  to  manhood  came. 

Song  from  celestial  heights  had  wandered  down,     ".•■' 

Put  off  her  robe  of  sunhght,  dew,  and  flame,  ■   .  J' 

And  donned  a  modish  dress  to  charm  the  Town. 

Thenceforth  she  but  festooned  the  porch  of  things; 

Apt  at  life's  lore,  incurious  what  life  meant.  - ' 

Dextrous  of  hand,  she  struck  her  lute's  few  strings;     ' 

Ignobly  perfect,  barrenly  content. 

Unflushed  with  ardor  and  unblanched  with  awe,"        ' 

Her  lips  in  profitless  derision  curled. 
She  saw  with  dull  emotion — if  she  saw — 

The  vision  of  the  glory  of  the  world. 

The  human  masque  she  watched,  with  dreamless  eyes 
In  whose  clear  shallows  lurked  no  trembling  shade: 

The  stars,  unkenned  by  her,  might  set  and  rise;         ''  '■'■t 
Unmarked  by  her,  the  daisies  bloom  and  fade. 


Wordsworth's  Grave  3685 

The  age  grew  sated  with  her  sterile  wit.. . ,. .  ,' 
Herself  waxed  weary  on  her  loveless  throne. 

Men  felt  life's  tide,  the  sweep  and  surge  of  it, 
And  craved  a  living  voice,  a  natural  tone. 

For  none  the  less,  though  song  was  but  half  true,'^  ^'^ 
The  world  lay  common,  one  abounding  theme. 

Man  joyed  and  wept,  and  fate  was  ever  new, 
And  love  was  sweet,  life  real,  death  no  dream. 

In  sad,  stern  verse  the  rugged  scholar-sage 
Bemoaned  his  toil  unvalued,  youth  uncheered. 

His  numbers  wore  tlie  vesture  of  the  age, 

But,  'neath  it  beating,  the  great  heart  was  heard. 

ii  ' 

From  dewy  pastures,  uplands  sweet  with  thyme, 
A  virgin  breeze  freshened  the  jaded  day. 

It  wafted  Collins'  lonely  vesper-chime. 

It  breathed  abroad  the  frugal  note  of  Gray. 

It  fluttered  here  and  there,  nor  swept  in  vain 
The  dusty  haunts  where  futile  echoes  dwell, — 

Then,  in  a  cadence  soft  as  summer  rain, 

And  sad  from  Auburn  voiceless,  drooped  and  fell. 

It  drooped  and  fell,  and  one  'neath  northern  skies, 
With  southern  heart,  who  tilled  his  father's  field, 

Found  Poesy  a-dying,  bade  her  rise 

And  touch  quick  Nature's  hem  and  go  forth  healed. 

On  life's  broad  plain  the  plowman's  conquering  share 
Upturned  the  fallow  lands  of  truth  anew, 

And  o'er  the  fonnal  garden's  trim  parterre 
The  peasant's  team  a  ruthless  furrow  drew. 

Bright  was  his  going  forth,  but  clouds  ere  long 

Whelmed  him;  in  gloom  his  radiance  set,  and  those 

Twin  morning  stars  of  the  new  century's  song, 
Those  morning  stars  that  sang  together,  rose. 


J 


686  Sentinel  Songs 


In  elvish  speech  the  Dreamer  told  his  tale  ' 

Of  marvelous  oceans  swept  by  fateful  wings. — ■ 

The  Seer  strayed  not  from  earth's  human  pale 
But  the  mysterious  face  of  common  things 

He  mirrored  as  the  moon  in  Rydal  Mere 

Is  mirrored,  when  the  breathless  night  hangs  blue: 

Strangely  remote  she  seems  and  wondrous  near, 
And  by  some  nameless  difference  born  anew. 


Peace — peace — and  rest!     Ah,  how  the  lyre  is  loth, 
Or  powerless  now,  to  give  Vv^hat  all  men  seek! 

Either  it  deadens  with  ignoble  sloth 

Or  deafens  with  shriU  tumult,  loudly  weak. 

Where  is  the  singer  whose  large  notes  and  clear 
Can  heal,  and  arm,  and  plenish,  and  sustain? 

Lo,  one  with  empty  music  floods  the  ear. 

And  one,  the  heart  refreshing,  tires  the  brain. 

And  idly  tuneful,  the  loquacious  throng 
Flutter  and  twitter,  prodigal  of  time. 

And  little  masters  make  a  toy  of  song, 

Till  grave  men  weary  of  the  sound  of  rhyme. 

And  some  go  pranked  in  faded  antique  dress, 
Abhorring  to  be  hale  and  glad  and  free; 

And  some  parade  a  conscious  naturalness. 
The  scholar's  not  the  child's  simplicity. 

Enough; — the  wisest  who  from  words  forbear 
The  gentle  river  rails  not  as  it  glides; 

And  suave  and  charitable,  the  winsome  air 
Chides  not  at  all,  or  only  him  who  chides. 


Nature!  we  storm  thine  ear  with  choric  notes. 

Thou  answerest  through  the  calm  great  nights  and  days, 
"Laud  me  who  will:  not  tuneless  are  your  throats; 

Yet  if  ye  paused  I  should  not  miss  the  praise." 


Wordsworth's   Grave  3687 

We  falter,  half-rebuked,  and  sing  again. 

We  chant  thy  desertness  and  haggard  gloom, 
Or  with  thy  splendid  wrath  inflate  the  strain, 

Or  touch  it  with  thy  color  and  perfume. 

One,  his  melodious  blood  aflame  for  thee. 

Wooed  with  fierce  lust,  his  hot  heart  world-defiled. 

One,  with  the  upward  eye  of  infancy. 

Looked  in  thy  face,  and  felt  himself  thy  child.  I 

Thee  he  approached  without  distrust  or  dread — !-^'j>( 
Beheld  thee  throned,  an  awful  queen,  above— ^\ 

Climbed  to  thy  lap  and  merely  laid  his  head  ' 

Against  thy  warm  wild  heart  of  mother-love. 

He  heard  that  vast  heart  beating — thou  didst  press 
Thy  child  so  close,  and  lov'dst  him  unaware. 

Thy  beauty  gladdened  him;  yet  he  scarce  less 
Had  loved  thee,  had  he  never  found  thee  fair! 

For  thou  wast  not  as  legendary  lands 
To  which  with  curious  eyes  and  ears  we  roam. 

Nor  wast  thou  as  a  fane  'mid  solemn  sands, 

Where  palmers  halt  at  evefiing.     Thou  wast  home. 

And  here,  at  home,  still  bides  he;  but  he  sleeps; 

Not  to  be  wakened  even  at  thy  word; 
Though  we,  vague  dreamers,  dream  he  somewhere  keeps 

An  ear  still  open  to  thy  voice  still  heard, — 

Thy  voice,  as  heretofore,  about-him  blown, 

For  ever  blown  about  his  silence  now ; 
Thy  voice,  though  deeper,  yet  so  like  his  own 

That  almost,  when  he  sang,  we  deemed  'twas  thou! 

VII 

Behind  Helm  Crag  and  Silver  Howe  the  sheen 

Of  the  retreating  day  is  less  and  less. 
Soon  will  the  lordlier  summits,  here  unseen, 

Gather  the  night  about  their  nakedness. 


3688  Sentinel  Songs 

The  half-heard  bleat  of  sheep  comes  from  the  hill. 

Faint  sounds  of  childish  play  are  in  the  air. 
The  river  murmurs  past.     All  else  is  still. 

The  very  graves  seem  stiller  than  they  were. 

Afar  though  nation  be  on  nation  hurled, 
And  life  with  toil  and  ancient  pain  depressed, 

Here  one  may  scarce  believe  the  whole  wide  world 
Is  not  at  peace,  and  all  man's  heart  at  rest. 

Rest!  'twas  the  gift  he  gave,  and  peace!  the  shade 
He  spread,  for  spirits  fevered  with  the  sun. 

To  him  his  bounties  are  come  back — here  laid      .; 
In  rest,  in  peace,  his  labor  nobly  done. 

William  Watson  [1858- 


f 

.ilT 


JERUSALEM  THE   GOLDEN 

JERUSALEM  * 

For  thee,  O  dear  dear  Country! 

Mine  eyes  their  vigils  keep ; 
For  very  love,  beholding 

Thy  happy  name,  they  weep: 
The  mention  of  thy  glory 

Is  unction  to  the  breast, 
And  medicine  in  sickness, 

And  love,  and  life,  and  rest. 

O  come,  O  onely  Mansion! 

O  Paradise  of  Joy! 
Where  tears  are  ever  banished, 

And  smiles  have  no  alloy; 
Beside  thy  living  waters 

All  plants  are,  great  and  small, 
The  cedar  of  the  forest, 

The  hyssop  of  the  wall: 
With  jaspers  glow  thy  bulwarks; 

Thy  streets  with  emeralds  blaze; 
The  sardius  and  the  topaz 

Unite  in  thee  their  rays: 
Thine  ageless  walls  are  bonded 

With  amethyst  unpriced: 
Thy  Saints  build  up  its  fabric, 

And  the  corner-stone  is  Christ. 

The  Cross  is  all  thy  splendor, 

The  Crucified  thy  praise: 
His  laud  and  benediction 

Thy  ransomed  people  raise: 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3824. 
3689 


3690  Jerusalem   the  Golden 

Jesus,  the  Gem  of  Beauty, 

True  God  and  Man,  they  sing: 
The  never-faiUng  Garden, 

The  ever-golden  Ring: 
The  Door,  the  Pledge,  the  Husband, 

The  Guardian  of  his  Court: 
The  Day-star  of  Salvation, 

The  Porter  and  the  Port. 
Thou  hast  no  shore,  fair  ocean! 

Thou  hast  no  time,  bright  day! 
Dear  fountain  of  refreshment 

To  pilgrims  far  away! 

Upon  the  Rock  of  Ages 

They  raise  thy  holy  tower: 
Thine  is  the  victor's  laurel, 

And  thine  the  golden  dower: 
Thou  fecl'st  in  mystic  rapture,     ' '  *  ' 

O  Bride  that  know'st  no  guile,'  ' 
The  Prince's  sweetest  kisses, 

The  Prince's  loveliest  smile: 

Unfading  lilies,  bracelets 

Of  living  pearl  thine  own: 
The  Lamb  is  ever  near  thee,         ,,    , 

The  Bridegroom  thine  alone: 
The  Crown  is  He  to  guerdon, 

The  Buckler  to  protect. 
And  He  Himself  the  Mansion, 

And  He  the  Architect. 
The  only  art  thou  needest. 

Thanksgiving  for  thy  lot : 
The  only  joy  thou  seekest, 

The  Life  where  Death  is  not.,    ,  . 
And  all  thine  endless  leisure.^     .q. 

In  sweetest  accents  sings, ,  ,.  ,  .,..,, 
The  ill  that  was  thy  merit, — 

The  weakh  that  is  thy  King's! 


Jerusalem  3^9^ 


Jerusalem  the  golden, 

With  milk  and  honey  blest, 
Beneath  thy  contemplation 

Sink  heart  and  voice  oppressed; 
I  know  not,  O  I  know  not. 

What  social  joys  are  there! 
What  radiancy  of  glory. 

What  light  beyond  compare! 

And  when  I  fain  would  sing  them 
My  spirit  fails  and  faints, 

And  vainly  would  it  image 
The  assembly  of  the  Saints. 

They  stand,  those  halls  of  Syon,    ■'■'■ 

Conjubilant  with  song,  ' 

And  bright  with  many  an  angel, 

And  all  the  martyr  throng: 
The  Prince  is  ever  in  them; 

The  daylight  is  serene: 
The  pastures  of  the  Blessed 

Are  decked  in  glorious  sheen. 

There  is  the  Throne  of  David,— 

And  there,  from  care  released. 
The  song  of  them  that  triumph, 

The  shout  of  them  that  feast: 
And  they  who,  with  their  Leader 

Have  conquered  in  the  fight. 
For  ever  and  for  ever 

Arc  clad  in  robes  of  white! 

O  holy,  placid  harp-notes 

Of  that  eternal  hymn! 
O  sacred,  sweet  refection, 

And  peace  of  Seraphim! 
O  thirst,  for  ever  ardent. 

Yet  evermore  content! 
O  true,  peculiar  vision 

Of  God  cunctipotent! 


3692  Jerusalem   the   Golden 

Ye  know  the  many  mansions 

For  many  a  glorious  name 
And  divers  retributions 

That  divers  merits  claim: 
For  midst  the  constellations 

That  deck  our  earthly  sky, 
This  star  than  that  is  brighter, — 

And  so  it  is  on  high. 


Jerusalem  the  glorious! 

The  glory  of  the  Elect ! 
O  dear  and  future  vision 

That  eager  hearts  expect: 
Even  now  by  faith  I  see  thee 

Even  here  thy  walls  discern: 
To  thee  my  thoughts  are  kindled. 

And  strive  and  pant  and  yearn: 
Jerusalem  the  onely. 

That  look'st  from  heaven  below, 
In  thee  is  all  my  glory; 

In  me  is  all  my  woe! 
And  though  my  body  may  not, 

My  spirit  seeks  thee  fain. 
Till  flesh  and  earth  return  me 

To  earth  and  flesh  again. 
O  none  can  tell  thy  bulwarks, 

How  gloriously  they  rise: 
O  none  can  tell  thy  capitals 

Of  beautiful  device: 
Thy  loveliness  oppresses 

All  human  thought  and  heart: 
And  none,  O  peace,  O  Syon, 

Can  sing  thee  as  thou  art. 
New  mansion  of  new  people, 

Whom  God's  own  love  and  light 
Promote,  increase,  make  holy, 

Identify,  unite. 
Thou  City  of  the  Angels! 

Thou  City  of  the  Lord! 


The   New  Jerusalem  73693 

Whose  everlasting  music 

Is  the  glorious  decachord! 
And  there  the  band  of  Prophets 

United  praise  ascribes, 
And  there  the  twelvefold  chorus 

Of- Israel's  ransomed  tribes: 
The  lily-beds  of  virgins, 

The  roses'  martyr-glow, 
The  cohort  of  the  Fathers 

Who  kept  the  faith  below! 
And  there  the  Sole-Begotten 

Is  Lord  in  regal  state; 
He,  Judah's  mystic  Lion, 

He,  Lamb  Immaculate. 

O  fields  that  know  no  sorrow! 

O  state  that  fears  no  strife! 
O  princely  bowers!  O  land  of  flowers! 

O  realm  and  home  of  life! 

John  Mason  Ncalc  [1818-1866] 


THE  NEW  JERUSALEM  * 

From  "  Song  of  Mary  the  Mother  of  Christ  " 

Jerusalem,  my  happy  home. 
When  shall  I  come  to  thee? 

When  shall  my  sorrows  have  an  end? 
Thy  joys  when  shall  I  see? 

O  happy  harbor  of  the  Saints! 

O  sweet  and  pleasant  soil! 
In  thee  no  sorrow  may  be  found, 

No  grief,  no  care,  no  toil. 

There  lust  and  lucre  cannot  dwell, 

There  envy  bears  no  sway; 
There  is  no  hunger,  heat,  nor  cold, 

But  pleasure  every  way. 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3826. 


3694  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Thy  walls  are  made  of  precious  stones, 
Thy  bulwarks  diamonds  square;  ; 

Thy  gates  are  of  right  orient  pearl. 
Exceeding  rich  and  rare. 

Thy  turrets  and  thy  pinnacles 

With  carbuncles  do  shine; 
Thy  very  streets  are  paved  with  gold, 

Surpassing  clear  and  fine. 

Ah,  my  sweet  home,  Jerusalem, 

Would  God  I  were  in  thee! 
Would  God  my  woes  were  at  an  end, 

Thy  joys  that  I  might  see! 

Thy  gardens  and  thy  gallant  walks 

Continually  are  green; 
There  grow  such  sweet  and  pleasant  flowers 

As  nowhere  else  are  seen. 


[dd8i-8. 


Quite  through  thy  streets,  with  silver  sound, 

The  flood  of  Life  doth  flow; 
Upon  whose  banks  on  every  side 

The  wood  of  Life  doth  grow. 

There  trees  for  evermore  bear  fruit, 

And  evermore  do  spring; 
There  evermore  the  angels  sit. 

And  evermore  do  sing. 

Our  Lady  sings  Magnificat 

With  tones  surpassing  sweet; 
And  all  the  virgins  bear  their  part. 

Sitting  about  her  feet. 

Jerusalem,  my  happy  home, 

Would  God  I  were  in  thee! 
Would  God  my  woes  were  at  an  end, 

Thy  joys  that  I  might  see! 

Unknown 


Paradise  3^9  S 


PEACE 

My  soul,  there  is  a  country 

Afar  beyond  the  stars, 
Where  stands  a  winged  sentry 

All  skilful  in  the  wars: 
There,  above  noise  and  danger, 

Sweet  Peace  sits  crowned  with  smiles, 
And  One  born  in  a  manger 

Commands  the  beauteous  files. 
He  is  thy  gracious  Friend, 

And — 0  my  soul,  awake! — 
Did  in  pure  love  descend 

To  die  here  for  thy  sake. 
If  thou  canst  get  but  thither, 

There  grows  the  flower  of  Peace, 
The  Rose  that  cannot  wither. 

Thy  fortress,  and  thy  ease. 
Leave  then  thy  foolish  ranges; 

For  none  can  thee  secure 
But  One  who  never  changes — 

Thy  God,  thy  Life,  thy  Cure. 

Henry  Vauglian  [1622-1695] 


PARADISE 

O  Paradise,  O  Paradise, 

Who  doth  not  crave  for  rest, 
Who  would  not  seek  the  happy  land 
Where  they  that  loved  are  blest? 
Where  loyal  hearts  and  true 

Stand  ever  in  the  light, 
All  rapture  through  and  through, 
In  God's  most  holy  sight. 

O  Paradise,  O  Paradise, 

The  world  is  growing  old ; 
Who  would  not  be  at  rest  and  free 

Where  love  is  never  cold? 


3696  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

O  Paradise,  O  Paradise, 

Wherefore  doth  death  delay? 

Bright  death,  that  is  the  welcome  dawn 
Of  our  eternal  day. 


0  Paradise,  O  Paradise, 
'Tis  weary  waiting  here; 

1  long  to  be  where  Jesus  is, 
To  feel,  to  see  Him  near. 

0  Paradise,  O  Paradise, 
I  want  to  sin  no  more, 

1  want  to  be  as  pure  on  earth 

As  on  thy  spotless  shore. 

0  Paradise,  O  Paradise, 

I  greatly  long  to  see 
The  special  place  my  dearest  Lord 

Is  destining  for  me. 

O  Paradise,  O  Paradise, 

I  feel  'twill  not  be  long; 
Patience!  I  almost  think  I  hear 
Faint  fragments  of  thy  song; 
Where  loyal  hearts  and  true 

Stand  ever  in  the  light. 
All  rapture  through  and  through, 
In  God's  most  holy  sight. 

Frederick  William  Faber  [1814-1863] 
rlj  yh-je 

THE  WORLD 

I  SAW  Eternity  the  other  night. 

Like  a  great  ring  of  pure  and  endless  light, 

All  calm,  as  it  was  bright ; 

And  round  beneath  it.  Time  in  hours,  days,  years, 

Driven  by  the  spheres. 

Like  a  vast  shadow  moved;  in  which  the  world 

And  all  her  train  were  hurled. 


The  World  3^97 

The  doting  lover  in  his  quaintest  strain 

Did  there  complain; 

Near  him,  his  lute,  his  fancy,  and  his  flights, 

Wit's  sour  delights; 

With  gloves,  and  knots  and  silly  snares  of  pleasure, 

Yet  his  dear  treasure 

All  scattered  lay,  while  he  his  eyes  did  pour 

Upon  a  flower. 

The  darksome  statesman,  hung  with  weights  and  woe, 

Like  a  thick  midnight-fog.  moved  there  so  slow, 

He  did  nor  stay,  nor  go; 

Condemning  thoughts — like  sad  eclipses — scowl 

Upon  his  soul,  l 

And  clouds  of  crying  witnesses  without  ;■' 

Pursued  him  with  one  shout. 

Yet  digged  the  mole,  and  lest  his  ways  be  found. 

Worked  under  ground. 

Where  he  did  clutch  his  prey;  but  one  did  see 

That  policy: 

Churches  and  altars  fed  him;  perjuries 

Were  gnats  and  flies; 

It  rained  about  him  blood  and  tears,  but  he 

Drank  them  as  free. 

The  fearful  miser  on  a  heap  of  rust 

Sate  pining  all  his  life  there,  did  scarce  trust 

His  own  hands  with  the  dust. 

Yet  would  not  place  one  piece  above,  but  lives 

In  fear  of  thieves. 

Thousands  there  were  as  frantic  as  himself, 

And  hugged  each  one  his  pelf; 

The  down-right  epicure  placed  heaven  in  sense, 

And  scorned  pretense; 

While  others,  slipped  into  a  wide  excess. 

Said  little  less; 

The  weaker  sort  slight,  t rival  wares  enslave. 

Who  think  them  brave; 

And  poor,  despised  Truth  sate  counting  by 

Their  victory. 


3698  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Yet  some,  who  all  this  while  did  weep  and  sing, 

And  sing  and  weep,  soared  up  into  the  ring; 

But  most  would  use  no  wing. 

O  fools — said  I — thus  to  prefer  dark  night   ■  ?,  y.  u 

Before  true  light!  n  rftiW 

To  live  in  grots  and  caves,  and  hate  the  day  • 

Because  it  shows  the  way; 

The  way,  which  from  this  dead  and  dark  abode 

Leads  up  to  God; 

A  way  where  you  might  tread  the  sun,  and  be 

More  bright  then  he! 

But  as  I  did  their  madness  so  discuss, 

One  whispered  thus, 

"This  ring  the  Bride-groom  did  for  none  provide, 

But  for  His  Bride." 

Henry  Vaughan  [162 2-1 695) 


THE  WHITE  ISLAND 

In  this  world,  the  Isle  of  Dreams, 
While  we  sit  by  sorrow's  streams, 
Tears  and  terror  are  our  themes 

Reciting:  '^^'"  ^"^• 

But  when  once  from  hence  we  fly. 
More  and  more  approaching  nigh 
Unto  young  Eternity 
Uniting: 


In  that  whiter  island,  where 

Things  are  evermore  sincere; 

Candor  here,  and  luster  there 

Delighting: 

There  no  monstrous  fancies  shall 
Out  of  Hell  an  horror  call, 
To  create  (or  cause  at  all) 
Affrighting. 


»uoriT 


The   Land  o'  the   Leal  3^99 

There  in  calm  and  cooling  sleep 
We  our  eyes  shall  never  steep; 
But  eternal  watch  shall  keep 
Attending 

Pleasures  such  as  shall  pursue 
Me  immortalized,  and  you; 
And  fresh  joys,  as  never  too 
Have  ending. 

Robert  Herrkk  [1591-1674] 


'THIS  WORLD   IS   ALL  A   FLEETING   SHOW" 

This  world  is  all  a  fleeting  show, 

For  man's  illusion  given; 
The  smiles  of  joy,  the  tears  of  woe, 
Deceitful  shine,  deceitful  flow, — 

There's  nothing  true  but  Heaven! 

And  false  the  light  on  glory's  plume, 

As  fading  hues  of  even; 
And  love,  and  hope,  and  beauty's  bloom 
Are  blossoms  gathered  for  the  tomb, — 

There's  nothing  bright  but  Heaven! 

Poor  wanderers  of  a  stormy  day, 

From  wave  to  wave  we're  driven. 
And  fancy's  flash  and  reason's  ray 
Serve  but  to  light  the  troubled  way, — 
There's  nothing  calm  but  Heaven! 

Thomas  Moore  [177 9- 1852] 


THE  LAND   O'  THE  LEAL 

I'm  wearin'  awa',  John, 
Like  snaw-wreaths  in  thaw,  John, 
I'm  wearin'  awa' 
To  the  land  o'  the  leal. 


3700  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

There's  nae  sorrow  there,  John, 
There's  neither  cauld  nor  care,  John, 
The  day  is  aye  fair 
In  the  land  o'  the  leal. 

Our  bonnie  bairn's  there,  John, 
She  was  baith  gude  and  fair,  John; 
And  O!  we  grudged  her  sair 

To  the  land  o'  the  leal. 
But  sorrow's  sel'  wears  past,  John, 
And  joy's  a-comin'  fast,  John, 
The  joy  that's  aye  to  last 

In  the  land  o'  the  leal. 

Sae  dear's  that  joy  was  bought,  John, 
Sae  free  the  battle  fought,  John, 
That  sinfu'  man  e'er  brought 

To  the  land  o'  the  leal. 
O,  dry  your  glistening  e'e,  John! 
My  saul  langs  to  be  free,  John, 
And  angels  beckon  me 

To  the  land  o'  the  leal. 

O,  haud  ye  leal  and  true,  John! 
Your  day  it's  wearin'  through,  John, 
And  I'll  welcome  you 

To  the  land  o'  the  leal. 
Now  fare-ye-weel,  my  ain  John, 
This  warld's  cares  are  vain,  John, 
We'll  meet,  and  we'll  be  fain. 

In  the  land  o'  the  leal. 
■.  . :.  -  Carolina  Nairne  [1766-1845] 


HEAVENWARD 

Would  you  be  young  again? 

So  would  not  I — 
One  tear  to  memory  given. 

Onward  I'd  hie. 


"Rest  is   Not  Here"  37oi 

Life's  dark  flood  forded  o'er, 
All  but  at  rest  on  shore, 
Say,  would  you  plunge  once  more, 
With  home  so  nigh? 

If  you  might,  would  you  now 

Retrace  your  way? 
Wander  through  thorny  wilds. 

Faint  and  astray? 
Night's  gloomy  watches  fled, 
]\Iorning  all  beaming  red, 
Hope's  smiles  around  us  shed. 

Heavenward — away. 

Where  are  they  gone,  of  yore 

My  best  delight? 
Dear  and  more  dear,  though  now 

Hidden  from  sight. 
Where  they  rejoice  to  be. 
There  is  the  land  for  me; 
Fly  time — fly  speedily, 

Come  life  and  light. 

Carolina  Nairne  [i 766-1845] 


"REST  IS  NOT  HERE" 

What's  this  vain  world  to  me? 

Rest  is  not  here; 
False  are  the  smiles  I  see. 

The  mirth  I  hear. 
Where  is  youth's  joyful  glee? 
Where  all  once  dear  to  me? 
Gone  as  the  shadows  flee — 

Rest  is  not  here. 

Why  did  the  morning  shine 

Blithely  and  fair? 
Why  did  those  tints  so  fine 

Vanish  in  air? 


2J02  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Does  not  the  vision  say, 
Faint  lingering  heart,  away, 
Why  in  this  desert  stay — 
Dark  land  of  care! 

Where  souls  angelic  soar, 

Thither  repair: 
Let  this  vain  world  no  more 

Lull  and  ensnare. 
That  heaven  I  love  so  well 
Still  in  my  heart  shall  dwell; 
All  things  around  me  tell 

Rest  is  found  there. 

Carolina  Nairiie  [  1 7  66- 1 84  5] 

AT  HOME  IN  HEAVEN 


"For  ever  with  the  Lord!" 

Amen!  so  let  it  be! 
Life  from  the  dead  is  in  that  word, 

'Tis  immortality. 

[?,i>8i-d  Here  in  the  body  pent. 

Absent  from  Him  I  roam, 
Yet  nightly  pitch  my  moving  tent 
A  day's  march  nearer  home. 

My  Father's  house  on  high, 
Home  of  my  soul!  how  near. 

At  times,  to  faith's  foreseeing  eye, 
Thy  golden  gates  appear! 

Ah !  then  my  spirit  faints 
To  reach  the  land  I  love,     ' 

The  bright  inheritance  of  saints, 
Jerusalem  above! 

Yet  clouds  will  intervene. 
And  all  my  prospect  flies; 

Like  Noah's  dove,  I  flit  between 
Rough  seas  and  stormy  skies. 


At   Home  in   Heaven  37^3 

Anon  the  clouds  depart,   ''  ■'w'>-ro'^  " 

The  winds  and  waters  cease; 
While  sweetly  o'er  my  gladdened  heart 

Expands  the  bow  of  peace! 

Beneath  its  glowing  arch, 

Along  the  hallowed  ground, 
I  see  cherubic  armies  march, 

A  camp  of  fire  around. 

I  hear  at  mom  and  even. 

At  noon  and  midnight  hour. 
The  choral  harmonies  of  heaven 

Earth's  Babel-tongues  o'erpower. 

Then,  then  I  feel  that  He, 

(Remembered  or  forgot,; 
The  Lord,  is  never  far  from  me, 

Though  I  perceive  Him  not. 

PART    u 

In  darkness  as  in  light, 

Hidden  alike  from  view, 
I  sleep,  I  wake,  as  in  His  sight 

Who  looks  all  nature  through. 

Irom  the  dim  hour  of  birth, 

Through  every  changing  state 
Of  mortal  pilgrimage  on  earth, 

Till  its  appointed  date; 

All  that  I  am,  have  been. 

All  that  I  yet  may  be. 
He  sees  at  once,  as  He  hath  seen, 

And  shall  forever  see. 

How  can  I  meet  His  eyes? 

Mine  on  the  cross  I  cast, 
And  own  my  life  a  Saviour's  prize, 

Mercy  from  first  to  last 


£c3704  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

"Forever  with  the  Lord:"  g-J-t  rrorrA 

Father,  if  'tis  Thy  will, 
The  promise  of  that  faithful  word    , 

Even  here  to  me  fulfil!  ] 

So,  when  my  latest  breath 

Shall  rend  the  veil  in  twain. 
By  death  I  shall  escape  from  death. 

And  life  eternal  gain. 

Knowing  as  I  am  known 

How  shall  I  love  that  word. 
And  oft  repeat  before  the  throne, 

"For  ever  with  the  Lord!"         i 

Then  though  the  soul  enjoy 
Communion  high  and  sweet,     ■ 

While  worms  this  body  must  destroy, 
Both  shall  in  glory  meet. 

The  trump  of  final  doom 

Will  speak  the  self-same  word. 
And  heaven's  voice  thunder  through  the  tomb, 

"For  ever  with  the  Lord!" 

The  tomb  shall  echo  deep 

That  death-awakening  sound; 
The  saints  shall  hear  it  in  their  sleep 

And  answer  from  the  ground. 

Then  upward  as  they  fiy. 

That  resurrection-word 
Shall  be  their  shout  of  victory, 

"For  ever  with  the  Lord!"  [ 

That  resurrection-word, 

That  shout  of  victory. 
Once  more, — "For  ever  with  the  Lord!" 

Amen,  so  let  it  be. 

^ames  Montgomery  [1771-1854 


Paradise      ^u^^l  ^jo^ 

PARADISE 

Once  in  a  dream  I  saw  the  flowers 

That  bud  and  bloom  in  Paradise; 

More  fair  they  are  than  waking  eyes 
Have  seen  in  all  this  world  of  ours,      '  ' 
And  faint  the  perfume-bearing  ruse, 

And  faint  the  lily  on  its  stem, 
And  faint  the  perfect  violet,  "_^\ 

Compared  with  them. 

I  heard  the  songs  of  Paradise; 

Each  bird  sat  singing  in  its  place; 
[t-QS !      A  tender  song  so  full  of  grace 
It  soared  like  incense  to  the  skies. 
Each  bird  sat  singing  to  its  mate 

Soft  cooing  notes  among  the  trees: 
The  nightingale  herself  were  cold 

To  such  as  these. 

I  saw  the  fourfold  River  flow, 

And  deep  it  was,  with  golden  sand; 

It  flowed  between  a  mossy  land 
With  murmured  music  grave  and  low. 
It  hath  refreshment  for  all  thirst, 

For  fainting  spirit  strength  and  rest : 
Earth  holds  not  such  a  draught  as  this 

From  east  to  west. 

The  Tree  of  Life  stood  budding  there. 
Abundant  with  its  twelvefold  fruits; 
Eternal  sap  sustains  its  roots. 

Its  shadowing  branches  fill  the  air. 

Its  leaves  are  healing  for  the  world, 
Its  fruit  the  hungry  world  can  feed, 

Sweeter  than  honey  to  the  taste 

.     And  balm  indeed. 

I  saw  the  Gate  called  Beautiful;  '^ 

And  looked,  but  scarce  could  look  within; 
I  saw  the  golden  streets  begin. 

And  outskirts  of  the  glassy  pool. 


37o6  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Oh  harps,  oh  crowns  of  plenteous  stars, 
Oh  green  palm  branches,  many-leaved — 

Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  hath  heard, 

■XT     u      .  -J  lb  i.  ill  iozO 

Nor  heart  conceived.  ,     .       ._, 

3ioM 

I  hope  to  see  these  things  again,       .,  •  -pT^ 

But  not  as  once  in  dreams  by  night; 

To  see  them  with  my  very  sight, 
And  touch  and  handle  and  attain: 
To  have  all  heaven  beneath  my  feet 

For  narrow  way  that  once  they  trod; 
To  have  my  part  with  all  the  saints, 

And  with  my  God. 

Christina  Gcorgina  Rossetli  [1830-1894] 


'HEAVEN  OVERARCHES  EARTH  AND  SEA" 

Heaven  overarches  earth  and  sea,  C 

Earth-sadness  and  sea-bitterness.  r 

Heaven  overarches  you  and  me: 

A  little  while  and  we  shall  be — 

Please  God — where  there  is  no  more  sea 
Nor  barren  wilderness. 

Heaven  overarches  you  and  me. 

And  all  earth's  gardens  and  her  graves. 

Look  up  with  me,  until  we  see 

The  day  break  and  the  shadows  flee. 

What  though  to-night  wrecks  you  and  me, 
If  so  to-morrow  saves? 

Christina  Georgiiia  Rossiiti  [i 830-1894] 


THE   SUNSET  CITY 

There's  a  city  that  lies  in  the  Kingdom  of  Clouds, 

In  the  glorious  country  on  high, 
Which  an  azure  and  silvery  curtain  enshrouds. 

To  screen  it  from  mortal  eye; 


f'3^  ■    Gradatim  3707 

A  city  of  temples  and  turrets  of  gold, 

That  gleam  by  a  sapphire  sea, 
Like  jewels  more  splendid  than  earth  may  behold, 

Or  are  dreamed  of  by  you  and  by  me.'^^l  ^^  "^ 

And  about  it  are  highlands  of  amber  that  reach 

Far  away  till  they  melt  in  the  gloom; 
And  waters  that  hem  an  immaculate  beach     '^ 

With  fringes  of  luminous  foam.  "''^- 

Aerial  bridges  of  pearl  there  are, 

And  belfries  of  marvelous  shapes. 
And  lighthouses  lit  by  the  evening  star, 

That  sparkle  on  violet  capes; 

And  hanging  gardens  that  far  away 

Enchantedly  float  aloof; 
Rainbow  pavilions  in  avenues  gay, 

And  banners  of  glorious  woof! 

When  the  Summer  sunset's  crimsoning  fires 

Are  aglow  in  the  western  sky, 
The  pilgrim  discovers  the  domes  and  spires 

Of  this  wonderful  city  on  high;  '^' 

And  gazing  enrapt  as  the  gathering  shade 
Creeps  over  the  twilight  lea,  '0^'~>'''  "^'U  '"'"  i 

Sees  palace  and  pinnacle  totter  aiid  fade,"  '  ' 
And  sink  in  the  sapphire  sea; 

Till  the  vision  loses  by  slow  degrees 

The  magical  splendor  it  wore; 
The  silvery  curtain  is  drawn,  and  he  sees 

The  beautiful  city  no  more! 

Henry  Sylvester  Cornwell  [1831-1886] 


GRADATIM 

Heaven  is  not  reached  at  a  single  bound ; 
But  we  build  the  ladder  by  which  we  rise 
From  the  lowly  earth  to  the  vaulted  skies. 

And  we  mount  to  its  summit  round  by  round. 


37o8  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

I  count  this  thing  to  be  grandly  true: 
That  a  noble  deed  is  a  step  toward  God, 
Lifting  the  soul  from  the  common  clod 

To  a  purer  air  and  a  broader  vieWrfj^g^i^  gix:  lO 

We  rise  by  the  things  that  are  under  feet; 

By  what  we  have  mastered  of  good  and  gain; 

By  the  pride  deposed  and  the  passion  slain, 
And  the  vanquished  ills  that  we  hourly  meet. 

We  hope,  we  aspire,  we  resolve,  we  trust, 
When  the  morning  calls  us  to  life  and  light. 
But  our  hearts  grow  weary,  and,  ere  the  night, 

Our  lives  are  trailing  the  sordid  dust. 

We  hope,  we  resolve,  we  aspire,  we  pray. 

And  we  think  that  we  mount  the  air  on  wings 
Beyond  the  recall  of  sensual  things. 

While  our  feet  still  cling  to  the  heavy  clay. 

Wings  for  the  angels,  but  feet  for  men! 

We  may  borrow  the  wings  to  find  the  way — 
We  may  hope,  and  resolve,  and  aspire,  and  pray; 

But  our  feet  must  rise,  or  we  fall  again. 

Only  in  dreams  is  a  ladder  thrown 

From  the  weary  earth  to  the  sapphire  walls;. 
But  the  dreams  depart,  and  the  vision  falls, 

And  the  sleeper  wakes  on  his  pillow  of  stone. 

Heaven  is  not  reached  at  a  single  bound; 
But  we  build  the  ladder  by  which  we  rise 
From  the  lowly  earth  to  the  vaulted  skies. 

And  we  mount  to  its  summit,  round  by  round. 

Josiah  Gilbert  Holland  [1819-1881] 


THE  OTHER  WORLD 

It  lies  around  us  like  a  cloud — 
The  world  we  do  not  see; 

Yet  the  sweet  closing  of  an  eye 
May  bring  us  there  to  be. 


The  Other   World  3709 

Its  gentle  breezes  fan  our  cheeks 

Amid  our  worldly  cares; 
Its  gentle  voices  whisper  love, 

And  mingle  with  our  prayers. 

Sweet  hearts  around  us  throb  and  beat, 

Sweet  helping  hands  are  stirred, 
And  palpitates  the  veil  between 

With  breathings  almost  heard. 
^ol:r!v 
smoabv/  Thef'silence — awful,  sweet,  and" calm 

They  have  no  power  to  break; 
For  mortal  words  are  not  for  them 

To  utter  or  partake. 


^  ^  ^    'So^thin,  so  soft,  so  sweet  they  glide, 
So  near  to  press  they  seem. 
They  lull  us  gently  to  our  rest. 
And  melt  into  our  dream. 


,3ra  uj  J 


And,  in  the  hush  of  rest  they  bring, 

'Tis  easy  now  to  see 
How  lovely  and  how  sweet  a  pass 

The  hour  of  death  may  be! 

To  close  the  eye  and  close  the  ear, 
Wrapped  in  a  trance  of  bliss, 

And,  gently  drawn  in  loving  arms. 
To  swoon  to  that — from  this. 

Scarce  knowing  if  we  wake  or  sleep, 
Scarce  asking  where  we  are, 
.orn  To  feel  all  evil  sink  away. 

All  sorrow  and  all  care. 

Sweet  souls  around  us!  watch  us  still, 
Press  nearer  to  our  side, 

Into  our  thoughts,  into  our  prayers, 
With  gentle  helping  glide. 


37 lO  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Let  death  between  us  be  as  naught,    : 
A  dried  and  vanished  stream; 

Your  joy  be  the  reahty, 

Our  suffering  hfe  the  dream. 

Harriet  Beecher  Stowe  [1811-1896] 


MY  AIN  COUNTREE 

I  AM  far  frae  my  hame,  an'  I'm  weary  often  whiles 

For  the  longed-for  hame-bringing  an'  my  Father's  welcome 

smiles; 
I'll  ne'er  be  fu'  content  until  my  een  do  see 
The  gowden  gates  o'  heaven,  an'  my  ain  countree. 

The  earth  is  flecked  wi'  flowers,  mony-tinted,  fresh  an'  gay, 
The  birdies  warble  blithely,  for  my  Father  made  them  sac; 
But  these  sights  an'  these  soun's  will  as  naething  be  to  me. 
When  I  hear  the  angels  singing  in  my  ain  countree. 

I've  his  gude  word  of  promise,  that  some  gladsome  day  the 

King 
To  his  ain  royal  palace  his  banished  hame  will  bring; 
Wi'  een  an'  wi'  heart  running  over  we  shall  see 
"The  King  in  his  beauty,"  an'  our  ain  countree. 

My  sins  hae  been  mony  an'  my  sorrows  hae  been  sair, 
But  there  they'll  never  vex  me,  nor  be  remembered  mair; 
His  bluid  has  made  me  white,  his  hand  shall  wipe  mine  ee, 
When  he  brings  me  hame  at  last  to  my  ain  countree. 

Like  a  bairn  to  his  mither,  a  wee  birdie  to  its  nest, 
I  wud  fain  be  ganging  noo  unto  my  Saviour's  breast; 
For  he  gathers  in  his  bosom  witless,  worthless  lambs  like  me, 
An'  he  carries  them  himsel'  to  his  ain  countree. 

He's  faithfu'  that  hath  promised,  he'll  surely  come  again; 
He'll  keep  his  tryst  wi'  me,  at  what  hour  I  dinna  ken; 
But  he  bids  me  still  to  watch,  an'  ready  aye  to  be 
To  gang  at  ony  moment  to  my  ain  countree. 


Chartless  37  ii 

So  I'm  watching  aye  an'  singing  o'  my  hame  as  I  wait, 
For  the  soun'ing  o'  his  footsteps  this  side  the  gowden  gate. 
God  gie  his  grace  to  ilka  ane  wha  hstens  noo  to  me, 
That  we  may  a'  gang  in  gladness  to  our  ain  count ree. 

Mary  Lee  Demurest  [i 838-1888] 
bao'.'f  ail' 

HOME  /. 

There  lies  a  little  city  in  the  hills;  ''  ' 

White  are  its  roofs,  dim  is  each  dwelling's  door, 
And  peace  with  perfect  rest  its  bosom  fills. 

There  the  pure  mist,  the  pity  of  the  sea, 
Comes  as  a  white,  soft  hand,  and  reaches  o'er 
And  touches  its  still  face  most  tenderly. 

Unstirred  and  calm,  amid  our  shifting  years, 
Lo!  where  it  lies,  far  from  the  clash  and  roar, 
With  quiet  distance  blurred,  as  if  through  tears. 

O  heart  that  prayest  so  for  God  to  send 

Some  loving  messenger  to  go  before 

And  lead  the  way  to  where  thy  longings  end. 

Be  sure,  be  very  sure,  that  soon  will  come 
His  kindest  angel,  and  through  that  still  door 
Into  the  Infinite  love  will  lead  thee  home. 

Edward  Rowland  Sill  [1841-1887] 


CHARTLESS 

I  NEVER  saw  a  moor, 

I  never  saw  the  sea; 

Yet  know  I  how  the  heather  looks, 

And  what  a  wave  must  be. 

I  never  spoke  with  God, 
Nor  visited  in  heaven ; 
Yet  certain  am  I  of  the  spot 
As  if  the  chart  were  given. 

Emily  Dickinson  [i  830-1 886] 


3712  Jerusalem  the  Golden 


j! 


.'>n  "IT  CANNOT' BE"  013  boO 


It  cannot  be  that  He  who  made 

This  wondrous  world  for  our  delight, 
Designed  that  all  its  charms  should  fade 

And  pass  forever  from  our  sight; 
That  all  shall  wither  and  decay.  ,     •,        ^^ 

And  know  on  earth  no  life  but  this,      t  „,, 
With  only  one  nmte  survey      , 

Of  all  its  beauty  and  its  bliss. 

It  cannot  be  that  all  the  years 

Of  toil  and  care  and  grief  we  live 
Shall  find  no  recompense  but  tears, 

No  sweet  return  that  earth  can  give; 
That  all  that  leads  us  to  aspire, 

And  struggle  onward  to  achieve. 
And  every  unattained  desire 

Were  given  only  to  deceive. 

It  cannot  be  that,  after  all 

The  mighty  conquests  of  the  mind, 
Our  thoughts  shall  pass  beyond  recall  { 

And  leave  no  record  here  behind; 
That  all  our  dreams  of  love  and  fame. 

And  hopes  that  time  has  swept  away, — 
All  that  enthralled  this  mortal  frame, — ■ 

Shall  not  return  some  other  day. 

It  cannot  be  that  all  the  ties 

Of  kindred  souls  and  loving  hearts 
Are  broken  when  this  body  dies, 

And  the  immortal  mind  departs; 
That  no  serener  light  shall  break 

At  last  upon  our  mortal  eyes. 
To  guide  us  as  our  footsteps  make 

The  pilgrimage  to  Paradise. 

David  Banks  Sickels  [1837- 


■Vff  iBfiT 


A   rhanksgiving  to  God. for  His  House    37^3 

A  THANKSGIVING  TO   GOD   FOR  HIS  JiOUSE 

Lord,  Thou  hast  given  me  a  cell 

Wherein  to  dwell; 
A  little  house,  whose  humble  roof 

Is  weather-proof; 
Under  the  spars  of  which  I  lie 

Both  soft  and  dry; 
Where  Thou,  my  chamber  for  to  ward. 

Hast  set  a  guard 
Of  harmless  thoughts,  to  watch  and  keep 

Me,  while  I  sleep. 
Low  is  ray  porch,  as  is  my  fate; 

Both  void  of  state; 
And  yet  the  tlircshold  of  my  door 

Is  worn  by  the  poor. 
Who  thither  come,  and  freely  get 

Good  words,  or  meat. 
Like  as  my  parlor,  so  my  hall 

And  kitchen's  small; 
A  little  buttery,  and  therein 

A  little  bin, 
Which  keeps  my  little  loaf  of  bread 

Unchipped,  untlcad; 
Some  brittle  sticks  of  thorn  or  briar 

Make  me  a  fire. 
Close  by  whose  living  coal  I  sit, 

And  glow  like  it. 
Lord,  I  confess  too,  when  I  dine. 

The  pulse  is  Thine, 
And  all  those  other  bits  that  be 

There  placed  by  Thee: 
The  worts,  the  purslain,  and  the  mess 

Of  water-cress; 
Which  of  Thy  kindness  Thou  hast  sent; 

And  my  content 
Makes  those,  and  my  beloved  beet, 

To  be  more  sweet. 
'Tis  Thou  that  crown'st  my  glittering  hearth 

With  guiltless  mirth, 


37^4  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

And  giv'st  me  wassail  bowls  to  drink, 
*  Spiced  to  the  brink. 

Lord,  'tis  Thy  plenty-dropping  hand 

That  soils  my  land, 
And  giv'st  me,  for  my  bushel  sown, 

Twice  ten  for  one ; 
Thou  mak'st  my  teeming  hen  to  lay 

Her  egg  each  day; 
Besides,  my  healthful  ewes  to  bear 

Me  twins  each  year; 
The  while  the  conduits  of  my  kine 

Run  cream,  for  wine: 
All  these,  and  better.  Thou  dost  send 

Me,  to  this  end, — 
That  I  should  render,  for  my  part, 

A  thankful  heart; 
Which,  fired  with  incense,'  I  resign, 

As  wholly  Thine; 
— But  the  acceptance,  that  must  be, 

My  Christ,  by  Thee. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 

THE   SHEPHERD   BOY   SINGS  IN  THE  VALLEY 
OF  HUMILIATION 

From  "  The  Pilgrim's  Progress  " 

He  that  is  down  needs  fear  no  fall, 

He  that  is  low,  no  pride; 
He  that  is  humble  ever  shall 

Have  God  to  be  his  guide. 

I  am  content  with  what  I  have, 

Little  be  it  or  much: 
And,  Lord,  contentment  still  I  crave. 

Because  Thou  savest  such.       ,  .  ,.,, 

Fullness  to  such  a  burden  is 

That  go  on  pilgrimage: 
Here  little,  and  hereafter  bliss, 

Is  best  from  age  to  age. 

John  Bimyan  [1628-1688] 


"The  Bird,  Let  Loose  in  Eastern  Skies"    37^5 


THE   PILGRIM 

From  "The  Pilgrim's  Progress  ' 

Who  would  true  valor  see, 

Let  him  come  hither! 
One  here  will  constant  be, 

Come  wind,  come  weather; 
There's  no  discouragement      ' 
Shall  make  him  once  relent 
His  tirst-avowed  intent 

To  be  a  Pilgrim. 

Whoso  beset  him  round 

With  dismal  stories, 
Do  but  themselves  confound; 

His  strength  the  more  is. 
No  lion  can  him  fright; 
He'll  with  a  giant  fight; 
But  he  will  have  a  right 

To  be  a  Pilgrim. 

Hobgoblin,  nor  foul  fiend, 

Can  daunt  his  spirit; 
He  knows  he  at  the  end 

Shall  Life  inherit: — 
Then,  fancies,  fly  away; 
He'll  not  fear  what  men  say; 
He'll  labor,  night  and  day,  . 

To  be  a  Pilgrim.         ,     

John  Bunyan  [1628-16? 


"THE  BIRD,   LET  LOOSE  IN  EASTERN  SKIES" 

The  bird,  let  loose  in  eastern  skies. 

When  hastening  fondly  home, 
Ne'er  stoops  to  earth  her  wing,  nor  flies 

Where  idle  warblers  roam; 


371 6  Jerusalem  the  Golden f>7ifl  '^dT- 

But  high  she  shoots  through  air  and  hght, 

Above  all  low  delay, 
Where  nothing  earthly  bounds  her  flight, 

Nor  shadow  dims  her  way. 

So  grant  me,  God!  from  every  care 

And  stain  of  passion  free, 
Aloft,  through  virtue's  purer  air, 

To  hold  my  course  to  Thee! 
No  sin  to  cloud, — no  lure  to  stay 

My  soul,  as  home  she  springs; — 
Thy  sunshine  on  her  joyful  way. 

Thy  freedom  in  her  wings! 

Thomas  Moore  [1779-1852] 


"HE  LIVETH  LONG  WHO  LIVETH   WELL" 

He  liveth  long  who  liveth  well! 

All  other  life  is  short  and  vain; 
He  liveth  longest  who  can  tell 

Of  living  most  for  heavenly  gain. 

He  liveth  long  who  liveth  well! 

All  else  is  being  flung  away; 
He  liveth  longest  who  can  tell 

Of  true  things  truly  done  each  day. 

Waste  not  thy  being;  back  to  Him 
Who  freely  gave  it,  freely  give; 

Else  is  that  being  but  a  dream; 
'Tis  but  to  be,  and  not  to  live. 

Be  what  thou  seemest!  live  thy  creed! 

Hold  up  to  earth  the  torch  divine; 
Be  what  thou  prayest  to  be  made; 
P.3  JX;-         Let  the  great  Master's  steps  be  thine. 

Fill  up  each  hour  with  what  will  last; 

Buy  up  the  moments  as  they  go; 
The  life  above,  when  this  is  past, 

Is  the  ripe  fruit  of  life  below. 


How  We  Learn  37 17 

Sow  truth,  if  thou  the  truth  wouldst  reap: 
Who  sows  the  false  shall  reap  the  vain; 

Erect  and  sound  thy  conscience  keep; 
From  hollow  words  and  deeds  refrain. 

Sow  love,  and  taste  its  fruitage  pure; 

Sow  peace,  and  reap  its  harvests  bright; 
Sow  sunbeams  on  the  rock  and  moor. 

And  find  a  harvest-home  of  light. 

H  oral  ins  Boiiar  [i8o8-i88g] 


THE   MASTER'S  TOUCH 

In  the  still  air  the  music  lies  unheard; 

In  the  rough  marble  beauty  hides  unseen: 
,  To  wake  the  music  and  the  beauty  needs 

The  master's  touch,  the  sculptor's  chisel  keen. 

Great  Master,  touch  us  with  thy  skilful  hand; 

Let  not  the  music  that  is  in  us  die! 
Great  Sculptor,  hew  and  polish  us;  nor  let. 

Hidden  and  lost,  thy  form  within  us  lie! 

Spare  not  the  stroke!  do  with  us  as  thou  wilt! 

Let  there  be  naught  unfinished,  broken,  marred; 
Complete  thy  purpose,  that  we  may  become 

Thy  perfect  image,  O  our  God  and  Lord ! 

Horalius  Bonar  [1808-188 


HOW  WE  LEARN 

Great  truths  are  dearly  bought.    The  common  truth, 
Such  as  men  give  and  take  from  day  to  day. 

Comes  in  the  common  walks  of  easy  life. 
Blown  by  the  careless  wind  across  our  way. 

Bought  in  the  market,  at  the  current  price, 

Bred  of  the  smile,  the  jest,  perchance  the  bowl, 
It  tells  no  tale  of  daring  or  of  worth, 
[f,;  6  Nor  pierces  even  the  surface  of  a  soul. 


371 8  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Great  truths  are  greatly  won.    Not  found  by  chance, 
Nor  wafted  on  the  breath  of  summer  dream, 

But  grasped  in  the  great  struggle  of  the  soul, 
Hard  buffeting  with  adverse  wind  and  stream. 

Not  in  the  general  mart,  'mid  corn  and  wine, 
Not  in  the  merchandise  of  gold  and  gems, 

Not  in  the  world's  gay  halls  of  midnight  mirth, 
Not  'mid  the  blaze  of  regal  diadems, 

But  in  the  day  of  conflict,  fear,  and  grief, 

When  the  strong  hand  of  God,  put  forth  in  might, 

Plows  up  the  subsoil  of  the  stagnant  heart, 

And  brings  the  imprisoned  truth-seed  to  the  light. 

Wrung  from  the  troubled  spirit  in  hard  hours 
Of  weakness,  solitude,  perchance  of  pain. 

Truth  springs,  like  harvest,  from  the  well-plowed  field. 
And  the  soul  feels  it  has  not  wept  in  vain. 

Horatius  Bonar  [1808- 1889] 

LOVE 

Love  bade  me  welcome;  yet  my  soul  drew  back, 

Guilty  of  dust  and  sin. 
But  quick-eyed  Love,  observing  me  grow  slack 

From  my  first  entrance  in, 
Drew  nearer  to  me,  sweetly  questioning 

If  I  lack  anything. 

"A  guest,"  I  answered,  "worthy  to  be  here:" 

Love  said,  "You  shall  be  he." 
"I,  the  unkind,  ungrateful?    Ah,  my  dear, 

I  cannot  look  on  Thee." 
Love  took  my  hand  and,  smiling,  did  reply, 

"Who  made  the  eyes  but  I?" 

"Truth,  Lord;   but  I  have  marred  them:  let  my  shame 

Go  where  it  doth  deserve." 
"And  know  you  not,"  says  Love,  "Who  bore  the  blame?" 

"My  dear,  then  I  will  serve." 
"You  must  sit  down,"  says  Love,  "and  taste  my  meat." 

So  I  did  sit  and  eat. 

George  Herbert  [1593-1633] 


The  Collar  3  7 19 


THE   COLLAR 

I  STRUCK  the  board,  and  cried,  "No  more; 

I  will  abroad. 
What,  shall  I  ever  sigh  and  pine? 
My  lines  and  life  are  free;  free  as  the  road, 
Loose  as  the  wind,  as  large  as  store. 
Shall  I  be  still  in  suit? 
Have  I  no  harvest  but  a  thorn 
To  let  me  blood  and  not  restore 
What  I  have  lost  with  cordial  fruit? 
Sure  there  was  wine, 
Before  my  sighs  did  dry  it;  there  was  corn 

Before  my  tears  did  drown  it; 
Is  the  year  only  lost  to  me? 
Have  I  no  bays  to  crown  it. 
No  flowers,  no  garlands  gay?  all  blasted. 
All  wasted? 
Not  so,  my  heart;  but  there  is  fruit. 
And  thou  hast  hands. 
Recover  all  thy  sigh-blown  age 
On  double  pleasures;  leave  thy  cold  dispute 
Of  what  is  lit  and  not;  forsake  thy  cage, 

Thy  rope  of  sands 
Which  petty  thoughts  have  made;  and  made  to  thee 
Good  cable,  to  enforce  and  draw. 

And  be  thy  law. 
While  thou  didst  wink  and  wouldst  not  see. 
Away!  take  heed; 
I  will  abroad. 
Call  in  thy  death's-head  there,  tie  up  thy  fears; 
He  that  forbears 
To  suit  and  serve  his  need 

Deserves  his  load." 
But  as  I  raved  and  grew  more  fierce  and  wild 
At  every  word, 
Methought  I  heard  one  calling,  "Child!" 
And  I  replied,  "My  Lord!" 

George  Herbert  [1593-1633] 


37^0  Jerusalem  the   Golden 


VIRTUE 

Sweet  day,  so  cool,  so  calm,  so  bright! 
The  bridal  of  the  earth  and  sky — 
The  dew  shall  weep  thy  fall  to-night; 
For  thou  must  die. 

Sweet  rose,  whose  hue  angry  and  brave 
Bids  the  rash  gazer  wipe  his  eye. 
Thy  root  is  ever  in  its  grave, 
And  thou  must  die. 

Sweet  spring,  full  of  sweet  days  and  roses, 
A  box  where  sweets  compacted  lie. 
My  music  shows  ye  have  your  closes, 
And  all  must  die. 

Only  a  sweet  and  virtuous  soul, 
Like  seasoned  timber,  never  gives; 
But  though  the  whole  world  turn  to  coal 
Then  chiefly  lives. 

George  Herbert  [1SQ3-1633] 


DISCIPLINE 

Throw  away  Thy  rod. 
Throw  away  Thy  wrath; 

0  my  God,  it  sJiriY/' 
Take  the  gentle  path! 

For  my  heart's  desire 
Unto  Thine  is  bent : 

1  aspire 

To  a  full  consent. 

Not  a  word  or  look 
I  affect  to  own. 

But  by  book. 
And  Thy  Book  alone. 


Holy   Baptism  3721 

Though  I  fail,  I  weep; 
Though  I  halt  in  pace, 

Yet  I  creep 
To  the  throne  of  grace. 

Then  let  wrath  remove; 
Love  will  do  the  deed; 

For  with  love 
Stony  hearts  will  bleed. 

Love  is  swift  of  foot; 
Love's  a  man  of  war, 

And  can  shoot. 
And  can  hit  from  far. 

Who  can  'scape  his  bow? 
That  which  wrought  on  Thee, 

Brought  Thee  low, 
Needs  must  work  on  me. 

Throw  away  Thy  rod ; 
Though  man  frailties  hath. 

Thou  art  God: 
Throw  away  Thy  wrath. 

George  Herbert  [1593-1633] 


HOLY  BAPTISM 

Since,  Lord,  to  Thee 
A  narrow  way  and  little  gate 
Is  all  the  passage,  on  my  infancy 
Thou  didst  lay  hold,  and  antedate 

My  faith  in  me. 

O,  let  me  still 
Write  Thee  "  great  God,"  and  me  "  a  child"; 
Let  mc  be  soft  and  supple  to  Thy  will, 
Small  to  myself,  to  others  mild, 

Bchither  ill. 


37'-^2  Jerusalem   the  Golden 

Although  by  stealth 
My  flesh  get  on;  yet  let  her  sister, 
My  soul,  bid  nothing,  but  preserve  her  wealth: 
The  growth  of  flesh  is  but  a  blister; 
Childhood  is  health. 

George  Herbert  [1593-1633] 


UNKINDNESS 

Lord,  make  me  coy  and  tender  to  offend: 
In  friendship  first,  I  think,  if  that  agree 
Which  I  intend 
Unto  my  friend's  intent  and  end; 
I  would  not  use  a  friend  as  I  use  Thee. 

If  any  touch  my  friend  or  his  good  name, 
It  is  my  honor  and  my  love  to  free 
His  blasted  fame 
From  the  least  spot  or  thought  of  blame; 
I  could  not  use  a  friend  as  I  use  Thee. 

My  friend  may  spit  upon  my  curious  floor. 
Would  he  have  gold?    I  lend  it  instantly; 
But  let  the  poor. 
And  Thee  within  them,  starve  at  door; 
I  cannot  use  a  friend  as  I  use  Thee. 

When  that  my  friend  pretendeth  to  a  place, 
I  quit  my  interest,  and  leave  it  free; 
But  when  Thy  grace 
Sues  for  my  heart,  I  Thee  displace; 
Nor  would  I  use  a  friend  as  I  use  Thee. 

Yet  can  a  friend  what  Thou  hast  done  fulfil? 
O,  write  in  brass,  "My  God  upon  a  tree 
His  blood  did  spill, 
Only  to  purchase  my  good-will"; 
Yet  use  I  not  my  foes  as  I  use  Thee. 

George  Herbert  [1593-1633] 


Prayer  37^3 


PRAYER 

AN   ODE   WHICH   WAS   PREFIXED   TO   A   LITTLE   PRAYER-BOOK 
GIVEN   TO   A   YOUNG   GENTLEWOMAN 

Lo,  here  a  little  volume,  bul  great  book! 
(Fear  it  not,  sweet. 
It  is  no  hypocrite), 
Much  larger  in  itself  than  in  its  look. 
A  nest  of  new-born  sweets. 
Whose  native  fires,  disdaining 
To  lie  thus  folded,  and  complaining 
Of  these  ignoble  sheets. 
Affect  more  comely  bands, 
Fair  one,  from  thy  kind  hands, 
And  confidently  look 
To  find  the  rest 

Of  a  rich  binding  in  your  breast! 
It  is,  in  one  choice  handful,  heaven;  and  all 
Heaven's  royal  host,  encamped  thus  small 
To  prove  that  true,  schools  use  to  tell. 
Ten  thousand  angels  in  one  point  can  dwell. 
It  is  love's  great  artillery. 
Which  here  contracts  itself,  and  comes  to  lie 
Close-couched  in  your  white  bosom;  and  from  thence. 
As  from  a  snowy  fortress  of  defense. 
Against  the  ghostly  foe  to  take  your  part. 
And  fortify  the  hold  of  your  chaste  heart. 

It  is  the  armory  of  light; 

Let  constant  use  but  keep  it  bright, 
You'll  find  it  yields 

To  holy  hands  and  humble  hearts 
More  swords  and  shields 

Than  .sin  hath  snares,  or  hell  hath  darts. 
Only  be  sure 
The  hands  be  pure 

That  hold  these  weapons;  and  the  eyes 

Those  of  turtles,  chaste  and  true, 
Wakeful  and  wise. 

Here  is  a  friend  shall  fight  for  you; 


37^4  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Hold  but  this  book  before  your  heart, — ■ 
Let  prayer  alone  to  play  his  part. 
But,  0!  the  heart 
That  studies  this  high  art 
Must  be  a  sure  house-keeper, 
And  yet  no  sleeper. 
Dear  soul,  be  strong; 
Mercy  will  come  ere  long, 
And  bring  her  bosom  fraught  with  blessings,- 

Flowers  of  never-fading  graces. 
To  make  immortal  dressings 

For  worthy  souls,  whose  wise  embraces 
Store  up  themselves  for  Him  Who  is  alone 
The  Spouse  of  virgins,  and  the  Virgin's  Son. 
But  if  the  noble  Bridegroom,  when  He  come. 
Shall  find  the  wandering  heart  from  home, 
Leaving  her  chaste  abode 
To  gad  abroad. 
Amongst  the  gay  mates  of  the  god  of  flies 
To  take  her  pleasure,  and  to  play 
And  keep  the  Devil's  holiday; 
To  dance  in  the  sunshine  of  some  smiling, 

But  beguihng 
Spheres  of  sweet  and  sugared  lies. 
Some  slippery  pair 
Of  false,  perhaps,  as  fair. 
Flattering,  but  forswearing,  eyes; 
Doubtless  some  other  heart 
Will  get  the  start 
Meanwhile,  and,  stepping  in  before, 
Will  take  possession  of  that  sacred  store 
Of  hidden  sweets,  and  holy  joys — 
Words  which  are  not  heard  \yith  ears 
(These  tumultuous  shops  of  noise). 
Effectual  whispers,  whose  still  voice 
The  soul  itself  more  feels  than  hears; 
Amorous  languishments,  luminous  trances, 

Sights  which  are  not  seen  with  eyes, 
Spiritual  and  soul-piercing  glances. 
Whose  pure  and  subtle  lightning  flies 


Prayer  3725 


Home  to  the  heart,  and  sets  the  house  on  fire, 
And  meUs  it  down  in  sweet  desire; 

Yet  doth  not  stay- 
To  ask  the  window's  leave  to  pass  that  way; 
DeHcious  deaths,  soft  exhalations 
Of  soul,  dear  and  divine  annihilations; 
A  thousand  unknown  rites 
Of  joys,  and  rarefied  delights; 
An  hundred  thousand  loves  and  graces. 

And  many  a  mystic  thing. 
Which  the  divine  embraces 
Of  the  dear  Spouse  of  spirits,  with  them  will  bring, 

For  which  it  is  no  shame 
That  dull  mortality  must  not  know  a  name. 
Of  all  this  store 
Of  blessings,  and  ten  thousand  more. 

If,  when  He  come. 
He  find  the  heart  from  home, 

Doubtless  He  will  unload 
Himself  some  otherwhere. 
And  pour  abroad 
His  precious  sweets 
On  the  fair  soul  whom  first  He  meets. 
O  fair!  O  fortunate!  O  rich!  O  dear! 
O  happy  and  thrice-happy  she. 
Selected  dove, 
Whoe'er  she  be. 

Whose  early  love 
With  winged  vows 
Makes  haste  to  meet  her  morning  Spouse, 
And  close  with  His  immortal  kisses! 
Happy,  indeed,  who  never  misses 
To  improve  that  precious  hour. 
And  every  day 
Seize  her  sweet  prey, 
All  fresh  and  fragrant  as  He  rises,    . 

Dropping,  with  a  balmy  shower, 
A  delicious  dew  of  spices. 
O,  let  the  blissful  heart  hold  fast- 
(d-.  Her  heavenly  armful;  she  shall  taste 


37^6  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

At  once  ten  thousand  paradises! 
She  shall  have  power 
To  rifle  and  deflower 
The  rich  and  roseal  spring  of  those  rare  sweets 
Which,  with  a  swelling  bosom,  there  she  meets; 
Boundless  and  infinite,  bottomless  treasures 
Of  pure  inebriating  pleasures; 
Happy  proof!  she  shall  discover 
What  joy,  what  bliss, 
IJow  many  heavens  at  once  it  is 
To  have  her  God  become  her  lover. 
'0--  Richard  Cr a shaw  [i6i3?-i649] 

PROVIDENCE 

Lo,  the  hhes  of  the  field. 
How  their  leaves  instruction  yield! 
Hark  lo  Nature's  lesson  given 
By  the  blessed  birds  of  heaven! 
Every  bush  and  tufted  tree 
Warbles  sweet  philosophy: 
Mortal,  fly  from  doubt  and  sorrow, 
God  provideth  for  the  morrow. 

Say,  with  richer  crimson  glows      - 

The  kingly  mantle  than  the  rose? 

Say,  have  kings  more  wholesome  fare 

Than  we  citizens  of  air? 

Barns  nor  hoarded  grain  have  we. 

Yet  we  carol  merrily. 

Mortal,  fly  from  doubt  and  sorrow, 

God  provideth  for  the  morrow. 

One  there  Hves,  whose  guardian  eye       '''^ 
Guides  our  humble  destiny; 
One  there  lives,  who,  Lord  of  all, 
Keeps  our  feathers  lest  they  fall. 
Pass  we  blithely  then  the  time, 
Fearless  of  the  snare  and  lime. 
Free  from  doubt  and  faithless  sorrow: 
God  provideth  for  the  morrow. 

Reginald  Heber  [  1 7  83- 1 8  2  6] 


My    Legacy  37^7 

THE  BELOVED 

Blow  gently  over  my  garden, 

Wind  of  the  Southern  sea, 
In  the  hour  that  my  Love  cometh 

And  callcth  me!  'l 

My  Love  shall  entreat  me  sweetly,  •^^•■ 

With  voice  like  the  wood-pigeon;  ■- 

"I  am  here  at  the  gate  of  thy  garden, 

Here  in  the  dawn." 

Then  I  shall  rise  up  swiftly 

All  in  the  rose  and  gray, 
And  open  the  gate  to  my  Lover 

At  dawning  of  day. 
He  hath  crowns  of  pain  on  His  forehead, 

And  wounds  in  His  hands  and  feet; 
But  here  mid  the  dews  of  my  garden 

His  rest  shall  be  sweet. 

Then  blow  not  out  of  your  forests. 

Wind  of  the  icy  North; 
But  Wind  of  the  South  that  is  healing, 

Rise  and  come  forth! 
And  shed  your  musk  and  your  honey, 

And  spill  your  odors  of  spice. 
For  one  who  forsook  for  my  garden 

His  Paradise! 

Kalherinc  Tynan  Hinkson  [1861- 

MY  LEGACY 

They  told  me  I  was  heir:  I  turned  in  haste. 

And  ran  to  seek  my  treasure, 

And  wondered,  as  I  ran,  how  it  was  placed,—      1  -, 

If  I  should  fuid  a  measure 

Of  gold,  or  if  the  titles  of  fair  lands 

And  houses  would  be  laid  within  my  hands. 

I  journeyed  many  roads;  I  knocked  at  gates; 

I  spoke  to  each  wayfarer 

I  met,  and  said,  "A  heritage  awaits 

Me.    Art  not  thou  the  bearer 


37^8  Jerusalem   the  Golden 

Of  news?    Some  message  sent  to  me  whereby 
I  learn  which  way  my  new  possessions  he?" 

Some  asked  me  in;  naught  lay  beyond  their  door; 

Some  smiled,  and  would  not  tarry, 

But  said  that  men  were  just  behind  who  bore 

More  gold  than  I  could  carry; 

And  so  the  morn,  the  noon,  the  day,  were  spent, 

While  empty-handed  up  and  down  I  went. 

At  last  one  cried,  whose  face  I  could  not  see. 

As  through  the  mists  he  hasted: 

"Poor  child,  what  evil  ones  have  hindered  thee 

Till  this  whole  day  is  wasted? 

Hath  no  man  told  thee  that  thou  art  joint  heir 

With  one  named  Christ,  who  waits  the  goods  to  share?" 

The  one  named  Christ  I  sought  for  many  days, 

In  many  places  vainly; 

I  heard  men  name  his  name  in  many  ways; 

I  saw  his  temples  plainly; 

But  they  who  named  him  most  gave  me  no  sign 

To  find  him  by,  or  prove  the  heirship  mine. 

And  when  at  last  I  stood  before  his  face, 

I  knew  him  by  no  token 

Save  subtle  air  of  joy  which  filled  the  place ; 

Our  greeting  was  not  spoken; 

In  solemn  silence  I  regeived  my  share, 

Kneeling  before  my  brother  and  "joint  heir." 

My  share!    No  deed  of  house  or  spreading  lands, 

As  I  had  dreamed;  no  measure 

Heaped  up  with  gold;  my  elder  brother's  hands 

Had  never  held  such  treasure. 

Foxes  have  holes,  and  birds  in  nests  are  fed: 

My  brother  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head. 

My  share!    The  right  like  him  to  know  all  pain 
Which  hearts  are  made  for  knowing; 
The  right  to  find  in  loss  the  surest  gain; 
To  reap  my  joy  from  sowing 


The  Celestial  Surgeon  37^9 

In  bitter  tears;  the  right  with  him  to  keep 
A  watch  by  day  and  night  with  all  who  weep. 

My  share!    To-day  men  call  it  grief  and  death; 
I  see  the  joy  and  life  to-morrow; 
I  thank  my  Father  with  my  every  breath, 
For  this  sweet  legacy  of  sorrow; 
And  through  my  tears  I  call  to  each,  "Joint  heir 
With  Christ  make  haste  to  ask  him  for  thy  share." 
Helen  Hunt  Jackson  [18.51-1885] 


THE   STARRY  HOST 

From  "  God  and  the  Soul  " 

The  countless  stars,  which  to  our  human  eye 
Are  fixed  and  steadfast,  each  in  proper  place, 
Forever  bound  to  changeless  points  in  space, 
Rush  with  our  sun  and  planets  through  the  sky, 
And  like  a  flock  of  birds  still  onward  fly; 
Returning  never  whence  began  their  race, 
They  speed  their  ceaseless  way  with  gleaming  face 
As  though  God  bade  them  win  Infinity. 
Ah  whither,  whither  is  their  forward  flight 
Through  endless  time  and  limitless  expanse? 
What  power  with  unimaginable  might 
First  hurled  them  forth  to  spin  in  tireless  dance? 
What  beauty  lures  them  on  through  primal  night. 
So  that  for  them  to  be  is  to  advance? 

John  Lancaster  Spalding  [1840- 


THE   CELESTIAL  SURGEON 

If  I  have  faltered  more  or  less 
In  my  great  task  of  happiness; 
If  I  have  moved  among  my  race 
And  shown  no  glorious  morning  face; 
If  beams  from  happy  human  eyes 
Have  moved  me  not;  if  morning  skies, 
Books,  and  my  food,  and  summer  rain 
Knocked  on  my  sullen  heart  in  vain,— 


373*^  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Lord,  Thy  most  pointed  pleasure  take, 

And  stab  my  spirit  broad  awake; 

Or,  Lord,  if  too  obdurate  I, 

Choose  Thou,  before  that  spirit  die, 

A  piercing  pain,  a  killing  sin, 

And  to  my  dead  heart  run  them  in! 

Robert  Louis  Stevenson  [1850-1894] 


THE  WAY,  THE  TRUTH,   AND  THE  LIFE 

O  THau  great  Friend  to  aU  the  sons  of  men. 
Who  once  appeared  in  humblest  guise  below, 

Sin  to  rebuke,  to  break  the  captive's  chain. 

And  call  thy  brethren  forth  from  want  and  woe, — 

We  look  to  thee !  thy  truth  is  still  the  Light 

Which  guides  the  nations,  groping  on  their  way, 

Stumbling  and  falling  in  disastrous  night. 
Yet  hoping  ever  for  the  perfect  day. 

Yes;  thou  art  still  the  Life,  thou  art  the  Way 

The  holiest  know;  Light,  Life,  the  Way  of  heaven! 

And  they  who  dearest  hope  and  deepest  pray. 

Toil  by  the  Light,  Life,  Way,  which  thou  hast  given. 
Theodore  Parker  [i8io-i85o] 

THE  INNER  LIGHT 

Lo,  if  some  pen  should  write  upon  your  rafter 
Mene  and  Mene  in  the  folds  of  flame. 

Think  you  could  any  memories  thereafter 
Wholly  retrace  the  couplet  as  it  came? 

Lo,  if  some  strange,  intelligible  thunder 
Sang  to  the  earth  the  secret  of  a  star. 

Scarce  could  ye  catch,  for  terror  and  for  wonder, 
Shreds  of  the  story  that  was  pealed  so  far. 

Scarcely  I  catch  the  words  of  His  revealing. 
Hardly  I  hear  Him,  dimly  understand, 

Only  the  Power  that  is  within  me  pealing 
Lives  on  my  lips  and  beckons  to  my  hand. 


Bringing  Our  Sheaves  373^ 

Whoso  has  felt  the  Spirit  of  the  Highest 
Cannot  confound  nor  doubt  Him  nor  deny: 

Yea,  with  one  voice,  O  world,  though  thou  deniest, 
Stand  thou  on  that  side,  for  on  this  am  I. 

Rather  the  earth  shall  doubt  when  her  retrieving 
Pours  in  the  rain  and  rushes  from  the  sod,  i 

Rather  than  he  for  whom  the  great  conceiving 
Stirs  in  his  soul  to  quicken  into  God. 

Ay,  though  thou  then  shouldst  strike  from  him  his  glory, 
Blind  and  tormented,  maddened  and  alone. 

Even  on  the  cross  would  he  maintain  his  story. 
Yes,  and  in  hell  would  whisper,  I  have  known. 

Frederic  William  Henry  Myers  [i  843-1  go  i] 


HEREDITY 

Why  bowest  thou,  O  soul  of  mine. 

Crushed  by  ancestral  sin? 
Thou  hast  a  noble  heritage, 

That  bids  thee  victory  win. 

The  tainted  past  may  bring  forth  flowers, 

As  blossomed  Aaron's  rod; 
No  legacy  of  sin  annids 

Heredity  from  God. 

Lydia  Avery  Coonley  Ward  [1845- 

BRINGING  OUR  SHEAVES 

The  time  for  toil  is  past,  and  night  has  come, 

The  last  and  saddest  of  the  harvest  eves; 
Worn  out  with  labor  long  and  wearisome. 
Drooping  and  faint,  the  reapers  hasten  home, 
Each  laden  with  his  sheaves. 

Last  of  the  laborers,  Thy  feet  I  gain. 

Lord  of  the  harvest!  and  my  spirit  grieves 
That  I  am  burdened  not  so  much  with  grain 
As  with  a  heaviness  of  heart  and  brain; 
Master,  behold  my  sheaves! 


373^  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Full  well  I  know  I  have  more  tares  than  wheat, 

Brambles  and  flowers,  dry  stalks  and  withered  leaves; 

Wherefore  I  blush  and  weep,  as  at  thy  feet 

I  kneel  down  reverently  and  repeat: 
"Master,  behold  my  sheaves!" 

Few,  light  and  worthless;  yet  their  trifling  weight 

Through  all  my  frame  a  weary  aching  leaves; 
For  long  I  struggled  with  my  hapless  fate. 
And  stayed  and  toiled  till  it  was  dark  and  late, 
But  these  are  all  my  sheaves. 

And  yet  I  gather  strength  and  hope  anew, 
For  well  I  know  thy  patient  love  perceives 

Not  what  I  did.  but  what  I  strove  to  do; 

And  though  the  full,  ripe  ears  be  sadly  few. 
Thou  wilt  accept  my  sheaves. 

Elizabeth  Akers  [1832-igii] 


TAKE  HEART 

All  day  the  stormy  wind  has  blown 

From  off  the  dark  and  rainy  sea; 
No  bird  has  past  the  window  flown, 
The  only  song  has  been  the  moan 
The  wind  made  in  the  willow-tree. 

This  is  the  summer's  burial-time: 

She  died  when  dropped  the  earliest  leaves; 
And,  cold  upon  her  rosy  prime, 
Fell  direful  autumn's  frosty  rime; 

Yet  I  am  not  as  one  that  grieves, — 

For  well  I  know  o'er  sunny  seas 

The  bluebird  waits  for  April  skies; 
And  at  the  roots  of  forest  trees 
The  May-flowers  sleep  in  fragrant  ease. 
And  violets  hide  their  azure  eyes. 

O  thou,  by  winds  of  grief  o'erblown 
Beside  some  golden  summer's  bier, — 


Forward  3733 

Take  heart!  Thy  birds  are  only  flown','''  '■'''''  ' 
Th}'  blossoms  sleeping,  tearful  sown, 
To  greet  thee  in  the  immortal  year! 

Edna  Dean  Proctor  [1838- 


FORWARD 

Dreamer,  waiting  for  darkness  with  sorrowful,  drooping 
eyes, 

Linger  not  in  the  valley,  bemoaning  the  day  that  is  done! 
Climb  the  hills  of  morning  and  welcome  the  rosy  skies — 

Never  yet  was  the  setting  so  fair  as  the  rising  sun! 

Dear  is  the  past;  its  treasures  we  hold  in  our  hearts  for  aye; 
Woe  to  the  hand  that  would  scatter  one  wreath  of  its 
garnered  flowers; 
But  larger  blessing  and  honor  will  cotne  with  the  waking 
day — 
Hail,  then,  To-morrow,  nor  tarry  with  Yesterday's  ghostly 
hours! 

Mark  how  the  summers  hasten  through  blossoming  fields 
of  June 
To  the  purple  lanes  of  the  vintage  and  levels  of  golden 
corn; 
"Splendors  of  life  I  lavish,"  runs  nature's  exultant  rune, 
"For  myriads  press  to  follow,  and  the  rarest  are  yet  un- 
born." 

Think  how  eager  the  earth  is,  and  every  star  that  shines. 
To  circle  the  grander  spaces  about  God's  throne  that  be; 

Never  the  least  moon  loiters  nor  the  largest  sun  declines — 
Forward  they  roll  forever  those  glorious  depths  to  see. 

Dreamer,  waiting  for  darkness  with  sorrowful,   drooping 
eyes. 
Summers  and  suns  go  gladly,  and  wherefore  dost  thou 
repine? 


3734  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Climb  the  hills  of  morning  and  welcome  the  rosy  skies — 
The  joy  of  the  boundless  future — nay,  God  himself  is 
thine! 

Edna  Dean  Proctor  [1838- 


"THE  HARVEST  WAITS" 

God  hath  been  patient  long.    In  eons  past 
He  plowed  the  waste  of  Chaos.    He  hath  sown 
The  furrows  with  His  worlds,  and  from  His  throne 

'"'Showered,  like  grain,  planets  upon  the  Vast. 

What  meed  of  glory  hath  He  from  the  past? 

Shall  He  not  reap,  who  hears  but  prayer  and  groan? 
The  harvest  waits.  .  .  .  He  cometh  to  His  own, — 
He  who  shall  scythe  the  starry  host  at  last. 

When  the  accumulated  swarms  of  Death 

Glut  the  rank  worlds  as  rills  are  choked  by  leaves, 

-*'  Then  shall  God  flail  the  million  orbs,  as  sheaves 

Unfruitful  gleaned;  and,  in  His  age  sublime. 
Winnow  the  gathered  stars,  and  with  a  breath 
Whirl  the  spurned  chaff  adown  the  void  of  Time! 

Lloyd  Mifflin  [1846- 


ONE   GIFT  I  ASK 

THRcmGH  weary  days  and  sleepless  nights 

I  fast  and  pray; 
And  of  my  listening  Lord  I  ask 

The  same  alway — 
That  He  will  to  His  child  impart 

Pureness  of  heart. 

The  pure  in  heart  God's  face  shall  see. 

And  does  not  this 
Include  the  whole  ecstatic  scale  rfisiQ 

Of  promised  bliss? 
Can  souls  which  His  dear  presence  gain    ...ui 

More  joy  attain?  Saniqsi 


Magdalen  3735 


1  need  not  plead  with  Him  to  give 

Me  every  grace 
That  makes  the  spirit  beautiful; 

For,  if  God's  face 
I  am  to  see,  He  will  bestow 

All  else,  I  know. 

And  so,  through  days  of  prayer  and  fast, 

I  only  try 
To  win  that  purity  of  heart 

Which,  by  and  by, 
The  wondrous  boon  will  gain  for  me, 

God's  face  to  see. 

Virginia  Bioren  Harrison  fiS    - 

MAGDALEN 

Magdalen  at  Michael's  gate 

Tided  at  the  pin; 
On  Joseph's  thorn  sang  the  blackbird, 

"Let  her  in!    Let  her  in!" 

"Hast  thou  seen  the  wounds?"  said  Michael, 

"Know'st  thou  thy  sin.'*" 
"It  is  evening,  evening,"  sang  the  blackbird, 
"Let  her  in!    Let  her  in!" 

"Yes,  I  have  seen  the  wounds. 

And  I  know  my  sin." 
"She  knows  it  well,  well,  well,"  sang  the  blackbird, 

"Let  her  in!    Let  her  in!" 

"Thou  bringest  no  offerings,"  said  Michael, 

"Naught  save  sin." 
And  the  blackbird  sang,  "She  is  sorry,  sorry,  sorry. 

Let  her  in!    Let  her  in!" 

When  he  had  sung  himself  to  sleep. 

And  night  did  begin. 
One  came  and  opened  Michael's  gate, 

And  Magdalen  went  in. 

Henry  Kingslcy  [1830-1876] 


373^  Jerusalem   the   Golden 


GOD'S  WILL 

God  meant  me  to  be  hungry, 

So  I  should  seek  to  find 
Wisdom,  and  truth,  and  beauty, 

To  satisfy  my  mind. 

God  meant  me  to  be  lonely. 

Lest  I  should  wish  to  stay 
In  some  green  earthly  Eden 

Too  long  from  heaven  away. 

God  meant  me  to  be  weary, 

That  I  should  yearn  to  rest 
This  feeble,  aching  body 

Deep  in  the  earth's  dark  breast. 

Mildred  Howells  [i8 

AFTER  THE  MARTYRDOM 

They  threw  a  stone,  you  threw  a  stone, 

I  threw  a  stone  that  day. 
Although  their  sharpness  bruised  his  flesh 

He  had  no  word  to  say. 

But  for  the  moan  he  did  not  make 

To-day  I  make  my  moan ; 
And  for  the  stone  I  threw  at  him 

My  heart  must  bear  a  stone. 

Scharmel  Iris  [i8 

THE  BURIAL  OF  MOSES 

"  And  he  buried  him  in  a  valley  in  the  land  of  Moab,  over  against  Beth-peor; 
but  no  man  knoweth  of  his  sepulcher  unto  this  day." — Deut.  xxxiv,  6. 

By  Nebo's  lonely  mountain, 

On  this  side  Jordan's  wave. 

In  a  vale  in  the  land  of  Moab, 

There  lies  a  lonely  grave; 

But  no  man  built  that  sepulcher. 

And  no  man  saw  it  e'er; 

For  the  angels  of  God  upturned  the  sod  "■'■'' 

And  laid  the  dead  man  there.  '^^'3"*'^  bnA 


The   Burial  of  Moses  3737 

That  was  the  grandest  funeral 

That  ever  passed  on  earth ; 

Yet  no  man  heard  the  trampling, 

Or  saw  the  train  go  forth: 

Noiselessly  as  the  dayhght 

Comes  when  the  night  is  done, 

And  the  crimson  streak  on  ocean's  cheek 

Grows  into  the  great  sun; 

Noiselessly  as  the  spring-time 

Her  crown  of  verdure  weaves, 

And  all  the  trees  on  all  the  hills 

Unfold  their  thousand  leaves: 

So  without  sound  of  music 

Or  voice  of  them  that  wept,  ,,j, 

Silently  down  from  the  mountain's  crown 

The  great  procession  swept. 

Perchance  the  bald  old  eagle 

On  gray  Beth-peor's  height 

Out  of  his  rocky  eyrie 

Looked  on  the  wondrous  sight; 

Perchance  the  lion  stalking 

Still  shuns  that  hallowed  spot; 

For  beast  and  bird  have  seen  and  heard 

That  which  man  knoweth  not. 

But,  when  the  warrior  dieth, 

His  comrades  of  the  war. 

With  arms  reversed  and  muffled  drums, 

Follow  the  funeral  car: 

They  show  the  banners  taken; 

They  tell  his  battles  won; 

And  after  him  lead  his  masterlcss  steed, 

While  peals  the  minute-gun. 

Amid  the  noblest  of  the  land 
Men  lay  the  sage  to  rest, 
And  give  the  bard  an  honored  place 
With  costly  marble  dressed, 


373^  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

In  the  great  minster  transept 

Where  lights  like  glories  fall, 

And  the  sweet  choir  sings,  and  the  organ  rings 

Along  the  emblazoned  wall. 

This  was  the  bravest  warrior 

That  ever  buckled  sword; 

This  the  most  gifted  poet 

That  ever  breathed  a  word; 

And  never  earth's  philosopher 

Traced  with  his  golden  pen 

On  the  deathless  page  truths  half  so  sage 

As  he  wrote  down  for  men. 

And  had  he  not  high  honor? — 

The  hillside  for  a  pall! 

To  lie  in  state,  while  angels  wait, 

With  stars  for  tapers  tall! 

And  the  dark  rock-pines,  like  tossing  plumes, 

Over  his  bier  to  wave, 

And  God's  own  hand,  in  that  lonely  land, 

To  lay  him  in  the  grave! — 

In  that  strange  grave  without  a  name, 

Whence  his  uncoffined  clay 

Shall  break  again — O  wondrous  thought!— 

Before  the  judgment-day. 

And  stand,  with  glory  wrapped  around, 

On  the  hills  he  never  trod 

And  speak  of  the  strife  that  won  our  life 

With  the  incarnate  Son  of  God. 

O  lonely  tomb  in  Moab's  land! 

O  dark  Bcth-peor's  hill! 

Speak  to  these  curious  hearts  of  ours, 

And  teach  them  to  be  still: 

God  hath  His  mysteries  of  grace, 

Ways  that  we  cannot  tell; 

He  hides  them  deep,  like  the  secret  sleep 

Of  him  He  loved  so  well. 

Cecil  Frances  Alexander  [i8i8-i8gs] 


The  Crooked  Footpath  3739 


THE   CROOKED   FOOTPATH 

From  "  The  Professor  at  the  Breakfast  Table" 

Ah,  here  it  is!  the  sliding  rail 

That  marks  the  old  remembered  spot, — 
The  gap  that  struck  our  schoolboy  trail, — 

The  crooked  path  across  the  lot. 

It  left  the  road  by  school  and  church, 
A  penciled  shadow,  nothing  more, 

That  parted  from  the  silver  birch 
And  ended  at  the  farm-house  door. 

No  line  or  compass  traced  its  plan; 

With  frequent  bends  to  left  or  right, 
In  aimless,  wayward  curves  it  ran 

But  always  kept  the  door  in  sight. 

The  gabled  porch,  with  woodbine  green, — 
The  broken  millstone  at  the  sill, — 

Though  many  a  rood  might  stretch  between 
The  truant  child  could  see  them  still. 

No  rocks  across  the  pathway  lie, — 
No  fallen  trunk  is  o'er  it  thrown, — 

And  yet  it  winds,  we  know  not  why. 
And  turns  as  if  for  tree  or  stone. 

Perhaps  some  lover  trod  the  way 

With  shaking  knees  and  leaping  heart, — 

And  so  it  often  runs  astray 

With  sinuous  sweep  or  sudden  start. 

Or  one,  perchance,  with  clouded  brain 
From  some  unholy  bancjuet  reeled, — 

And  since,  our  devious  steps  maintain 
His  track  across  the  trodden  field. 


374^  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Nay,  deem  not  thus, — no  earthborn  will 
Could  ever  trace  a  faultless  line; 

Our  truest  steps  are  human  stUl,^ 
To  walk  unswerving  were  divine! 

Truants  from  love,  we  dream  of  wrath; — 
Oh,  rather,  let  us  trust  the  more! 

Through  all  the  wanderings  of  the  path, 
We  still  can  see  our  Father's  door! 

Oliver  We>id ell  Holmes  [i8og- 


ALLAH'S  TENT 

With  fore-cloth  smoothed  by  careful  hands 
The  night's  serene  pavihon  stands, 
And  many  cressets  hang  on  high 
Against  its  arching  canopy. 

Peace  to  His  children  God  hath  sent. 
We  are  at  peace  within  His  tent. 
Who  knows  without  these  guarded  doors 
What  wind  across  the  desert  roars? 

Arthur  Colion  [1868- 


ST.   JOHN  BAPTIST 

I  THINK  he  had  not  heard  of  the  far  towns; 
Nor  of  the  deeds  of  men,  nor  of  kings'  crowns; 

Before  the  thought  of  God  took  hold  of  him, 
As  he  was  sitting  dreaming  in  the  calm 

Of  one  first  noon,  upon  the  desert's  rim. 
Beneath  the  tall  fair  shadows  of  the  palm. 
All  overcome  with  some  strange  inward  balm. 

He  numbered  not  the  changes  of  the  year. 
The  days,  the  nights,  and  he  forgot  all  fear 

Of  death:  each  day  he  thought  there  should  have  been 
A  shining  ladder  set  for  him  to  climb 

Athwart  some  opening  in  the  heavens,  e'en 
To  God's  eternity,  and  see,  sublime — 
His  face  whose  shadow  passing  fills  all  time. 


"The  Spring  is   Late"  374i 

But  he  walked  through  the  ancient  wilderness. 
O,  there  the  prints  of  feet  were  numberless 

And  holy  all  about  him!    And  quite  plain 
He  saw  each  spot  an  angel  silvershod 

Had  lit  upon;  where  Jacob  too  had  lain 
The  place  seemed  fresh, — and,  bright  and  lately  trod, 
A  long  track  showed  where  Enoch  walked  with  God. 

And  often,  while  the  sacred  darkness  trailed 
Along  the  mountains  smitten  and  unveiled 

By  rending  lightnings, — over  all  the  noise 
Of  thunders  and  the  earth  that  quaked  and  bowed 

From  its  foundations — he  could  hear  the  voice 
Of  great  Elias  prophesying  loud 
To  Him  whose  face  was  covered  by  a  cloud. 

Arthur  O'Shaughnessy  [1844-1881] 

FOR  THE   BAPTIST 

The  last  and  greatest  Herald  of  Heaven's  King, 
Girt  with  rough  skins,  hies  to  the  deserts  wild, 
Among  that  savage  brood  the  woods  forth  bring. 
Which  he  than  man  more  harmless  found  and  mild. 
His  food  was  locusts,  and  what  there  doth  spring, 
With  honey  that  from  virgin  hives  distilled; 
Parched  body,  hollow  eyes,  some  uncouth  thing 
Made  him  appear,  long  since  from  earth  exiled. 
There  burst  he  forth:  "All  ye  whose  hopes  rely 
On  God,  with  me  amidst  these  deserts  mourn. 
Repent,  repent,  and  from  old  errors  turn!" 
— Who  listened  to  his  voice,  obeyed  his  cry? 
Only  the  echoes,  which  he  made  relent. 
Rung  from  their  flinty  caves,  "Repent!  Repent!" 

William  Drummond  [1585-1649] 

"THE  SPRING  IS  LATE" 

She  stood  alone  amidst  the  April  fields, — 
Brown,  sodden  fields,  all  desolate  and  bare, — 

"The  spring  is  late,"  she  said, — "the  faithless  spring. 
That  should  have  come  to  make  the  meadows  fair. 


374^  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

"Their  sweet  South  left  too  soon,  among  the  trees 
The  birds,  bewildered,  flutter  to  and  fro; 

For  them  no  green  boughs  wait, — their  memories 
Of  last  year's  April  had  deceived  them  so. 

"From  'neath  a  sheltering  pine  some  tender  buds 
Looked  out,  and  saw  the  hollows  filled  with  snow'; 

On  such  a  frozen  world  they  closed  their  eyes; 

When  spring  is  cold,  how  can  the  blossoms  blow?" 

She  watched  the  homeless  birds,  the  slow,  sad  spring, 
The  barren  fields,  and  shivering,  naked  trees: 

"Thus  God  has  dealt  with  me,  his  child,"  she  said, — 
"I  wait  my  spring-time,  and  am  cold  like  these. 

"To  them  will  come  the  fulness  of  their  time; 
[t; Their  spring,  though  late,  will  make  the  meadows  fair; 
Shall  I,  who  wait  like  them,  like  them  be  blest? 
I  am  His  own, — doth  not  my  Father  care?" 

Louise  Chandler  Moiilton  [i  835-1908] 


THE  QUESTION 

^^1  Saw  the  Son  of  God  go  by 

Crowned  with  the  crown  of  Thorn. 
"Was  It  not  finished.  Lord?"  I  said, 
"And  all  the  anguish  borne?" 

He  turned  on  me  His  awful  eyes: 

"Hast  thou  not  understood? 
Lo!  Every  soul  is  Calvary, 

And  every  sin  a  Rood,"  ;(  oriW — 

Rachel  Annand  Taylor  \\^  [fiQ 
::ij;f 
A  DIVINE  RAPTURE 

E'en  like  two  Httle  bank-dividing  brooks. 

That  wash  the  pebbles  with  their  wanton  streams, 

And  having  ranged  and  searched  a  thousand  nooks, 
Meet  both  at  length  in  silver-breasted  Thames, 
Where  in  a  greater  current  they  conjoin: 

So  I  my  Best-beloved's  am;  so  He  is  minei^  tcdr 


"If  I   Could  Shut  the  Gate"      3743 

E'en  so  we  met;  and  after  long  pursuit, 
E'en  so  we  joined;  we  both  became  entire; 

No  need  for  either  to  renew  a  suit, 

For  I  was  flax,  and  He  was  flames  of  fire: 
Our  firm-united  souls  did  more  than  twine; 

So  I  my  Best-beloved's  am;  so  He  is  mine. 

If  all  those  glittering  Monarchs,  that  command 

The  servile  quarters  of  this  earthly  ball, 
Should  tender  in  exchange  their  shares  of  land, 
I  would  not  change  my  fortunes  for  them  all : 
Their  wealth  is  but  a  counter  to  my  coin: 
The  world's  but  theirs;  but  my  Beloved's  mine. 

Francis  Quarks  [i 592-1 644] 


'IF  I   COULD   SHUT  THE   GATE  AGAINST 
MY  THOUGHTS" 

If  I  could  shut  the  gate  against  my  thoughts, 
And  keep  out  sorrow  from  this  room  within, 

Or  memory  could  cancel  all  the  notes 
Of  my  misdeeds,  and  I  unthink  my  sin: 

How  free,  how  clear,  how  clean  my  soul  should  lie, 

Discharged  of  such  a  loathsome  company. 

Or  were  there  otlier  rooms  within  my  heart 
That  did  not  to  my  conscience  join  so  near, 

Where  I  might  lodge  the  thoughts  of  sin  apart. 
That  I  might  not  their  clamorous  crying  hear; 

What  peace,  what  joy,  what  ease  should  I  possess, 

Freed  from  their  horrors  that  my  soul  oppress. 

But,  O  my  Saviour,  who  my  refuge  art, 
Let  Thy  dear  mercies  stand  'twixt  them  and  me, 

And  be  the  wall  to  separate  my  heart 
So  that  I  may  at  length  repose  mc  free; 

That  peace,  and  joy,  and  rest  may  be  within, 

And  I  remain  divided  from  my  sin. 

John  Daniel  [fl.  1625] 


3744  Jerusalem  the  Golden 


HIS  LITANY  TO  THE   HOLY   SPIRIT 

In  the  hour  of  my  distress, 
When  temptations  me  oppress, 
And  when  I  my  sins  confess, 

Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

When  I  He  within  my  bed, 
Sick  at  heart  and  sick  in  head. 
And  with  doubts  discomforted, 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

When  the  house  doth  sigh  and  weep, 
And  the  world  is  drowned  in  sleep. 
Yet  mine  eyes  the  watch  do  keep. 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

When  the  artless  doctor  sees 
No  one  hope,  but  of  his  fees. 
And  his  skill  runs  on  the  lees, 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

When  his  potion  and  his  pill. 
His,  or  none,  or  little  skill. 
Meet  for  nothing,  but  to  kill. 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

When  the  passing-bell  doth  toll. 
And  the  furies  in  a  shoal 
Come  to  fright  a  parting  soul. 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

When  the  tapers  now  burn  blue. 
And  the  comforters  are  few, 
And  that  number  more  than  true. 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

When  the  priest  his  last  hath  prayed, 
And  I  nod  to  what  is  said 
'Cause  my  speech  is  now  decayed. 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 


To   Keep  a  True   Lent  3745 

When,  God  knows,  I'm  tossed  about 
Either  with  despair  or  doubt, 
Yet,  before  the  glass  be  out. 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

When  the  tempter  me  pursu'th 
With  the  sins  of  all  my  youth, 
And  half  damns  me  with  untruth, 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

When  the  flames  and  hellish  cries 
Fright  mine  ears  and  fright  mine  eyes, 
And  all  terrors  me  surprise. 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

When  the  Judgment  is  revealed, 
And  that  opened  which  was  sealed, 
When  to  Thee  I  have  appealed, 
Sweet  Spirit,  comfort  me! 

Robert  Her  rick  [1591-1674] 


TO  KEEP  A  TRUE  LENT 

Is  this  a  fast,  to  keep 
The  larder  lean, 
And  clean 
From  fat  of  veals  and  sheep? 

Is  it  to  quit  the  dish 

Of  flesh,  yet  still 
To  fill 
The  platter  high  with  fish? 

Is  it  to  fast  an  hour. 

Or  ragged  to  go. 
Or  show 
A  downcast  look,  and  sour? 

No;  'tis  a  fast  to  dole 

Thy  sheaf  of  wheat 
Arid  meat 
Unto  the  hungry  soul. 


374^  Jerusalem  the  Golden 


It  is  to  fast  from  strife, 
From  old  debate 
And  hate; 
To  circumcise  thy  hfe. 

To  show  a  heart  grief -rent; 
To  starve  thy  sin, 
Not  bin; 
And  that's  to  keep  thy  Lent. 

Robert  Herrick  [1591-1674] 


THE   FALLEN   STAR 

A  STAR  is  gone!  a  star  is  gone! 

There  is  a  blank  in  Heaven; 
One  of  the  cherub  choir  has  done 

His  airy  course  this  even. 

He  sat  upon  the  orb  of  fire 

That  hung  for  ages  there, 
And  lent  his  music  to  the  choir 

That  haunts  the  nightly  air. 

But  when  his  thousand  years  are  passed, 

With  a  cherubic  sigh 
He  vanished  with  his  car  at  last, 

For  even  cherubs  die! 

Hear  how  his  angel-brothers  mourn — 
The  minstrels  of  the  spheres — 

Each  chiming  sadly  in  his  turn 
And  dropping  splendid  tears. 

The  planetary  Sisters  all 

Join  in  the  fatal  song. 
And  weep  this  hapless  brother's  fall, 

Who  sang  with  them  so  long. 

But  deepest  of  the  choral  band 

The  Lunar  Spirit  sings, 
And  with  a  bass-according  hand 

Sweeps  all  her  sullen  strings. 


"A  Child   My  Choice"  3747 

From  the  deep  chambers  of  ihe  dome 

Where  sleepless  Uriel  lies, 
His  rude  harmonic  thunders  come 

^lingled  with  mighty  sighs. 

The  thousand  car-borne  cherubim, 

The  wandering  Eleven,  > 

All  join  to  chant  the  dirge  of  him 

Who  fell  just  now  from  Heaven. 

George  Darky  [1795-1846]    - 


"WE  NEED   NOT  BID,   FOR   CLOISTERED 
CELL" 

We  need  not  bid,  for  cloistered  cell, 
Our  neighbor  and  our  work  farewell, 
Nor  strive  to  wind  ourselves  too  high 
For  sinful  man  beneath  the  sky: 

The  trivial  round,  the  common  task, 
Would  furnish  all  we  ought  to  ask; 
Room  to  deny  ourselves;  a  road 
To  bring  us,  daily,  nearer  God. 

Seek  we  no  more;  content  with  these 
Let  present  Rapture,  Comfort,  Ease, 
As  Heaven  shall  bid  them,  come  and  go:— 
The  secret  this  of  Rest  below 

John  Kcblc  [1792-1866] 


"A  CHILD   MY   CHOICE" 

Let  folly  praise  that  fancy  loves,  I  praise  and  love  that  Child 
Whose  heart  no  thought,  whose  tongue  no  word,  whose 

hand  no  deed  defiled. 
I  praise  Him  most,  I  love  Him  best,  all  praise  and  love  is  His, 
While  Him  I  love,  in  Him  I  live,  and  cannot  live  amiss. 


3748  Jerusalem  the   Golden 

Love's  sweetest  mark,  laud's  highest  theme,  man's  most  de- 
sired hght, 

To  love  Him  life,  to  leave  Him  death,  to  live  in  Him  delight. 

He  mine  by  gift,  I  His  by  debt,  thus  each  to  other  due, 

First  friend  He  was,  best  friend  He  is,  all  times  will  try  Him 
true. 

Though  young,  yet  wise,  though  small,  yet  strong;  though 
man,  yet  God  He  is; 

As  wise  He  knows,  as  strong  He  can,  as  God  He  loves  to  bliss. 

His  knowledge  rules.  His  strength  defends.  His  love  doth 
cherish  all; 

His  birth  our  joy,  His  life  our  light,  His  death  our  end  of 
thrall. 

Alas!  He  weeps.  He  sighs,  He  pants,  yet  do  His  angels  sing; 

Out  of  His  tears,  His  sighs  and  throbs,  doth  bud  a  joyful 
spring. 

Almighty  Babe,  whose  tender  arms  can  force  all  foes  to  fly, 

Correct  my  faults,  protect  my  life,  direct  me  when  I  die! 

Robert  Southwell  [i56i?-i595] 


AN   UPPER   CHAMBER 

I  CAME  into  the  City  and  none  knew  me; 

None  came  forth,  none  shouted  "He  is  here!" 

Not  a  hand  with  laurel  would  bestrew  me, 
All  the  way  by  which  I  drew  anear — 
Night  my  banner,  and  my  herald  Fear. 

But  I  knew  where  one  so  long  had  waited 
In  the  low  room  at  the  stairway's  height, 

Trembling  lest  my  foot  should  be  belated, 
Singing,  sighing  for  the  long  hours'  flight 
Towards  the  moment  of  our  dear  delight, 

I  came  into  the  City  when  you  hailed  me       rVo\  T3 J 
Saviour,  and  again  your  chosen  Lord: —  if V/ 

Not  one  guessing  what  it  was  that  failed  me, 
While  along  the  way  as  they  adored 
Thousands,  thousands,  shouted  in  accord.  ;i  uiul// 


The  Second   Crucifixion  3749 

But  through  all  the  joy  I  knew — I  oiily — 
How  the  hostel  of  my  heart  lay  bare  and  cold, 

Silent  of  its  music,  and  how  lonely! 
Never,  though  you  crown  me  with  your  gold, 
Shall  I  find  that  little  chamber  as  of  old! 

Frances  Bannerman  [i8     - 


THE  SECOND   CRUCIFIXION 

Loud  mockers  in  the  roaring  street 
Say  Christ  is  crucified  again: 

Twice  pierced  His  gospel-bearing  feet, 
Twice  broken  His  great  heart  in  vain. 

I  hear,  and  to  myself  I  smile, 

For  Christ  talks  with  me  all  the  while. 

No  angel  now  to  roll  the  stone 
From  off  His  unawaking  sleep, 

In  vain  shall  Mary  watch  alone, 
In  vain  the  soldiers  vigil  keep. 

Yet  while  they  deem  my  Lord  is  dead 
My  eyes  are  on  His  shining  head. 

Ah!  never  more  shall  INIary  hear 
That  voice  exceeding  sweet  and  low 

Within  the  garden  calling  clear: 
Her  Lord  is  gone,  and  she  must  go. 

Yet  all  the  while  my  Lord  I  meet 
In  every  London  lane  and  street. 

Poor  Lazarus  shall  wait  in  vain, 
And  Bartima^us  stiU  go  blind; 

The  healing  hem  shall  ne'er  again 
Be  touched  by  suff'ering  humankind. 

Yet  all  the  while  I  see  them  rest, 
The  poor  and  outcast,  on  His  breast. 


375*^  Jerusalem   the  Golden 

No  more  unto  the  stubborn  heart 
With  gentle  knocking  shall  He  plead, 

No  more  the  mystic  pity  start, 

For  Christ  twice  dead  is  dead  indeed. 

So  in  the  street  I  hear  men  say, 
Yet  Christ  is  with  me  ah  the  day. 

Richard  Lc  Gallienne  fi866- 


THE  VOICE  OF  CHRISTMAS 

I  CANNOT  put  the  Presence  by,  of  Him,  the  Crucified, 

Who  moves  men's  spirits  with  His  Love  as  doth  the  moon 

the  tide; 
Again  I  see  the  Life  He  lived,  the  godlike  Death  He  died. 

Again  I  see  upon  the  cross  that  great  Soul-battle  fought, 
Into  the  texture  of  the  world  the  tale  of  which  is  wrought 
Until  it  hath  become  the  woof  of  human  deed  and  thought, — 

And,  joining  with  the  cadenced  bells  that  all  the  morning 

fill, 
His  cry  of  agony  doth  yet  my  inmost  being  thrill, 
Like  some  fresh  grief  from  yesterday  that  tears  the  heart- 
strings still. 

I  cannot  put  His  Presence  by,  I  meet  Him  everywhere; 
I  meet  Him  in  the  country  town,  the  busy  market-square; 
The  Mansion  and  the  Tenement  attest  His  Presence  there. 

Upon  the  funneled  ships  at  sea  He  sets  His  shining  feet; 
The  Distant  Ends  of  Empire  not  in  vain  His  Name  repeat, — 
And,  like  the  presence  of  a  rose,  He  makes  the  whole  world 
sweet. 

He  comes  to  break  the  barriers  down  raised  up  by  barren 

creeds; 
About  the  globe  from  zone  to  zone  like  sunlight  He  proceeds; 
He  comes  to  give  the  World's  starved  heart  the  perfect  love 

it  needs, 


On  a  Sculptured   Head   of  the   Christ     3751 

The  Christ  Whose  friends  have  played  Him  false,  Whom 

Dogmas  have  belied. 
Still  speaking  to  the  hearts  of  men — though  shamed  and 

crucified, 
The  Master  of  the  Centuries  Who  will  not  be  denied! 

Harry  Kemp  [1883- 


TE  MARTYRUM  CANDIDATUS 

Ah,  see  the  fair  chivalry  come,  the  companions  of  Christ! 

While  Horsemen,  who  ride  on  white  horses,  the  Knights  of 
God! 
They,  for  their  Lord  and  their  Lover  who  sacrificed 

All,  save  the  sweetness  of  treading  where  He  first  trod! 

These  through  the  darkness  of  death,  the  dominion  of  night, 
Swept,  and  they  woke  in  white  places  at  morning  tide: 

They  saw  with  their  eyes,  and  sang  for  joy  of  the  sight, 
They  saw  with  their  eyes  the  Eyes  of  the  Crucified. 

Now,  whithersoever  He  goeth,  with  Him  they  go: 

White  Horsemen,  who  ride  on  white  horses,  oh  fair  to  see! 

They  ride,  where  the  Rivers  of  Paradise  flash  and  flow, 
White  Horsemen,  with  Christ  their  Captain:  for  ever  He! 

Lionel  Johnson  [1867-1902] 


ON  A  SCULPTURED  HEAD  OF  THE  CHRIST 

I  SAW  it  once  where  myriad  works  adorn 

Encloistered  walls  as  with  a  Cloth  of  Gold; 

Then  did  I  see,  still  fair  in  every  fold. 

Still  jewel-strewn,  the  robe  a  king  had  worn. 

I  glimpsed  a  god,  of  antique  glory  born; 

A  boasted  picture,  and  a  carven  gem, — 

Soul-sick,  the  while,  to  view,  unvexed  of  them, 

That  simple  Christus  with  its  crown  of  thorn! 

The  World  is  old;  she  hath  seen  many  wars;    ' 

And  states  and  kingdoms  crowd  her  courts  like  grass; 

Princes  in  pride  she  watches  where  they  pass 

Unnumbered  and  innumerable  as  the  stars; 


375^  Jerusalem   the   Golden 

'""■^'  Then  turns,  a  child  with  tired  feet  homeward  set, 
Back  to  the  Cross,  and  lo!  her  hds  are  wet. 

Mahlon  Leonard  Fisher  [1S74- 


GOOD  KING  WENCESLAS 

Good  King  Wenceslas  looked  out, 

On  the  Feast  of  Stephen, 
When  the  snow  lay  round  about, 

Deep,  and  crisp,  and  even: 
Brightly  shone  the  moon  that  night, 

Though  the  frost  was  cruel. 
When  a  poor  man  came  in  sight. 

Gathering  winter  fuel. 

"Hither,  page,  and  stand  by  me, 

If  thou  know'st  it,  telling. 
Yonder  peasant,  who  is  he? 

Where  and  what  his  dwelling?" 
"Sire,  he  lives  a  good  league  hence, 

Underneath  the  mountain; 
Right  against  the  forest  fence, 

By  Saint  Agnes'  fountain." 

"Bring  me  flesh,  and  bring  me  wine. 

Bring  me  pine  logs  hither; 
Thou  and  I  will  see  him  dine. 

When  we  bear  them  thither." 
Page  and  monarch  forth  they  went, 

Forth  they  went  together; 
Through  the  rude  wind's  wild  lament, 

And  the  bitter  weather. 

"Sire,  the  night  is  darker  now. 

And  the  wind  blows  stronger; 
Fails  my  heart,  I  know  not  how, 

I  can  go  no  longer." 
"Mark  my  footsteps,  good  my  page! 

Tread  thou  in  them  boldly; 
Thou  shalt  find  the  winter's  rage 

Freeze  thy  blood  less  coldly." 


?Jj.  uxIT 


Simon   the   Cyrenean  3753 

In  his  master's  steps  he  trod, 

Where  the  snow  lay  dinted; 
Heat  was  in  the  very  sod 

Which  the  saint  had  printed. 
Therefore,  Christian  men,  be  sure, 

Wealth  or  rank  possessing, 
Ye  who  now  will  bless  the  poor. 

Shall  yourselves  find  blessing. 

John  Ncal  [1793- 1876] 


SIMON  THE  CYRENEAN 

"  And  as  tbcy  came  out  they  found  a  man  of  Cyrcne.  Simon  by  name;  him 
they  compelled  to  bear  his  cross." 

This  is  the  tale  from  first  to  last; — 

Outside  Jerusalem 
I  saw  them  lead  a  prisoner  past 

With  thorns  for  diadem. 
Broken  and  weak  and  driven  fast 

He  feU  at  my  garment's  hem. 

There  stood  no  other  stranger  by 

On  me  they  laid  his  load. 
The  Cross  whereon  he  was  to  die 

I  bore  along  the  road, 
I  saw  him  nailed,  I  heard  him  cry 

Forsaken  of  his  God. 


Now  I  am  dead  as  well  as  he, 
And,  marvel  strange  to  tell, 

But  him  they  nailed  upon  the  tree 
Is  Lord  of  Heaven  and  Hell, 

And  judgeth  who  doth  wickedly, 
Rewardeth  who  doth  well. 

He  has  given  to  me  the  beacons  four, 
A  Cross  in  the  southern  sky, 


3754  Jerusalem   the  Golden 

In  token  that  his  Cross  I  bore 

In  his  extremity; 
For  one  I  never  knew  before 

The  day  he  came  to  die. 

Lucy  Lyttleton  [li 


THE  WINGED   WORSHIPPERS 

Gay,  guiltless  pair, 
What  seek  ye  from  the  fields  of  Heaven? 

Ye  have  no  need  of  prayer. 
Ye  have  no  sins  to  be  forgiven. 

Why  perch  ye  here, 
Where  mortals  to  their  Maker  bend? 

Can  your  pure  spirits  fear 
The  God  ye  never  could  offend? 

Ye  never  knew 
The  crimes  for  which  we  come  to  weep. 

Penance  is  not  for  you. 
Blessed  wanderers  of  the  upper  deep. 

To  you  'tis  given 
To  wake  sweet  Nature's  untaught  lays, 

Beneath  the  arch  of  Heaven 
To  chirp  away  a  life  of  praise. 

Then  spread  each  wing, 
Far,  far  above,  o'er  lakes  and  lands. 

And  join  the  choirs  that  sing 
In  yon  blue  dome  not  reared  with  hands. 

Or,  if  ye  stay 
To  note  the  consecrated  hour. 

Teach  me  the  airy  way. 
And  let  me  try  your  envied  power. 


r 


De  Sheepfol'  3755 

Above  the  crowd, 
On  upward  wings  could  I  but  fly, 

I'd  bathe  ha  yon  bright  cloud. 
And  seek  the  stars  that  gem  the  sky. 

"Twere  Heaven  indeed 
Through  fields  of  trackless  light  to  soar, 

On  nature's  charms  to  feed, 
And  Nature's  own  great.  God  adore. 

diaries  Sprague  [1791-1875] 


DE   SHEEPFOL' 

De  massa  ob  de  sheepfol', 
Dat  guards  de  sheepfol'  bin. 
Look  out  in  de  gloomerin'  meadows, 
Wha'r  de  long  night  rain  begin — 
So  he  call  to  de  hirelin'  shepa'd, 
"Is  ray  sheep,  is  dey  all  come  in? — • 
My  sheep,  is  dey  all  come  in?" 

Oh  den,  says  de  hirelin'  shepa'd: 
"Dey's  some,  dey's  black  and  thin. 
And  some,  dey's  po'  oF  wedda's, 
Dat  can't  come  home  agin. 
Dey's  some  black  sheep  an'  ol'  wedda's. 
But  de  res',  dey's  all  brung  in. — 
De  res',  dey's  all  brung  in." 

Den  de  massa  ob  de  sheepfol', 

Dat  guards  de  sheepfol'  bin. 

Goes  down  in  de  gloomerin'  meadows, 

Wha'r  de  long  night  rain  begin — 

So  he  le'  down  de  ba's  ob  de  sheepfol', 

Callin'  sof,  "Come  in.    Come  in." 

Callin'  sof,  "Come  in.    Come  in." 

Den  up  t'ro'  de  gloomerin'  meadows, 
T'ro'  de  col'  night  rain  and  win', 
And  up  t'ro'  de  gloomerin'  rain-paf, 
Wha'r  de  sleet  fa'  pie'cin'  thin, 


375^  Jerusalem   the  Golden 

De  po'  los'  sheep  ob  de  sheepfol', 
Dey  all  comes  gadderin'  in. 
De  po'  los'  sheep  ob  de  sheepfol', 
Dey  all  comes  gadderin'  in. 

Sarah  Pratt  McLean  Greene  [1856- 


THE  LOST  SHEEP 

("the  ninety  and  nine") 

There  were  ninety  and  nine  that  safely  lay 

In  the  shelter  of  the  fold; 
But  one  was  out  on  the  hills  away, 

Far  ofT  from  the  gates  of  gold, — 
Away  on  the  mountains  wild  and  bare, 
Away  from  the  tender  Shepherd's  care. 

"Lord,  thou  hast  here  thy  ninety  and  nine: 

Are  they  not  enough  for  thee?" 
But  the  Shepherd  made  answer:  "'Tis  of  mine 

Has  wandered  away  from  me; 
And  although  the  road  be  rough  and  steep 
I  go  to  the  desert  to  find  my  sheep." 

But  none  of  the  ransomed  ever  knew 

How  deep  were  the  waters  crossed, 
Nor  how  dark  was  the  night  that  the  Lord  passed  through 

Ere  he  found  his  sheep  that  was  lost. 
Out  in  the  desert  he  heard  its  cry — 
Sick  and  helpless,  and  ready  to  die. 

"Lord,  whence  are  those  blood-drops  all  the  way, 

That  mark  out  the  mountain-track?" 
"They  were  shed  for  one  who  had  gone  astray 

Ere  the  Shepherd  could  bring  him  back." 
"Lord,  whence  are  thy  hands  so  rent  and  torn?" 
"They  are  pierced  to-night  by  many  a  thorn." 

But  all  through  the  mountains,  thunder-riven. 

And  up  from  the  rocky  steep. 
There  rose  a  cry  to  the  gate  of  heaven, 

"Rejoice!  I  have  found  my  sheep!" 


(1- Lost  But  Found  3757 

And  the  angels  echoed  around  the  throne, 
"Rejoice,  for  the  Lord  brings  back  his  own!" 

Elizabeth  Cecilia  Clcplianc  [i  830-1 869] 

LOST  BUT  FOUND 

I  WAS  a  v.'andering  sheep, 

I  did  not  love  the  fold; 
I  did  not  love  my  Shepherd's  voice, 

I  would  not  be  controlled. 

I  was  a  wayward  child, 

I  did  not  love  my  home, 
I  did  not  love  my  Father's  voice, 

I  loved  afar  to  roam. 

The  Shepherd  sought  his  sheep; 

The  Father  sought  his  child; 
They  followed  me  o'er  vale  and  hill, 

O'er  deserts  waste  and  wild. 

They  found  me  nigh  to  death. 

Famished,  and  faint,  and  lone; 
They  bound  me  with  the  bands  of  love; 

They  saved  the  wandering  one. 

They  spoke  in  tender  love. 

They  raised  my  drooping  head; 
They  gently  closed  my  bleeding  wounds, 

My  fainting  soul  they  fed. 

They  washed  my  tilth  away, 

They  made  me  clean  and  fair; 
They  brought  me  to  my  home  in  peace, 

The  long-sought  wanderer. 

Jesus  my  Shepherd  is, 

'Twas  he  that  loved  my  soul ; 
'Twas  he  that  washed  me  in  his  blood, 

'Twas  he  that  made  me  whole; 

'Twas  he  that  sought  the  lost, 

That  found  the  wandering  sheep; 
'Twas  he  that  brought  me  to  the  fold, 

'Tis  he  that  still  doth  keep. 


375^  Jerusalem   the  Golden 

I  was  a  wandering  sheep, 

I  would  not  be  controlled; 
But  now  I  love  my  Shepherd's  voice, 

I  love,  I  love  the  fold. 

I  was  a  v.ayward  child, 

I  once  preferred  to  roam; 
But  now  I  love  my  Father's  voice, 

I  love,  I  love  his  home. 

Horatius  Bonar  [1808-1889] 


STAINS 

The  three  ghosts  on  the  lonesome  road 

Spake  each  to  one  another, 
"Whence  came  that  stain  about  your  mouth 

No  lifted  hand  may  cover?" 
"From  eating  of  forbidden  fruit, 

Brother,  my  brother." 

The  three  ghosts  on  the  sunless  road 

Spake  each  to  one  another,  * 
"Whence  came  that  red  burn  on  your  foot 

No  dust  uor  ash  may  cover?  " 
"I  stamped  a  neighbor's  hearth-flame  out, 

Brother,  my  brother." 

The  three  ghosts  on  the  windless  road 

Spake  each  to  one  another, 
"Whence  came  that  blood  upon  your  hand 

No  other  hand  may  cover?" 
"From  breaking  of  a  woman's  heart, 

Brother,  my  brother." 

"Yet  on  the  earth  clean  men  we  walked, 

Glutton  and  Thief  and  Lover; 
White  flesh  and  fair  it  hid  our  stains 

That  no  man  might  discover. " 
"Naked  the  soul  goes  up  to  God, 

Brother,  my  brother." 

Theodosia  Garrison    [1874- 


Sheep  and   Lambs  3759 


A  HYMN  TO   GOD   THE   FATHER 

Wilt  Thou  forgive  that  sin  where  I  begun, 

Which  was  my  sin,  though  it  were  done  before? 

Wilt  Thou  forgive  that  sin  through  which  I  run, 
And  do  run  still,  though  still  I  do  deplore? 

When  Thou  hast  done.  Thou  hast  not  done; 
For  I  have  more. 

Wilt  Thou  forgive  that  sin  which  I  have  won 
Others  to  sin,  and  made  my  sin  their  door? 

Wilt  Thou  forgive  that  sin  which  I  did  shun 
A  year  or  two,  but  wallowed  in  a  score? 

When  Thou  hast  done,  Thou  hast  not  done; 
For  I  have  more. 

I  have  a  sin  of  fear,  that  when  I've  spun 

My  last  thread,  I  shall  perish  on  the  shore; 
But  swear  by  Thyself  that  at  my  death  Thy  Son 

Shall  shine  as  He  shines  now  and  heretofore: 
And  having  done  that.  Thou  hast  done; 
I  fear  no  more. 

John  Donne  [1573-1631] 


SHEEP  AND   LAMBS 

All  in  the  April  evening, 

April  airs  were  abroad ; 
The  sheep  with  their  little  lambs 

Passed  me  by  on  the  road. 

The  sheep  with  their  little  lambs 

Passed  me  by  on  the  road;  -/Hr 

All  in  the  April  evening 

I  thought  on  the  Lamb  of  God. 

The  lambs  were  weary,  and  crying 

With  a  weak  human  cry, 
I  thought  on  the  Lamb  of  God 

Going  meekly  to  die. 


3760  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

Up  in  the  blue,  blue  mountains 
■.:  !      Dewy  pastures  are  sweet: 
Rest  for  the  little  bodies, 
Rest  for  the  little  feet. 

But  for  the  Lamb  of  God 

Up  on  the  hill-top  green, 
Only  a  Cross  of  shame 

Two  stark  crosses  between. 

All  in  the  April  evening, 

April  airs  were  abroad; 
I  saw  the  sheep  with  their  lambs, 

And  thought  on  the  Lamb  of  God. 

Katharine  Tynan  [1861- 

" ALL'S   WELL!" 

Eight  bells!     Eight  bells!  their  clear  tone  tells 

The  midnight  hour  is  here, 
And  as  they  cease,  these  words  of  peace 

Fall  gently  on  my  ear: 
"All's  well!     All's  well!" 

Fond  thoughts  fly  far,  where  loved  ones  are, 

Though  distant,  ever  near. 
From  those  dear  homes  the  echo  comes. 

Our  longing  hearts  to  cheer: 
"All's  well!     All's  well!" 

Swift  through  the  deep  our  course  we  keep, 

To  shores  unseen  we  steer. 
No  thought  of  ill  our  souls  shall  chill, 

Nor  wind  nor  wave  we  fear: 
"All's  well!     All's  well!" 

Thus  o'er  life's  sea  our  voyage  may  be 

A  pathway  lone  and  drear. 
Through  tempest  loud  and  sorrow's  cloud, 

Faith  still  shall  whisper  near: 
"All's  well!     All's  well!" 

And  when  for  me,  earth,  sky,  and  sea 
Shall  fade  and  disappear, 


One  bv  One 


3761 


May  this  sweet  note  still  downward  float, 
From  some  undying  sphere: 
"All's  well!     All's  well!" 

William  Allen  Btitier  [1825-1902] 

LIVING  WATERS 

There  are  some  hearts  like  wells,  green-mossed  and  deep 

As  ever  Summer  saw; 
And  cool  their  water  iSv — yea,  cool  and  sweet;; — 

But  you  must  come  to  draw. 
They  hoard  not,  yet  they  rest  in  calm  content, 

And  not  unsought  will  give; 
They  can  be  quiet  with  their  wealth  unspent, 

So  self-contained  they  live. 

And  there  are  some  like  springs,  that  bubbling  burst 

To  follow  dusty  ways. 
And  run  with  offered  cup  to  quench  his  thirst 

Where  the  tired  traveller  strays; 
That  never  ask  the  meadows  if  they  want 

What  is  their  joy  to  give; — 
Unasked,  their  lives  to  other  life  they  grant, 

So  self-bestowed  they  live! 

And  One  is  hke  the  ocean,  deep  and  wide, 

Wherein  all  waters  fall; 
That  girdles  the  broad  earth,  and  draws  the  tide, 

Feeding  and  bearing  all; 
That  broods  the  mists,  that  sends  the  clouds  abroad, 

That  takes,  again  to  give; — 
Even  the  great  and  loving  heart  of  God, 
I ,  Whereby  all  love  doth  live. 

Caroline  Spencer  [iS 

ONE  BY  ONE 

One  by  one  the  sands  are  flowing, 

One  by  one  the  moments  fall; 
Some  arc  coming,  some  are  going; 

Do  not  strive  to  grasp  them  all. 


37^2  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

One  by  one  thy  duties  wait  thee — 
Let  thy  whole  strength  go  to  each, 

Let  no  future  dreams  elate  thee, 

Learn  thou  first  what  these  can  teach. 

One  by  one  (bright  gifts  from  heaven) 
Joys  are  sent  thee  here  below; 
,,.j.ii  Take  them  readily  when  given — 

Ready,  too,  to  let  them  go. 

One  by  one  thy  griefs  shall  meet  thee;'-*^  ^'"'^^ 
Do  not  fear  an  armed  band;  ^'' 

One  will  fade  as  others  greet  thee — 
Shadows  passing  through  the  land. 

Do  not  look  at  life's  long  sorrow; 

See  how  small  each  moment's  pain; 
God  will  help  thee  for  to-morrow, 

So  each  day  begin  again. 

■/• 
Every  hour  that  fleets  so  slowly 

Has  its  task  to  do  or  bear; 
Luminous  the  crown,  and  holy, 

When  each  gem  is  set  with  care.  ; 

Do  not  linger  with  regretting. 

Or  for  passing  hours  despond; 
Nor,  thy  daily  toil  forgetting. 

Look  too  eagerly  beyond. 

Hours  are  golden  links,  God's  token, 
Reaching  heaven;  but,  one  by  one, 

Take  them,  lest  the  chain  be  broken 
Ere  the  pilgrimage  be  done. 

Adelaide  Anne  Procter  [1825-1864] 


UNBELIEF 

There  is  no  unbelief; 
Whoever  plants  a  seed  beneath  the  sod 
And  waits  to  see  it  push  away  the  clod, 
He  trusts  in  God. 


"There  is  no   Death"  37^3 

Whoever  says  when  clouds  are  in  the  sky, 
"Be  patient,  heart;  hght  breaketh  by  and  by," 
Trusts  the  Most  High. 

Whoever  sees  'neath  Winter's  field  of  snow 
The  silent  harvest  of  the  future  grow,       '  i 
God's  power  must  know. 

Whoever  lies  down  on  his  couch  to  sleep, 
Content  to  lock  each  sense  in  slumber  deep. 
Knows  God  will  keep. 

Whoever  says,  "To-morrow,"  "The  unknown," 
"The  future,"  trusts  the  Power  alone 
He  dares  disown. 

The  heart  that  looks  on  when  eyelids  close, 
And  dares  to  live  when  life  has  woes,  >-, 

God's  comfort  knows. 

There  is  no  unbelief;  •'' 

And  day  by  day,  unconsciously, 
The  heart  lives  by  that  faith  the  lips  deny, 
God  knoweth  why! 

Elizabeth  York  Case  [i8    -        ] 


"THERE  IS  NO  DEATH" 

There  is  no  death!    The  stars  go  down 
To  rise  upon  some  other  shore, 

And  bright  in  heaven's  jeweled  crown 
They  shine  for  evermore. 

There  is  no  death!     The  dust  we  tread 
Shall  change  beneath  the  summer  showers 

To  golden  grain  or  mellow  fruit 
Or  rainbow-tinted  llowers. 

The  granite  rocks  disorganize 
To  feed  the  hungry  moss  they  bear; 

The  forest  leaves  drink  daily  life 
From  out  the  viewless  air. 


37^4  Jerusalem  the   Golden 

There  is  no  death !     The  leaves  may  fall, ,  / 
The  flowers  may  fade  and  pass  away — 

They  only  wait,  through  wintry  hours, 
The  coming  of  the  May. 

There  is  no  death !     An  angel  form  rp 

Walks  o'er  the  earth  with  silent  tread;  '  . 

He  bears  our  best  loved  things  away,       (jyiu^ 
And  then  we  call  them  "dead." 

He  leaves  our  hearts  all  desolate — 

He  plucks  our  fairest,  sweetest  flowers; 

Transplanted  into  bliss,  they  now 
Adorn  immortal  bowers. 

The  bird-like  voice,  whose  joyous  tones 
Made  glad  this  scene  of  sin  and  strife, 

Sings  now  an  everlasting  song, 
Amid  the  tree  of  life. 

Where'er  He  sees  a  smfle  too  bright, 
Or  soul  too  pure  for  taint  of  vice. 

He  bears  it  to  that  world  of  light, 
To  dwell  in  Paradise. 

Born  into  that  undying  life, 

They  leave  us  but  to  come  again; 

With  joy  we  welcome  them — the  same 
Except  in  sin  and  pain. 

And  ever  near  us,  though  unseen. 

The  dear  immortal  spirits  tread; 
For  all  the  boundless  universe 

Is  life — there  are  no  dead! 

John  Luckey  McCreery  [1835-1906] 


THE  FOOL'S  PRAYER 

The  royal  feast  was  done;  the  King 
Sought  some  new  sport  to  banish  care, 

And  to  his  jester  cried:  "Sir  Fool, 

Kneel  now,  and  make  for  us  a  prayer!" 


The   Fool's   Prayer  37^5 

The  jester  doffed  his  cap  and  bells, 

And  stood  the  mocking  court  before; 
They  could  not  see  the  bitter  smile 

Behind  the  painted  grin  he  wore. 

He  bowed  his  head,  and  bent  his  knee 

Upon  the  monarch's  silken  stool; 
His  pleading  voice  arose:  "O  Lord, 

Be  merciful  to  me,  a  fool! 

"No  pity,  Lord,  could  change  the  heart 
From  red  with  wrong  to  white  as  wool; 

The  rod  must  heal  the  sin:  but  Lord, 
Be  merciful  to  me,  a  fool! 

"  'Tis  not  by  guilt  the  onward  sweep 

Of  truth  and  right,  O  Lord,  we  stay; 
'Tis  by  our  follies  that  so  long 

We  hold  the  earth  from  heaven  away. 

"These  clumsy  feet,  still  in  the  mire, 

Go  crushing  blossoms  without  end ; 
These  hard,  well-meaning  hands  we  thrust 

Among  the  heart-strings  of  a  friend. 

"The  ill-timed  truth  we  might  have  kept^ 
Who  knows  how  sharp  it  pierced  and  stung? 

The  word  we  had  not  sense  to  say — 
Who  knows  how  grandly  it  had  rung! 

"Our  faults  no  tenderness  should  ask. 

The  chastening  stripes  must  cleanse  them  all; 

But  for  our  blunders — oh,  in  shame 
Before  the  eyes  of  heaven  we  fall. 

"Earth  bears  no  balsam  for  mistakes; 

Men  crown  the  knave,  and  scourge  the  tool 
That  did  his  will;  but  Thou,  O  Lord, 

Be  merciful  to  me,  a  fool!" 


3766  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

The  room  was  hushed;  in  silence  rose 
The  King,  and  sought  his  gardens  cool, 

And  walked  apart,  and  murmured  low, 
"Be  merciful  to  me,  a  fool!" 

Edward  Roiuland  Sill  [i 841-1887] 


THE   ECLIPSE 

Whither,  O  whither  didst  Thou  fly? 
When  did  I  grieve  Thine  holy  eye? 
When  Thou  didst  mourn  to  see  me  lost. 
And  all  Thy  care  and  counsels  crossed. 
O  do  not  grieve,  where'er  Thou  art! 
Thy  grief  is  an  undoing  smart. 
Which  doth  not  only  pain,  but  break 
My  heart,  and  makes  me  blush  to  speak. 
Thy  anger  I  could  kiss,  and  will ; 
But  O  Thy  grief.  Thy  grief,  doth  kill! 

Henry  Vaughan  [1622-1695] 


COMFORT 

Speak  low  to  me,  my  Saviour,  low  and  sweet 
From  out  the  hallelujahs,  sweet  and  low, 
Lest  I  should  fear  and  fall,  and  miss  Thee  so, 
Who  art  not  missed  by  any  that  entreat. 
Speak  to  me  as  to  Mary  at  Thy  feet ! 
And  if  no  precious  gums  my  hands  bestow, 
Let  my  tears  drop  like  amber,  while  I  go 
In  reach  of  Thy  divinest  voice  complete 
In  humanest  affection — thus,  in  sooth, 
To  lose  the  sense  of  losing.     As  a  child. 
Whose  song-bird  seeks  the  wood  for  evermore, 
Is  sung  to  in  its  stead  by  mother's  mouth. 
Till,  sinking  on  her  breast,  love-reconciled. 
He  sleeps  the  faster  that  he  wept  before. 

Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning  [i8o6-i{ 


St.  Agnes'  Eve  3767 

ST.  AGNES'  EVE 

Deep  on  the  convent-roof  the  snows 

Are  sparkHng  to  the  moon: 
My  breath  to  heaven  hke  vapor  goes: 

May  my  soul  follow  soon ! 
The  shadows  of  the  convent-towers 

Slant  down  the  snowy  sward, 
Still  creeping  with  the  creeping  hours 

That  lead  me  to  my  Lord : 
Make  Thou  my  spirit  pure  and  clear 

As  are  the  frosty  skies, 
Or  this  first  snowdrop  of  the  year 

That  in  my  bosom  lies. 

As  these  white  robes  are  soiled  and  dark, 

To  yonder  shining  ground; 
As  this  pale  taper's  earthly  spark, 

To  yonder  argent  round ; 
So  shows  my  soul  before  the  Lamb, 

My  spirit  before  Thee; 
So  in  mine  earthly  house  I  am, 

To  that  I  hope  to  be. 
Break  up  the  heavens,  O  Lord!  and  far, 

Through  all  yon  starlight  keen. 
Draw  me,  thy  bride,  a  glittering  star, 

In  raiment  white  and  clean. 

He  lifts  me  to  the  golden  doors; 

The  Hashes  come  and  go; 
All  heaven  bursts  her  starry  floors, 

And  strows  her  lights  below. 
And  deepens  on  and  up!  the  gates 

Roll  back,  and  far  within 
For  me  the  Heavenly  Bridegroom  waits, 

To  make  me  pure  of  sin. 
The  Sabbaths  of  Eternity, 

One  Sabbath  deep  and  wide — 
A  light  upon  the  shining  sea — 

The  Bridegroom  with  his  bride! 

Alfred  Tennyson  [1809-1802] 


37^8  Jerusalem  the  Golden 


HIS  BANNER  OVER  ME 

Surrounded  by  unnumbered  foes, 
Against  my  soul  the  battle  goes! 
Yet  though  I  weary,  sore  distressed, 
I  know  that  I  shall  reach  my  rest: 

I  lift  my  tearful  eyes  above, — 

His  banner  over  me  is  love. 

Its  sword  my  spirit  will  not  yield, 
Though  tlesh  may  faint  upon  the  field; 
He  waves  before  my  fading  sight 
The  branch  of  palm, — the  crown  of  light; 

I  Hft  my  brightening  eyes  above, — 

His  banner  over  me  is  love. 

My  cloud  of  battle-dust  may  dim, 
His  veil  of  splendor  curtain  him! 
And  in  the  midnight  of  my  fear 
I  may  not  feel  him  standing  near; 

But,  as  I  lift  mine  eyes  above, 

His  banner  over  me  is  love. 

Gerald  Massey  [182 8-1907] 


JESUS  THE   CARPENTER 

"Isn't  this  Joseph's  son?" — ay,  it  is  He; 
Joseph  the  carpenter— same  trade  as  me — 
I  thought  as  I'd  find  it — I  knew  it  was  here^ 
But  my  sight's  getting  queer. 

I  don't  know  right  where  as  His  shed  must  ha'  stood- 
But  often,  as  I've  been  a-planing  my  wood, 
I've  took  off  my  hat,  just  with  thinking  of  He 
At  the  same  work  as  me, 

He  warn't  that  set  up  that  He  couldn't  stoop  do^^•n 
And  work  in  the  countr}-  for  folks  in  the  town; 
And  I'll  warrant  He  felt  a  bit  pride,  Uke  I've  done, 
At  a  good  job  begun. 


"1   Saw  Thee"  3769 

fhe  parson  he  knows  that  I'll  not  make  too  free, 
But  on  Sunday  I  feels  as  pleased  as  can  be, 
When  I  wears  my  clean  smock,  and  sits  in  a  pew, 
And  has  thoughts  a  few. 

I  think  of  as  how  not  the  parson  hissen. 
As  is  teacher  and  father  and  shepherd  o'  men. 
Not  he  knows  as  much  of  the  Lord  in  that  shed, 
Where  He  earned  His  own  bread. 

And  when  I  goes  home  to  my  missus,  says  she, 
"Are  ye  wanting  your  key?"  .      .,.     , 

For  she  knows  my  queer  ways,  and  my  love  for  the  shed, 
(We've  been  forty  years  wed.) 

So  I  comes  right  away  by  mysen,  with  the  Book, 
And  I  turns  the  old  pages  and  has  a  good  look 
For  the  text  as  I've  found,  as  tells  me  as  He 
Were  the  same  trade  as  me. 

Why  don't  I  mark  it?    Ah,  many  says  so, 
But  I  think  I'd  as  Hef,  with  your  leaves,  let  it  go: 
It  do  seem  that  nice  when  I  fall  on  it  sudden — 
Unexpected,  you  know! 

Catharine  C.  Lidddl  [1848- 


"I  SAW  THEE" 

"  When  thou  wast  under  the  fig-tree,  I  saw  thee  " 

I  SAW  thee  when,  as  twilight  fell, 
And  evening  lit  her  fairest  star. 

Thy  footsteps  sought  yon  quiet  dell, 
The  world's  confusion  left  afar. 


I  saw  thee  when  thou  stood 'st  alone, 

Where  drooping  branches  thick  o'erhung, 
Thy  still  retreat  to  all  unknown, 
Hid  in  deep  shadows  darkly  flung. 


3770  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

I  saw  thee  when,  as  died  each  sound 
Of  bleating  flock  or  woodland  bird, 

Kneeling,  as  if  on  holy  ground. 

Thy  voice  the  listening  silence  heard. 

I  saw  thy  calm,  uplifted  eyes, 

And  marked  the  heaving  of  thy  breast, 

When  rose  to  heaven  thy  heartfelt  sighs 
For  purer  life,  for  perfect  rest. 

I  saw  the  light  that  o'er  thy  face 
Stole  with  a  soft,  suffusing  glow. 

As  if,  within,  celestial  grace 

Breathed  the  same  bliss  that  angels  know. 

I  saw — what  thou  didst  not — above 
Thy  lowly  head  an  open  heaven; 

And  tokens  of  thy  Father's  love 
With  smiles  to  thy  rapt  spirit  given. 

I  saw  thee  from  that  sacred  spot 
With  firm  and  peaceful  soul  depart, 

I,. Jesus,  saw  thee, — doubt  it  not, — 
And  read  the  secrets  of  thy  heart! 

Ray  Palmer  [1808-1 


THE  VETERAN  OF  HEAVEN 

O  CAPTAIN  of  the  wars,  whence  won  Ye  so  great  scars? 
In  what  fight  did  Ye  smite,  and  what  manner  was  the 
foe? 
Was  it  on  a  day  of  rout  they  compassed  Thee  about, 

Or  gat  Ye  these  adornings  when  Ye  wrought  their  over- 
throw? 

"  'Twas  on  a  day  of  rout  they  girded  Me  about. 
They  wounded  all  My  brow,  and  they  smote  Me  through 
the  side: 
My  hand  held  no  sword  when  I  met  their  armed  horde, 
And  the  conqueror  fell  down,  and  the  conquered  bruised 
his  pride." 


Lucifer  in   Starlight  377i 

What  is  this,  unheard  before,  that  the  unarmed  make  war, 
And  the  slain  hath  the  gain,  and  the  victor  hath  the  rout? 

What  wars,  then,  are  these,  and  what  the  enemies, 

Strange  Chief,  with  the  scars  of  Thy  conquest  trenched 
about? 

"  The  Prince  I  drave  forth  held  the  Mount  of  the  North, 
Girt  with  the  guards  of  flame  that  roll  around  the  pole. 

I  drave  him  with  IMy  wars  from  all  his  fortress-stars, 

And  the  sea  of  death  divided  that  My  march  might  strike 
its  goal. 

"In  the  keep  of  Northern  Guard,  many  a  great  demonian 
sword 
Burns  as  it  turns  round  the  Mount  occult,  apart: 
There  is  given  power  and  place  still  for  some  certain  days, 
And  his  Name  would  turn  the  Sun's  blood  back  upon  its 
heart." 

What  is  Thy  Name?     0  show! — "My  Name  ye  may  not 
know; 
'Tis  a  going  forth  with  banners,  and  a  baring  of  much 
swords : 
But  my  titles  that  are  high,  are  they  not  upon  my  thigh? 
'King  of  Kings!'  are  the  words,  'Lord  of  Lords'; 
It  is  written  'King  of  Kings,  Lord  of  Lords.'" 

Francis  Thompson  [iSsqP-iqo;] 


LUCIFER  IN   STARLIGHT 

On  a  starred  night  Prince  Lucifer  uprose. 
Tired  of  his  dark  dominion  swung  the  fiend 
Above  the  rolling  ball  in  cloud  part  screened, 
Where  sinners  hugged  their  specter  of  repose. 
Poor  prey  to  his  hot  fit  of  pride  were  those. 
And  now  upon  his  western  wing  he  leaned. 
Now  his  huge  bulk  o'er  Afric's  sands  careened, 
Now  the  black  planet  shadowed  Arctic  snows. 
Soaring  through  wider  zones  that  pricked  his  scars 


i77^  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

With  memory  of  the  old  revolt  from  Awe, 
He  reached  a  middle  height,  and  at  the  stars, 
Which  are  the  brain  of  Heaven,  he  looked,  and  sank. 
Around  the  ancient  track  marched,  rank  on  rank, 
The  army  of  unalterable  law. 

George  Meredith  [i828-i9og] 


=  j^  ^HT 


HORA   CHRISTI 

Sweet  is  the  time  for  joyous  folk 

Of  gifts  and  minstrelsy; 
Yet  I,  0  lowly-hearted  One, 

Crave  but  Thy  company. 
On  lonesome  road,  beset  with  dread, 

My  questing  lies  afar. 
I  have  no  light,  save  in  the  east 

The  gleaming  of  Thy  star. 

In  cloistered  aisles  they  keep  to-day 

Thy  feast,  O  living  Lord! 
With  pomp  of  banner,  pride  of  song, 

And  stately-sounding  word. 
Mute  stand  the  kings  of  power  and  place, 

While  priests  of  holy  mind 
Dispense  Tlty  blessed  heritage 

Of  peace  to  all  mankind. 

I  know  a  spot  where  budless  twigs 

Are  bare  above  the  snow, 
And  where  sweet  winter-loving  birds 

Flit  softl)'  to  and  fro; 
There  with  the  sun  for  altar-fire, 

The  earth  for  kneeling-place, 
The  gentle  air  for  Chorister, 

Will  I  adore  Thy  face. 

Loud,  underneath  the  great  blue  sky. 

My  heart  shall  paean  sing, 
The  gold  and  myrrh  of  meekest  love 

Mine  only  offering. 


Christus  Consolator  3773 

Bliss  of  Thy  birth  shall  quicken  me, 

And  for  Thy  pain  and  dole 
Tears  are  but  vain,  so  I  will  keep 

The  silence  of  the  soul. 

Alice  Brown  [1857- 

CHRISTUS   CONSOLATOR 

Beside  the  dead  I  knelt  for  prayer, 

And  felt  a  presence  as  I  prayed. 
Lo!  it  was  Jesus  standing  there. 

He  smiled:  "Be  not  afraid!" 

"Lord,  thou  hast  conquered  death  we  know; 

Restore  again  to  life,"  I  said, 
"This  one  who  died  an  hour  ago." 

He  smiled:  "She  is  not  dead!" 

"Asleep  then,  as  thyself  did  say; 

Yet  thou  canst  lift  the  hds  that  keep 
Her  prisoned  eyes  from  ours  away!" 

He  smiled:  "She  doth  not  sleep!" 

"Nay  then,  though  haply  she  do  wake, 

And  look  upon  some  fairer  dawn, 
Restore  her  to  our  hearts  that  ache!" 

He  smiled:  "She  is  not  gone!" 

"Alas!  too  well  we  know  our  loss. 

Nor  hope  again  our  joy  to  touch, 
Until  the  stream  of  death  we  cross." 

He  smiled:  "There  is  no  such!" 

"Yet  our  beloved  seem  so  far, 

The  while  we  yearn  to  feel  them  near, 

Albeit  with  Thee  we  trust  they  are." 
He  smiled:  "And  I  am  here!" 

"Dear  Lord,  how  shall  we  know  that  they 

Still  walk  unseen  with  us  and  Thee, 
Nor  sleep,  nor  wander  far  away?  " 

He  smiled:  "Abide  with  me." 

Rossiter  WorlhingLon  Raymond  [1840- 


3774  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

THAT  HOLY  THING 

From  "  Paul  Faber  " 

They  all  were  looking  for  a  king 

To  slay  their  foes  and  lift  them  high: 
Thou  cam'st,  a  Uttle  baby  thing 
That  made  a  woman  cry. 

O  Son  of  Man,  to  right  my  lot 

Naught  but  Thy  presence  can  avail; 
Yet  on  the  road  Thy  wheels  are  not, 
Nor  on  the  sea  Thy  sail! 

My  how  or  when  Thou  wilt  not  heed, 

But  come  down  Thine  own  secret  stair, 
That  Thou  mayst  answer  all  my  need — 
Yea,  every  bygone  prayer. 

George  Macdonald  [1824-1905] 


WHAT  CHRIST  SAID 

I  SAID,  "Let  me  walk  in  the  fields;" 
He  said,  "  Nay,  walk  in  the  town;  " 

I  said,  "There  are  no  flowers  there;" 
He  said,  "No  flowers,  but  a  crown." 

I  said,  "But  the  sky  is  black, 
There  is  nothing  but  noise  and  din;" 

But  He  wept  as  He  sent  me  back — 

"There  is  more,"  He  said,  "there  is  sin. 

I  said,  "But  the  air  is  thick. 
And  fogs  are  yelling  the  sun;" 

He  answered,    "Yet  hearts  are  sick, 
And  souls  in  the  dark  undone." 

I  said,  "I  shall  miss  the  light. 

And  friends  will  miss  me,  they  say;" 

He  answered  me,  "Choose  to-night 
If  I  am  to  miss  you  or  they." 


San   Lorenzo  Giustiniani's    Mother      3775 

I  pleaded  for  time  to  be  given; 

He  said,  "Is  it  hard  to  decide? 
It  will  not  seem  hard  in  heaven 

To  have  followed  the  steps  of  your  Guide." 

I  cast  one  look  at  the  field, 

Then  set  my  face  to  the  town; 
He  said,  "My  child,  do  you  yield? 

Will  you  leave  the  flowers  for  the  crown?" 

Then  into  His  hand  went  mine. 

And  into  my  heart  came  He. 
And  I  walk  in  a  light  divine 

The  path  I  had  feared  to  see. 

George  Macdonald  [i 824-1 905 J 

SAN  LORENZO  GIUSTINIANI'S  MOTHER 

•  "  And  we  the  shadows  of  the  dream  " — Shelley 

I  HAD  not  seen  my  son's  dear  face 
(He  chose  the  cloister  by  God's  grace) 

Since  it  had  come  to  full  flower-time. 

I  hardly  guessed  at  its  perfect  prime, 
That  folded  flower  of  his  dear  face. 

Mine  eyes  were  veiled  by  mists  of  tears 

When  on  a  day  in  many  years 
One  of  his  Order  came.    I  thrilled. 
Facing,  I  thought,  that  face  fulfilled. 

I  doubted,  for  my  mists  of  tears. 

His  blessing  be  with  me  forever! 

My  hope  and  doubt  were  hard  to  sever. 

— That  altered  face,  those  holy  weeds. 

I  filled  his  wallet  and  kissed  his  beads, 
And  lost  his  echoing  feet  for  ever. 

If  to  my  son  my  alms  were  given 
I  know  not,  and  I  wait  for  Heaven. 

He  did  not  plead  for  child  of  mine, 

But  for  another  Child  divine. 
And  unto  Him  it  was  surely  given. 


377^  Jerusalem  the  Golden 

There  is  One  alone  who  cannot  change; 
Dreams  are  we,  shadows,  visions  strange; 

And  all  I  give  is  given  to  One. 

I  might  mistake  my  dearest  son, 
But  never  the  Son  who  cannot  change. 

Alice  Meynell  [1853- 


A  BALLAD   OF  TREES  AND   THE   MASTER 

Into  the  woods  my  Master  went, 

Clean  forspent,  forspent. 

Into  the  woods  my  Master  came, 

Forspent  with  love  and  shame. 

But  the  olives  they  were  not  blind  to  Him; 

The  little  gray  leaves  were  kind  to  Him; 

The  thorn -tree  had  a  mind  to  Him 

When  into  the  woods  He  came. 

Out  of  the  woods  my  Master  went, 

And  He  was  well  content. 

Out  of  the  woods  my  Master  came, 

Content  with  death  and  shame. 

When  Death  and  Shame  would  woo  Him  last, 

From  under  the  trees  they  drew  Him  last: 

'Twas  on  a  tree  they  slew  Him — last 

When  out  of  the  woods  He  came. 

Sidney  Lanier  [1842-1881 


THE  MYSTERY 

He  came  and  took  me  by  the  hand 

Up  to  a  red  rose  tree. 
He  kept  His  meaning  to  Himself 

But  gave  a  rose  to  me. 

I  did  not  pray  Him  to  lay  bare 

The  mystery  to  me; 
Enough  the  rose  was  Heaven  to  smell, 

And  His  own  face  to  see. 

Ralph  Hodgson  [i 


SONGS  OF  PRAISE 

DIES  IR^* 

Day  of  wrath,  that  day  of  burning, 
Seer  and  Sibyl  speak  concerning, 
All  the  world  to  ashes  turning. 

Oh,  what  fear  shall  it  engender. 

When  the  Judge  shall  come  in  splendor. 

Strict  to  mark  and  just  to  render! 

Trumpet,  scattering  sounds  of  wonder, 
Rending  sepulchers  asunder, 
Shall  resistless  summons  thunder. 

All  aghast  then  Death  shall  shiver. 
And  great  Nature's  frame  shall  quiver. 
When  the  graves  their  dead  deliver. 

Volume,  from  which  nothing's  blotted, 

Evil  done  nor  evil  plotted, 

Shall  be  brought  and  dooms  allotted. 

When  shall  sit  the  Judge  unerring, 
He'U  unfold  all  here  occurring, 
Vengeance  then  no  more  deferring. 

What  shall  /  say,  that  time  pending? 
Ask  what  advocate's  befriending. 
When  the  just  man  needs  defending? 

Dreadful  King,  all  power  possessing, 
Saving  freely  those  confessing. 
Save  thou  me,  O  Fount  of  Blessing! 

■  For  the  original  of  this  poem  sec  page  3819. 
3777 


377^  Songs  of  Praise 

Think,  O  Jesus,  for  what  reason, 

Thou  didst  bear  earth's  spite  and  treason, 

Nor  me  lose  in  that  dread  season! 

Seeking  me  Thy  worn  feet  hasted. 
On  the  cross  Thy  soul  death  tasted: 
Let  such  travail  not  be  wasted! 

Righteous  Judge  of  retribution! 
Make  me  gift  of  absolution 
Ere  that  day  of  execution! 

Culprit-like,  I  plead,  heart-broken, 
On  my  cheek  shame's  crimson  token: 
Let  the  pardoning  word  be  spoken! 

Thou,  who  Mary  gav'st  remission, 
Heard'st  the  dying  Thief's  petition, 
Cheer'st  with  hope  my  lost  condition. 

Though  my  prayers  be  void  of  merit. 
What  is  needful,  Thou  confer  it, 
Lest  I  endless  fire  inherit. 

Be  there,  Lord,  my  place  decided 
With  Thy  sheep,  from  goats  divided, 
Kindly  to  Thy  right  hand  guided! 

When  the  accursed  away  are  driven. 

To  eternal  burnings  given, 

Call  me  with  the  blessed  to  heaven! 

I  beseech  Thee,  prostrate  lying. 
Heart  as  ashes,  contrite,  sighing, 
Care  for  me  when  I  am  dying! 

Day  of  tears  and  late  repentance, 
Man  shall  rise  to  hear  his  sentence: 
Him,  the  child  of  guilt  and  error. 
Spare,  Lord,  in  that  hour  of  terror! 
Translated  from  the  Latin  of  Tommaso  di  Celano  by 
Abrahavi  Coles  [i 8 13-189 


Stabat  Mater  Dolorosa  3779 


STABAT  MATER  DOLOROSA* 

Stood  the  afflicted  mother  weeping, 
Near  the  cross  her  station  keeping 

Whereon  hung  her  Son  and  Lord; 
Through  whose  spirit  sympathizing, 
Sorrowing  and  agonizing, 

Also  passed  the  cruel  sword. 

Oh!  how  mournful  and  distressed 
Was  that  favored  and  most  blessed 

Mother  of  the  only  Son, 
Trembhng,  grieving,  bosom  heaving, 
While  perceiving,  scarce  beheving, 

Pains  of  that  Illustrious  One! 

Who  the  man,  who,  called  a  brother, 
Would  not  weep,  saw  he  Christ's  mother 

In  such  deep  distress  and  wild? 
Who  could  not  sad  tribute  render 
Witnessing  that  mother  tender 

Agonizing  with  her  child? 

For  His  people's  sins  atoning, 
Him  she  saw  in  torments  groaning, 

Given  to  the  scourger's  rod; 
Saw  her  darling  offspring  dying. 
Desolate,  forsaken,  crying. 

Yield  His  spirit  up  to  God. 

Make  me  feel  thy  sorrow's  power, 
That  with  thee  I  tears  may  shower, 

Tender  mother,  fount  of  love! 
Make  my  heart  with  love  unceasing 
Burn  toward  Christ  the  Lord,  that  pleasing 

I  may  be  to  Him  above. 

Holy  mother,  this  be  granted. 
That  the  slain  one's  wounds  be  planted 
Firmly  in  my  heart  to  bide. 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  sec  page  3821. 


^ySo  Songs  of  Praise 


Of  Him  wounded,  all  astounded — 
Depths  unbounded  for  me  sounded — 
All  the  pangs  with  me  divide. 

Make  me  weep  with  thee  in  union; 
With  the  Crucified,  communion 

In  His  grief  and  suffering  give; 
Near  the  cross,  with  tears  unfailing, 
I  would  join  thee  in  thy  wailing 

Here  as  long  as  I  shall  live. 

Maid  of  maidens,  all  excelling! 
Be  not  bitter,  me  repeUing; 

Make  thou  me  a  mourner  too; 
Make  me  bear  about  Christ's  dying, 
Share  His  passion,  shame  defying; 

All  His  wounds  in  me  renew. 

Wound  for  wound  be  there  created; 
With  the  cross  intoxicated 

For  thy  Son's  dear  sake,  I  pray — 
May  I,  fired  with  pure  affection. 
Virgin,  have  through  thee  protection 

In  the  solemn  Judgment  Day. 

Let  me  by  the  cross  be  warded. 
By  the  death  of  Christ  be  guarded, 

Nourished  by  divine  supplies. 
When  the  body  death  hath  riven, 
Grant  that  to  the  soul  be  given 
Glories  bright  of  Paradise. 
Translated  from  the  Latin  of  Jacopone  da  Todi  by 
Abraham  Coles  [1813-1891] 


VENI,   SANCTE  SPIRITUS* 

Come,  Holy  Ghost!  thou  fire  divine! 
From  highest  heaven  on  us  shine! 
Comforter,  be  Thy  comfort  mine! 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3822. 


Veni,  Sancte  Spiritus  3781 

Come,  Father  of  the  poor,  to  earth; 
Come,  with  Thy  gifts  of  precious  worth; 
Come,  Light  of  all  of  mortal  birth! 

Thou  rich  in  comfort!    Ever  blest 

The  heart  where  Thou  art  constant  guest, 

Who  giv'st  the  heavy-laden  rest. 

Come,  Thou  in  whom  our  toil  is  sweet, 
Our  shadow  in  the  noonday  heat. 
Before  whom  mourning  llieth  fleet. 

Bright  Sun  of  Grace!  Thy  sunshine  dart 
On  all  who  cry  to  Thee  apart, 
And  fill  with  gladness  every  heart. 

Whate'er  without  Thy  aid  is  wrought. 
Or  skilful  deed,  or  wisest  thought, 
God  counts  it  vain  and  merely  naught. 

O  cleanse  us  that  we  sin  no  more. 
O'er  parched  souls  Thy  waters  pour; 
Heal  the  sad  heart  that  acheth  sore. 

Thy  will  be  ours  in  all  our  ways; 
O  melt  the  frozen  with  Thy  rays; 
Call  home  the  lost  in  error's  maze. 

And  grant  us.  Lord,  who  cry  to  Thee, 
And  hold  the  Faith  in  unity. 
Thy  precious  gifts  of  charity; 

That  we  may  live  in  holiness. 
And  find  in  death  our  happiness, 
And  dwell  with  Thee  in  lasting  bhss! 
Translated  from  Ike  Latin  of  Robert  II.  of  France  by 

Catharine  Winkworth  [1827-1878] 


37^^  Songs  of  Praise  ^ 

VENI,   CREATOR  SPIRITUS  * 

Creator  Spirit,  by  whose  aid 
The  world's  foundations  first  were  laid, 
Come  visit  every  pious  mind, 
Come  pour  thy  joys  on  human-kind; 
From  sin  and  sorrow  set  us  free, 
And  make  thy  temples  worthy  thee. 

0  source  of  uncreated  light. 
The  Father's  promised  Paraclete! 
Thrice  holy  fount,  thrice  holy  fire, 
Our  hearts  with  heavenly  love  inspire; 
Come,  and  thy  sacred  unction  bring, 
To  sanctify  us  while  we  sing. 

Plenteous  of  grace,  descend  from  high, 

Rich  in  thy  seven-fold  energy! 

Thou  strength  of  His  Almighty  hand, 

Whose  power  does  heaven  and  earth  command! 

Proceeding  Spirit,  our  defense, 

Who  dost  the  gifts  of  tongues  dispense. 

And  crown'st  thy  gift  with  eloquence!  ,,  ^^^ 

Refine  and  purge  our  earthly  parts; 
But,  O,  inflame  and  fire  our  hearts! 
Our  frailties  help,  our  vice  control, 
Submit  the  senses  to  the  soul; 
And  when  rebellious  they  are  grown. 
Then  lay  thy  hand  and  hold  them  down. 

Chase  from  our  minds  the  infernal  foe. 
And  peace,  the  fruit  of  love,  bestow; 
And,  lest  our  feet  should  step  astray. 
Protect  and  guide  us  in  the  way. 

Make  us  eternal  truths  receive, 
]v.      And  practise  all  that  we  believe; 
Give  us  thyself,  that  we  may  see 
The  Father,  and  the  Son,  by  thee. 

*  For  the  original  of  this  poem  see  page  3823., 


Song  to   David  37^3 

Immortal  honor,  endless  fame, 
Attend  the  Almighty  Father's  name; 
The  Saviour  Son  be  glorified. 
Who  for  lost  man's  redemption  died; 
And  equal  adoration  be, 
Eternal  Paraclete,  to  thee. 
Translated  from  the  Latin  of  St.  Gregory  the  Great{?)  by 
John  Dryden  [ 1 63 1- 1 700] 


STANZAS  FROM  "SONG  TO  DAVID" 

Sublime — invention  ever  young, 
Of  vast  conception,  towering  tongue 

To  God  the  eternal  theme; 
Notes  from  yon  exaltations  caught, 
Unrivaled  royalty  of  thought 

O'er  meaner  strains  supreme. 

His  muse,  bright  angel  of  his  verse, 
Gives  balm  for  all  the  thorns  that  pierce, .' 

For  all  the  pangs  that  rage; 
Blest  light  still  gaining  on  the  gloom. 
The  more  than  Michal  of  his  bloom, 

The  Abishag  of  his  age. 

He  sang  of  God — the  mighty  source 
Of  all  things — the  stupendous  force 

On  which  all  strength  depends; 
From  whose  right  arm,  beneath  whose  eyes. 
All  period,  power,  and  enterprise 

Commences,  reigns,  and  ends. 

Tell  them,  I  am,  Jehovah  said 

To  Moses;  while  earth  heard  in  dread, 

And,  smitten  to  the  heart. 
At  once  above,  beneath,  around. 
All  Nature,  without  voice  or  sound, 

RepHed,  O  Lord,  Thou  art. 


3784  Songs  of  Praise 

The  world,  the  clustering  spheres,  He  made; 
The  glorious  light,  the  soothing  shade, 

Dale,  champaign,  grove,  and  hill; 
The  multitudinous  abyss. 
Where  Secrecy  remains  in  bliss, 

And  Wisdom  hides  her  skill. 

The  pillars  of  the  Lord  are  seven. 

Which  stand  from  earth  to  topmost  heaven; 

His  Wisdom  drew  the  plan; 
His  Word  accomplished  the  design, 
From  brightest  gem  to  deepest  mine; 

From  Christ  enthroned,  to  Man. 

For  Adoration  all  the  ranks 
Of  Angels  yield  eternal  thanks, 

And  David  in  the  midst; 
With  God's  good  poor,  which,  last  and  least 
In  man's  esteem,  Thou  to  Thy  feast, 

O  blessed  Bridegroom,  bidd'st! 

For  Adoration,  David's  Psalms 
Lift  up  the  heart  to  deeds  of  alms; 

And  he,  who  kneels  and  chants. 
Prevails  his  passions  to  control, 
Finds  meat  and  medicine  to  the  soul, 

Which  for  translation  pants. 

For  Adoration,  in  the  dome 

Of  Christ,  the  sparrows  find  a  home, 

And  on  His  olives  perch : 
The  swallow  also  dwells  with  thee, 
O  man  of  God's  humihty. 

Within  his  Saviour's  church. 

Sweet  is  the  dew  that  falls  betimes, 
And  drops  upon  the  leafy  limes; 

Sweet,  Hermon's  fragrant  air: 
Sweet  is  the  lily's  silver  bell, 
And  sweet  the  wakeful  tapers'  smell 

That  watch  for  early  prayer. 


Song  to   David  37^5 

Sweet  the  young  nurse,  with  love  intense, 
Which  smiles  o'er  sleeping  innocence;     ; j 

Sweet,  when  the  lost  arrive:  ■ 

Sweet  the  musician's  ardor  beats,  '.'"^ 

While  his  vague  mind's  in  quest  of  sweets, 

The  choicest  flowers  to  hive. 

Strong  is  the  horse  upon  his  speed; 
Strong  in  pursuit  the  rapid  glede, 

Which  makes  at  once  his  game: 
Strong  the  tall  ostrich  on  the  ground; 
Strong  through  the  turbulent  profound!  i /•, 

Shoots  Xiphias  to  his  aim. 

Strong  is  the  lion — like  a  coal 
His  eyeball, — like  a  bastion's  mole 

His  chest  against  the  foes: 
Strong  the  gier-eagle  on  his  sail; 
Strong  against  tide  the  enormous  whale 

Emerges  as  he  goes. 

But  stronger  still,  in  earth  and  air. 
And  in  the  sea,  the  man  of  prayer, 

And  far  beneath  the  tide: 
And  in  the  seat  to  fate  assigned. 
Where  ask  is  have,  where  seek  is  find. 

Where  knock  is  open  wide. 

Precious  the  penitential  tear; 
And  precious  is  the  sigh  sincere. 

Acceptable  to  God: 
And  precious  are  the  winning  flowers. 
In  gladsome  Israel's  feast  of  bowers 

Bound  on  the  hallowed  sod. 

Glorious  the  sun  in  mid  career; 
Glorious  the  assembled  fires  appear; 

Glorious  the  comet's  train: 
Glorious  the  trumpet  and  alarm; 
Glorious  the  Almighty's  stretched-out  arm; 

Glorious  the  enraptured  main; 


3786  Songs  of  Praise 

Glorious  the  northern  hghts  astream; 
Glorious  the  song,  when  God's  the  theme; 

Glorious  the  thunder's  roar: 
Glorious  Hosanna  from  the  den; 
Glorious  the  catholic  Amen; 

Glorious  the  martyr's  gore: 

Glorious — more  glorious — is  the  crown 
Of  Him  that  brought  salvation  down, 

By  meekness  called  thy  Son: 
Thou  that  stupendous  truth  believed; — 
And  now  the  matchless  deed's  achieved, 

Determined,  dared,  and  done! 

Christopher  Smart  [  1 7  2  2- 1 7  7 1] 


NOX  NOCTI  INDICAT  SCIENTIAM 

When  I  survey  the  bright 

Celestial  sphere; 
So  rich  with  jewels  hung,  that  night 
Doth  Kke  an  Ethiop  bride  appear: 

My  soul  her  wings  doth  spread 
And  heavenward  flies, 
The  Almighty's  mysteries  to  read 
In  the  large  volumes  of  the  skies. 

For  the  bright  firmament 
Shoots  forth  no  i^ame 
So  silent,  but  is  eloquent 
In  speaking  the  Creator's  name. 

No  unregarded  star 
Contracts  its  light 
Into  so  small  a  character, 

Removed  far  from  our  human  sight. 

But  if  we  steadfast  look 
We  shall  discern 
In  it,  as  in  some  holy  book, 

How  man  may  heavenly  knowledge  learn. 


"The  Spacious   Firmament  on   High"    37^7 

It  tells  the  conqueror 

That  far-stretched  power, 
Which  his  proud  dangers  traffic  for, 
Is  but  the  triumph  of  an  hour; 

That  from  the  farthest  North, 
Some  nation  may, 
Yet  undiscovered,  issue  forth, 

And  o'er  his  new-got  conquest  sway: 

Some  nation  yet  shut  in 
With  hills  of  ice 
May  be  let  out  to  scourge  his  sin, 
Till  they  shall  equal  him  in  vice. 

a 

And  then  they  likewise  shall 
Their  ruin  have; 
For  as  yourselves  your  empires  fall, 
And  every  kingdom  hath  a  grave.    .^ 

Thus  those  celestial  fires. 
Though  seeming  mute, 
The  fallacy  of  our  desires 

And  all  the  pride  of  life  confute: — 

For  they  have  watched  since  first  • 
The  world  had  birth; 
And  found  sin  in  itself  accurst, 
And  nothing  permanent  on  earth. 

William  Hahington  [1605-1654] 


"THE   SPACIOUS   FIRMAMENT  ON  HIGH" 

From  "  The  Spectator,"  No.  465 

The  spacious  firmament  on  high. 

With  all  the  blue  ethereal  sky, 

And  spangled  heavens,  a  shining  frame, 

Their  great  Original  proclaim. 

The  unwearied  Sun,  from  day  to  day, 

Does  his  Creator's  power  display; 


37^8  Songs  of  Praise  i 

And  publishes  to  every  land 
The  work  of  an  Almighty  hand. 

Soon  as  the  evening  shades  prevail, 
The  Moon  takes  up  the  wondrous  tale; 
And  nightly  to  the  listening  Earth 
Repeats  the  story  of  her  birth: 
Whilst  all  the  stars  that  round  her  burn, 
And  all  the  planets  in  their  turn, 
Confirm  the  tidings  as  they  roll 
And  spread  the  truth  from  pole  to  pole. 

What  though,  in  solemn  silence,  all 
Move  round  the  dark  terrestrial  ball? 
What  though  nor  real  voice  nor  sound 
Amidst  their  radiant  orbs  be  found? 
In  Reason's  ear  they  all  rejoice. 
And  utter  forth  a  glorious  voice; 
For  ever  singing  as  they  shine, 
"The  Hand  that  made  us  is  divine." 

Joseph  Addison  [1672-1710] 


UNIVERSAL  PRAYER 

DEO.    OPT.    MAX. 

Father  of  all!  in  every  age, 

In  every  clime  adored, 
By  saint,  by  savage,  and  by  sage, 

Jehovah,  Jove,  or  Lord! 

(1  Thou  Great  First  Cause,  least  understood, 
Who  all  my  sense  confined 
To  know  but  this,  that  Thou  art  good, 
And  that  myself  am  blind; 

Yet  gave  me,  in  this  dark  estate, 

To  see  the  good  from  ill; 
And,  binding  nature  fast  in  fate, 

Left  free  the  human  will. 


Universal  Prayer  37^9 

What  conscience  dictates  to  be  done, 

Or  warns  me  not  to  do, 
This,  teach  me  more  than  hell  to  shun. 

That,  more  than  heaven  pursue. 

What  blessings  Thy  free  bounty  gives 

Let  me  not  cast  away; 
For  God  is  paid  when  man  receives, 

To  enjoy  is  to  obey. 

Yet  not  to  earth's  contracted  span 
'^'   Thy  goodness  let  me  bound, 
Or  think  Thee  Lord  alone  of  man, 
When  thousand  worlds  are  round: 

Let  not  this  weak,  unknowing  hand 

Presume  Thy  bolts  to  throw 
And  deal  damnation  round  the  land 

On  each  I  judge  Thy  foe. 

If  I  am  right,  Thy  grace  impart 

Still  in  the  right  to  stay; 
If  I  am  wrong,  O,  teach  my  heart 

To  find  that  better  way! 

Save  me  aUke  from  foolish  pride 

And  impious  discontent 
At  aught  Thy  wisdom  has  denied. 

Or  aught  Thy  goodness  lent. 

Teach  me  to  feel  another's  woe, 

To  hide  the  fault  I  see; 
That  mercy  I  to  others  show, 

That  mercy  show  to  me. 

Mean  though  I  am,  not  wholly  so, 

Since  quickened  by  Thy  breath; 
0,  lead  me,  whercso'cr  I  go, 

Through  this  day's  life  or  death! 


j,790  Songs  of  Praise 

This  day  be  bread  and  peace  my  lot; 

All  else  beneath  the  sun,   '''"'  '^^' 
Thou  know'st  if  best  bestowed  or  hot, 

And  let  Thy  will  be  done. 

To  Thee,  whose  temple  is  aU  space, 

Whose  altar  earth,  sea,  skies, 
One  chorus  let  all  Being  raise, 

All  Nature's  incense  rise! 

Alexander  Pope  [1688-1744] 

"O  GOD!   OUR  HELP  IN  AGES   PAST" 

O  God!  our  help  in  ages  past. 

Our  hope  for  years  to  come, 
Our  shelter  from  the  stormy  blast. 

And  our  eternal  home!  '''.'. 

Under  the  shadow  of  Thy  Throne     ,, 
Thy  saints  have  dwelt  secure;     , 

Sufficient  is  Thine  arm  alone, 
And  our  defense  is  sure. 

Before  the  hills  in  order  stood. 

Or  earth  received  her  fame, 
From  everlasting  Thou  art  God, 

To  endless  years  the  same. 

A  thousand  ages  in  Thy  sight 

Are  like  an  evening  gone; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  night 

Before  the  rising  sun. 

Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream, 

Bears  all  its  sons  away; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dreiim 

Dies  at  the  opening  da.y. 

O  God!  our  help  in  ages  past. 

Our  hope  for  years  to  come. 
Be  Thou  our  guide  when  troubles  last, 

And  our  eternal  home! 

Isaac  Waits  [1674-1748] 


"Jesus,   Lover   of  My   Soul"       3791 

"JESUS,   LOVER  OF   MY  SOUL" 

Jesus  lover  of  my  soul, 

Let  me  to  Thy  bosom  fly, 
While  the  nearer  waters  roll. 

While  the  tempest  still  is  high! 
Hide  me,  O  my  Saviour,  hide, 

Till  the  storm  of  life  is  past; 
Safe  into  the  haven  guide, 

Oh  receive  my  soul  at  last! 

Other  refuge  have  I  none. 

Hangs  my  helpless  soul  on  Thee; 
Leave,  ah!  leave  me  not  alone. 

Still  support  and  comfort  me! 
All  my  trust  on  Thee  is  stayed. 

All  my  help  from  Thee  I  bring; 
Cover  my  defenseless  head 

With  the  shadow  of  Thy  wing. 

Wilt  Thou  not  regard  my  call? 

Wilt  Thou  not  accept  my  prayer?  ? 
Lo!  I  sink,  I  faint,  I  fall, — 

Lo!  on  Thee  I  cast  my  care; 
Reach  me  out  Thy  gracious  hand, 

While  I  of  Thy  strength  receive! 
Hoping  against  hope  I  stand, — 

Dying,  and  behold  I  live! 

Thou,  O  Christ,  art  all  I  want; 

More  than  all  in  Thee  I  find: 
Raise  the  fallen,  cheer  the  faint. 

Heal  the  sick,  and  lead  the  blind! 
Just  and  holy  is  Thy  Name; 

I  am  all  unrighteousness; 
False  and  full  of  sin  I  am, 

Thou  art  full  of  truth  and  grace. 

Plenteous  grace  with  Thee  is  found,— 

Grace  to  cover  all  my  sin; 
Let  the  heahng  streams  abound. 

Make  and  keep  me  pure  within: — 


379^  Songs  of  Praise 


Thou  of  life  the  Fountain  art, 

Freely  me  let  take  of  Thee; 
Spring  Thou  up  within  my  heart, 

Rise  to  all  eternity! 

Charles  Wesley  [1707-17? 


"A   CHARGE  TO   KEEP  I  HAVE" 

A  CHARGE  to  keep  I  have, 

A  God  to  glorify, 
A  never-dying  soul  to  save. 

And  fit  it  for  the  sky. 

From  youth  to  hoary  age. 

My  calling  to  fulfil, 
Oh,  may  it  all  my  powers  engage 

To  do  my  Master's  will! 

Arm  me  with  jealous  care 

As  in  Thy  sight  to  live; 
And  oh,  Thy  servant,  Lord,  prepare 

A  strict  account  to  give! 

Help  me  to  watch  and  pray. 

And  on  Thyself  rely. 
Assured,  if  I  my  trust  betray, 

I  shall  forever  die. 

Charles  Wesley  [i 707-1 7? 


CORONATION 

All  hail  the  power  of  Jesus'  name! 

Let  angels  prostrate  fall; 
Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem, 

To  crown  Him  Lord  of  all! 

Let  high-born  seraphs  tune  the  lyre, 

And,  as  they  tune  it.  fall 
Before  His  face  who  tunes  their  choir, 

And  crown  Him  Lord  of  all! 


"Holy,  Holy,  Holy"  3793 

Crown  Him,  ye  morning  stars  of  light, 

Who  fixed  this  floating  ball; 
Now  hail  the  Strength  of  Israel's  might, 

And  crown  Him  Lord  of  all! 

Crown  Him,  ye  martyrs  of  your  God,  f  .vIoH 

Who  from  His  altar  call; 
Extol  the  stem  of  Jesse's  rod. 

And  crown  Him  Lord  of  all ! 

•cr  J       r  T  T'         1  T.l-j  i   ^jjii  1    HI   U'jO 

1  e  seed  of  Israel  s  chosen  race, 

Ye  ransomed  of  the  fall, 
Hail  Him  who  saves  you  by  His  grace, 

And  crown  Him  Lord  of  all! 

Hail  Him,  ye  heirs  of  David'^  line, 

Whom  David  Lord  did  call, 
The  God  incarnate,  Man  divine. 

And  crown  Him  Lord  of  all ! 

Sinners,  whose  love  can  ne'er  forget 

The  wormwood  and  the  gall, 
Go  spread  your  trophies  at  His  feet,      f} 

And  crown  Him  Lord  of  all! 

Let  every  tribe  and  ever>^  tongue 

That  bound  creation's  call, 
Now  shout,  in  universal  song, 

The  Crowned  Lord  of  all! 

Edward  Perro net  [1721-1792] 


"HOLY,  HOLY,  HOLY" 

Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  Almighty! 

Early  in  the  morning  our  songs  shall  rise  to  Thee; 
Holy,  holy,  holy!  merciful  and  mighty! 

God  in  Three  Persons,  Blessed  Trinity! 

Holy,  holy,  holy!  all  the  saints  adore  Thee,  '' 

Casting  down  their  golden  crowns  around  the  glassy  sea, 

Cherubim  and  seraphim  falling  down  before  Thee, 
Who  wert,  and  art,  and  evermore  shalt  be! 


3794  Songs  of  Praise 

Holy,  holy,  holy!  though  the  darkness  hide  Thee, 

Though  the  eye  of  sinful  man  Thy  glory  may  not  see, 

Only  Thou  art  holy,  there  is  none  beside  Thee, 
Perfect  in  power,  in  love,  and  purity! 

Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  Almighty! 

AU  Thy  works  shall  praise  Thy  name  in  earth  and  sky 
and  sea; 
Holy,  holy,  holy!  merciful  and  mighty! 
God  in  Three  Persons,  Blessed  Trinity! 

Reginald  Heber  [1783-1826] 


"THE  SON  OF  GOD   GOES  FORTH  TO  WAR" 

The  Son  of  God  goes  forth  to  war, 

A  kingly  crown  to  gain ; 
His  blood-red  banner  streams  afar! 

Who  follows  in  His  train? 
Who  best  can  drink  his  cup  of  woe. 

Triumphant  over  pain, 
Who  patient  bears  his  cross  below, 

He  follows  in  His  train!       .■•;,    .;,. 

Thy  martyr  first,  whose  eagle '^ye'''''  *' 

Could  pierce  beyond  the  grave; 
Who  saw  his  Master  in  the  sky, 

And  called  on  Him  to  save: 
'■^^^^~' Like  Him,  with  pardon  on  his  tongue, 

In  midst  of  mortal  pain, 
He  prayed  for  them  that  did  the  wrong! 

Who  follows  in  His  train? 

A  glorious  band,  the  chosen  few,-  -' "    ■  L^'   '  ■ 

On  whom  the  Spirit  came; 
Twelve  valiant  saints,  their  Piope  they  knew, 

And  mocked  the  cross  and  flame! 

They  met  the  tyrant's  brandished  steel 

,jif)2  X8SB1     The  lion's  gory  mane:  ) 

•  They  bowed  their  necks,  the  death  to  ie^U.  jijilj 
Who  follows  in  their  train?  ,  ,/■  odW 


From  Greenland's   Icy  Mountains"     3795 

A  noble  army- — men  and  boys, 

The  matron  and  the  maid, — 
Around  the  Saviour's  throne  rejoice 

In  robes  of  light  arrayed. 
They  climbed  the  steep  ascent  of  Heaven, 

Through  perU,  toil,  and  pain! 
O  God!  to  us  may  grace  be  given 

To  follow  in  their  train! 

Regmald  Heber  [i 783-1 826] 


"FROM   GREENLAND'S   ICY  MOUNTAINS' 

From  Greenland's  icy  mountains, 

From  India's  coral  strand; 
Where  Afric's  sunny  fountains 

RoU  down  their  golden  sand: 
From  many  an  ancient  river. 

From  many  a  palmy  plain, 
They  call  us  to  deliver 

Their  land  from  error's  chain. 

What  though  the  spicy  breezes 

Blow  soft  o'er  Ceylon's  isle; 
Though  every  prospect  pleases. 

And  only  man  is  vile: 
In  vain  with  lavish  kindness 

The  gifts  of  God  are  strown; 
The  heathen,  in  his  blindness, 

Bows  down  to  wood  and  stone. 

Can  we,  whose  souls  are  lighted 
With  wisdom  from  on  high — 

Can  we,  to  men  benighted. 
The  lamp  of  life  deny? 

Salvation!  oh,  salvation! 
The  joyful  sound  proclaim; 

Till  each  remotest  nation 
[0081-1  Has  learnt  Messiah's  Name. 


2 -7^6  Songs  of  Praise 


Waft,  waft,  ye  winds,  His  story, 

And  you,  ye  waters,  roll, 
Till,  like  a  sea  of  glory, 

It  spreads  from  pole  to  pole; 
Till  o'er  our  ransomed  nature, 

The  Lamb  for  sinners  slain, 
Redeemer,  King,  Creator, 

In  bliss  returns  to  reign. 

Reginald  Heber  [1783-1826] 


LIGHT   SHINING  OUT  OF  DARKNESS 

God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way, 

His  wonders  to  perform; 
He  plants  His  footsteps  in  the  sea, 

And  rides  upon  the  storm. 

Deep  in  unfathomable  mines 

Of  never-failing  skill 
He  treasures  up  His  bright  designs. 

And  works  His  sovereign  will. 

Ye  fearful  saints,  fresh  courage  take; 

The  clouds  ye  so  much  dread 
Are  big  with  mercy,  and  shall  break 

In  blessings  on  your  head. 

Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  sense, 

But  trust  Him  for  His  grace; 
Behind  a  frowning  Providence 

He  hides  a  smiling  face. 

His  purposes  will  ripen  fast, 

Unfolding  every  hour; 
The  bud  may  have  a  bitter  taste. 

But  sweet  will  be  the  flower. 

Blind  unbelief  is  sure  to  err. 

And  scan  His  work  in  vain; 
God  is  His  own  interpreter. 

And  He  will  make  it  plain. 

William  Cow  per  [i  731-1800] 


Love  to  the  Church  3797 


ROCK  OF  AGES 

Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee! 
Let  the  water  and  the  blood. 
From  Thy  riven  side  which  flowed, 
Be  of  sin  the  double  cure- 
Cleanse  me  from  its  guilt  and  power. 

Not  the  labors  of  my  hands 
Can  fulfil  Thy  law's  demands; 
Could  my  zeal  no  respite  know, 
Could  my  tears  for  ever  flow, 
Afl  for  sin  could  not  atone^ 
Thou  must  save,  and  Thou  alone. 

Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring — 
Simply  to  Thy  Cross  I  cling; 
Naked  come  to  Thee  for  dress — 
Helpless  look  to  Thee  for  grace; 
Foul,  I  to  the  Fountain  fly — 
Wash  me,  Saviour,  or  I  die! 

While  I  draw  this  fleeting  breath. 
When  my  eye-strings  break  in  death, 
When  I  soar  to  worlds  unknown, 
See  Thee  on  Thy  judgment-throne, 
Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee! 

Augustus  Montague  Toplady  [1740-1778] 


LOVE  TO  THE   CHURCH 

I  LOVE  Thy  kingdom,  Lord, 
The  house  of  Thine  abode. 

The  cliurch  our  blest  Redeemer  saved 
With  His  own  precious  blood. 


379^  ri   Songs  of  Praise 

I  love  Thy  church,  O  God! 

Her  walls  before  Thee  stand, 
Dear  as  thfe  apple  of  Thine  eye. 

And  graven  on  Thy  hand. 

If  e'er  to  bless  Thy  sons  ^^ 

My  voice  or  hands  deny, 
These  hands  let  useful  skiU  forsake, ' 

This  voice  in  silence  die. 

For  her  my  tears  shall  fall. 

For  her  my  prayers  ascend; 
To  her  my  cares  and  toils  be  given' 

Till  toils  and  cares  shall  end.       ' 

Beyond  my  highest  joy 

I  prize  her  heavenly  ways. 
Her  sweet  communion,  solemn  vows, 

Her  hymns  of  love  and  praise. 

Jesus,  Thdxl  FHerid  divine. 

Our  Saviour  and  our  King, 
Thy  hand  from  every  snare  and  foie  ' 

Shall  great  deliverance  bring. 

Sure  as  thy  Truth  shaU  last. 

To  Zion  shall  be  given 
The  brightest  glories  earth  can  yield, 
And  brighter  bliss  of  heaven. 
From  the  Latin  of  St.  Ambrose  by  Timothy  Dwight  [175  2-1 817] 

GOOD  TIDINGS  OF  GREAT  JOY  TO  ALL  PEOPLE 

Angels  from  the  realms  of  glory, 
Wing  your  flight  o'er  all  the  earth; 

Yp  who  sang  creation's  story 
Now  proclaim  Messiah's  birth; 

Come  and  worship,  T 

Worship  Christ,  the  new-bom  King. 


Christ   Our   Example  in   Suffering     3799 

Shepherds,  in  the  fields  abiding, 
Watching  o'er  your  flocks  by  night, 

God  with  man  is  now  residing, 
Yonder  shines  the  infant-light; 
Come  and  worship;  ' 

Worship  Christ,  the  new-born  King. 

Sages,  leave  your  contemplations, 

Brighter  visions  beam  afar; 
Seek  the  great  Desire  of  Nations; 

Ye  have  seen  His  natal-star; 
Come  and  worship; 
Worship  Christ,  the  new-born  King. 

Saints,  before  the  altar  bending, 

Watching  long  in  hope  and  fear 
Suddenly,  the  Lord  descending. 

In  His  temple  shall  appear; 
Come  and  worship; 
Worship  Christ,  the  new-born  King. 

Sinners,  wrung  with  true  repentance, 
Doomed,  for  guilt,  to  endless  pains. 
Justice  now  revokes  the  sentence, 
Mercy  calls  you — break  your  chains; 
Come  and  worship; 
Worship  Christ,  the  new-born  King. 

James  Montgomery  [17  71-1854] 

Lj.'.;^  vir-  ■       .    i 
CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE  IN  SUFFERING 

Go  to  dark  Gethsemane, 
Ye  that  feel  the  tempter's  power; 

Your  Redeemer's  conflict  sec, 
Watch  with  Him  one  bitter  hour; 

Turn  not  from  His  griefs  away, 

Learn  of  Jesus  Christ  to  pray ! 

Follow  to  the  judgment  hall, 
View  the  Lord  of  Life  arraigned; 

O  the  wormwood  and  the  gall! 
O  the  pangs  His  soul  sustained! 


>oo  Songs  of  Praise         j';;iir!") 

Shun  not  suffering,  shame,  or  loss, — 
Learn  of  Him  to  bear  the  cross! 

Calvary's  mournful  mountain  climb; 

There,  adoring  at  His  feet, 
Mark  that  miracle  of  time, 

God's  own  sacrifice  complete! 
"It  is  finished!"  hear  the  cry; 
Learn  of  Jesus  Christ  to  die! 

Early  hasten  to  the  tomb 

Where  they  laid  His  breathless  clay; 
All  is  solitude  and  gloom; 

Who  hath  taken  Him  away? 
Christ  is  risen!    He  meets  our  eyes! 
•     Saviour,  teach  us  so  to  rise! 

James  Montgomery  [1771-1854] 


''JUST  AS   I  AM" 

Just  as  I  am,  without  one  plea 
But  that  Thy  blood  was  shed  for  me. 
And  that  Thou  bid'st  me  come  to  Thee, 
O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 

Just  as  I  am,  and  waiting  not 
To  rid  my  soul  of  one  dark  blot. 
To  Thee,  whose  blood  can  cleanse  each  spot, 
O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 

Just  as  I  am,  though  tossed  about. 
With  many  a  conflict,  many  a  doubt. 
Fightings  and  fears  within,  without, 

O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 

Just  as  I  am,  poor,  wretched,  blind; 
Sight,  riches,  healing  of  the  mind. 
Yea,  all  I  need,  in  Thee  to  find, 

O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 


"Blest   Be  the  Tie  That   Binds"     3801 

Just  as  I  am,  Thou  wilt  receive, 

Wilt  welcome,  pardon,  cleanse,  relieve; 

Because  Thy  promise  I  believe, 

O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 

Just  as  I  am — Thy  love  unknown 
Has  broken  every  barrier  down; 
Now  to  be  Thine,  yea.  Thine  alone, 

O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 

Just  as  I  am,  of  that  free  love. 

The  breadth,  length,  depth,  and  height  to  prove, 

Here  for  a  season,  then  above, 

O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 

Charlotte  Elliott  [  1 7  89- 1 8  7 1  ] 

"BLEST  BE  THE  TIE  THAT  BINDS" 

Blest  be  the  tie  that  binds 

Our  hearts  in  Jesus'  love; 
The  fellowship  of  Christian  minds 

Is  like  to  that  above. 

Before  our  Father's  throne 

We  pour  united  prayers; 
Our  fears,  our  hopes,  our  aims,  are  one, 

Our  comforts,  and  our  cares. 

We  share  our  mutual  woes. 

Our  mutual  burdens  bear. 
And  often  for  each  other  flows 

The  sympathizing  tear. 

When  we  at  death  must  part, 

Not  like  the  world's  our  pain; 
But  one  in  Christ,  and  one  in  heart, 

We  part  to  meet  again. 

From  sorrow,  toil,  and  pain, 

And  sin,  we  shall  be  free; 
And  perfect  love  and  friendship  reign 

Throughout  eternity. 

John  Fawcelt  [1740-1817] 


3802  Songs  of  Praiseg   -tp^fff 


'IN  THE   CROSS   OF   CHRIST  I   GLORY" 

In  the  Cross  of  Christ  I  glory, 
Towering  o'er  the  wrecks  of  time, 

All  the  light  of  sacred  story 

Gathers  round  its  head  sublime. 

When  the  woes  of  life  o'ertake  me, 
Hopes  deceive,  and  fears  annoy, 

Never  shall  the  Cross  forsake  me^*  izu\ 
Lo !  it  grows  with  peace  and  joy. 

When  the  sun  of  bliss  is  beaming 

Light  and  love  upon  my  way, 
From  the  Cross  the  radiance  streaming 
• .. ,  .  ^Adds  more  luster  to  the  day. 

Bane  and  blessing,  pain  and  pleasure, 

By  the  Cross  are  sanctified: 
Peace  is  there  that  knows  no  measure, 

Joys,  that  through  all  time  abide. 

In  the  Cross  of  Christ  I  glory. 
Towering  o'er  the  wrecks  of  time. 

All  the  light  of  sacred  story 

Gathers  round  its  head  sublime. 

John  Bowring  [179 2- 1872] 


"ABIDE  WITH  ME" 

Abide  with  me!     Fast  falls  the  eventide; 
The  darkness  deepens:  Lord,  with  me  abide! 
When  other  helpers  fail,  and  comforts  flee. 
Help  of  the  helpless,  O  abide  with  me! 

Swift  to  its  close  ebbs  out  hfe's  httle  day; 
Earth's  joys  grow  dim;  its  glories  pass  away: 
Change  and  decay  in  all  around  I  see; 
O Thou,  who  changest  not,  abide  with  me! 


The   Hour  of  Peaceful   Rest       3803 

Not  a  brief  glance,  I  beg,  a  passing  word, 
But,  as  Thou  dwell'st  with  Thy  disciples,  Lord, 
FamiHar,  condescending,  patient,  free, — 
Come,  not  to  sojourn,  but  abide,  with  me! 

Come  not  in  terrors,  as  the  King  of  kings; 
But  kind  and  good,  \vith  healing  in  Thy  wings: 
Tears  for  all  woes,  a  heart  for  every  plea; 
Come,  Friend  of  sinners,  and  abide  with  me! 

Thou  on  my  head  in  early  youth  didst  smile. 
And,  though  rebellious  and  perverse  meanwhile, 
Thou  hast  not  left  me,  oft  as  I  left  Thee: 
On  to  the  close,  O  Lord,  abide  with  me! 

I  need  Thy  presence  every  passing  hour. 
What  but  Thy  grace  can  foil  the  tempter's  power? 
Who  like  Thyself  my  guide  and  stay  can  be? 
Through  cloud  and  sunshine,  O  abide  with  me! 

I  fear  no  foe  with  Thee  at  hand  to  bless: 
Ills  have  no  weight,  and  tears  no  bitterness. 
Where  is  death's  sting,  where,  grave,  thy  victory? 
I  triumph  still,  if  Thou  abide  with  me. 

Hold  then  Thy  cross  before  my  closing  eyes; 
Shine  through  the  gloom,  and  point  me  to  the  skies: 
Heaven's  morning  breaks,  and  earth's  vain  shadows  flee: 
In  life  and  death,  O  Lord,  abide  with  me! 

Henry  Francis  Lyte  [1793-1847] 


THE  HOUR  OF  PEACEFUL  REST 

There  is  an  hour  of  peaceful  rest 
.•■■  ■     To  mourning  wanderers  given; 
There  is  a  joy  for  souls  distressed, 
A  balm  for  every  wounded  breast, 
'Tis  found  alone  in  heaven. 


3804.  Songs  of  Praise        j  V 

There  is  a  soft,  a  downy  bed,       •■  ■  '-.'nu  i:  trr/" 

Far  from  these  shades  of  even — 
A  couch  for  weary  mortals  spread, 
Where  they  may  rest  the  aching  head, 
And  find  repose,  in  heaven. 

There  is  a  home  for  weary  souls  ; 

By  sin  and  sorrow  driven;  tibjT 

When  tossed  on  life's  tempestuous  shoals,  .,n;(.') 
Where  storms  arise,  and  ocean  rolls. 

And  all  is  drear  but  heaven. 

There  faith  lifts  up  her  cheerful  eye, 

To  brighter  prospects  given; 
And  views  the  tempest  passing  by, 
The  evening  shadows  quickly  fly. 

And  all  serene  in  heaven. 

There  fragrant  flowers  immortal  bloom,  ' 

And  joys  supreme  are  given;  ' 

There  rays  divine  disperse  the  gloom: 

Beyond  the  confines  of  the  tomb  T 

Appears  the  dawn  of  heaven.  ' 

William  Bingham  Tappan  [1794-1849] 


THE   PILLAR  OF  THE   CLOUD 

Lead,  kindly  Light,  amid  the  encircling  gloom,       , 
Lead  Thau  me  on!  -.,    , 

The  night  is  dark,  and  I  am  far  from  home — . 
Lead  Thou  me  on! 

Keep  Thou  my  feet;  I  do  not  ask  to  see 

The  distant  scene, — one  step  enough  for  me. 

I  was  not  ever  thus,  nor  prayed  that  Thou 

Shouldst  lead  me  on. 
I  loved  to  choose  and  see  my  path;  but  now 

Lead  Thou  me  on! 
I  loved  the  garish  day,  and,  spite  of  fears. 
Pride  ruled  my  will:  remember  not  past  years. 


"Nearer  to  Thee"  3805 

So  long  Thy  power  hath  blessed  me,  sure  it  still 

Will  lead  me  on, 
O'er  moor  and  fen,  o'er  crag  and  torrent,  till 

The  night  is  gone; 
And  with  the  morn  those  angel  faces  smile 
Which  I  have  loved  long  since,  and  lost  awhile. 

John  Henry  Neivman  [i8oi-i8go] 


"NEARER  TO  THEE" 

Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee, 

Nearer  to  Thee! 
E'en  though  it  be  a  cross 

That  raiseth  me; 
Still  all  my  song  shall  be, 
Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee, 

Nearer  to  Thee ! 

Though  like  the  wanderer. 

The  sun  gone  down. 
Darkness  be  over  me. 

My  rest  a  stone; 
Yet  in  my  dreams  I'd  be 
Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee, 

Nearer  to  Thee! 

There  let  the  way  appear 

Steps  unto  heaven; 
All  that  Thou  send'st  to  me 

In  mercy  given; 
Angels  to  beckon  me 
Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee, 

Nearer  to  Thee ! 

Then,  with  my  waking  thoughts 
Bright  with  *rhy  praise, 

Out  of  my  stony  griefs 
Bethel  I'll  raise; 

So  by  my  woes  to  be 

Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee, 
Nearer  to  Thee! 


3806  Songs  of  Praise 

L.       i       Or  if  on  joyful  wing  ■'  '  ".;    '-' 

Cleaving  the  sky, 
Sun,  moon,  and  stars  forgot, 

Upward  I  fly, 
Still  all  my  song  shall  be,       rlji//  {jfj/^ 
rx  Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee,     '  "  ,i.  ..rn 

Nearer  to  Thee! 

Sarah  Flower  Adams  [1805-184 

"A  MIGHTY  FORTRESS  IS  OUR  GOD"* 

A  MIGHTY  fortress  is  our  God, 

A  bulwark  never  failing; 
Our  helper  He  amid  the  flood 
Of  mortal  ills  prevailing. 
For  stiU  our  ancient  foe 
Doth  seek  to  work  us  woe; 
His  craft  and  power  are  great. 
And,  armed  with  cruel  hate, 
On  earth  is  not  his  equal. 

Did  we  in  our  own  strength  confide, 

Our  striving  would  be  losing, — 
Were  not  the  right  man  on  our  side, 
The  man  of  God's  own  choosing. 
Dost  ask  who  that  may  be? 
Christ  Jesus,  it  is  He, 
Lord  Sabaoth  His  name, 
From  age  to  age  the  same. 
And  He  must  win  the  battle. 

And  though  this  world,  with  devils  filled, 

Should  threaten  to  undo  us. 
We  will  not  fear,  for  God  hath  willed 
His  truth  to  triumph  through  us. 
The  Prince  of  Darkness  grim, — 
We  tremble  not  for  him; 
His  rage  we  can  endure. 
For  lo!  his  doom  is  sure: 
One  little  word  shall  fell  him. 
*For  the  original  of  this  poem,  see  page  3831. 


Prayer  to  the  Irinity  3807 

That  word  above  all  earthly  powers, 

No  thanks  to  them,  abideth; 
The  spirit  and  the  gifts  are  ours 
Through  Him  who  with  us  sideth.' 
Let  goods  and  kindred  go, 
This  mortal  life  also; 
The  body  they  may  kill, 
God's  truth  abideth  still. 
His  Kingdom  is  forever. 
From  the  German  of  Martin  Luther,  by 

Frederick  Henry  Hedge  [i8o5-i8go] 


PRAYER  TO  THE  TRINITY 

Lead  us,  heavenly  Father,  lead  us 

O'er  the  world's  tempestuous  sea; 

Guard  us,  guide  us,  keep  us,  feed  us. 

For  we  have  no  help  but  Thee; 

Yet  po=;sessing 

Every  blessing, 

If  our  God  our  Father  be. 

Saviour,  breathe  forgiveness  o'er  us; 
All  our  weakness  Thou  dost  know ; 
Thou  didst  tread  this  earth  before  us. 
Thou  didst  feel  its  keenest  woe; 
Lone  and  dreary, 
Faint  and  weary. 
Through  the  desert  Thou  didst  go. 

Spirit  of  our  God,  descending. 

Fill  our  hearts  with  heavenly  joy, 
Love  with  every  passion  blending. 
Pleasure  that  can  never  cloy: 
Thus  provided, 
Pardoned,  guided. 
Nothing  can  our  peace  destroy. 

James  Edmeston  [1701-1867] 


ogoS  Songs  of  Praise 


■■:■■■■      r      f.fr-..      ''r    v,/.;,:  -,.,    •.    :,rfT 

IN    SORROW 

Gently,  Lord,  oh,  gently  lead  us, 

Pilgrims  in  this  vale  of  tears. 
Through  the  trials  yet  decreed  us. 

Till  our  last  great  change  appears. 
When  temptation's  darts  assail  us, 

When  in  devious  paths  we  stray. 
Let  Thy  goodness  never  fail  us. 

Lead  us  in  Thy  perfect  way. 

In  the  hour  of  pain  and  anguish. 

In  the  hour  when  death  draws  near, 
Suffer  not  our  hearts  to  languish. 

Suffer  not  our  souls  to  fear; 
And,  when  mortal  hfe  is  ended. 

Bid  us  in  Thine  arms  to  rest. 
Till,  by  angel  bands  attended, 

We  awake  among  the  blest. 

.     Thomas  Hastings  [1784-187 2] 


"JUST  FOR  TO-DAY" 

Lord,  for  to-morrow  and  its  needs, 

I  do  not  pray: 
Keep  me,  my  God,  from  stain  of  sin, 

Just  for  to-day; 
Let  me  no  wrong  or  idle  word 

Unthinking  say: 
Set  Thou  a  seal  upon  my  lips. 

Just  for  to-day. 

Let  me  both  diligently  work, 

And  duly  pray; 
Let  me  be  kind  in  word  and  deed, 

Just  for  to-day ; 
Let  me  in  season,  Lord,  be  grave. 

In  season,  gay; 
Let  me  be  faithful  to  Thy  grace. 

Just  for  to-day. 


Lovest  Thou   Me?  3^09 

In  pain  and  sorrow's  cleansing  fires, 

Brief  be  my  stay; 
Oh,  bid  me  if  to-day  I  die, 

Come  home  to-day; 
So,  for  to-morrow  and  its  needs, 

I  do  not  pray; 
But  keep  me,  guide  me,  love  me.  Lord, 

Just  for  to-day. 

Sybil  F.  Partridge  [18    -       ] 


LOVEST  THOU  ME? 

Hark,  my  soul!  it  is  the  Lord; 
'Tis  thy  Saviour,  hear  his  word; 
Jesus  speaks,  and  speaks  to  thee; 
"  Say,  poor  sinner,  lov'st  thou  me? 

"I  delivered  thee  when  bound, 
And,  when  wounded,  healed  thy  wound; 
Sought  thee  wandering,  set  thee  right, 
Turned  thy  darkness  into  light. 

"  Can  a  woman's  tender  care 
Cease,  towards  the  child  she  bare? 
Yes,  she  may  forgetful  be, 
Yet  will  I  remember  thee. 

"Mine  is  an  michanging  love, 
Higher  than  the  heights  above; 
Deeper  than  the  depths  beneath, 
Free  and  faithful,  strong  as  death. 

"Thou  shalt  see  my  glory  soon, 
When  the  work  of  grace  is  done; 
Partner  of  my  throne  shalt  be; 
Say,  poor  sinner,  lov'st  thou  me?" 

Lord,  it  is  my  chief  complaint, 
That  my  love  is  weak  and  faint ; 
Yet  I  love  thee  and  adore. 
Oh  for  grace  to  love  thee  more! 

William  Cow  per  [i  731 -1800] 


3810  Songs  of  Praise 

,c'y  —TO?  hr"  n'i"r\  rrT 

THE  VOICE  FROM   GALILEE 

I  HEARD  the  voice  of  Jesus  say, 

"  Come  unto  Me  and  rest; 
Lay  down,  thou  weary  one,  lay  down 

Thy  head  upon  My  breast." 
I  came  to  Jesus  as  I  was, 
(       ._    p ,    Weary,  and  worn,  and  sad, 
I  found  in  Him  a  resting-place, 

And  He  has  made  me  glad. 

I  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  say, 

"Behold,  I  freely  give 
The  living  water, — thirsty  one. 

Stoop  down,  and  drink,  and  live."^''l 
I  came  to  Jesus  and  I  drank 

Of  that  life-giving  stream; 
My  thirst  was  quenched,  my  soul  revived, 

And  now  I  live  in  Him. 

I  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  say, 

"I  am  this  dark  world's  Light; 
Look  unto  Me,  thy  morn  shall  rise, 

And  all  thy  day  be  bright." 
I  looked  to  Jesus,  and  I  found 

In  Him,  my  Star,  my  Sun; 
And  in  that  Light  of  life  I'll  walk    ,  . 

Till  traveling  days  be  done.    '  "     ''^ 

Horatiiis  Bonaf  [1808-1J 


FAITH 

My  faith  looks  up  to  Thee,  '-^^'^ 

Thou  Lamb  of  Calvary,  '-'^^ 

Saviour  divine !  . , ,  j 

Now  hear  me  while  I  pray,  ,,  , 

Take  all  my  guilt  away,  ..^y 

O  let  me  from  this  day  ,ff , 

Be  wholly  Thine! 


He  Standeth  at  the   Door         381 1 

May  Thy  rich  grace  impart       ^' 
Strength  to  my  fainting  heart, 

My  zeal  inspire; 
As  Thou  hast  died  for  me, 
O  may  my  love  for  Thee 
Pure,  warm,  and  changeless  be. — • 

A  living  fire! 

While  hfe's  dark  maze  I  tread, 
And  griefs  around  me  spread, 

Be  Thou  my  guide; 
Bid  darkness  turn  to  day, 
Wipe  sorrow's  tears  away. 
Nor  let  me  ever  stray 

From  Thee  aside. 

When  ends  life's  transient  dream, 
When  death's  cold,  sullen  stream 

Shall  o'er  me  roll; 
Blest  Saviour,  then,  in  love, 
Fear  and  distrust  remove; 
O  bear  me  safe  above, 

A  ransomed  soul! 

Ray  Palmer  [1808-1887] 


HE  STANDETH  AT  THE  DOOR 

In  the  silent  midnight  watches, 

List — thy  bosom  door! 
How  it  knocketh — knocketh — knocketh 

Knocketh  evermore  1 
Say  not  'tis  thy  pulse's  beating: 

'Tis  thy  heart  of  sin; 
'Tis  thy  Saviour  knocks,  and  crieth, 

"Rise,  and  let  Me  in!" 

Death  comes  on  with  reckless  footsteps, 

To  the  hall  and  hut : 
Think  you  Death  will  tarry,  knocking, 

Where  the  door  is  shut? 


3812  Songs  of  Praise".  sH 

Jesus  waiteth — waiteth — waiteth, 

But  the  door  is  fast; 
Grieved,  away  my  Saviour  goeth; 

Death  breaks  in  at  last. 

Then  'tis  time  to  stand  entreating 

Christ  to  let  thee  in : 
At  the  gate  of  Heaven  beating, 

Wailing  for  thy  sin. 
Nay! — alas,  thou  guilty  creature! 

Hast  thou,  then,  forgot? 
Jesus  waited  long  to  know  thee;.. 

Now  He  knows  thee  not. 

Arthur  Cleveland  Coxe  [1818-1896] 


"THERE  IS  A   GREEN  HILL" 

■  f ' 

There  is  a  green  hill  far  away, 

Without  a  city  wall, 
Where  the  dear  Lord  was  crucified. 

Who  died  to  save  us  all. 

We  may  not  know,  we  cannot  tell 

What  pains  He  had  to  bear, 
But  we  believe  it  was  for  us 

He  hung  and  suffered  there. 

He  died  that  we  might  be  forgiven,'^ '  ^ 

He  died  to  make  us  good, 
That  we  might  go  at  last  to  heaven. 

Saved  by  His  precious  blood. 

There  was  no  other  good  enough 

To  pay  the  price  of  sin; 
He  only  could  unlock  the  gate 

Of  heaven,  and  let  us  in. 

O  dearly,  dearly  has  He  loved. 

And  we  must  love  Him  too j 
And  trust  in  His  redeeming  blood, 

And  try  His  works  to  do.  "■"' 

Cecil  Frances  Alexander  [1818-1895] 


Nearer  Home  3813 


NEARER  HOME 

One  sweetly  solemn  thought 

Comes  to  me  o'er  and  o'er; 
I  am  nearer  home  to-day 

Than  I  ever  have  been  before; 

Nearer  my  Father's  house, 

Where  the  many  mansions  be; 
Nearer  the  great  white  throne, 

Nearer  the  crystal  sea ; 

Nearer  the  bound  of  life, 

Where  we  lay  our  burdens  down; 

Nearer  leaving  the  cross! 
Nearer  gaining  the  crown! 

But  lying  darkly  between, 
Winding  down  through  the  night, 

Is  the  silent,  unknown  stream, 
That  leads  at  last  to  the  light. 

Closer  and  closer  my  steps 

Come  to  the  dread  abysm: 
Closer  Death  to  my  lips 

Presses  the  awful  chrism. 

Oh,  if  my  mortal  feet 

Have  almost  gained  the  brink; 
If  it  be  I  am  nearer  home 

Even  to-day  than  I  think; 

Father,  perfect  my  trust ; 

Let  my  spirit  feel  in  death, 
That  her  feet  are  firmly  set"^'^ 

On  the  rock  of  a  hving  faith! 

Phoebe  Cary  [i 824-1 871] 


3814  Songs  of  Praise 

"ONWARD,   CHRISTIAN   SOLDIERS! 

Onward,  Christian  soldiers! 

Marching  as  to  war. 
With  the  Cross  of  Jesus 

Going  on  before. 
Christ  the  Royal  Master  i 

Leads  against  the  foe; 
Forward  into  battle. 

See,  His  banners  go!  1/. 

Onward,  Christian  soldiers! 

Marching  as  to  war. 
With  the  Cross  of  Jesus 
Going  on  before. 

At  the  sign  of  triumph  ''^ 

Satan's  host  doth  flee; 
On,  then.  Christian  soldiers, 

On  to  victory! 
Hell's  foundations  quiver 

At  the  shout  of  praise; 
Brothers,  lift  your  voices, 

Loud  your  anthems  raise!    ■•    ^■■ 
[  JijffT 
Like  a  mighty  army 

Moves  the  Church  of  God; 
Brothers,  we  are  treading 

Where  the  Saints  have  trod; 
We  are  not  divided 

All  one  body  we, 
One  in  hope  and  doctrine. 

One  in  charity.  '''  ' 

:[ 
Crowns  and  thrones  may  perish, 

Kingdoms  rise  and  wane, 
But  the  Church  of  Jesus 

Constant  will  remain;       ■i.^iU^^'q^ 
Gates  of  hell  can  never    ...„  ,.  j 

'Gainst  that  Church  prevail;   •  p 
We  have  Christ's  own  promise, , 
[i^Ei-i  ^^^  ^^^^  cannot  fail. 


Evening  3815 

Onward,  then,  ye  people! 
Join  our  happy  throng, 
Blend  with  ours  your  voices 

In  the  triumph  song;  ,  .^i  ,^>ir 

Glory,  laud,  and  honor 

Unto  Christ  the  King,    .  j 

This  through  countless  ages 
Men  and  angels  sing. 

Onward,  Christian  soldiers!         :; 
Marching  as  to  war, 
•"':>'  ''With  the  Cross  of  Jesus 
aim  21  at:    Going  on  before. 

Sabine  Baring-Gould  (1834- 


EVENING 

Softly  now  the  light  of  day 
Fades  upon  my  sight  away; 
Free  from  care,  from  labor  free. 
Lord,  I  would  commune  with  Thee:     ' 

Thou,  whose  all-pervading  eye 
Naught  escapes,  without,  withinp'^  ^^T 
Pardon  each  infirmity,  '^f^l 

Open  fault,  and  secret  sin.  '  uorfT 

Soon,  for  me,  the  light  of  day 

Shall  for  ever  pass  away; 

Then,  from  sin  and  sorrow  free, 

Take  me.  Lord,  to  dwell  with  Thee:     ;I 

Thou,  who,  sinless,  yet  hast  known 
All  of  man's  infirmity;  n 

Then,  from  Thine  eternal  throne, 
Jesus,  look  with  pitying  eye. 

George  Washington  Pgane  [1799-1859] 
-Ed8i]  >,.v 


diHf 


A  DEDICATION 

My  new-cut  ashlar  takes  the  light 

Where  crimson-blank  the  windows  flare; 

By  my  own  work,  before  the  night, 
Great  Overseer,  I  make  my  prayer. 

If  there  be  good  in  that  I  wrought, 
Thy  hand  compelled  it.  Master,  Thine; 

Where  I  have  failed  to  meet  Thy  thought 
I  know,  through  Thee,  the  blame  is  mine. 

One  instant's  toil  to  Thee  denied 

Stands  all  Eternity's  offence; 
Of  that  I  did  with  Thee  to  guide 

To  Thee,  through  Thee,  be  excellence. 

Who,  lest  all  thought  of  Eden  fade, 
Bringest  Eden  to  the  craftman's  brain. 

Godlike  to  muse  o'er  his  own  trade 

And  manlike  stand  with  God  again. " 

.  M-IT 
The  depth  and  dream  of  my  desire,    ^.^ 

The  bitter  paths  wherein  I  stray. 

Thou  knowest  Who  hast  made  the  Fire, 

Thou  knowest  Who  hast  made  the  Clay. 

One  stone  the  more  swings  to  her  place 
In  that  dread  Temple  of  Thy  wortl>-p- 

It  is  enough  that  through  Thy  grace  ^/p 
I  saw  naught  common  on  Thy  earth. 

Take  not  that  vision  from  my  ken ;     .  / . 

O,  whatso'er  may  spoil  or  speed,     ■  i 
Help  me  to  need  no  aid  from  men,      A 

That  I  may  help  such  men  as  need ! 

Rudyard  Kipling  [1865- 


3816 


APPENDIX 

CONTAINING   A   FEW   OF  THE    MORE    FAMOUS 
POEMS  IN  OTHER  LANGUAGES,  OF  WHICH 
TRANSLATIONS  OR  PARAPHRASES  OC- 
CUR  IN  THE   FOREGOING   PAGES 


'VlimATVLOD 

11  8Mao<i 


APPENDIX 

DIES  IR^* 

Dies  ir*,  dies  illa,  dies  tribulationis  ct  anguslia;,  dies  calamilalis  el  misericr, 
dies  tencbrarum  el  caliginis,  dies  nebula:  el  lurbinis,  dies  tuba  ct  clangoris  super 
civitates  munilas  el  super  angulos  excelsos  1 — Sophonias  i.  15,  16. 

Dies  ira>,  dies  ilia! 

Sol  vet  sgeclum  in  fa  villa, 

Teste  David  cum  Sybilla. 

Quantus  tremor  est  futiirus, 
Quando  Judex  est  venturus, 
Cuncta  striate  discussurus! 

Tuba  mirum  spargens  sonum 
Per  sepulcra  regionum, 
Coget  omnes  ante  thronum. 

Mors  stupebit,  et  natura, 
Quum  resurget  creatura, 
Judicanti  responsura. 

Liber  scriptus  proferetur, 
In  quo  totum  continetur, 
Unde  mundus  judicetur. 

Judex  ergo  cum  sedebit, 
Quidquid  latet,  apparebit: 
Nil  inultum  remanebit. 

Quid  sum,  miser!  tunc  dicturus, 
Quem  patronum  rogaturus, 
Quum  vix  Justus  sit  securus? 

Rex  trcmendae  majestatis, 
Qui  salvandos  salvas  gratis, 
Salva  me,  fons  pietatis! 

*  For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  3777. 
3819 


3820  Appendix 

Recordare,  Jesu  pie, 
Quod  sum  causa  tuae  viae; 
Ne  me  perdas  ilia  die! 

Quaerens  me,  sedisti  lassus, 
Redemisti,  crucem  passus: 
Tantus  labor  non  sit  cassus! 

Juste  Judex  ultionis, 
Donum  fac  remissionis 
Ante  diem  rationis! 

Ingemisco  tanquam  reus, 
Culpa  rubet  vultus  meus; 
Supplicanti  parce,  Deus! 

Qui  Mariam  absolvisti, 
Et  latronem  exaudisti, 
Mihi  quoque  spem  dedisti. 

Preces  meae  non  sunt  dignae, 
Sed  tu  bonus  fac  benigne 
Ne  perenni  cremer  igne! 

Inter  oves  locum  praesta, 
Et  ab  haedis  me  sequestra, 
Statuens  in  parte  dextra 


Confutatis  maledictis, 
Flammis  acribus  addictis, 


vbuL 


Voca  me  cum  benedictisT'^ . 

Oro  supplex  et  acclinis, 
Cor  contritum  quasi  cinis, 
Gere  curam  mei  finis! 

Lacrymosa  dies  ilia, 
Qua  resurget  ex  faviM 
Judicandus  homo  reus; 
Huic  ergo  parce,  Deus! 

Tomtniso  di  Celano  [ii8s?-i2S5?] 


Stabat   Mater  Dolorosa  3821 


STABAT  MATER  DOLOROSA* 

Stabat  Mater  dolorosa 
Juxta  crucem  lacrymosa, 

Dum  pendebat  filius; 
Cujus  animam  gementem, 
Contristatam  et  dolcntem, 

Pertransivit  gladius. 

O  quam  tristis  ct  afflicta 
Fuit  ilia  benedicta 

Mater  unigeniti, 
Quae  moerebat  et  dolebat, 
Pia  mater,  dum  videbat 

Nati  poenas  inclyti! 

Quis  est  homo  qui  non  fleret, 
Christi  mat  rem  si  videret 

In  tanto  supplicio? 
Quis  non  posset  contristari 
Piam  matrem  contemplari 

Dolcntem  cum  filio? 

Pro  peccatis  suae  gentis, 
Vidit  Jesum  in  tormentis, 

Et  flagellis  subditum. 
Vidit  suum  dulcem  natum, 
Morientem,  desolatum, 

Dum  emisit  spiritum. 

Eia  mater,  fons  amoris, 
Me  sentire  vim  doloris 

Fac,  ut  tecum  lugeam. 
Fac  ut  ardeat  cor  meum 
In  amando  Christum  Deum, 

Ut  illi  complaceam. 

Sancta  Mater,  istud  agas, 
Crucifixi  fige  plagas 

Cordi  meo  valide. 

*  For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  3779. 


3822  Appendix 

Tui  nati  vulnerati, 
Tarn  dignati  pro  me  pati,      !>. 
Poenas  mecum  divide. 

Fac  me  vere  tecum  flere, 
Crucifixo  condolere, 

Donee  ego  vixero; 
Juxta  crucem  tecum  stare, 
Et  tibi  me  sociare 

In  planctu  desidero. 

Virgo  virginum  praeclara, 
Mihi  jam  non  sis  amara; 

Fac  me  tecum  plangere; 
Fac  ut  portem  Christi  mortem, 
Passionis  fac  consortem, 

Et  plagas  recolere. 

Fac  me  plagis  vulnerari, 
Cruce  hac  inebriari, 

Et  cruore  filii; 
Inflammatus  et  accensus, 
Per  te,  Virgo,  sum  defensus 

In  die  judicii. 

Fac  me  cruce  custodiri, 
Morte  Christi  praemuniri, 

Confoveri  gratia. 
Quando  corpus  morietur, 
Fac  ut  animae  donetur 

Paradisi  gloria. 

Jacopone  da  Todi  [    ?   -1306] 


VENI,   SANCTE   SPIRITUS  * 

Veni,  Sancte  Spiritus, 
Et  emitte  coelitus    ■ 
Lucis  tuaj  radium. 

'■  For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  3780. 


Veni,  Creator  Spiritus  3^'^3 

Veni,  pater  pauperum, 
Veni,  dator  munerum, 
Veni,  lumen  cordium. 

Consolator  optime, 
Dulcis  hospes  animae, 
Dvdce  refrigerium. 

In  labore  requies, 
In  aestu  temperies, 
In  fletu  solatium. 

O  lux  beatissima! 
Reple  cordis  intima, 
Tuorum  fidelium. 

Sine  tuo  numine, 
Nihil  est  in  homine, 
NihU  est  innoxium. 

Lava  quod  est  sordidum, 
Riga  quod  est  aridum, 
Sana  quod  est  saucium, 

Flecte  quod  est  rigidum, 
Fove  quod  est  f rigidum, 
Rege  quod  est  devium. 

Da  tuis  fideUbus, 
In  te  confidentibus, 
Sacrum  septenarium; 

Da  virtutis  meritum. 
Da  salutis  exitum, 
Da  perenne  gaudium! 

Robert  II.  of  France  [971-1031] 

VENI,   CREATOR  SPIRITUS* 

Veni,  Creator  Spiritus, 
Mentes  tuorum  visita, 
Imple  superna  gratia, 
Quae  tu  creasti  pectora. 

*For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  3782. 


3824  Appendix 


Qui  diceris  Paraclitus, 
Altissimi  donum  Dei, 
Fons  vivus,  ignis,  caritas, 
Et  spiritalis  unctio. 

Tu  septiformis  munere, 
Dextra;  Dei  tu  digitus, 
Tu  rite  promissum  Patris, 
Sermone  ditans  guttura.  , 

Accende  lumen  sensibus, 
Infunde  amorem  cordibus, 
Infirma  nostri  corporis 
Virtute  firmans  perpeti. 

Hostem  repellas  longius, 
Pacemque  dones  protinus: 
Ductore  sic  te  pra;vio 
Vitemus  omne  noxium. 

Per  te  sciamus  da  Pat  rem, 
Noscamus  at  que  Filium; 
Te  utriusque  Spiritum 
Credamus  omni  tempore. 

Deo  Patri  sit  gloria 
Et  Filio  qui  a  mortuis 
Surrexit,  ac  Paraclito, 
In  sa^culorum  saecula. 

St.  Gregory  the  Great  (?)  [54o?-6o4] 


URBS  SYON  AUREA  * 

From  "  Hora  Novissima  " 

Urbs  Syon  aurea,  patria  lactea,  cive  decora, 
Omne  cor  obruis,  omnibus  obstruis  et  cor  et  ora. 
Nescio,  nescio,  quae  jubilatio,  lux  tibi  qualis, 
Quam  socialia  gaudia,  gloria  quam  specialis: 
Laude  studens  ea  toUere,  mens  mea  victa  fatiscit: 
O  bona  gloria,  vincor;  in  omnia  laus  tua  vicit. 

*  For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  3689. 


Urbs  Syon   Aurea  3825 

Sunt  Syon  atria  conjubilantia,  martyre  plena, 

Give  micantia,  Principe  stantia,  luce  serena:  . » 

Est  ibi  pascua,  mitibus  afflua,  pra;stita  Sanctis, 

Regis  ibi  thronus,  agminis  et  sonus  est  epulantis. 

Gens  duce  splendida,  concio  Candida  vestibus  albis 

Sunt  sine  tletibus  in  Syon  sedibus,  aedibus  almis; 

Sunt  sine  crimine,  sunt  sine  turbine,  sunt  sine  lite 

In  Syon  sdibus  editioribus  Israelitae. 

Urbs  Syon  inclyta,  gloria  debita  glorificandis, 

Tu  bona  visibus  interioribus  intima  pandis: 

Intima  lumina,  mentis  acumina  te  speculantur, 

Pectora  flammea  spe  modo,  postea  forte  lucrantur. 

Urbs  Syon  unica,  mansio  mystica,  condita  ca^lo, 

Nunc  tibi  gaudeo,  nunc  mihi  lugeo,  tristor,  anhelo: 

Te  qui  corpore  non  queo,  pectore  saepe  penetro, 

Sed  caro  terrea,  terraque  carnea,  mox  cado  retro. 

Nemo  retexere  nemoque  promere  sustinet  ore, 

Quo  tua  mocnia,  quo  capitalia  plena  decore; 

Opprimit  omne  cor  ille  tuus  decor,  o  Syon,  o  pax, 

Urbs  sine  tempore,  nulla  potest  fore  laus  tibi  mendax; 

O  sine  luxibus,  o  sine  luctibus,  o  sine  lite 

Splendida  curia,  florida  patria,  patria  vitai! 

Urbs  Syon  inclyta,  turris  et  edita  littore  tuto, 
Te  peto,  te  colo,  te  ilagro,  te  volo,  canto,  saluto; 
Nee  meritis  peto,  nam  meritis  meto  morte  perire. 
Nee  reticens  tego,  quod  meritis  ego  fillius  ira;: 
Vita  quidem  mea,  vita  nimis  rea,  mortua  vita, 
Quippe  reatibus  exitialibus  obruta,  trita. 
Spe  tamen  ambulo,  pr^mia  postulo  speque  fideque, 
Ilia  perennia  postulo  pra^mia  nocte  dieque. 
Me  Pater  optimus  atque  piissimus  ille  creavit; 
In  lue  pertulit,  ex  lue  sustulit,  a  lue  lavit. 
Gratia  ca?lica  sustinet  unica  totius  orbis 
Parcere  sordibus,  interioribus  unctio  morbis; 
Diluit  omnia  ca^lica  gratia,  fons  David  undans 
Omnia  diluit,  omnibus  affluit,  omnia  mundans: 
O  pia  gratia,  celsa  palatia  cernere  praesta, 
Ut  videam  bona,  festaque  consona,  caelica  festa. 
O  mea,  spes  mea,  tu  Syon  aurea,  clarior  auro. 


3826  '  Appendix 

Agmine  splendida,  stans  duce,  florida  perpete  lauro, 

O  bona  patria,  num  tua  guadia  teque  videbo? 

O  bona  patria,  num  tua  praemia  plena  tenebo? 

Die  mihi,  flagito,  verbaque  reddito,  dicque,  Videbis:     ,^ 

Spem  solidam  gero;  remne  tenens  ero?  die,  Retinebis.  ,; 

O  sacer,  o  pius,  o  ter  et  amplius  ille  beatus, 

Cui  sua  pars  Deus:  o  miser,  o  reus,  hac  viduatus. 

Bernard  of  Clitny  [ii22?-ir56?] 


URBS  BEATA  HIERUSALEM 

.I'Cj:  r 

,  Jr  .  Urbs  beata  Hierusalem, 

Dicta  Pads  Visio, 
Quae  construitur  in  coelis 

Vivis  ex  lapidibus, 
Et  ab  angelis  ornata, 

Ut  sponsata  comite. 

Nova  veniens  e  coelo, 

.Nuptiali  thalamo 
Praeparata,  ut  sponsata 

Copuletur  Domino; 
Plateae  et  muri  ejus 

Ex  auro  purissimo. 

Portae  nitent  margaritis, 

Adytip  paten tibus; 
Et  virtute  meritorum 

Illuc  introducitur 
Omnis  qui  ob  Christi  Nomen 

Hoc  in  mundo  premitur. 


Tunsionibus,  pressuris  , ; 

Expoliti  lapides  ;  1 

Suis  coaptantur  locis  -j 

Per  Manum  Artificis;  huHG. 

Disponuntur  permansuri  <  • 

Sacris  aedificiis. 

*  For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  3693. 


Perslcos  Odi  3^'^'] 


[.o 


Gloria  et  honor  Deo 
Usquequo  Altissimo, 

Una  Patri,  Filioque, 
Inclyto  Paraclito, 

Cui  laus  est  et  potestas 
Per  aeterna  saecula. 


Unknown 


VIVAMUS,   MEA  LESBIA  * 

VivAMUs,  mea  Lesbia,  atque  amemus, 
Rumoresque  senum  severiorum 
Omnes  unius  aestimemus  assis. 
Soles  occidere  et  redire  possunt: 
Nobis,  cum  scmel  occidit  brevis  lux, 
Nox  est  perpetua  una  dormienda. 
Da  mi  basia  mille,  deinde  centum, 
Dein  mille  altera,  dein  secunda  centum, 
Deinde  usque  altera  mille,  deinde  centum. 
Dein,  cum  milia  multa  fecerimus, 
Conturbabimus  ilia,  ne  sciamus, 
Aut  ne  quis  malus  invidere  possit, 
Cum  tantum  sciet  esse  basiorum. 

Gains  Valerius  Catullus  [87  B.  C.P-54  B.  c.?] 

PERSICOS  ODIt 

Persicos  odi, 
Puer,  apparatus; 
Displicent  nexse 
Philyra  corona;: 
Mitte  sectari, 
Rosa  quo  locorum 
Sera  moretur. 

Simplici  myrto 
Nihil  allabores 
Sedulus,  euro: 

*  For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  588. 
t  For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  igSy. 


3828  Appendix 


Neque  te  ministrum 
Dedecet  myrtus, 
Neque  me  sub  arcta 
Vite  bibentem. 
Quintus  Horalius  Flaccus  [65  b  c.-8  b.  c.l 


INTEGER  VIT^* 

Integer  vit;c  scelerisque  purus 
Non  eget  Mauris  jaculis  neque  arcu 
Nee  venenatis  gravida  sagittis, 

Fusee,  pharetra;  ,'\, 

Sive  per  Syrtis  iter  aestuosas 
Sive  facturus  per  inhospitalem 
Caucasum,  vel  quae  loca  fabulosus 

Lambit  Hydaspes. 

Namque  me  silva  lupus  in  Sabina, 
Dum  meam  canto  Lalagen  et  ultra 
Terminum  curis  vagor  expeditis, 

Fugit  inermem, 
Quale  portentum  neque  militaris 
Daunias  latis  alit  a?sculetis 
Nee  Jubse  tellus  generat,  leonum 

Arida  nutrix. 

Pone  me  pigris  ubi  nulla  campis 
Arbor  estiva  recreatur  aura, 
Quod  latus  mundi  nebulte  malusque 

Juppiter  urget; 
Pone  sub  curru  nimium  propinqui 
Solis,  in  terra  domibus  negata: 
Dulce  ridentem  Lalagen  amabo, 

Dulce  loquentem. 
Quinlns  Horatiiis  Flaccus  [65  b.  c.-8  b.  c. 

For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  2912. 


De  Brevitate  Vitae  3829 


RECTIUS  VIVES* 

Rectius  vives,  Licini,  neque  altum 
Semper  urgendo  neque,  dum  procellas 
Cautus  horrescis,  nimium  premendo 
Litus  iniquum. 

Auream  quisquis  mediocritatem 
Diligit,  tutus  caret  obsoleti 
Sordibus  tecti,  caret  invidcnda 
Sobrius  aula. 

Saepius  ventis  agitatur  ingens 
Pinus  et  celsae  graviore  casu 
Decidunt  turres  feriuntque  summos 
Fulgura  montis. 

Sperat  infestis,  metuit  secundis 
Alteram  sortem  bene  praeparatum 
Pectus.     Informis  hiemes  reducit 
Juppitcr,  idem 

Submovet;  non,  si  male  nunc,  et  olim 
Sic  erit;  quondam  cithara  tacentem 
Suscitat  musam  neque  semper  arcum 
Tendit  Apollo. 

Rebus  angustis  animosus  atque 
Fortis  appare;  sapienter  idem 
Contrahes  vento  nimium  secundo 
Turgida  vela. 
QuinlHs  Horatius  Flaccus  [65  b.  c.-8  b.  c] 


DE  BREVITATE  VIT.E  f 
(carmen  amceb^eum) 

Gaudeamus  igitur, 

Juvcncs  dum  sumus; 
*  For  a  [paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  2991. 
t  For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  2895. 


3830  Appendix 


!  M 


Post  jucundam  juventutem, 
Post  molestam  senectutem 
Nos  habebit  humus. 

Ubi  sunt,  qui  ante  nos 
In  mundo  fuere? 

Vadite  ad  superos, 

Transite  ad  inferos, 
Ubi  jam  fuere. 

Vita  nostra  brevis  est, 

Brevi  finietur, 
Venit  mors  velociter, 
Rapit  nos  atrociter, 

Nemini  parcetur. 

Vivat  academia, 

Vivant  professores, 
Vivat  membrum  quodlibet, 
Vivant  membra  quaelibet, 

Semper  sint  in  fiore! 

Vivant  omnes  virgines, 
Faciles,  formosae, 

Vivant  et  mulieres, 

Tenerae,  amabiles, 
Bonae,  laboriosae! 

Vivat  et  respublica 
Et  qui  illam  regit, 

Vivat  nostra  civitas, 

Maecenatum  caritas, 

Quae  nos  hie  protegit! 


Pereat  tristitia, 

Pereant  osores, 
Pereat  diabolus, 
Quivis  antiburschius, 

Atque  irrisores. 

Unknown 


Ein  Feste   Burg  3831 


LAURIGER  HORATIUS* 

LaURIGER  HORATIUS,  i\"  ] 

Quam  dLxisti  verum; 
Fugit  Euro  citius 
Tempus  edax  rerum! 
Ubi  sunt,  o  pocula 
Dulciora  melle! 
Rix£e,  pax  et  oscula 
Rubentis  puellae? 

Crescit  uva  moUiter 
Et  puella  crescit, 
Sed  poeta  turpiter 
Sitiens  canescit. 
Quid  juvat  jeternitas 
Nominis,  amare 
Nisi  terras  filias 
Licet,  et  potare. 


Unknown 


EIN  FESTE  BURGt 

Ein  feste  Burg  ist  unser  Gott, 
Ein  gute  Wehr  und  Waflfen, 
Er  hilft  uns  frei  aus  aller  Not, 
Die  uns  jetzt  hat  betroffen. 
Der  alt  bose  Feind 
Mit  Ernst  ers  jetzt  meint, 
Gross  Macht  und  viel  List 
Sein  grausam  Riistung  ist, 

Auf  Erd  ist  nicht  seins  Gleichen. 

Mit  unsrer  Macht  ist  nichts  getan, 

Wir  sind  gar  bald  verloren; 
Es  streit  fiir  uns  der  rechte  Mann, 

Den  Gott  hat  selbst  erkoren. 

lit  i. 

*  For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  2896. 
t  For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  3806. 


3832  Appendix 

Fragst  du,  wer  der  ist! 
Er  heisst  Jesus  Christ,,  f   • 
Der  Herr  Zebaoth, 
Und  ist  kein  andrer  Gott, 

Das  Feld  muss  er  behalten. 

Und  wenn  die  Welt  voll  Teufel  war 
Und  wollt  uns  gar  verschlingen, 
So  fiirchten  wir  uns  nicht  so  sehr, 
Es  soil  uns  doch  gelingen. 
Der  Fiirst  dieser  Welt, 
Wie  saur  er  sich  stellt, 
Tut  er  uns  doch  nicht; 
Das  macht,  er  ist  gericht, 

Ein  Wortlein  kann  ihn  fallen. 

Das  Wort  sie  soUen  lassen  stan 

Und  kein  Dank  dazu  haben. 
Er  ist  bei  uns  wohl  auf  dem  Plan 

Mit  seinem  Geist  und  Gaben. 
Nehmen  sie  den  Leib, 

WB^WJU-  ^^^^    j,^^^    j^jj^^    ^^^   ^gjj^^ 

Lass  fahren  dahin, 
Sie  habens  kein  Gev/inn: 

Das  Reich  muss  uns  doch  bleiben. 

Martin  Luther  [1483-1546] 

LIED* 
Ins  stille  Land! 
Wer  leitet  uns  hiniiber? 

Schon  wolkt  sich  uns  der  Abendhimmel  triiber, 
Und  immer  triimmervoUer  wird  der  Strand. 
Wer  leitet  uns  mit  sanfter  Hand 
Hiniiber,  ach!  hiniiber 
Ins  stille  Land? 

Ins  stille  Land !  .^ 

Zu  euch,  ihr  freien  Raume 

Fiir  die  Veredlung!     Zarte  Morgentraume 

-f  For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  3456. 


Die  Wacht  Am   Rhein  3^33 

Der  schonen  Seelen!     kiinftgen  Daseins  Pfand. 
Wer  treu  dcs  Lebens  Kampf  bestand, 
Tragt  seiner  HofTnung  Keime 
Ins  stille  Land. 

Ach  Land!  ach  Land!  -  loH" 

Fiir  alle  Sturmbedrohten 

Der  mildeste  von  unsers  Schicksals  Boten 

Winkt  tins,  die  Fackel  umgewandt, 

Und  Icitet  uns  mit  sanfter  Hand 

Ins  Land  der  grossen  Toten, 

Ins  stille  Land. 

Joliann  Gaudenz  von  Salis-Seewis  [i 762-1 834] 


DIE  WACHT  AM  RHEIN* 

Es  braust  ein  Ruf  wie  Donnerhall, 

Wie  Schwertgeklirr  und  Wogenprall : 

"Zum  Rhein,  zum  Rhein,  zum  deutschen  Rhein! 

Wer  will  des  Stromes  Hiiter  sein?" 

Chorus — Lieb  Vaterland,  magst  ruhig  sein, 

Fest.steht  und  treu  die  Wacht  am  Rhein! 

Durch  Hunderttausend  zuckt  es  schnell, 
Und  aller  Augen  blitzen  hell. 
Der  deutsche  JiAngling  fromm  und  stark 
Beschirmt  die  heil'ge  Landesmark. 

Er  blickt  hinauf  in  Himmelsau'n, 

Wo  Heldengeister  niederschaun, 

L'nd  schwort  mit  stolzer  Kampfeslust: 

"Du,  Rhein,  bleibst  deutsch  wie  meinc  Brust! 

"L^nd  ob  mein  Herz  im  Tode  bricht, 
Wirst  du  doch  drum  ein  Welscher  nicht. 
Reich  wie  an  Wasser  deine  Flut, 
1st  Deutschland  ja  an  Heldenblut. 

*  For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  2269. 


3834  ntu       Appendix 

"So  lang  ein  Tropfen  Blut  noch  gluht,  f-,;.  n  ,0" 
Noch  eine  Faust  den  Degen  zieht, 
Und  noch  ein  Arm  die  Biichse  spannt, 
Betritt  kein  Feind  hier  deinen  Strand."  , , 

Der  Schwur  erschallt,  die  Woge  rinnt,  >A 

Die  Fahnen  flattern  hoch  im  Wind:  ;•] 

Zum  Rhein,  zum  Rhein,  zum  deutschen  Rhein! 
Wir  alle  wollen  Hiiter  sein! 

Max  Schneckenburger  [1819-1849] 

■nl 

DES  DEUTSCHEN  VATERLAND* 

Was  ist  des  Deutschen  Vaterland? 
Ist's  Preussenland?  ist's  Schwabenland? 
Ist's,  wo  am  Rhein  die  Rebe  bliiht? 
Ist's,  wo  am  Belt  die  Move  zieht? 
O  nein!  nein!  nein! 
Sein  Vaterland  muss  grosser  sein. 

•  Was  ist  des  Deutschen  Vaterland? 
Ist's  Baierland?  ist's  Steierland? 
Ist's,  wo  des  Marsen  Rind  sich  streckt? 
Ist's,  wo  der  Marker  Eisen  reckt? 
O  nein!  nein!  nein! 
Sein  Vaterland  muss  grosser  sein. 

Was  ist  des  Deutschen  Vaterland? 
Ist's  Pommerland,  Westfalenland? 
Ist's,  wo  der  Sand  der  Dunen  weht? 
Ist's,  wo  die  Donau  brausend  geht? 
O  nein!  nein!  nein! 
Sein  Vaterland  muss  grosser  sein. 

Was  ist  des  Deutschen  Vaterland? 
So  nenne  mir  das  grosse  Land! 

*  For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  2270. 


Des   Deutschen  Vaterland  3835 

Ist's  Land  der  Schweitzer?  ist's  Tirol? 
Das  Land  und  Volk  gefiel  mir  wohl; 
Doch  nein!  nein!  nein! 
Sein  Vaterland  muss  grosser  sein. 

Was  ist  des  Deutschen  Vaterland? 
So  nenne  mir  das  grosse  Land! 
Gewiss  es  ist  das  Oesterreich, 
An  Ehren  und  an  Siegen  reich? 
O  nein!  nein!  nein! 
Sein  Vaterland  muss  grosser  sein. 

Was  ist  des  Deutschen  Vaterland? 
So  nenne  mir  das  grosse  Land! 
So  weit  die  deutsche  Zunge  klingt 
Und  Gott  im  Himmel  Lieder  singt, 
Das  soil  es  sein! 
Das,  wackrer  Deutscher,  nenne  dein! 

Das  ist  des  Deutschen  Vaterland, 

Wo  Eide  schwbrt  der  Druck  der  Hand, 

Wo  Treue  hell  vom  Auge  blitzt 

Und  Liebe  warm  im  Herzen  sitzt — 

Das  soil  es  sein! 

Das,  wackrer  Deutscher,  nenne  dein! 

Das  ist  des  Deutschen  Vaterland, 
Wo  Zorn  vertilgt  den  walschen  Tand, 
Wo  jeder  Franzmann  heisset  Feind, 
Wo  jeder  Deutsche  heisset  Freund — 
Das  soil  es  sein!  , 

Das  ganze  Deutschland  soil  es  sein! 

Das  ganze  Deutschland  soil  es  sein! 
O  Gott  vom  Himmel  sieh'  darein, 
Und  gieb  uns  rechten  deutschen  Muth, 
Dass  wir  es  lieben  treu  und  gut. 
Das  soil  es  sein! 
Das  ganze  Deutschland  soil  es  sein! 

Ernst  Moritz  Arndt  [1769-1860] 


3836  Appendix 


LA  MARSEILLAISE  J  J  skCI 

Allons,  enfants  de  la  Patrie, 
Le  jour  de  gloire  est  arrive; 
Contra  nous  de  la  tyrannie 
L'etendard  sanglant  est  leve, 
Entendez-vous  dans  ces  campagnes 
Mugir  ces  feroces  soldats? 
lis  viennent  jusque  dans  vos  bras 
Egorger  nos  fils,  nos  compagnes!  .  .  . 
Aux  armes,  citoyens!  formez  vos  bataillons! 
Marchons,  marchons! 
Qu'un  sang  impur  abreuve  nos  sillons! 

Que  veut  cette  horde  d'esclaves,  ,^ 
De  traitres,  de  rois  conjures? 
Pour  qui  ces  ignobles  entraves, 
Ces  fers  des  longtemps  prepares? 
Frangais,  pour  nous,  ah!  quel  outrage! 
Quels  transports  il  doit  exciter!    -j 
;       C'est  nous  qu'on  ose  mediter 
De  rendre  a  I'antique  esclavage. 

Quoi!  ces  cohortes  etrangeres         • 
Feraient  la  loi  dans  nos  foyers? 
Quoi!  ces  phalanges  mercenaires 
Terrasseraient  nos  fiers  guerriers? 
Grand  Dieu!  par  des  mains  enchainees 
Nos  fronts  sous  le  joug  se  ploieraient! 
De  vils  despotes  deviendraient 
Les  maitres  de  nos  destinees. 

Tremblez,  tyrans,  et  vous  perfides, 
L'opprobre  de  tous  les  partis, 
Tremblez!  vos  projets  parricides 
Vent  enfin  recevoir  leur  prix! 
Tout  est  soldat  pour  vous  combattre. 
S'ils  tombent,  nos  jeunes  heros, 
La  terra  en  produit  de  nouveaux 
Contra  vous  tout  prets  a  se  battre! 
[oo,      *  For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  2271. 


Ballade  des   Dames  du  Temps  Jadis    3837 

Frangais,  en  guerriers  magnanimes, 
Portez  ou  retenez  vos  coups; 
Epargnez  ces  tristes  victimes 
A  regret  s'armant  centre  nous. 
Mais  ces  despotes  sanguinaires, 
Mais  les  complices  de  Bouille, 
Tous  ces  tigres  qui  sans  pi  tie 
Dechirent  le  sein  de  leurs  meres!     .  .  . 

Nous  entrerons  dans  la  carriere 
Quand  nos  aines  n'y  seront  plus; 
Nous  y  trouverons  leur  poussiere 
Et  la  trace  de  leurs  vertus! 
Bien  moins  jaloux  de  leur  survivre 
Que  de  partager  leur  cercueil, 
Nous  aurons  le  sublime  orgueil 
De  les  venger  ou  de  les  suivre!  .  .  . 

Amour  sacre  de  la  Patrie, 
Conduis,  soutiens  nos  braves  vengeurs: 
Liberte,  Liberte  cherie, 
Combats  avex  tes  defenseurs! 
Sous  nos  drapeaux  que  la  Victoire 
Accoure  a  tes  males  accents; 
Que  tes  ennemis  expirants 
Voient  ton  triomphe  et  notre  gloire!  .  .  . 
Aux  armes,  citoyens!  formez  vos  bataillons! 
Marchons,  marchons! 
Qu'un  sang  impur  abreuvc  nos  sillons! 

Claude  Joseph  Rougct  de  Lisle  [i 760-1836] 


BALLADE  DES  DAMES  DU  TEMPS  JADIS* 

DiCTES-MOY  ou,  n'en  quel  pays, 
Est  Flora,  la  belle  Romaine; 

Archipiada,  ne  Thais, 

Qui  fut  sa  cousine  germaine; 

*  For  translations  of  this  poem  sec  pages  1783,  1784,  1785. 


3838  Appendix      '    --h  abuHBa 

Echo,  parlant  quand  bruyt  on  maine 
Dessus  riviere  ou  sus  estan, 

Qui  beaute  eut  trop  plus  qu'humaine? 
Mais  ou  sont  les  neiges  d'antan! 

Ou  est  la  tres  sage  Helois, 

Pour  qui  fut  blesse  et  puis  moyne 
Pierre  Esbaillart  a  Sainct-Denys 

(Pour  son  amour  eut  cest  essoyne)? 

Semblablement,  ou  est  la  royne 
Qui  commanda  que  Buridan 

Fust  jette  en  ung  sac  en  Seine?  .   .   . 
Mais  ou  sont  les  neiges  d'antan? 

La  royne  Blanche  comme  ung  lys, 

Qui  chantoit  a  voix  de  sereine; 
Berthe  au  grand  pied,  Bietris,  AUys; 

Harembourges,  qui  tint  le  Mayne, 

Et  Jehanne,  la  bonne  Lorraine, 
Qu'Angloys  bruslerent  a  Rouen; 
.,     Ou  sont-ils,  Vierge  souveraine?  .  .  . 
Mais  ou  sont  les  neiges  d'antan! 

ENVOI 

Prince,  n'enquerez  de  sepmaine 

Ou  elles  sont,  ne  de  cest  an, 
Que  ce  refrain  ne  vous  remaine: 

Mais  ou  sont  les  neiges  d'antan? 

Franqois  Villon  [1431-14?] 

[0  BALLADE  DE  FRERE  LUBIN  * 

Pour  courir  en  poste  a  la  ville 
Vingt  fois,  cent  fois,  ne  sgai  combien. 
Pour  faire  quelque  chose  vile, 
Frere  Lubin  le  fera  bien; 
Mais  d'avoir  honneste  entretien, 
Ou  mener  vie  salutaire, 
Cest  a  faire  a  un  bon  chrestien, 
Frere  Lubin  ne  le  pent  faire. 
*For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  1874. 


Le  Grenier  3^39 

Pour  mettre  (comme  un  homme  habile) 
Le  bien  d'autruy  avec  le  sien, 
Et  vous  laisser  sans  croix  ne  pile, 
Frere  Lubin  le  fera  bien. 
On  a  beau  dire,  je  le  tien, 
Et  le  presser  de  satisfaire,  ^'  '>*i9?iJ 

Jamais  ne  vous  en  rendra  rien;  ' 

Frere  Lubin  ne  le  peut  faire.  ' 

Pour  desbaucher  par  un  doux  stile 
Quelque  fiUe  de  bon  main  tien, 
Point  ne  faut  de  vieille  subtile, 
Frere  Lubin  le  fera  bien. 
II  presche  en  theologien; 
Mais  pour  boire  de  belle  eau  claire, 
Faites  la  boire  a  vostre  chien, 
Frere  Lubin  ne  le  peut  faire. 

ENVOI 

Pour  faire  plus  tost  mal  que  bien, 
Frere  Lubin  le  fera  bien, 
Et  si  c'est  quelque  bon  affaire, 
Frere  Lubin  ne  le  peut  faire. 

Clement  Marol  [1495-1544] 

LE  GRENIER* 

Je  viens  revoir  I'asile  ou  ma  jeunesse 

De  la  misere  a  subi  les  legons. 
J 'avals  vingt  ans,  une  foUe  maitresse,  ., 

De  francs  amis  et  I'amour  des  chansons* ; 
Bravant  le  monde  et  les  sots  et  les  sages, 

Sans  avenir,  riche  de  mon  printemps, 
Leste  et  joyeux,  je  montais  six  etages. 

Dans  un  grenier  qu'on  est  bien  a  vingt  ans! 

C'est  un  grenier,  point  ne  veux  qu'on  I'ignore. 

La  fut  mon  lit,  bien  chetif  et  bien  dur; 
La  fut  ma  table;  et  je  retrouve  encore 

Trois  pieds  d'un  vers  charbonnes  sur  le  mur. 

*  For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  46.^. 


3840  Appendix 

Apparaissez,  plaisirs  de  mon  bel  age,      -T 
Que  d'un  coup  d'aile  a  fustiges  le  temps, 

Vingt  fois  pour  vous  j'ai  mis  ma  montre  en  gage. 
Dans  un  grenier  qu'on  est  bien  a  vingt  ans! 

Lisette  ici  doit  surtout  apparaitre, 

Vive,  jolie,  avec  un  frais  chapeau; 
Deja  sa  main  a  I'etroite  fenetre 

Suspend  son  schal,  en  guise  de  rideau. 
Sa  robe  aussi  va  parcr  ma  couchette; 

Respecte,  Amour,  ses  plis  longs  et  flottans. 
J'ai  su  depuis  qui  payait  sa  toilette. 

Dans  un  grenier  qu'on  est  bien  a  vingt  ans! 

A  table  un  jour,  jour  de  grande  richesse, 

De  mes  amis  les  voix  brillaient  en  choeur, 
Quand  jusqu'ici  monte  un  cri  d'allegresse: 

A  Marengo  Bonaparte  est  vainqueur. 
Le  canon  gronde;  un  autre  chant  commence' 

Nous  celebrons  tant  de  faits  eclatans. 
Les  rois  jamais  n'envahiront  la  France.   ' 

Dans  un  grenier  qu'on  est  bien  a  vingt  ans! 

u  <-    Quittons  ce  toit  ou  ma  raison  s'enivre. 

Oh!  qu'ils  sont  loin  ces  jours  si  regrettes! 
J'echangerais  ce  qu'il  me  reste  a  vivre 

Contre  un  des  mois  qu'ici  Dieu  m'a  comptes. 
Pour  rever  gloire,  amour,  plaisir,  folie, 

Pour  depenser  sa  vie  en  pen  d'instans, 
D'un  long  espoir  pour  la  voir  embellie. 

Dans  un  grenier  qu'on  est  bien  a  vingt  ans! 

Pierre-Jean  de  Beranger  [1780-1857] 


LE  ROI   D'YVETOT* 

It,  etait  un  roi  d'Yvetot 
Peu  connu  dans  I'histoire, 

Se  levant  tard,  se  couchant  tot. 
Dormant  fort  bien  sans  gloire, 

'  For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  li 


Le   Roi   D'Yvetot 

Et  couronne  par  Jeanneton 
D'un  simple  bonnet  de  coton, 

Dit-on. 
Oh! oh! oh! oh! ah! ah! ah! ah! 
Quel  bon  petit  roi  c'etait  la! 

La,  la. 

II  faisait  ses  quatre  repas 
Dans  son  palais  de  chaume, 

Et  sur  un  ane,  pas  a  pas, 
Parcourait  son  royaume. 

Joyeux,  simple  et  croyant  le  bien, 

Pour  toute  garde  il  n'avait  rien 
Qu'un  chien. 

II  n'avait  de  gout  onereux 

Qu'une  soif  un  peu  vive; 
Mais,  en  rendant  son  peuple  heureux, 

II  faut  bien  qu'un  roi  vive. 
Lui-meme,  a  table  et  sans  suppot, 
Sur  chaque  muid  levait  un  pot 
D'impot. 

Aux  filJes  de  bonnes  maisons 

Comme  il  avait  su  plaire, 
Ses  sujets  avaient  cent  raisons 

De  le  nommer  leur  pere. 
D'ailleurs  il  ne  levait  de  ban 
Que  pour  tirer,  quatre  fois  l"'an, 
Au  blanc. 

II  n'agrandit  point  ses  etats, 

Fut  un  voisin  commode, 
Et,  modele  des  potentats, 

Prit  le  plaisir  pour  code. 
Ce  n'est  que  lorsqu'il  expira 
Que  le  peuple,  qui  I'enterra, 
Pleura. 

On  conserve  encor  le  portrait 
De  ce  digne  et  bon  prince: 


3841 


3842  ^''       Appendix 

C'est  I'enseigne  d'un  cabaret 
Fameux  dans  la  province. 
Les  jours  de  fete,  bien  souvent, 
La  foule  s'ecrie  en  buvant 

Devant: 
Oh! oh! oh! oh! ah! ah! ah! ah! 
Quel  bon  petit  roi  c'etait  la! 

La,  la.  '   ■  '^ 

Pierre-Jean  de  Beranger  [1780-1&57] 

FANTAISIE  * 

II  est  un  air  pour  qui  je  donnerais 

Tout  Rossini,  tout  Mozart,  tout  Weber, 

Un  air  tres  vieux,  languissant  et  funebre, 
Qui  pour  moi  seul  a  des  charmes  secrets. 

Or,  chaque  fois  que  je  viens  a  I'entendre, 

De  deux  cents  ans  men  ame  rajeunit; 
C'est  sous  Louis  treize   .   .   .   et  je  crois  voir  s'etendre 

Un  coteau  vert  que  le  couchant  jaunit. 

Puis  un  chateau  de  brigue  a  coins  de  pierres, 
Aux  vitraux  teints  de  rougeatres  couleurs, 

Ceint  de  grands  pares,  avec  une  riviere 
Baignant  ses  pieds,  qui  coule  entre  les  fleurs. 

Puis  une  dame  a  sa  haute  fenetre, 

Blonde,  aux  yeux  noirs,  en  ses  habits  anciens  .   .  . 
Que  dans  une  autre  existence,  peut-etre, 

J'ai  deja  vue!   .   .   .   et  dont  je  me  souviens. 

Gerard  de  Nerval  [1808-1855] 


L'ART  t 

Oui,  I'ceuvre  sort  plus  beUe 
D'une  forme  au  travail 

Rebelle, 
Vers,  marbre,  onyx,  email. 

*  For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  920. 
t  For  a  paraphrase  of  this  poem  see  page  3140. 


L'art  ^3843 


Point  de  contraintes  fausses! 
Mais  que,  pour  marcher  droit, 

Tu  chausses, 
Muse,  un  cothurne  etroit. 

Fi  du  rhythme  commode, 
Comma  un  Soulier  trop  grand, 

Du  mode 
Que  tout  pied  quitte  et  prend! 

Statuaire,  repousse 
L'argile  que  petrit 

Le  pouce 
Quand  flotte  ailleurs  I'esprito 

Lutte  avec  le  carrare, 
Avec  le  paros  dur 
Et  rare, 
Gardiens  du  contour  pur; 

Emprunte  a  Syracuse 
Son  bronze  oii  fcrmement 

S'accuse 
Le  trait  fier  et  charmant; 

D'une  main  delicate 
Poursuis  dans  un  filon 

D 'agate 
Le  profil  d'Apollon. 

Peintre,  fuis  I'aquarelle, 
Et  fixe  la  couleur 

Trop  frele 
Au  four  de  Femailleur. 

Fais  les  sirenes  bleues, 
Tordant  de  cent  fagons 

Leurs  queues, 
Les  monstres  des  blasons; 

Dans  son  nimbe  trilobc 
La  Vierge  et  son  Jesus, 

Le  globe 
Avec  la  croix  dessus. 


3844  Appendix 


Tout  passe. — L'art  robuste 
Seul  a  Feternite. 

Le  buste. 
Survit  a  la  cite. 

Et  la  medaille  austere 
Que  trouve  un  laboureur 

Sous  terre 
Revele  un  empereur. 

Les  dieux  eux-memes  meurent. 
Mais  les  vers  souverains 

Demeurent 
Plus  fort  que  les  airains. 

Sculpte,  lime,  cisele; 
Que  ton  reve  flottant 

Se  scelle 
Dans  le  bloc  resistant! 

Theophile  Gaidier  [181 1—1872] 


CARCASSONNE  * 

Je  me  fais  vieux,  j'ai  soixante  ans; 

J'ai  travaille  toute  ma  vie 
Sans  avoir,  durant  ce  temps, 

Pu  satisfaire  mon  envie. 
Je  vols  bien  qu'il  n'est  ici-bas 

De  bonheur  complet  pour  personne. 
Mon  voeu  ne  s'accomplira  pas: 

Je  n'ai  jamais  vu  Carcassonne! 

On  voit  la  ville  de  la-haut 

Derriere  les  montagnes  bleues, 
Mais,  pour  y  parvenir,  U  faut, 

II  faut  faire  cinq  grandes  lieues, 
En  faire  autant  pour  revenir; 

Ah,  si  la  vendange  etait  bonne! 
Le  raigin  ne  veut  pas  jaunir: 

Je  ne  verrai  pas  Carcassonne! 

'  For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  438. 


Carcassonne  3845 

On  dit  qu'on  y  voit  tons  les  jours, 

Ni  plus  ni  moins  que  les  dimanches, 
Des  gens  s'en  aller  sur  les  cours. 

En  habits  neufs,  en  robes  blanches. 
On  dit  qu'on  y  voit  des  chateaux 

Grands  commes  ccux  de  Babylone, 
Un  eveque  et  deux  generaux! 

Je  ne  connais  pas  Carcassonne! 

Le  vicaire  a  cent  fois  raison: 

C'est  des  imprudents  que  nous  sommes. 
II  disait  dans  son  oraison 

.  Que  1 'ambition  pcrd  les  hommes. 
Si  je  pouvois  trouver  pourtant 

Deux  jours  sur  la  fin  de  Tautomne — 
Mon  Dieu,  que  je  mourrais  content 

Apres  avoir  vu  Carcassonne! 

iMon  Dieu,  mon  Dieu,  pardonnez-moi 

Si  ma  priere  vous  offense ; 
On  voit  toujours  plus  haut  que  soi, 

En  vieillesse  comme  en  enfance. 
Ma  femme,  avec  mon  fils  Aignan, 

A  voyage  jusqu'a  Narbonne; 
Mon  filleul  a  vu  Perpignan, 

Et  je  n'ai  pas  vu  Carcassonne! 

Ainsi  chantait  pres  de  Limoux 

Un  paysan  courbe  par  Tage. 
Je  lui  dis:  "Ami,  levez-vous; 

Nous  allons  faire  le  voyage." 
Nous  partimes  le  lendcmain, 

Mais,  que  le  Bon  Dieu  lui  pardonne, 
II  mourut  a  moitir  chemin: 

II  n'a  jamais  vu  Carcassonne! 

Custave  Nadaud  [1820-1803] 


3846  .  Appendix 


HASSGESANG  GEGEN  ENGLAND  * 

Was  schiert  uns  Russe  und  Franzos? 
Schuss  wider  Schuss  und  Stoss  um  Stoss, 
Wir  lieben  sie  nicht, 
Wir  hassen  sie  nicht, 

Wir  schiitzen  Weichsel  und  Wasgaupass, — 
Wir  haben  nur  einen  einzigen  Hass, 
Wir  lieben  vereint,  wir  hassen  vereint, 
Wir  haben  nur  einen  einzigen  Feind: — 

Den  ihr  allc  wisst,  den  ihr  alle  wisst, 
Er  sitzt  geduckt  hinter  der  grauen  Flut, 
Voll  Neid,  voll  Wut,  voll  Schliiue,  voll  List, 
Durch  Wasser  getrennt,  die  sind  dicker  als  Blut. 
Wir  wollen  treten  in  ein  Gericht, 
Einen  Schwur  zu  schworen,  Gesicht  in  Gesicht. 
Einen  Schwur  von  Erz,  den  verblast  kein  Wind, 
Einen  Schwur  fiir  Kind  und  fiir  Kindeskind. 
Vernehmt  das  Wort,  sagt  nach  das  Wort, 
Es  walze  sich  durch  ganz  Deutschland  fort: 
Wir  wollen  nicht  lassen  von  unserem  Hass, 
Wir  haben  alle  nur  einen  Hass, 
Wir  lieben  vereint,  wir  hassen  vereint, 
Wir  haben  alle  nur  einen  Feind : 
ENGLAND! 

In  der  Bordkajiite,  in  Feiersaal, 
Sassen  Schiffsoffiziere  beim  Liebesmahl, — 
Wie  ein  Sabelhieb,  wie  ein  Segelschwung, 
Finer  riss  griissend  empor  den  Trunk; 
Knap  hinknallend  wie  Ruderschlag 
Drei  Worte  sprach  er:  "Auf  den  Tag!" 

Wem  gait  das  Glas? 
Sie  hatten  alle  nur  einen  Hass. 
Wer  war  gemeint? 
Sie  hatten  alle  nur  einen  Feind: 
ENCjLAND! 

*  For  a  translation  of  this  poem  see  page  2549. 


Hassgesang  Gegen   England        3^47 

Nimm  du  die  Volker  der  Erde  in  Sold, 
Baue  Walle  aus  Barren  von  Gold, 
Bedecke  die  Meerflut  mit  Bug  bei  Bug, 
Du  rechnetest  klug,  doch  nicht  klug  genug. 
Was  schiert  uns  Russe  und  Franzes? 
Schuss  wider  Schuss,  und  Stoss  um  Stoss. 
Wir  kampfen  den  Kampf  mit  Bronze  und  Stahl 
Und  schliessen  Frieden  irgend  einmal, 
Dich  werden  wir  hassen  mit  langem  Hass, 
Wir  werden  nicht  lassen  von  unserem  Hass. 
Hass  zu  Wasser  und  Hass  zu  Land, 
Hass  des  Hauptes  und  Hass  der  Hand, 
Hass  der  Hammer  und  Hass  der  Kronen, 
Drosselnder  Hass  von  siebzig  Millionen, 
Sie  lieben  vereint,  sie  hassen  vereint, 
Sie  haben  alle  nur  einen  Feind : 
ENGLANDI 

Ernst  Lissauer  [1882- 


H 


INDEX  OF  AUTHORS 


"A.   E.,"  sec  Russell,   George 
William. 

Abbey    Henry 

Born  al  Rondoul,  N.  ¥.,  July  ii, 
1842;  died  at  Kingston,  N.  Y .,  June  7, 
igii. 

"What  do  we  Plant 1402 

Abercrombie,  Lascelles 

An  Engtis/i  writer,  born  in  1884,  and 

now  tiring  in  London. 

"All  Last  Night" 674 

Balkis 3215 

Epilogue 513 

Hope  and  Despair 3368 

Adam,  Jean 

Born  at  Crawjordsdykc,  Renfrnvshire, 
Scottand,  in  lyin;  died  in  the  Gtasgow 
almshmisc.  April  3,  1765. 

The  Sailor's  Wife  (?) 1217 

Adams,  Charles  Pollen 

Born  at  Dorchester.  Mass.,  April  21, 
1S42;  died  al  Boston,  Mass.,  March  g, 
1Q18. 

Yaw,  dot  is  so 2030 

Adams,  James  Barton 

Born  in  Jejferson  County,  Ohio, 
A  pril  17 ,  184^;  now  limng  at  Fort  Van- 
couver, Washington. 

At  a  Cowboy  Dance 2187 

Adams,  Sarah  Flower 

Born  al  Great  Harlow.  Essex,  Englantl 
February  22,  1805;  died  in  London, 
August  13.  1848. 

"Mourners  Came  at  Break 

of  Day,  The" 35 14 

"  Nearer  to  Thee 3805 

Addison,  Joseph 

Born  al  Mihlon.  Wilts,  England, 
May  I,  1672;  died  at  Uolland  house, 
London,  June  17.  17IQ. 

"The   Spacious   Firmament 
on  High" 3787 

Aide,  Charles  HAMiLxosf- 

An  English  poet  and  novelist,  born  in 
Paris,  France,  November  4.  1826;  died 
in  London.  F.nglami.  December  i\,  iqo6. 

Remember  or  Forget 987 

"When  We  arc  Parted".. . .     087 

Aiken,  Conr.\d 

Born  at  .Savannah,  Ga.,  in  i88q;  now 
living  al  Cambridge,  Mass. 

"Music  I  Heard" 1129 


AiNSLiE,  Hew 

Born  in  Ayrshire.  Scotland,  April  5, 
1702;  came  to  America  in  1822;  died  at 
Louisville,  Ky.,  March  11,  1878. 

The  Ingle-side 3239 

Willie  and  Helen 941 

Akenske,  Mark 

Born  at  N vwcastle-on-Tyne,  England, 
November  c),  1721;  died  in  London, 
June  23,  1770. 

Araorct 537 

Nightingale,  The 1549 

Song,  "The  shape  alone  let 
others  prize 537 

Akers,  Elizabeth  [Mrs.  Eliz.v 
BETH  Akers  Allen] 
Born  at  Strong,  Me.,  October  g,  1832; 

died  at  Tuckahoe,  N.  Y .,  August  7,  icjii. 

Bringing  Our  Sheaves 373 1 

Endurance 3382 

Left  Behind 1020 

Little  Feet 17 

Lost  Light loio 

Rock  Me  to  Sleep 465 

Sea-birds 1522 

Snow liQo 

Until  Death 1116 

Akins,  Zoe 

Born  al  Uumansvillc,  Mo.,  October  ,jo, 

1886.  atul  now  living  al  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

"I  am  the  Wind" 680 

Nnrah 1054 

"This  is  My  Hour" 1318 

Albee,  John 

Born  at  Bellingltam,  Mass.,  April  ?, 
181^;  died  at  Chocorna,  N.  11.,  in 
March,  igis. 

At  the  Grave  of  Champer- 
nowne 3597 

Alcott,  Louisa  May 

Born  at  Germanlown,  Pa..  November 
20,  18^2,  and  died  in  Boston,  Mass., 
March  6,  18S8. 

Thoreau's  Flute 3667' 

Alden,  Henry  Mills 

Born  at  Mount  Tabor,  Vl.,  Novem- 
bfr  1 1,  1836;  present  address,  Metuchen, 
N.J. 

The  Magic  Mirror 2849 

Aldington,  Richard 

Born  in  Hampshire,  England,  July  8, 
iSg2;  now  living  in  London. 

After  Two  Years 581 


3849 


3850 


Index  of  Authors 


Aldrich,  Anne  Reeve 

Born  in  New  York  City,  April  25, 

1866;  died  there,  June  22,  iSgz. 

Fanny 344 

Little  Parable,  A 3462 

Suppose IQ08 

Aldrich,  James 

Born  in  Suffolk  county,  N.  Y., 
July  10,  1810;  died  in  New  York  City, 
in  October,  1856. 

A  Death-bed 3548 

Aldrich,  Thomas  Bailey 

Born  at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  Novem- 
bcy  JT,  1836;  died  at  Boston,  Mass., 
March  ig,  igoy. 

Baby  Bell 28 

"Enamored     Architect     of 

Airy  Rhyme" 3083 

Flight  of  the  Goddess,  The.   3103 

"Forever  and  a  Day" ggi 

Hint  from  Herrick,  A 3090 

L'Eau  Dormante 739 

Nocturne 711 

Ode  on  the  Unveiling  of  the 

Shaw  Memorial 3655 

On    an    Intaglio    Head    of 

Minerva...... 1748 

Palabras  Carinosas 711 

Thalia 1750 

Turkish  Legend,  A 2845 

When   the   Sultan   Goes   to 

Ispahan ?>%\ 

World's  Way,  The 1S60 

Alexander,  Cecil  Frances 

Born  in  County  Wicklow,  Ireland,  in 
j8r8;  died  at  Londonderry,  Ireland, 
October  12.  i8gs. 

The  Burial  of  Moses 3736 

"There  is  a  Green  Hill".. . .   3812 

Alexander,  William 

Born  at  Derry.  Ireland,  April  7.?, 
1824:  died  at  Torquay,  Devonshire, 
England,  September  12,  igii. 

Robert  Burns 3595 

Alford,  Henry 

Born  in  London.  England,  October  7, 
1810;  died  at  Canterbury,  England, 
January  12,  187T. 

Gipsy  Girl,  The 344 

Allen,    Elizabeth    Akers,    see 
Akers,  Elizabeth 

Allingham,  William 

Born  at  Ballyshannon.  Donegal,  Ire- 
land. March  ig,  1824:  died  at  Hamp- 
stead.  England,  November  18,  i88g. 
Abbot  of  Inisfalen,  The.  .  .  .    2739 

Fairies,  The 241 

Homeward  Bound 1633 

Lovely  Mary  Donnelly 554 

Robin  Redbreast i.s6i 

Sailor,  The 1625 

Wishing 138 

Allston,  Washington 

Born  at  Waccamaw,  S.  C,  Novem- 


ber 5,  J77g;  died  at  Cambridge,  Mass., 
July  Q,  1843. 

America  to  Great  Britain. .  .    2223 

Alma-Tadema,  Laurence 

An  English  writer,  daughter  of  Sir 
Lawrence  Alma-Tadema;  present  ad- 
dress, Wittersham,  Kent,  England. 

Playgrounds 130 

Anderson,  Alexander 

Born  at  Kirkconnel,  Dumfriesshire, 
Scotland,  April  30,  1S45;  died  at  Edin- 
burgh, Scotland,  July  11,  jQog. 

Cuddle  Doon 95 

"Jenny  Wi'  the  Aim  Teeth"     94 
"Langsyne,  when  Life  Was 
Bonnie" 447 

Anderson,  Aristine 

An  American  writer;  no  biographical 
data  available. 

A  Mosquito  Triolet 2085 

Anderson,  Margaret  Steele 

An  American  writer  living  in  Louis- 
ville, Ky. 

The  Breaking 351 

Annan,  Annie  Rankin 

An  American  writer,  living  at  Buf- 
falo, N.  Y. 

Dandelion 1483 

Appleton,  Eveeard  John 

Born  at  CItarleston.  W.  Va., March  24, 
1872;  now  living  at  Cincinnati,  Ohio. 
The  Fighting  Failure 2942 

Arensberg,  Walter  Conrad 

An  American  writer,  tu>w  living  in 
New  York  City. 

To  Hasekawa 2908 

Arndt,  Ernst  Moritz 

Born  at  Schoritz,  Sweden,  December 
26,  i/dg;  died  at  Bonn,  Germany,  Jan- 
uary 2q,  i860. 

Des  Deutschen  Vaterland .  .    3834 
The  Gennan  Fatherland ..  .    2270 

Arnold,  [Sir]  Edwin 

Born  at  Gravesend,  England,  June  10, 
1832;  died  in  London.  March  24,  1004. 

After  Death  in  Arabia 3582 

Almond  Blossom 1466 

In  Memoriam 3648 

She  and  He 3S79 

To  a  Pair  of  Egyptian  Slip- 
pers    1762 

Arnold,  George 

Born  in  New  York  City,  June  24, 
1834:  died  at  Strawberry  Farms,  Mon- 
mouth County,  N  J,  November  g,  186=;. 

Alone  bv  the  Hearth 460 

Golden  Fish,  The 736 

In  the  Dark 3496 

Jolly  Old  Pedagogue,  The.  .   1746 

September 1371 

Youth  and  Age 421 


Index  of  Authors 


3851 


Arnold,  Matthew 

Born  al  Lakliam,  England,  Decem- 
ber 24.  1822;  died  al  Liverpool.  England, 
April  IS,  iSSS. 

Dover  Beach 2595 

Forsaken  Merman,  The.  .. .    1021 

Geist's  Grave 182S 

Growing  Old 418 

Last  Word,  The. 2944 

Longing 967 

Memorial  Verses 3680 

Morah'ty 337f> 

Philomela iS47 

Quiet  Work 1300 

Requiescat 1098 

Scholar-Gipsy,  The 3305 

Self-Dependence 2843 

Separation 966 

Shakespeare 3653 

To  Marguerite 966 

Urania 639 

Wish,  A 3459 

AsHBURTON,   Robert  Offley 
[First  M.arquess  of  Crewe] 
Born  in  London.     England,  January 
12,  iS$S:  and  still  living  there. 

A  Harrow  Grave  in  Flanders  2326 


Ashby-Sterry,  Joseph 

Born  in  London  in  1S38;  died  there 
in  igi~. 

King  of  the  Cradle,  The. ...        22 
Portrait,  A 175S 

Ashe,  Thomas 

Born  at  Stockport,  Cheshire,  England, 
in  18^6;  died  in  London,  December  18, 
iSSg.' 

"Meet     We     No     Angels, 

Pansie" 567 

No  and  Yes 895 

Austin,  Alfred 

Born  at  Ucadingley.  Leeds,  England, 

May  ,?(>,  /.?,?.5,'  died  at  Ashford.  England, 

June  2,  igij.     Poet  Laureate,  i8q6- 

1913- 

Agatha 1046 

Last  Redoubt,  The 2531 

Mot  her- Song 90 

To  America 2226 


Ayton,  [Sir]  Robert 

Born  al  the  castle  of  Kinaldie,  near 

St.   Atutreu's.   Scotland,   in   1,17":  died 

in  London.  England,  February  28,  i6jS. 

The  name  is  sometimes  spelled  .iytoun. 
To  His  Forsaken  Mistress.  .  808 
To  an  Inconstant 809 

Aytoun,  William  Edmonstoune 

Born  a (  Edinburgh.  Scotlami,  June  2 1 , 
jSn;  died  al  Blackhills,  near  Elgin, 
August  4,  186^. 

The  Execution  of  Montrose.  2394 

The  Lav  of  the  Levite 2023 

The  Old  Scottish  Cavalier. .   2734 


B 

Bacon,   Francis    [Baron   Veru- 

lam,  Viscount  Saint  Albans 

Born  in  Loiuion,  England.  January 

22,  1561;  died  there,  April  y,  1626. 

The  World 399 

Bacon,  Josephine  Dodge   Das- 

KAM 
Born  at  Stamford,  Conn.,  February  1 7, 

1876;    present    address,    Pleasantville, 

N.  Y. 

Motherhood 303 

Omar  for  Ladies,  An 19  21 

Baillie,  Joanna 

Born  in  Lanarkshire,  Scotland,  Sep- 
tember II,  1762;  died  al  Ilampstead, 
England,  February  23,  i8';i. 

"Wake,  Lady" 698 

Baker,  George  Augustus 

An  American  writer,  born  in  1S4Q, 
died  in  igo6. 

"Thoughts    on    the    Com- 
mandments"      806 

Baker,  Karle  Wilson  ("Char- 
lotte Wilson"). 
Born  at  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  October  ij, 
1S78;  now  living  at  Nacogdoches,  Texas. 
Good  Company 1301 

Ballantine,  J"ames 

Born    at    Edinburgh,    Scotland,     in 

iSoS;  died  there  in  December,  1S77. 

Castles  in  the  Air 257 

Creep  afore  ye  Gang 256 

Its  Ain  Drap  o'  Dew 2992 

Muckle-mou'd  Meg 782 

Bangs,  Edward 

Born  in  Mas-iachuselts  about  1758; 
graduated  from  Harvard  in  1777;  after- 
wards a  judge  in  Worcester  county. 
Given  as  the  author  of  "  Yankee  Doodle" 
on  the  authority  of  Edward  Everett  Hale. 
Yankee  Doodle 2198 

Bangs,  John  Kendrick 

Born  at  Yonkers.  N.  Y.,  May  27, 
1862;  now  livinv,  at  Ogunquit,  Me. 

Little  Elf,  The 248 

Philosopher,  A 2983 

Bannerman,  Frances 

An  English  writer,  living  in  London. 
An  Upper  Chamber 3748 

Banning,  Kendall 

Born  in  Nnv  York  City,  September  20, 

1S7Q;  now  living  in  Washington,  D.  C. 

Once  on  a  Time si7 

Barbauld,  Anna  Letitia 

Born  in  Leicestershire,  England, 
June  20,  1743;  died  nca'  Lomion 
March  0,  1825. 

Life 34yi 


J 


3852 


Index  of  Authors 


Barham,  Richard  Harris  . 

Born  al  Canterbury,  England,  De- 
cember 6, 1788;  died  in  London,  June  17, 
1845. 

"  As  I  Laye  a-Thynkynge  .  3359 
Jackdaw  of  Rheims,  The .. .  2140 
Misadventures  at  Margate  .  2120 
"Not  a  Sou  Had  He  Got"..    1933 

Baring,  Maurice 

An   English   writer,   born   in   1874, 

died  in  1Q16. 

Ballad. 1138 

The  Dying  Reservist 3474 

Baring-Gould,  Sabine 

Born  al  Exeter,  Englaml,  January  28, 
1S34;  and  still  living  in  Devonshire. 
"Onward,     Christian     Sol- 
diers"    3814 

Barker,  Elsa 

Born  at  Leicester,  Vl.,  and  7tow  living 
in  New  York  City. 

"When  I  am  Dead  and  Sis- 
ter to  the  Dust 3506 

Barlow,  Jane 

Born    al    Clontarf,    County    Dublin, 

Ireland;  died  at  Dublin,  April  17,  1Q17. 

Out  of  Hearing 3560 

Barnard,  [Lady]  Anne 

Born  in  Fijeshire,  Scotland,  Decem- 
ber S,  17 so:  died  in  London,  May  6, 182$. 

Auld  Robin  Gray loog 

"My  Heart  is  a  Lute" 620 

Barnes,  William 

Borji  at  Riishay,  Dorsetshire,  England, 

in  March,  180:;  died  al  Came,  Dorset, 

October  7,  1886. 

Blackbird,  The 1527 

Blackmwore  Maidens 336 

"Girt  Woak  Tree  that's  in 

the  Dell,  The": 1404 

Mater  Dolorosa 301 

Readen  ov  a  Headstwone. .  .  3569 
The  Spring 1347 

Barnfield,  Richard 

Born  al  Norbury,  Shropshire,  Eng- 
land, in  June,  1^74!  died  in  Stafford- 
shire. March  ,j,  1627. 

Philomel 1546 

Barr,  Matthias 

Born  at  Edinburgh,  .Scotland.  Decem- 
ber 6.  1831;  now  living  in  London. 
"Moon,     So     Round     and 

Yellow  " 49 

"Only  a  Baby  Small" 3 

Barrett,  Eaton  Stannard 

Born  at  Cork,  Ireland,  in  1786;  died 
in  Glamorganshire,  March  20,  1820. 
Woman 377 

Barton,  Bernard 

Born  at  Carlisle,  England,  January 
31,  1784:  died  al  Woodhridge,  Febru- 
ary 10,  1S40. 

"Not  Ours  the  Vows" 865 


Bashford,  Henry  Howarth 

An  English  writer,  burn  in  18S0,  now 
living  in  London. 

Good  Day,  The 2983 

Lullaby  in  Bethlehem 218 

To  Petronilla 343 

Bashford,  Herbert 

Born  al  SioiCx  City,  Iowa,  March  4, 
1871;  now  living  at  Piedmont,  Cal. 

Alice II 

The  Song  of  the  Forest  Ran- 
ger      1696 

Bates,  Arlo 

Born  al  East  Machias,  Me.,  Decem- 
ber 16,  1850;  present  address,  Boston, 
Mass. 

Cyclamen,  The 668 

Rose,  A 745 

Shadow  Boat,  A 437 

Bates,  Katherine  Lee 

Born  at  Falmouth,  Mass.,  August  12, 

i8sq:  present  address,  Wellesley,  Mass. 

Changing  Road,  The 3427 

Laddie 183 1 

Bayly,  Thomas  Haynes 

Born  at  Bath,  England,  October  13, 
I7Q7;  died  in  Lniuion,  April  22,  1830. 

"Do  You  Remember" 788 

I'd  be  a  Butterfly 1712 

Mistletoe  Bough,  The 2738 

"Oh!  Where  do  Fairies  Hide 
Their  Heads" 235 

Beattie,  James 

Born  at  Laurencekerk,  Kincardine, 
Scotland,  October  25,  173s;  died  at 
Aberdeen,  .August  18,  1803. 

An    Epitaph    Intended    for 
Himself 3518 

Beatty,  Pakenham  Thomas 

Born  al  Maranham,  Brazil,  June  23, 
1855:  now  living  al  Dundalk,  Ireland. 
When  Will  Love  Come 504 

Beaumont,  Francis 

Born  at  Grace-Dieu,  Leicestershire, 
England,  in  1584;  died  in  London, 
March  6,  1616. 

Indifferent,  The 812 

On    the    Tombs    in    West- 
minster    3517 

True  Beauty ._.     811 

Beddoes,  Thomas  Lovell 

Born  at  Clifton,  England,  July  20, 
1803;  died  at  Bale,  Switzerland,  Janu- 
ary 26.  1840. 

Sailor's  Song 1593 

Bedingfield,  Thomas 

.in  English  writer,  "gentleman  pen- 
sioner" to  Queen  Elizabeth;  the  date  of 
hi'!  birth  is  unknown;  he  died  in  1613. 
The  Lover's  Choice S4i 


Index  of  Authors 


3853 


Beeching,  Henry  Charles 

An   English   writer,   horn   May   is, 
l8s9,  and  now  Iriing  in  London. 
Going  Down  Hill  on  a  Bi- 
cycle       129 

Beers,  Ethel  Lynn  [Ethelinda 
Eliot] 
Born  at  Goshen.  N.  Y.,  January  13, 

1827;  died  at  Orange,  N.  J.,  October  10, 

1S79. 

The  Picket-Guard 2401 

Weighing  the  Baby 15 

Beers,  Henry  Augustin 

Born  at  Buffalo.  .V.  Y.,  Jidy  2,  1847, 
and  mrw  living  at  Ne^v  Haven,  Conn. 
Biftek  aux  Champignons. .  .    iSoo 

Beesly,  a.  H. 

A  Canadian  writer,  concerning,  whom 
no  biographical  data  arc  available. 

Andre's  Ride 2801 

Behn,  Aphra 

Born  at  Wye,  England,  in  July,  1640; 
died  inioJidon,  April  16,  i68q.  _ 
Song,  "  Love  in  fantastic  tri- 
umph sate" 824 

Bell,  John  Joy 

Born  at  Glasgow.  Scotland.  May  7, 
rS-i,  and  now  living  at  Craigendoran, 
Dumbar'on<:hire,  Scotland. 

On  the  Quay 1605 

Belloc,  Hilaire 
An   English   writer,   born  July   27, 

1870.  and  now  living  at  King's  Land, 

Shiplev,  Horsham,  England. 

The  Frog 2081 

The  Night 322,3 

The  South  Country 2601 

Benedict,  Hester  A. 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Good-night 1 1 2 1 

Benjamin,  Park 

Born  at  Demcrnra,  British  Guiana, 
August  ;,?,  iSng;  died  in  New  York 
Citv.  .September  12.  1864. 

'  The  Old  Sexton 3441 

Bennett,  Henry 

Born  at  Cork.  Ireland,  in  1785;  date 
of  death  unknown. 

Saint  Patrick ig66 

Bennett,  Henry  Hot.comb 

Born  at  Chillicothe.  Ohio.  Decem- 
ber 5.  iS6^.  and  still  living  there. 

The  Flag  Goes  By 2208 

Bennett,  John 

Born  at  Chillicothe.  Ohio,  May  17, 
1S65;  present  address,  Charleston.  S.  C. 
"God  Bless  You,  Dear,  To- 
day"       662 

i,„.  In  a  Rose  Garden 661 

""The    Song    of   the    Spanish 
.    .      Main 2381 


Bennett,  William  Cox  ■ 

Born  at  Greenwich,  England,  Oc- 
tober 14.  1820;  died  at  Blackheath,  Eng- 
lami,  March  4,  1805. 

Baby  Mav 10 

"Lullaby,  O  Lullaby" 83 

Summer  Invocation 1443 

To  a  Cricket 15 12 

Wife's  Song,  A 12 17 

Benson,  Arthur  Christopher 

Born  at  Canterbury.  Englaml.  A  pril 
24.  1862;  present  address,  Cambridge, 
England. 

Knapweed 1491 

Benson,  Margaret 

.in  En  Irtish  writer,  now  living  at 
Uorsted  Keynes.  Sussex. 

Once  on  a  Time 1507 

Beranger,  Pierre  Jean  de 

Born  in  Paris,  France,  in  1780;  died 

there,  July  16,  1857. 

Le  Grenier 3839 

Le  Roi  d'Yvetot 3840 

Berkeley,   George   [Bishop  of 

Cloyne] 

Born    March    12,    i68<;,    at    Dyserl 

Castle,   County   of   Kilkenny,    Ireland; 

died  at  Oxford,  Englaiui,  January  14, 

1753-  • 

On  the  Prospect  of  Plantmg 
Arts  and  Learning  in 
America 2565 

Bernard  of  Cluny 

Born  of  English  parentage  at  Morlaix, 
Brittany,  about  1122;  died  about  1156. 
A  Benedictine  monk. 

Urbs  Syon  Aurca 5824 

Besant,  [Sir]  Walter 

Born  at  Portsmouth,  England,  .Au- 
gust 14.  i8j!6;  died  at  Hampstcad,  Eng- 
land. June  in,  igni. 

To  Daphne... 568 

Best,  Charles 

An  English  writer,  concerning  whom 
nothing  is  known,  except  that  he  con- 
tributed two  sounets  to  Paiison's  "Poet- 
ical Rapsodie."  published  in  1602. 

A  Sonnet  of  the  Moon 1253 

Bickerstaffe,  Isaac 

Born  in  Ireland  about  17^5:  died,  an 
exile  in  France,  about  1812. 

"There  Was  a  Jolly  Miller"     163 

BiNYON,  Laurence 

Born  at  Lancaster,  England,  .\uiusl 
10,  i860:  present  address,  Loitdon. 

Ferry  Hinksey Qg2 

Fourth  of  August,  The 2546 

Little  Hands 20 

"O  World,  be  Nobler" 632 

Bird,  Robert  Montgomery 

An  American  writer  born  in  1S67, 
and  still  living. 

The  Fairy  Folk 24s 


3^54 


Index  of  Authors 


BiRDSEYE,  George 

No  hiographical  dala  available. 

The  Hindoo's  Death iSgg 

Bishop,  Samuel 

Born  ill  Londnn,  England,  Septem- 
ber 21,  1731;  died  there,  November  17, 
1795- 

To  Mary 1225 

Touchstone,  The 826 

Blackmore,  Richard  Doddridge 

Bnrn  at  Longworth,  Berkshire,  Eng- 
land, June  7,  1825;  died  at  Teddington, 
England,  January  20,  igno. 

"Yes" 1172 

Blake,  William 

Born  in  London,  England,  Novem- 
ber 28,  1757;  died  there,  August  12, 
1827. 

Cradle  Song 81 

Holy  Thursday 174 

Infant  Joy 4 

Lamb,  The 48 

Little  Black  Boy,  The 156 

Night 1,521 

Nurse's  Song 151 

Reeds  of  Innocence 126 

Shepherd,  The 153 

Song,    "My   silks   and    fine 

array" looi 

Tiger,  The • 140 

To  Spring 1542 

To  the  Muses 3096 

Blamire,  Susanna 

Born  near  Carlisle,  England,  in  1747; 
died  at  Carlisle,  April  5,  1704. 

The  Siller  Croun 943 

Blanchard,  Samuel  Laman 

Born  al  Great  Yarmouth,  England, 
May  IS,  1S04;  suicided  in  London, 
February  /?,  1S4S. 

Nell  Gwynne's  Looking-glass  1766 

Bland,  Mrs.  Hubert,  see  Nesbit, 
Edith. 

Blanden,  Charles  Granger 
Born  al  Marengo.  III..  January  ig, 

1857:  now  living  in  Chicago. 

"John  Anderson,  My  Jo".  .  3560 
Song  the  Grass  Sings,  A. .  .  .  1488 
The  Songs  I  Sing 3085 

Blind,  Mathilde 

Born  at  Mannheim,  Germany,  March 
21 .  1841 .  the  daughter  of  a  banker  named 
Cohen,  but  took  the  name  acquired  by 
her  mnlher  by  her  second  marriage: 
taken  to  London  at  the  age  of  eight,  and 
died  there.  November  26,  i8g6. 

April  Rain 1443 

Blunt,  Wilfrid  Scawen 

Born  in  Sussex.  England,  August  17, 

1S40.  and  still  living  there. 

Gibraltar 2230    • 

Old  Squire,  The 1638 

Pleasures  of  Love,  The 1261 


To  Manon 852 

To  One  Who  Would  Make  a 
Confession 1261 

BoKER,  George  Henry 

Born  at  Philadclpliia.  Pa.,  October  6, 
1823;  died  there  in  j8qo. 

Ballad  of   Sir  John  Frank- 
lin, A 2465 

Black  Regiment,  The 2500 

Dirge  for  a  Soldier 2315 

To  England 2225 

BONAR,  HoRATIUS 

Born  al  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  Decem- 
ber iQ,  1808;  died  there,  July  31 ,  i88g. 

Be  True 293s 

"Beyond    the    Smiling   and 

the  Weeping" 3490 

"He     Liveth     Long     Who 

Liveth  Well" 3716 

How  We  Learn 3717 

Lost  but  Found 3757 

Master's  Touch,  The 37 17 

Voice  from  Galilee,  The. .  .  .   3810 

BosTwicK,  Helen  Louise  Barron 

An  American  writer,  born  in  1826  at 
Charlestown.  N.  II. 

Little  Dandelion 12S 

BouRDiLLON,  Francis  William 

An  English  ■writer,  born  March  22, 
i8s2,  and  now  living  near  Midhurst, 
Sussex. 

All's  Well 2561 

Aucassin  and  Nicolete 1768 

Eurydice 911 

"Night    Has    a    Thousand 

Eyes,  The" 863 

"Where  Runs  the  River".  .    2S42 

Bowen,  Edward  Ernest 

Born  at   Woolaston,   near  Chepstow, 

England.   March  30,   1836;  died  near 

Moux,  Frawe.  April  8,  igoi. 

Forty  Years  On 421 

Shemuel 3578 

BowEN,  Robert  Adgee 

Born  at  Charleston.  ,S.  C,  Dec.  30, 
1868;  present  address.  New  York  City. 
Gloaming 1315 

Bowles,  William  Lisle  j 

Born  at  King's  Sutton,  Northampton-       J 
shire,    England,    September    24,    1762;       il 
died  at  Salisbury,  England,  in  1S50. 
Butterfly  and  the  Bee,  The.     116 

Dover  Cliffs 3257 

Time  and  Grief 335  2 

BowRiNG,  [Sir]  John 

Born  at  Exeter,  England,  October  17, 
I7g2;  died  there,  November  23,  1872. 
"In   the  Cross  of  Christ  I 
Glorj' 3802 

Boyd,  Thomas 

An  Irish  writer,  born  in  1867,  and 
still  living. 

Love  on  the  Mountain 648 


Index  of  Authors 


3^SS 


Bovr.K,  Sarah  Roberts 

Bnrii  al  Portsinoulli,  N.  U .,  in  1S12; 
died  in  New  York  City,  in  i86q. 

The  Voice  of  the  Grass 14S7 

Bradley,  Mary  Emily 

Born  al  Eastim,  Mil.,  in  1S35;  died 
at  Washinglnn.  D.  C,  in  i8gS. 

A  Chrysalis 1  300 

Bradley,  William  Aspenwall 

Born  al  llarljord.  Conn.,  February  8, 

1S78;  now  livini"  at  New  Canaan,  Conn. 

To  Little  Rcncc 6 

Braithwaite,  William  Stanley 
Born  at  Boston,  i\fass.,  December  6, 
1878;  now  living  al  Cambridge,  Mais. 
Sic  Vita 1,50.5 

Brainard,  John  Gardiner  Cal- 
kins 

Born  at  New  London,  Conn.,  October 
21,  i7q6;  died  there,  September  26.  1828. 
"I     Saw    Two    Clouds    at 
Morning" iig6 

Branch,  Anna  Hempste^vd 

Born  al  New  London,  Conn.,  and 
still  livint;  there. 

"Grieve  Not,  Ladies" S57 

To  a   New  York  Shop-girl, 

Dressed  for  Sunday 3021 

Warrior  Maid,  The 2821 

Branch,  Mary  Lydia  Bolles 

Born  at  .Vcii'  London,  Conn.,  June  7j, 
1840,  and  still  living,  there. 

The  Petrified  Fern 2859 

Brenan,  Joseph 

Born  al  Cork,  Ireland,  November  17, 
1828,  fled  In  America  in  1S40,  and  died 
al  New  Oilcans,  La.,  in  1857. 

"Come  to  Me,  Dearest". . .     982 

Breton,  Nicholas 

Born  in  London.  England,  about 
154a:  and  died  there  about  1626. 

A  Cradle  Sony 10.56 

Philiida  and  Coridon 716 

Bridges,  Madeline,  see  De  Vere 
Mary  Ainge. 

Bridges,  Robert 

An  Eni^liih  writer,  born  October  23, 
1844.  and  now  living  at  Oxford. 

"Awake,  My  Heart" 50S 

"Mv  Delight  and  Thy  De- 

liKht". 1158 

Passer-by,  A 1600 

'■'So  Sweet  Love  Seemed".  .     920 
To     the     United    States    of 

America 2363 

Triolet 1903 

"When     Death     to    Either 
Shall  Come" 1168 


Brome,  Alexander 

Born  in  London  in  1620,  and  died 
there,  June  30,  1666. 

Why  I  Love  Her 606 

Bronte,  Emily  Jane 

Born  in  Yorkshire,  England,  in  1S18; 
died  there  in  1848. 

Last  Lines 3.186 

Remembrance log.s 

Song.    "The    linnet   in    the 

rocky  dells" 1096 

Stanzas,  "Often  rebuked, 
yet  always  back  return- 
ing"    2928 

Brooke,  Rupert 

Born  at  Rugby,  England.  August  .?, 
18S7;  died  on  the  island  of  Scyros. 
April  2,;,  ;y;7,  while  with  the  English 
expedition  to  titc  Dardanelles. 

Busy  Heart,  The 1270 

Dust 1 137 

Hill,  The, 1270 

1914 2SAA. 

"Oh,  Death  Will  Find  Me"    1269 
Song,    "Oh!     Love!"    they 

said,  "is  King  of  Kings"..     580 
"There's         VVisdom         in 
Women" 1055 

Brooke,  Stopford  Augustus 

Born  near  Leilcrkenny,  Ireland.  No- 
I'nnbcr  14.  1832;  died  at  Ewhurst, 
Surrey.  England.  March  j8.  IQ16. 

The  Earth  and  Man 2909 

Brooks,  Charles  Timothy 

Horn  at  Salem,  Mass.,  June  20,  1813; 
died  at  Newport.  R.  I.,  June  14,  i8Sj;. 
The  Great  Voices 2972 

Brooks,       Charles       William 
Shirley 

Born  in  Lomlon,  England,  April  20, 
1816:  died  there  February  2j,  1874. 
Mentioned  as  the  author  of  the  Lincoln 
poem  in  Spiclmann's  "History  of 
Punch" — probably  a  slip  nf  the  pen. 
Abraham  Lincoln 3642 

Brooks,  Phillips 

Born  at  Boston.  Mass.,  December  7.j, 
18  J$;  died  there.  January  2?,  i8ijj. 
"O  Little  Town  of  Bethle- 
hem " 203 

Brough,  Robert  Barnabas 

Born  in  London.  Englaiul,  April  in, 

1828;  died  al  Manchester,  June  26,  i86n. 

The  Marquis  of  Carabas .  .  .    1843 

Brown,  Abbie  Farwell 

Born  in  Boston,  Mass.,  and  still  living 

there. 

Fairy  Book,  The 246 

Friends 112 

Brown,  .\lice 

Born  at  Hampton  Falls.  N.  11.,  De- 
cember s,  1857;  now  living  in  Boston. 


3^6 


Index  ot  Authors 


Benedictine  Garden,  A 1451 

Edwin  Booth 35QO 

Farewell,  A 929 

Hora  Christ! 3772 

Sunrise  on  Mansfield  Moun- 
tain     13 1 1 

The  West-Country  Lover. .  .     669 

Brown,  Joseph  Brownlee 

Born  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1824; 
died  at  Brooklyn,  N .  Y.,in  1SS8. 

"Thalatta!    Thalatta" 3499 

Brown,  Thomas  Edward 

Born   at  Douglas,   Isle  of  Man,   in 

1830;  died  at  Clifton,  October  jo,  iSgy. 

Jessie 887 

My  Garden 1446 

Salve 2999 

Brown,  William  Goldsmith 
Born  at  Wliitingimm,  Vt.,  in  1812; 

died  in  Wisconsin  in  1006. 

A  Hundred  Years  to  Come.    3470 
"Mother,  Home,  Heaven".    3244 

Brown,     William     Laird,     see 
Laird,  William. 

Browne,  Francis  Fisher 

Born  at  South  IJalifax,  Vermont, 
December  i,  1843;  died  al  Chicago,  III., 
May  II,  1Q13. 

Vanquished 3609 

Browne,  [Sir]  Thomas 

Born  in  London,  England,  October  ig, 
i6n$;  died  al  Norwich,  England,  Oc- 
tober IQ,  i68z. 

"Love   Who   Will,    for   I'll 
Love  None" 817 

Browne,  William 

Born  at  Tavistock,  England,  in  isgi; 
died  there,  probably  in  March,  1643. 

Complete  Lover, "The 528 

Epitaph    on    the    Countess 
Dowager  of  Pembroke ..  .   3518 

Memory 93 1 

Rose.  The 1498 

Song,  "  Shall  I  tell  you  whom 

V   I  love" 815 

Welcome,  A 527 

Brownell,  Henry  Howard 

Born  at  Providence,  R.  I..  February  6, 
i8jo;  died  at  East  Hartford,  Conn.. 
October  31,  1872. 

The  Burial  of  the  Dane.  .  ,  .    1626 

Brownino,  Elizabeth  Barrett 
Born  at  Durham.  England,  March  6. 

i8ng;  died  at  Florence,  Italy,  June  ;o, 

1861. 

Comfort 3766 

Court  Lady,  A 33x5 

Cowper'fi  Grave 3601 

Cry  of  the  Children,  The. .  .      283 

Deserted  Garden,  The 1455 

Grief. 33.^3 

Inclusions 872 

Lady's  "Yes,"  The 632 


Lessons  from  the  Gorse.  .  .  .  i486 

Mother  and  Poet 3555 

Musical  Instrument,  A 1324 

My  Heart  and  1 1083 

Pet  Name,  The 455 

Portrait,  A 338 

Rosalind's  Scroll 1085 

Sea-mew,  The 1563 

Sleep,  The 3412 

Sonnets  from  "  Sonnets  from 

the  PortuRucse" 1276 

Valediction,  A 960 

Weakest  Thing,  The 3385 

Woman's  Shortcomings,  A. .  495 

Browning,  Robert 

Born  in  London,  England,  May  7. 
1812;  died  at  Venice,  Italy,  December  12, 
iS8q. 

Abt  Vogler 313S 

Adam,  Lilith,  and  Eve 848 

Andrea  del  Sarto 839 

Bishop  Orders  His  Tomb  at 

St.  Praxed's  Church,  The  1862 

Cavalier  Tunes 2283 

"DeGustibus — " 261 1 

Earl  Mertoun's  Song 1156 

Epilogue  from  "Asolando".   3503 

Evelyn  Hope 1094 

Flower's  Name,  The 964 

Grammarian's  Funeral,  A.  .    2871 

Guardian-Angel,  The 2620 

Her\e  Riel 2804 

Home       Thoughts,       from 

Abroad I353 

How     They     Brought     the 

Good   News   from   Ghent 

to  Ai.\- 2732 

Incident     of     the     French 

Camp 2449 

Last  Ride  Together,  The. . .     877 

Life  in  a  Love 638 

Light  Woman.  A 1029 

Lost  Leader,  The 1836 

Lost  Mistress,  The . 848 

Love  Among  the  Ruins.  .  .  .    1154 

Love  in  a  Life 637 

Meeting  at  Night 1157 

Memorabilia 3657 

Muckle-mouth  Meg 781 

My  Last  Duchess 846 

My  Star 1321 

"Never  the  Time  and  the 

Place" 88s 

One  Way  of  Love 884 

One  Word  More 1284 

Parting  at  Morning. _ 1157 

Pied  Piper  of  Hamelin,  The,     192 

Porphyria's  Lover 1003 

Prospice 34^4 

Rabbi  Ben  Ezra 411 

Song.  "  Nay  but  you,  who  do 

not  love  her" 553 

Song,  "The  moth's  kiss  first"    688 
Song,    "The   year's   at    the 

spring" 1333 

Song,  "There's  a  woman  like 

a  dew-drop" iis6. 

Song,  "You'll  love  me  yet".     637 

Song  from  Paracelsus 3192 

Summum  Bonum 689 

Toccata  01  Galuppi's,  A..  .  .    3133 
Two  in  the  Campagna 8S2 


Index  of  Authors 


3857 


Up  at  a  Villa.  Down  in  the 

City i8fi5 

Woman's  Last  Word,  A.  ..  .  876 

Youth  and  Art 880 

Bryant,  William  Cullen 

Bnrn    at    Cummini;lon,    Mass.,  N<>- 

rember  5,  1794;  died  in  ^ew  York  City, 

June  12,  iS~S. 

Death  of  the  Flowers.  The..  1505 

Gladness  o£  Nature,  The ..  .  139 

June 3457 

"Oh    Mother  of   a   Mighty 

Race" 2203 

Planting  of  the  Apple-Tree, 

The 1411 

Robert  of  Lincoln 1528 

Seventy-six. 2431 

Snow-shower,  The 1301 

Song  of  Marion's  Men 2432 

Thanatopsis 3444 

To  a  Waterfowl 1582 

To  a  Fringed  Gentian 1484 

Buchanan,  Robert  William 

Born   in   Staffordshire,   En^tand,   in 
1841:  died  in  London  in  it)(il. 
Ballad    of    Judas    Iscariot, 

The 27gi 

Churchyard,  The 343S 

Langley  Lane 3383 

Spring  Song  in  the  City.  . .  .    1672 
Tom  Dunstan,  or,  The  Poli- 
tician    3018 

Buck,  Richard  Henry 

An  American  writer,  born  in  iSdg, 
at  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Kentucky  Babe 91 

Buckingham,  Duke  of,  see  Shef- 
field, John 

Bulwer-Lyttox,  see  Lytton. 

BuNNER,  Henry  Cuyler 

Born  at  O.swego,  X.   Y.,  Aiinust  3, 

IBS';:  died  at  Niitlev,  N.  J.,  May  it, 

i8g6. 

Behold  the  Deeds 21S9 

('andor 787 

Chaperon,  The I79S 

Da  Capo 82S 

Pitcher  of  Mignonette,  A..  .    1796 

"She  Was  a  Beauty" 1765 

Strong  as  Death 1080 

Yes? 804 

Bunyan,  John 

Born  at  Elslow,  Bedfordshire,  Eng- 
land, in  November,  1628;  died  in  Lon- 
don, August  31,  1688. 

The  Pilgrim 37iS 

The  Shepherd  Boy  Sings  in 
the  Valley  of  Humiliation  3714 

Burgess,  Frank  Gelett 

Born  at  Boston.  Mass.,  January  30, 
1 866.  and  still  living  there. 

Nonsense  Verses 2086 

The  Purple  Cow 2085 


BuRNAND,  ISiRJ  Francis  Cowley 
A  n  English  writer,  born  November  2g, 
1836;  died  in  London  in  1017. 

His  Heart  Was  True  to  Poll  2076 

Burnett,  Dana 

Born   at   Cincinnati,   Ohio,   July   3, 
1888;  now  living  in  New  York  City. 
Song,  "Love's  on  the  high- 
road"      627 

Burns,  Robert 

Born  at  .Alloway,  Scotland.  Janu- 
ary 25.  1759;  died  at  Dumfries,  Scot- 
land, July  21 ,  I7q6. 

Address  to  the  Unco  Guid, 

An 1869 

Ae  Fond  Kiss 945 

Auld  Lang  Syne 464 

Bonnie  Doon 1044 

"Bonnie  Wee  Thing" 622 

Bruce  to  His  Men  at  Ban- 

nockburn 2350 

Chloe 540 

"Comin'  through  the  Rye"     727 
Cotter's     Saturday     Night, 

The 3246 

"  Day  Returns,  The" 94s 

Farewell,  The 2275 

"Flow    Gently,    Sweet    Af- 

ton" 1425 

"  For  a'  That  and  a'  That" . .  3034 
"Green   Grow   the   Rashes, 

O" 727 

"Here's  a  Health  to  Them 

That's  Awa'" 2275 

Highland  Mary 107 1 

I  Love  My  Jean 947 

John  Anderson 1224 

John  Barleycorn 2000 

Lament  for  CuUoden 2420 

Mary  Morison 697 

My  Bonnie  Mary 946 

"My  Heart's  in  the  High- 
lands " ififig 

My  Nannie's  Awa' 944 

"  My  Wife's  a  Winsome  Wee 

Thing" 120S 

"O  Mally's  Meek,  Mally's 

Sweet" 541 

"OSaw  Ye  Bonnie  Lesley".     331 
"O    Were    My    Love    Yon 

Lilac  Fair"     621 

On  a  Henpecked  Squire  ....    19 19 
Prayer   in   the   Prospect  of 

Death.  A 3455 

Red,  Red  Rose,  A. 94b 

Song,  "Again  rejoicing  Na- 
ture sees" 1341 

Tam  o'Shanter 2106 

To  a  Mountain  Daisy. .-. . .    1474 

To  a  Mouse _ 1507 

To  Mary  in  Heaven .  ." 1072 

Winter:  a  Dirge 1386 

Burr,  Amelia  Josephine 

Born  in  New   Yoik   City   in  1878, 

now  living  at  Englewood,  .V.  /. 

New  Life i349 

Nocturne u66 

Perugia 2621 

Poet  Enlists,  A 2564 

Song  of  Living,  A 3479 


3^^ 


Index  of  Authors 


Surrender 1 166 

To  Her — Unspoken 1029 

Where  Love  Is 659 

Burroughs,  John 

Born  at  Roxhury,  N.   Y.,  April  3, 
iSjy;  now  living  at  Wesl  Park,  N.  Y. 
Waiting 3495 

Burton,  Richard  Eugene 

Born  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  March  14, 

1S50;  now  living  at  Minneapolis,  Minn. 

Across  the  Fields  to  Anne,  .     801 

Black  Sheep 3058 

City  of  the  Dead,  The 3440 

Love  is  Strong 507 

Of  Those  Who  Walk  Alone .     382 
Sealed  Orders 3478 

Burton,  [Sir]  Richard  Francis 

Born  in  Hertfordshire,  England, 
March  IQ,  iSzi;  died  at  Trieste,  Austria, 
October  20.  iSqo. 

The  Kasidah  (II  and  IX).  .    28S7 

Butler,  William  Allen 

Born  at  Albany,  N.  Y..  February  20 
1825,  died  in  New  York  City,  in  IQ02. 

"All's  Well" 3760 

"Nothing  to  Wear" 2154 

Butts,  Mrs.  Mary  Frances 

Born  in  Rhode  Island  in  1836,  and 
still  living. 

Trot,  Trot 84 

Byers,   Samuel  Hawkins  Mar- 
shall 
Born  at  Pulaski,  Pa.,  July  23,  1S38; 
now  living  at  Des  Moines,  Iowa. 
Song  of  Sherman's  March  to 
the  Sea 2512 

Bynner,  Witter 

Born  in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,  August  10, 
18S1;  now  living  at  Windsor,  Vt. 

Mystic.  The ■.     680 

Sentence 3553 

Songs  Ascending 579 

Byrd,  William 

Born  in  London,  England,  about 
IS38;  died,  probably  at  Stondon,  Eng- 
land, July  4,  1623. 

The  Quiet  Life 1654 

Byeom,  John 

Born  at  Broughton.  England,  Febru- 
ary 2Q,  i6q2;  di^d  at  Manchester,  Eng- 
land, .September  26,  1763. 

Careless  Content 2989 

Epigrams 1918 

Byron,  George  Gordon  [Sixth 
Lord] 
Born  in  London.  Englaiul,  January 
22,  1788;  died  at  Missalonghi,  Greece, 
April  IQ,  1824. 

Destruction  of  Sennacherib, 

The 2327 

Epigram 1917 


Eve  of  Waterloo,  The 2450 

Fare  Thee  Well 950 

"Farewell!  If  Ever  Fondest 

Prayer" ioc2 

First  Kiss  of  Love,  The.  . .  .  686 

From  the  Turkish 103 1 

Isles  of  Greece,  The 2623 

"Maid  of  Athens,  Ere  We 

Part" ._.  951 

"Oh!      Snatched   Away   in 

Beauty's  Bloom" 1082 

On  This  Day  I  Complete  my 

Thirty-si.xth  Year 360 

Prisoner  of  Chillon,  The. ..  .  3273 

Sea,  The 1586 

"She  Walks  in  Beauty"... .  383 
Stanzas,    "Could   Love   for 

Ever" 491 

Stanzas  for  Music 355 

Stanzas  for  Music 546 

Stanzas     'Written     on     the 
Road    between    Florence 

and  Pisa 354 

To  Woman 834 

Venice 2618 

Vision  of  Belshazzar,  The.  .  2328 
"We'll  Go  no  More  a  Rov- 
ing"   866 

"When  We  Two  Parted"  .  .  952 

Byron,  May  [Mrs.  George  F.] 

Born  in  Cheshire,  Englatul,  in  1S61, 

and  now  living  in  London. 

The  Adventurers 3012 

The  Fairy  Thrall 243 

The  Pageant  of  Seamen. .. .  2827 

The  Storm-Child 20 


Cable,  George  Washington 

Born  at  New  Orleans,  La.,  October  12, 
1844;  present  address,  Northampton, 
Mass. 

The  New  Arrival 1928 

Calverley,  Charles  Stuart 
Born     at     Martley,     Worcestershire, 

England,  December  22,  1831;  died  in 

London,  February  17,  1S84. 

Alphabet,  The 2049 

Ballad 1939 

Companions 1736 

Disaster 1929 

Ode  to  Tobacco 1983 

Campbell,  Thomas 

Born  at  Glasgow,  Scollatid,  July  22, 

1777;  died  at  Boulogne,  France,  June  1$, 

1844. 

Battle  of  the  Baltic 2441 

Beech  Tree's  Petition,  The.    1410 

E.\ile  01  Erin 2252 

Glenara 2722 

Hallowed  Ground 3432 

Hohenlinden 2440 

Lord  Ullin's  Daughter 2723 

Margaret  and  Dora 544 

River  of  Life.  The 407 

Soldier's  Dream,  The 2281 

Song,   "Earl  March  looked 
on  his  dying  child" io77 


Index  of  Authors 


3859 


Song,  "How  delicious  Ls  the 

winning" 4qo 

Song  to  the  Evening  Star..  .    13 19 

To  the  Rainbow 1444 

"  Ye  Mariners  of  England  " .   2233 

Campion,  Thomas 

Born   in   Essex,   England,   dale   un- 

knoTvn;  died  in  London,  in  February, 

161Q. 

Advice  to  a  Girl 810 

Amarillis 524 

Cherry-ripe 524 

Her  Sacred  Bower 587 

Integer  Vita? 2912 

Jack  and  Joan 767 

"  Rind  Are  Her  Answers".  .  591 

"Love  Me  or  Not" 589 

Of  Corinna's  Singing S90 

"Sleep.  Angry  Beauty".  . .  .  694 

Song,  "O  sweet  delight".  .  .  1141 
"There   is   None,  O,   None 

but  You" 589 

To  Lesbia 588 

Vobiscum  Est  lope 850 

"Were  My  Heart  as  Some 

Men's  Are" Sgo 

Canning,  George 

Born  in  London,  England,  April  it, 
1770;  died  at  Cltiswick,  England, 
Aiigusl  S,  1S27. 

The  Friend  of  Humanity 
and  the  Knife-Grinder.  .  .   1S56 

Canton,  William 

Born  on  the  Island  of  Cliusan,  in  the 
China  Sea,  October  27.  1845;  present 
address,  Berkhamsted,  England. 

Crow,  The 1536 

Laus  Infantium 253 

New  Poet,  A 269 

Carbery,  Ethna  [Mrs.  Seumas 

Macmanus) 
An  Irish  writer,  who  died  in  IQ02. 

Hills  o'  My  Heart 2267 

Carevv,  Thomas 

Born  in  London,  England,  about 
J5qS;  died  there  abmil  i6sg. 

Disdain  Returned 817 

Ingrateful  Beauty  Threat- 
ened      816 

Mediocrity  in  Love  Re- 
jected       Sq8 

Persaasions  to  Enjoy 597 

Song,    "Ask    me    no    more 

where  Jove  bestows".  .  .  .     530 
To  My  Inconstant  Mistress.     597 

Carey,  Henry 

An  English  writer,  born  about  1700; 
died  in  London.  October  4,  1743. 

"God  Save  the  King" 2231 

Harry  Carey's  General  Re- 
ply to  the  Libelling  Gen- 
try  • 199s 

Maiden's  Ideal  of  a  Hus- 
band, A 722 

Sally  in  Our  Alley 769 


Carlyle,  Jane  Baillie  Welsh 

Born  at  Haddington,  Englatid,  July 
14,  1 801;  died  London.  April  21,  1S66. 
To  a  Swallow,  Building  Un- 
der Our  Eaves 1573 

Carlyle,  Thomas 

Born  at  Ecclefechan,  Dumfriesshire, 
Scollatul,  December  4,  1795;  died  in 
London.  England,  February  4,  18S1. 

Adieu 954 

Cui  Bono 3377 

To-day 2920 

Carman,  William  Bliss 

Born  at  Frcdcricton,  N .  B.,  April  75, 
1S61 ;  present  address.  New  Canaan,  CI. 

Autumn  Garden,  An 1452 

Daisies 1478 

Deserted  Pasture,  The 1438 

Envoy    from    "  Songs    from 

Vagabondia  " 2858 

Hack  and  Hew 3139 

Hem  and  Haw 1887 

Joys  of  the  Road,  The 1694 

"Lord  of  My  Heart's  Ela- 
tion"     2852 

Marian  Drury 998 

Mendicants,  The 1692 

"Over  the  Wintry  Threshold"  1349 

Sea  Child,  A 1041 

Song,  "Love,  by  that  loos- 
ened hair" 577 

Spring  Song 1689 

Vagabond  Song,  A 1689 

Carnegie    [Sir]    James    [Sixth 
Earl  of  Southesk] 
Born  at  Kinnaird,  Scotland,  in  1827; 
died  in  igos. 

The  Flitch  of  Dunmow 2176 

Carney,  Julia  Fletcher 

Born  at  Lancaster,  Mass.,  April  6, 
1823;  died  at  Galesburg,  III.,  in  iQu8. 
Little  Things 103 

Carroll,  Lewis  [Ch.a.rles  Lut- 
wiDGE  Dodgson] 
Born  at  Daresbury.  England.  Jan- 
uary 27.  1832;  died  at  Guildford,  Eng- 
land, January  14.  i8qS. 

Father  William 1927 

Gardener's  Song,  The 2060 

Jabberwocky 2059 

Walrus  and  the  Carpenter  .    2062 
Whiting  and  the  Snail.  The    1934 

Carruth,  William  Herbert 

Born  at  Osaivatomie,  Kansas, 
April 3.  iSsq;  present  address,  Stanford 
University,  Cal. 

Each  in  His  Own  Tongue. .  .    2867 

Carryx,  Charles  Edward 

Born  in  New  York  City,  December  30, 
1 841,  and  stilt  living  there. 

My  Recollectest  Thoughts. .    207 1 

Nautical  Ballad,  A.  ." 2079 

Plaint  of  the  Camel,  The..  .    2080 
Robinson  Crusoe 2184 


3860 


Index  of  Authors 


Carryl,  Guy  Wetmore 

Born  in  New  York  Cily,  March  4, 
1873;  died  April  i,  IQ04. 

Red  Ridinghood 2077 

The    Sycophantic    Fox   and 

the  Gullible  Raven 1854 

When  the  Great  Gray  Ships 
Come  In 2343 

Cartwright,  William 

Born   at   Northway,    Gloucestershire, 
England,  in  .September,   1611;  died  at 
Oxford,  England,  November  zg,  1643. 
To  Chloe 603 

Gary,  Alice 

Born  near  Cincinnati,  O.,  April  20, 

1820;  died  in  N.  ¥.  Cily,  Feb.  12,  i8yi. 

Dying  Hymn 3492 

Make  Believe 690 

Gary,  FaaiSK 

Born  near  Cincinnati,  0.,  Sep.  4, 
1824;  died  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  July  31, 
1S71.  ■ 

Legend  of  the  Northland,  A.    143 

Lovers,  The 2067 

Nearer  Home 3813 

"When  Lovely  Woman". .  .    1923 

Gase,  Elizabeth  York 

An  American  writer;  no  biographical 
data  available. 

Unbelief 3762 

Gather,  Willa  Sibert 

Born  at  Winchester,  Va.,  December  7, 
^8/$;  present  address.  New  York  City. 
"Grandmither,  Think  not  I 

Forget" 1033 

L'Envoi 3429 

Likeness,  A 1794 

Catullus,  Gaius  Valerius 

Born  at  Verona,  Italy,  about  87  B.  C; 
died  about  54  B.  C. 

Vivamus,  Mea  Lesbia 3827 

Cawein,  Madison  Julius 

Born  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  March  23, 
1865;  died  there  December  7 ,  IQI4. 

Ballad  of  Low-lie-Down. .. .    1699 

Enchantment 1406 

"Here  is   the  Place  Where 

Loveliness  Keeps  House".  1302 
Miracle  of  the  Dawn,  The.  .    1308 

Morning  Serenade 700 

Old  Home,  The 3233 

To  a  Wind-Flower 1503 

Gayley,  George  John 
Born  in  1826;  died  in  1878. 

An  Epitaph 1919 

GeLANO,  T0MMASO  DI 

A  Franciscan  monk,  born  at  Celano, 

Italy,  about  iiS^,  arui  died  about  1255. 

Dies  Irse 3819 


Chalkhill,  John 

An  English  writer,  two  of  whose  songs 
were  included  by  Isaac  Walton  in  "  The 
Compleat  Angler,"  published  about  1648. 

Angler,  The 1665 

Coridon's  Song 1636 

Ghalmers,  Patrick  R. 
An  Irish-born  writer,  now  living  in 

London. 

"Hold" 1832 

The  Road 760 

The  Visitor 247 

Ghambers,  Robert  William 

Born  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  May  26, 

i86s,  and  still  living  in  New  York  City. 

The  "Grey  Horse  Troop"..     2291 

The  Recruit 1977 

Ghanning,  William  Ellery 

Born  in  Boston,  Mass.,  November  2Q, 
1818;  died  in  igoi. 

Edith 3217 

Ghapman,  Arthur 

Born  at  Rockford,  III.,  June  25,  1873, 
and  now  living  at  Denver,  Colo. 

Out  Where  the  West  Begins  2574 

Ghatterton,  Thomas 

Born  at  Bristol,  England,  November 
20, 1752;  suicided  in  London,  August  25, 
7770. 

The  Minstrel's  Song 1070 

Gheney,  John  Vance 

Born  at  Grovelatul,  N.  Y.,  December 
2Q,  1848;  present  address,  San  Diego, 
Cal. 

The  Happiest  Heart 2994 

The  Man  with  the  Hoe,  a 

Reply 3043 

The  Way  of  It 1049 

Gherry,  Andrew 

Born  at  Limerick,  Ireland,  January 
IT,  1762;  died  at  Monmouth,  England, 
February  12,  1S12. 

The  Green  Little  Shamrock 
of  Ireland 2264 

Ghesson,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  see  Hop- 
per, Nora. 

Ghesterton,  Gilbert  Keith 
Born  in  London,  England,  in   1874, 

and  still  living  there. 

Ballade  of  Suicide,  A 1787 

Christmas  Carol,  A 212 

Feast  of  the  Snow,  The.  .  .  .     214 
House  of  Christmas,  The. .  .      213 
Songs  of  Guthrum  and  Al- 
fred, The 2823 

ToM.E.  W 3482 

Chew,  Beverly 

Born  at  Geneva,  New  York,  March  5, 
1S50;  now  living  in  New  York  City. 
"Old  Books  are  Best" 1579 


Index  of  Authors 


3861 


Child,  Lydia  Maria 

Born  at  Mcdjord,  Mass.,  February  11, 
1802;  died  al  Wayland,  Mass.,  October 
20.  1S80. 

The    World    I    am    Passing 
Through 40S 

Chorley,  Henry  Fothergill 

Born  at  B.acklcy  Hurst,  Lancashire, 
England,  December  1$,  iSoS;  died  in 
London.  February  16,  1872. 

The  Brave  Old  Oak 1403 

Cibber,  Colley 

Born  in  London.  England-,  Novem- 
ber 6,  16/1;  died  there,  December  12, 
1757. 

The  Blind  Boy 157 

Clare,  John 

Born  at  Helpstone,  Enfjatui,  July  13. 
1793;  died  in  tite  asylum  al  North- 
ampton, May  20,  1864,  having  been  in- 
sane since  i8j7. 

My  Early  Home 3233 

Clarke,  James  Freeman 

Born  at  Hanover,  N.  H.,  April  4, 
iSio;  died  at  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass., 
June  8,  1SS8. 

Rabia 2953 

Clarke,  Joseph  Ignatius  Con- 
stantine 
Born  at  Kingstown,  Ireland,  July  31 , 
1846;  came  to  the  United  States  in  1S68; 
present  address.  New  York  City. 

The  Fighting  Race 229S 

Cleaveland,  C.  L. 
No  biographical  data  available. 

November 1384 

Cleghorn,  Sarah  Norcliffe 
Born  at  Norfolk,   Va.,  February  4, 

1S76;  now  living  at  Manchester,  Vl. 

Emilia 346 

Hemlock  Mountain 1436 

Clephane,  Elizabeth  Cecilia 

Born  at  Edinburgh,  Scotlatul,  in  1830; 
died  at  Melrose,  in  i86q. 

The  Lost  Sheep 37S6 

Clerk,  [Sir]  John 

Born  at  Penicuik,  Scotland,  in  1684, 
died  there.  October  4,  i7S5- 

"O  Merry  may  the  Maid  Be"     772 

Clifford,   Ethel   [Mrs.   Fisher 
Wentworth  Dilke] 
An   English    writer,    now   living   in 
London. 

The  Dark  Road 3559 

The  Harp  of  Sorrow 3360 

The  Last  Hour 1 295 

Cloud,  Virginia  Woodward 

Born  at  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  still 
living  there. 

Care 3373 


Clough,  Arthur  Hugh 

Born  at  Liverpool,  F,ngland,  January 
J,  18 iq;  died  at  Florence,  Italy,  Novem- 
ber 13,  1861. 

Peschiera 247 1 

Qua  Cursum  Ventus 3033 

"Say      not      the      Struggle 

Naught  Availeth" 2839 

Sic  Itur 3037 

"Where  Lies  the  Land". .. .   3414 

CoATES,  Florence  Earle 

Born  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1850, 
and  still  living  there. 

Angelus,  The 3646 

Death 3430 

House  of  Pain,  The 3386 

Morning-glory,  The 1494 

Song,  "I  love  and  the  world 

is  mine" 1148 

Cochrane,  Alfred 

An  English  writer,  born  in  1865,  and 
now  living  at  Ncwcastte-on-Tync. 

Eight-day  Clock,  The 1756 

Omnia  Vincit 744 

To  Anthea,  Who  May  Com- 
mand Him  Anything I7SS 

Upon  Lcsbia — Arguing i7S4 

Cochrane,  Frances 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Face  to  Face 915 

Cocke,  Zitella 

Born  in  Perry  County,  Ala.,  in  1847; 

and  now  living  al  Boston,  Mass. 

Miss  Nancy's  Gown 1802 

My  Cross 3463 

Coe,  Alice  Rollitt 

An  American  writer;  no  biographical 
data  available. 

The  Turn  of  the  Road 11 24 

Cole,  Timothy 

Born  in  London,  England,  in  1852; 
came  to  America,  1857;  now  living  al 
Poughkeepsic,  N .  Y. 

The  Year's  End 425 

Coleridge,  Hartley 

Born  at  Clmcdon,  Somersetshire, 
England.  September  ig,  1706;  died  at 
Rydal,  Westmoreland,  Englatui,  Janu- 
ary 6,  184Q. 

Early  Death 3550 

"Long  Time  a  Child" 40S 

Multum  Dile.xit 33''^7 

Solitary-Hearted.  The 381 

Song,  "  She  is  not  fair  to  out- 
ward view  " 548 

Song,    "Tis   sweet   to   hear 

the  merry  lark" 1554 

To  a  Friend 3015 

To  Shakespeare 3652 

"Whither  is  Gone  the  Wis- 
dom and  the  Power".  .  .  .   30g6 

Coleridge,  Mary  E. 

An  English  writer,  born  in  1861,  died 
August  25,  1907. 

Gone 3005 


3862 


Index  of  Authors 


Coleridge,  Samuel  Taylor 

Born  at  Otter y  Saint  Mary,  Devon- 
shire, England,  Oitoher  zi,  1772;  died 
in  London,  July  25,  1834. 

Answer  to  a  Child's  Ques- 
tion      141 

Cologne 191 1 

Dejection:  An  Ode 3369 

Epigram 1915 

Epigram 1917 

Epigram 1918 

Exchange,  The 726 

Good  Great  Man,  The. 2860 

Hymn  before  Sunrise,  in  the 

Vale  of  Chamouni 1430 

"I    Asked    My    Fair,    One 

Happy  Day" 726 

-     Kubla  Khan 3160 

Love 1173 

Metrical  Feet 3m 

Rime  of  the  Ancient  Mar- 
iner, The 2747 

Work  Without  Hope 3373 

Youth  and  Age 403 

Coleridge,  Sara 

Bnrn  at  Greta  Hall,  near  Keswick, 
England,  December  22,  1802;  died  in 
London,  May  3,  1852. 

The  Garden  Year 61 

Coles,  Abraham 

Born  at  Scotch  Plains,  N.  J.,  in  1S13, 

died  at  Monterey,  Cal.,  in  i8gi. 

Dies  Ira: 3777 

Stabat  Mater  Dolorosa.  ...    3779 

Collins,  John 

Born  at  Bath,  England,  about  1742; 
died  at  Birmingham,  England,  May  2, 
1808. 

Tomorrow 402 

Collins,  Mortimer 

Born  at  Plymouth,  England,  June  2q, 

1827;  died  at  Knowl  Hill,  Berkshire, 

England,  July  28,  1876. 

Ad  Chloen,  M.  A 1899 

If IQ44 

Kate  Temple's  Song 649 

My  Thrush 1580 

ToF.  C 1171 

Collins,  William 

Borti  at  Chichester,  England,  De- 
cember 25,  1721;  died  there,  June  12, 
1759- 

Dirge  in  Cymbeline 3431 

"How  Sleep  the  Brave".. . .    2194 

Ode  to  Evening 1273 

The  Passions 3 119 

Collyer,  Robert 

Born  at  Keighly,  Yorkshire,  England, 
December  8,  1S23;  came  to  America  in 
1850;  died  in  New  York  City,  Novem- 
ber 30,  1Q12. 

Saxon  Grit 2227 

Colman,  George,  the  younger 

Born  in  London,  England.  October  21, 
1762;  died  there.  October  26,  1S36. 

Gluggity  Glug 2n2 


Colton,  Arthur  Willis 

Born  at  Washington,  Conn.,  May  22, 

1868,  a>id  now  living  in  New  York  City. 

Allah's  Tent 3740 

Phyllis  and  Corydon 693 

"Sometime  it  May  Be"..  .  .     927 

Cone,  Helen  Gray 

Born  in  New  York  City,  March  8, 
i8sQ,  and  still  living  there. 

Ballad  of  Cassandra  Brown, 

The 1906 

Chant  of  Love  for  England,  A  255 1 

Common  Street,  The 3021 

Dandelions,  The 1483 

CoLUM,  Padraic 
Born  in  Ireland  in  1881;  now  living 

in  New  York  City. 

Across  the  Door 1145 

Drover,  A 1698 

CoNGREVE,  William 

Born  at  Bardslcy.  near  Leeds,  Eng- 
land, in  February,  1670;  died  in  London, 
January  10,  J72Q. 

"False  Though  She  Be".  .  .      613 

Pious  Selinda 721 

Song,  "See,  see,  she  wakes!"  697 

CoNKLiNG,  Grace  Walcott  Ha- 
zard [Mrs.  R.  p.] 
Born  in  New  York  City  in  1878;  now 
living  at  Northampton,  Mass. 

"The  Little  Rose  is  Dust, 

My  Dear" 1139 

To  a  New-born  Baby  Girl.  .  s 

The  Wind's  Way 3374 

Connell,  F.  Norreys 

An  English  writer;  ?to  biographical 
data  available. 

Requiem 3,Soo 

Constable,  Henry 

Born  at  Neiiiark,  England,  in  J.';62; 
died  at  Liege,  Belgium,  October  0.  161 3. 
Damelus'  Song  of  His  Dia- 

phenia ,';2  2 

Sonnets  from  "Diana" 1245 

Constable,  Thomas 

Born  at  Craigcrook,  near  Edinburgh, 
.Scotland,  Jujie  20.  1812;  died  at  Edin- 
burgh, May  26,  1881. 

Old  October   1383 

Cooke,  Philip  Pendleton 

Born  at  Martinsburgh,   Va.,  October 

26,  1S16;  died  there,  January  20,  1850. 

Florence  Vane 1117 

Cooke,  Rose  Terry 

Born  at  West  Hartford.  Conn..  Feb- 
ruary 17,  1827;  died  at  Pittsfield,  Mass., 
July  18,  i8q2. 

Then 666 

Two  Villages,  The 3442 


Index  of  Authors 


3863 


COOLBRITH,  InA  DoNNA 

Born  in  lltinnis  in  1844,  and  now 
living  al  San  Francisco. 

"  When  the  Grass  shall  cover 
Me" 1114 

CooLiDGE.  Susan,  see  Woolsey, 
Sarah  Chauncey. 

Cooper,  George 

Born  in  New  York  City,  in  1S40. 

Baby-land 55 

October's  Party 152 

Corbet,  Richard 

Born  at  EweU,  Surrey,  England,  in 
jj<S2;  died,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  al  Nor- 
wich, July  28,  163$. 

Farewell  to  the  Fairies 244 

Cornwall,  Barry,  see  Procter, 
Bryan  Waller. 

Cornwell,  Henry  Sylvester 

An  American  wriler,  born  in  1831; 
died  at  New  London,  Conn.,  in  1886. 

May 1362 

The  Sunset  City 3706 

CoRTissoz,       Ellen       Mackay 
Hutchinson 

An  American  writer,   horn  in  New 

York  City,  and  still  living  there. 

Harvest 1370 

Pamela  in  Town 802 

Quest,  The 357 

Cory,     William    Johnson,     see 
johnson-cory,  william. 

Cotton,  Charles 

Born  al  Bcrc.'iford,  Staffordshire,  Eng- 
land, April  28,  1630;  died  in  London 
in  February,  16S7. 

Les  Amours 825 

The  Retirement 1641 

The  Winter  Glass 1004 

ToCelia 609 

Cousins,  James  H. 

Born  in  Ulster.  Ireland,  in  1873,  and 
now  living  in  Dublin. 

A  Starling's  Spring  Rondel.    1337 

Cowley,  Abraham 

Born  in  Lotvlon,  England,  in  1618; 

died    al    Cherlsey,    Surrey,    England, 

July  28.  1667. 

Drinking iQ03 

Epicure,  The i003 

Grasshopper,  The 150Q 

Wish,  The 1655 

CowpER,  William 

Born  at  Great  Bcrkhamfistead,  Flert- 
fordshire.  England.  November  75,  17.3'; 
died  at  East  Dereham,  Norfolk,  Eng- 
land, April  2S,  iSoo. 

Boadicea:  An  Ode 2348 

Cricket,  The 1511 

Diverting   History   of  John 
Gilpin,  The 2093 


Epitaph  on  a  Hare 1823 

Golden  Mean,  The 2091 

Human  Frailty 2861 

Jackdaw,  'J'he 1540 

Light  Shining  out  of  Dark- 
ness   3796 

Lovest  Thou  Me 3809 

Nightingale  and  the  Glow- 
worm, The 179 

On     the     Death     of     Mrs. 

Throckmortcn's  Bullfinch  1824 
On  the  Loss  of  the  "Royal 

George" 2435 

On     the     Receipt     of     My 
Mother's  Picture,  out  of 

Norfolk 3251 

Poplar  Field,  The 1411 

Riddle.  A 685 

Snail,  The 1514 

To  a  Young  Lady 332 

To  Mary  Unwin 1254 

\'erses  Supposed  to  be  Writ- 
ten by  Alexander  Selkirk  .   3038 

Coxe,  Arthur  Cleveland 

Born  at  Mendham,  N.  J .  May  10, 
181S;  died  in  i8(j6. 

He  Standeth  at  the  Door. .  .   3811 

Crabbe,  George 

Born  at  Aldeburgh,  Suffolk,  England, 
December  24.  17^4;  died  al  Trowbridge, 
England,  February  .j,  1832. 

Late  Wisdom 403 

Meeting 621 

Craik,  Dinah  Maria  Mulock 
Born  at  Stoke-on-Trent,  England,  in 

JS26;  died  at  Shorllands,  Kent,  England, 

October  12.  18S7. 

Four  Years 1090 

Green  Things  Growing 1461 

In  Our  Boat 1597 

Lettice 1 208 

Now  and  Afterwards 3572 

"Philip,  My  King" 21 

Plighted ii6r 

Too  Late 1099 

Cranch,  Christopher  Pearse 

Born  at  Alcxamlria,  Va.,  March  8, 
1813;  died  al  Cambridge,  Ma.^s.,  Janu- 
ary 20,  j802. 

Gnosis 2975 

I    in   Thee,   and   Thou    in 

Me 2974 

The  Pines  and  the  Sea ii90 

Crane,  Stephen 

Born  at  Newark,  N.  J.,  in  1870;  died 
in  England  in  iqoo. 

The  Peaks 143? 

Crapsey,  Adelaide 

Born  at  Rochester,  N.  V .,  September 
Q.  187S;  died  at  Saranac  Lake.  N.  Y., 
October  8,  IQ14. 

Dirge ir39 

Rose  Marie  of  the  Angels. .       326 
Song.   "  I  make  my  shroud 

but  no  one  knows" 3478 

Vendor's  Song 3109 


3864 


Index  of  Authors 


Crashaw,  Richard 

Born  in  Lo>ulon,  England,  about 
1613;  died  in  Italy  in  1640. 

Love's  Horoscope 484 

Prayer 3723 

Wishes  to  His  Supposed  Mis- 
tress      820 

Crawford,  Louisa  Macartney 

An  English  tvriler,  ■whose  one  mem- 
orable poem  was  written  about  1840. 
Kathleen  Mavourneen g79 

Crewe,  Marquess  of,  see  Ash- 
burton,  Robert  Offley. 

Croly,  George 

Born  at  Dublin,  Irelami,  in  August, 
1780;  died  in  London,  November  24, 
i860. 

Genius  of  Death,  The 3408 

Leonidas 2345 

Crosby,  Ernest  Howard 

Born  in  New  York  City,  November  4, 
1856;  died  January  3,  IQ07. 

In  the  Garden 138 

Cross,    Marion    Evans   Lewes, 
see  Eliot,  George. 

Cunningham,  Allan 

Born  at  Blackwood,  Dumfriesshire, 
Seolland,  December  7,  1784;  died  in 
London,  October  30,  1842. 

Hame.  Hame,  Hame 3226 

John  Grumlie 2 118 

Spring  of  tlie  Year,  The..  .  .   3561 
"  Sun  Rises  Bright  in  France, 

The" 3259 

"Wet  Sheet  and  a  Flowing 
Sea,  A" 1592 

Cunningham,  John 

Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1720; 
died  at  Newcastle,  England,  September 
18.  1773- 

Kate  of  Aberdeen 538 

Cunninghame-Graham,  Robert 

An  English  writer;  date  of  birth  un- 
known; died  about  17Q7. 

Cavalier's  Song 619 

Curran,'  John  Philpot 

Born  at  Cork,  Ireland,  July  24,  1750; 
died  in  London,  England,  October  14, 
i8i7- 

Cushla  Ma  Chree 2263 

CuRRiE,  Lady,  see  Fane,  Violet. 

Curtis,  George  William 

Born  at  Providence,  R.  I.,  February 
24,  1824;  died  on  Staten  Island,  N.  Y ., 
August  31.  i8q2. 

Ebij  and  Flow 2S49 

Egyptian  Serenade 868 


Custance,  Olive,  Eleanor  [Lady 
Alfred  Douglas] 
An  English  writer,  born  in  1874,  and 

now  living  in  Sussex. 

Parting  Hour,  The 9S5 

Twilight 13 1 7 

CuTTS,  John  [Baron  Cutts  of 
Gowran,  Ireland] 
Born  in  Sussex,  Englaiui,  in  1661; 
died  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  January  26, 
1707. 

Song,  "Only  tell  her  that  I 
love" O13 

D 

Dallas,  Mary  Kyle 

Born  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1830; 
died  in  New  York  City  in  i8q7, 
"He'd  Nothing  but  his  Vio- 
lin"     1202 

Daly,  Thomas  Augustin 

Born  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  May  28, 

1 87 1,  and  still  living  there. 

Da  Leetla  Boy 306 

The  Peaceable  Race 1976 

Dana,  Richard  Henry 

Born  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  November 
i5<  1787;  died  in  Boston,  February  2, 
1879. 

The  Little  Beach  Bird 1522 

Daniel,  John 

Ah  F,ne.lish  writer,  horn  about  i6on. 
"If  I  Could  Shut  the  Gate 
against  my  Thoughts". .  .    3743 

Daniel,  Samuel 

Born  near  Taunton,  Somerset,  Eng- 
land, in  1562;  died  at  Beckingham, 
Somerset,  October  14,  i6ig. 

Song,   "Love   is  a  sickness 

full  of  woes  " 47S 

Sonnets  from  "To  Delia".  .    1239 

Darley,  George 

Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  in  7  7p.?; 
died  in  London,  November  23,  4846, 

Fallen  Star,  The 3746 

Flower  of  Beauty,  The 628 

"It    is    not    Beauty    I    De- 
mand"      547 

Last  Night 954 

Serenade 703 

Darmesteter,  Mrs.,  see  Robin- 
son, A.  M.  F. 

Daubeny,  Charles 

Born  at  Bristol,  Englatid,  in  August, 
1745;  died  at  Salisbury,  England, 
July  10,  1827. 

Verses  on  a  Cat 1822 

D'Avenant,  [Sir]  William 

Born  at  Oxford,  England,  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1606;  died  in  London,  April  7, 
1668. 

Morning.  .  .• 1  ...J.  ,;L!i.;  .     69S 


Index  of  Authors 


3865 


DAvrosoN.  John 

An  English  writer,  born  in  iSsT; 
commuted  suicide  ?iy  drowning  in  iqoq. 

Butterflies 1032 

Kunnable  Stag,  A 1659 

St.  Michael's  Mount 2596 

Song,    "Closes    and    courts 
and  lanes  " 2598 

Davies,  Mary  Caroline 

Born  in  a  gold  mining  town  in  the 
Canadian  Ro<kies;  at  present  living 
in  New  York  City. 

The  Dream-bearer 3058 

Davies,  William  H. 

Born  at  Newport,  Montana,  April  20, 
1870;  now  living  in  London,  England. 

Leisure 299S 

Poor  Kings 2998 

Thunderstorms 31 10 

Truly  Great 1644 

Davis,    Fannie    Stearns    [Mrs. 
Augustus  McK.  Gifford] 
Born  at  Cle-i'cland,   Ohio,   March   6, 

18S4;  now  living  at  Pittsfield,  Mass. 

The  Forbidden  Lure 1686 

The  Moods 3102 

Davis,  Fr.ancis 

An  Irish  writer,  horn  in  18 10,  died 
in  i8Ss. 

Narmy 653 

Davis,  Mary  Evelyn  Moore 

Born  at  Talladega,  Ala.,  in  1852; 
died  at  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  iqoq. 

Counsel 3014 

D.wis,  Thomas  Osborne 

Born  at  Mallow,  Ireland,  October  14, 

1814;   died  at   Dublin,   .September    16, 

1845. 

Fontenoy 2417 

My  Land 2265 

The  Welcome 638 

Davison,  Francis 

Born  in  Lnivlon,  England,  about 
1575;  dale  of  death  unknown. 

"Are  Women  Fair" 1902 

Dispraise     of     Love     and 

Lovers'  Follies 818 

"How  Can  the  Heart  For- 
get Her" S99 

Dekker,  Thomas 

Born  in  Loiulon,  England,  about 
1570;  died  there  about  1641. 

"  Golden  Slumbers  Kiss  Your 

Eyes" 75 

Happy  Heart,  The 2981 

De  la  Mare,  Walter 

Born    at    Charlton,    Kent,    England, 

April  25,  iS7_^;  iu>w  living  in  Loiuion. 

Listeners,  The 3219 

Miss  Lou 17QO 


D  ELAND,  Margaret  Wade 

Born  at  Allegheny,  Pa.,  February  33, 

i8s7;  now  living  at  Boston,  Mass. 

Affaire  D'Amour 1048 

Love  and  Death 3574 

Demarest,  Mary  Lee 

.An  .American  writer,  bovn  in  18^7, 
died  in  188S. 

My  Ain  Countree 3710 

Denison,  J.  P. 

An  .American  writer,  no  biographical 
data  available. 

Wing  Tee  Wee 1803 

De  Tabley,  Lord,  see  Warren' 
John  Byrne  Leicester. 

De  Vere,  see  also  Vere. 

De  Vere,  [.Sir]  Aubrey 

Born  at  Curragh  Chase,  County 
Limerick.  Ireland,  August  z8,  1788; 
died  there.  July  5,  1846, 

The  Opening  of  the  Tomb  of 

Charlemagne 3597 

Waterloo 2452 

De  Vere,  Aubrey  Thomas 

Born    at    Curragh    Chase,    County 

Limerick,  Ireland,  January  10,   1814; 

died  in  1002. 

Ballad  of  Sarsfield,  A 2410 

Evening  Melody 1315 

" Flowers  I  Would  Bring" . .     546 

Human  Life 416 

Love's  Spite 834 

Serenade 701 

Song,  "Sing  the  old  song"..     866 
Sorrow 3352 

De  Vere,  Mary  Ainge  [Made- 
line S.  Bridges] 
Born  in  Brooklyn.  N.  V.,  in  1S44  {f) 

Friend  and  Lover 849 

Poet  and  Lark 30S9 

"When  the  Most  is  Said". .   3423 

DiBDiN,  Charles 

Born  at  Southampton,  England, 
March  is,  1745;  died  in  London.  July 
25,  1S14. 

"Blow  High!     Blow  Low".     943 

Leadsman's  Song,  The 1632 

Nongtongpaw 1850 

Poor  Jack 1597 

Sailor's  Consolation,  The  .  .    2 105 
Tom  Bowling 1628 

Dickens,  Charles 

Born  at  Landporl,  near  Portsmouth, 
England.  February  7,  1812;  died  at 
Gadshill.  near  Rochester,  England, 
June  0.  1870. 

The  Ivy  Green 1489 

Dickinson,  Charles  Monroe 

Born  at  Lowville,  N.  V..  Novem- 
ber IS,  1S42;  present  address,  Bing- 
hamton,  N.  Y. 

The  Children 250 


3866 


Index   of  Authors 


Dickinson,  Emily 

Born  at  Amherst,  Mass.,  Decem- 
ber 10,  1830;  died  there.  May  15,  1886. 

Autumn 1381 

Chartless 3711 

Indian  Summer 1573 

The  Waking  Year 1332 

0 

Dickinson,     Martha     Gilbert 
[Mrs.  Alexander  Bianchi] 
Born   at   Amherst,   Mass.,   a>id   still 
living  there. 

Heaven 1112 

DiLKE,  Mrs.  Fisher  Wentworth, 
see  Clifford,  Ethel. 

DiMOND,  William 

An  English  writer,  born  at  Bath, 
about  1780;  died  in  Paris  in  1837. 

The  Mariner's  Dream 1615 

DoANE,  George  Washington 
Born   at    Trenton,   N.   J.,   May   27, 

i7qq;  died  at  Burlington,  N .  J .,  April 

27,  185Q. 

Evening 3S15 

Robin  Redbreast 1561 

DoBELL,  Sydney  Thompson 

Born  at  Cranbrook,  Kent,  England, 
April  5,  1824;  died  at  Nailsworth, 
Gloucester ,  England,  August  22,  1874. 

America 2225 

Ballad  of  Keith  of  Ravelston, 

The 2736 

Chanted  Calendar,  A 1462 

How's  My  Boy 161 2 

Tommy's  Dead 3542 

Dobson,  Austin 

Born  at  Plymouth,  England,  Janu- 
ary 18,  1840;  now  living  in  London. 

Ars  Victrix 314° 

Ballad  of  Heroes,  A 2304 

Ballad  of  Imitation,  The.  ..    1883 
Ballade  of  Prose  and  Rhyme, 

The 1770 

Cure's  Progress,  The 1776 

Dance  of  Death,  The 3446 

Dead  Letter,  A 1S14 

Dialogue  from  Plato,  A.  .  .  .    1773 

Don  Quixote 2g5o 

"Fame  is  a  Food  that  Dead 

Men  Eat" 3013 

Fancy  from  Fontanelle,  A.  .   3378 
For  a  Copy  of  Theocritus. .  .   3664 

Garden  Song,  A 1449 

Gentleman  of  the  Old  School, 

A 1777 

"Good-night,  Babette".  . . .    177 1 

Growing  Gray 361 

Henry     Wadsworth     Long- 
fellow    3645 

"In  After  Days" 3502 

Kiss,  A 1800 

Ladies  of  St.  James's,  The..    1775 
Maltworm's  Madrigal,  The.   2015 

Milkmaid,  The 573 

On  a  Fan 178 1 

Paradox  of  Time,  The 423 

Rondeau,  The 31H 


Song  of  Angiola  in  Heaven, 

A 3202 

Song  of  the  Four  Seasons,  A     797 

To  a  Greek  Girl 347 

Urceus  Exit 1782 

Wanderer,  The 868 

"When    I    Saw    You    Last, 
Rose" 1782 

Dodge,  Mary  Mapes 

Born  in  New  York  City  in  1838;  died 

in  JQ05. 

One  and  One 164 

Two  Mysteries,  The 35  70 

Dodgson,  ,  Charles    Lutwidge, 
see  Carroll,  Lewis. 

DOLBEN,  DigBY  MaCKVVORTH 

An  English  poet,  born  in  1S48,  died 
in  1867. 

The  Shrine 39s 

DoLLivER,  Clara 

No  biographical  data  available. 
No  Baby  in  the  House 23 

Domett,  Alfred 

Born  at  Camberwell  Grove.  Surrey, 
England,  May  20,  1811;  died,  Novem- 
ber 12,  1887. 

A  Christmas  Hymn 204 

A  Glee  for  Winter 1394 

DoNNE,  John 

Born  in  London,  England,  in  1573; 
died  there,  March  31,  1631. 

"Death,  be  not  Proud".  .  .  .   334S 

Good-morrow,  The 1142 

Hymn  to  God  the  Father,  A  3759 

Message,  The 593 

Song,  "Go  and  catch  a  fall- 
ing star" S92 

Dorr,  Julia  Carolina  Ripley 

Born  at  Charleston,  S.  C.,  Febru- 
ary 13,  1825;  died  at  Rutland,  Vt.,  Jan- 
uary 18.  1Q13. 

Outgrown 1017 

Dorset,  Earl  of,  see  Sackville, 
Charles. 

Doty,  Walter  G. 

Born  at  Hornell.  N.  Y.,  September  13, 
1S76,  and  still  living  there. 

The  Best  Firm 114 

DouDNEY,  Sarah 

Born  at  Portsmouth.  Englaiul,  Janu- 
ary 13,  1S43,  and  still  living  there. 
The  Lesson   of  the   VVater- 
Mill 2930 

Douglas,     Lady     Alfred,     see 
Custance,  Olive. 

Douglas,  William  op  Fleugland 
A    Scotch  writer;  born  about    1672; 
died  in  1748. 

Annie  Laurie 550 


Index  of  Authors 


3867 


DowDEN,  Edward 

Born  at  Cork.  Ireland,  May  j,  184^^; 
died  April  4,  iQi_i. 

Love's  Lord 2g77 

U'indle-Straws 8S7 

DowLiNG,  Bartholomew 

Born  at  Lisloivel,  County  Kerry, 
Ireland,  in  1823;  came  to  America  in 
1857;  died  at  San  Francisco,  Cat.,  in 
JS63. 

The  Revel 3S66 

Downing,  Ellen  Mary  Patrick 
Born  at  Cork.   Ireland,   March   ig, 
1828;  died  in  a  convent  in  i86q. 

M3'  Owen 1200 

DowsoN,  Ernest 

Born  in  Kent,  England,  August  2, 
i86~;  died  in  London,  February  23,  IQOO. 

Ad  DoranuUim  Suam 9Q7 

Amantium  Irx 660 

Dregs 422 

Garden  of  Shadow,  The.  . .  .     508 

Impenitentia  Ultima 917 

Lyric,  "You  would  have  un- 
derstood    me,     had     you 

waited" 11 20 

Non     Sum     Quah's     Eram 

Bona;,  sub  Regno  Cynara;     918 
Quid  non  Speremus.Amantes    919 

Sapientia  Luna; 2995 

Villanelie     of     His     Lady's 

Treasures 576 

V'itae  Summa  Brevis  Spem 
Nos  V'etat  Incohare 
Longam 3404 

Doyle,  [Sir]  Arthur  Conan 

Born  at  Edinburgh,  Scotlatul,  May  22, 
iSsq;  tww  living  in  Sussex,  Englattd. 

Cremona 2436 

The  Song  of  the  Bow 2241 

Doyle,  [Sir]  Francis  Hastings 
Charles  [Second  Baronet] 
Born    at     Nunappleluii.     Yorkshire, 
Englatul,    August    zi,    1810;   died    in 
Lotulon.  June  8.  1888. 

The  Lajss  of  the  "Birken- 
head"     2472 

The  Private  of  the  Buffs.  .  .    2478 

Drake,  Joseph  Rodman 

Born  in  New   York  City,  August  7, 
17Q,';;  died  there.  September  2i,  1820. 
The  American  Flag 2197 

Drayton,  Michael 

Born    at     llarlsliill.     Warwickshire. 

Englaiul,  in  1563;  died  in  London  in 

1631. 

Agincourt 2.361 

Sonnets  from  "Idea" 1242 

To  His  Coy  Love 586 

To  the  \'irginian  Voyage.  . .    2384 

Drinkwater,  John 

An   English    writer,    born    June    r. 
1882.  and  now  living  in  Birmingham. 
Birthright 3401 


Prayer,  A 29,';i 

Sunrise  on  Rydal  Water. . .  .    1436 

Driscoll,  Louise 

Born  at  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  Jan- 
vary  IS,  1875;  now  living  at  Catskill, 
A'.  Y. 

The  Highway 509 

Drummond,  William,   of  Haw- 
thornden 
Born   at    Hawlhornden,    near   Edin- 
burgh.   Scnllaiui.    December    13.    1383: 
died  there,  December  4,  164Q. 

"Alexis,  Here  She  Stayed".    1252 

Angels,  The 207 

Book  of  the  World,  The..  . .    1293 

For  the  Baptist 374i 

Of  Phyllis _. 527 

"Sleep,  Silence'  Child".  .  .  .   3220 
Song,  "Phoebus,  arise".  .  .  .    1305 

"Thrice  Happy  He" 1635 

To  the  Nightingale 1548 

Drummond,  William  Henry 
A    Canadian  writer,   born  in   1834, 

died  in  iQO~. 

Two  Hundred  Years  Ago..  .    2031 
Wreck  of  the  "Julie  Plante"  2033 

Dryden,  John 

Born  at  the  vicarage  of  Aldwinkle 
All  Saints,  Northamptonshire,  Englaiul, 
A  ugust  Q,  1631;  died  in  London,  May  i, 
1700. 

"Ah,  How  Sweet  it  is  to 

Love  " 485 

Alexander's  Feast,  or,  The 

Power  of  Music 3 114 

Epigram 1919 

Song  for  St.  Cecilia's  Day,  A  3112 
Song  to  a  Fair  Young  Lady, 
Going  Out  of  the  Town  in 

the  Spring 934 

To  the  Pious  Memory  of 
the  Accomplished  Young 
Lady,    Mrs.    Anne    Killi- 

grew 3524 

Under  the  Portrait  of  Milton  3647 
Veni,  Creator  Spiritus 3782 

Dufferin,     Countess     of,     see 
Sheridan,  Helen  Selina. 

Du    Maurier,     George     Louis 
Palmella  Busson 
Born  in  Paris,  March  6,  1834;  died 

in  Lomlon.  October  6.  iSq6. 

"A  Little  Work" 2910 

Vers  Nonsensiques 2087 

Dunbar,  Paul  Laurence 

Born  at  Dayton.  Ohio.  June  27,  1S72; 

died  in  Washington,  February  g,  ign6. 

Angelina 2043 

Compensation 3479 

Dunsany,  Lord,    sec    Plunkett, 
I.DWARD,  J.  M.  D. 


3868 


Index  of  Authors 


DuNLOP,  John 

Born  at  Cafmyle,  Lanarkshire,  Scot- 
land, in  November,  1755;  died  at  Port 
Glasgow.  Scotland,  September  4,  1820. 

.    "Dinna  Ask  Me" 1163 

The  Year  That's  Awu' 2000 

D'Urfey,  Thomas 

Born  at  Exeter,  England,  in  1653; 
died  in  London,  in  1723. 

Chloe  Divine 533 

DwiGHT,  Timothy 

Born  at  Northampton,  Mass.,  May  14, 
J752;  died  at  New  Uaven,  Conn.,  Janu- 
ary ii,  1817. 

Columbia 2202 

Love  to  the  Church 3797 

Dyer,  [Sir]  Edward 

Born     in     Somersetshire,     England, 
about  rs'io;  died  in  London  in  1607. 
"  My  Mind  to  Me  a  Kingdom 
Is" 29S7 

E 

Eastman,  Elaine  Goodale 

Born    at    Mt.    Washington,    Mass., 

October     g,      1S63;     present     address, 

Amherst,  Mass. 

Ashes  of  Roses 923 

Goldenrod 1485 

Eastman,  Max 

Born  at  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  Janu- 
ary 4,  i8Sj,  now  living  at  Croton-on- 
Uudson,  N.  Y. 

Diogenes 2997 

Eden,      Helen     Parry      (Mrs. 
Denis) 
An    English    writer    now    living    in 
Oxfordshire. 

The   Poet   and    the    Wood- 
louse  I7gi 

To  a  Little  Girl 267 

Edmeston,  James 

Born    at    Wapping,    England,    Sep- 
tember 10,  17Q1;  died,  January  7,  1867. 
Prayer  to  the  Trinity 3807 

Edwards,  Richard 

Born  in  Somersetshire,  England, 
about  1523;  died,  October  31,  1566. 

Amantium  Ine 3031 

Egan,  Maurice  Francis 

Born  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  May  24, 
iS$2;  present  address,  Copenhagen, 
Denmark. 

The  Shamrock 1501 

Eliot,  George  [Marian  Evans 
Lewes  Crossj 
Born  at  Arbury  Farm.  Chihers 
Colon.  Warwickshire,  England,  Novem- 
ber 22,  iSiq;  died  in  London,  Decem- 
ber 22.  1S80. 

1  Am  Lonely 323 


"Oh,  May  I  Join  the  Choir 

Invisible" 3485 

Two  Lovers 1204 

Ellerton,  John  Lodge 

Born  at  Liverpool,  England,  in  iSoi; 
died    in    London,    January    3,    1873. 
"Now  the  Laborer's  Task  is 
O'er" 3573 

Elliott,    [Sir]    Gilbert    [Third 

Baronet  of  Minto] 

Born    at    Minto    House.    Teviotdale, 

Scotland,  in  September,   1722;  died  at 

Marseilles,  France,  January  11,  1777 . 

Amynta 617 

Elliott,  Jane 

Born  at  Minto  House,  Teviotdale, 
Scotland,  in  1727;  died  there,  March  2g, 
180S. 

A  Lament  for  Flodden 2368 

Elliott,  Charlotte 

An  English  hymn-writer,  born  March 
17,  178Q;  died  at  Brighton,  Septem- 
ber 22,  1871. 

"Just  as  I  Am" 3800 

Elliott,  Ebenezer 

Born     at     Masborough,      Yorkshire, 
England,   March    17,    1781;  died   near 
Barnsley,  England,  December  i,  184Q. 
"Land      Which     No     One 
Knows,  The" 3576 

Ellsworth,  Erastus  Wolcott 

Born  al  South  Windsor,  Conn., 
November  27,  1822;  died  at  East  Wind- 
sor Hill,  Conn.,  January  5,  igo2. 

The  Mayflower 2389 

Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo 

Born  at  Boston.  Mass.,  May  25,  1803; 

died  at  Concord.  Mass.,  April  27,  1S82. 

Bacchus 2964 

Brahma 2964 

Concord  Hymn 2205 

Duty 2go 

Each  and  All 2962 

Eros 474 

Fable 1909 

Forbearance 3076 

Give  All  to  Love 502 

Good-bye 2995 

Humble-bee,  The 1515 

Problem,  The 2966 

Rhodora,  The 1497 

Song  of  Nature 1296 

Terminus 410 

Waldeinsamkeit i39fJ 

Emmett,  Daniel  Decatur 

Born  al  Mt.  Vernon,  Ohio,  in  1S13; 
died  there  in  ICJ04. 

Dixie 2218 

English,  Thomas  DunJ^ 

Born  al  Philailelphia,  Pa.,  June  2g, 
iSig;  died  at  Newark,  N.  J.,  in  igo2. 
Ben  Bolt 470 


Index  of  Authors 


3869 


Erskine,    Francis    Robert    St. 
Clair  [Earl  of  RosslynI 
An   EtiKtisIt   writer,    born    in    iSjj; 
died  in  iSgn. 

Bedtime 97 

Erskine,  William 

Born  at  Muthill,  Perthshire,  Scotland, 
in  176Q;  died,  August  14,  1822. 

Epigram igi6 

Ether EGE,  [Sir]  George 

An  English  writer,  horn  about  163;; 
died  in  idgi. 

Song,    "Ladies,    though    to 

your  conquering  eyes".  .  .      504 
Song,    "  Ve    happy    swains, 
whose  hearts  are  free" .  .  .     80S 
To  a  Lady  Asking  How  Long 

He  Would  Love  Her sq4 

Evans,     Florence     Wilkinson, 
see  Wilkinson,  Florence. 

F 

Faber,  Frederick  William 

Born  at  Calverlcy,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, June  28,  1S14;  died,  September  26, 
1S63. 

Paradise 3695 

Written  in  a  Little  Lady's 
Little  Album 124 

Fahy,  Francis  A. 

Born  at  Kinvara,  County  Galway, 
Ireland,  September  29,  1854;  present 
address,  London,  England. 

Little  Mary  Cassidy 759 

The  Ould  Plaid  Shawl 758 

Fane,  Julian 

An  English  writer,  born  in  1827,  died 
in  1870. 

Ad  Matrem 396 

Fane,     Violet     [Mary     Mont- 
GOMEKiE,  Lady  Currie] 
A  n  English  writer,  at  present  living  in 
Rome. 

Afterwards 346Q 

"In  Green  Old  Gardens"..  .    1450 

Fanshawe,  Catherine  Maria 

Born  at  Shabdcn,  Surrey,  England, 
July  6,  176s;  died  at  Putney  Uealh, 
England,  April  17,  18 u- 

Fragment    in    Imitation    of 
Wordsworth 1923 

Fanshawe,  [Sir]  Richard 

Born   at    Ware   Park,    Hertfordshire,  ■ 
Englaiul,  in  June,  1608;  died  at  Madrid, 
Spain,  June  26,  1666. 

A  Rose 1500 

Father    Prodt,     see    Mahony, 
Francis  Sylvester. 

Faulks,     Mrs.     Frederic,     see 
Garrison,  Theodosia. 


Fawcett,  Edgar 

Born  in  New   York  City,  May  26, 

1847;  died  in  London,  England,  in  IQ04. 

Fireflies. 1319 

To  an  Oriole 1357 

Wild  Roses 1498 

Fawcett,  John 

Born  at  Lidget  Green,  near  Bradford, 
England,  January  6,  174":  died  in  the 
parish  of  Halifax,  England,  July  25, 
1817. 

"Blest     be    the    Tie     that 
Binds" ,  3801 

Ferguson,  James 

A  Scotch  writer;  no  biographical  data 
available., 

Auld  Daddy  Darkness 71 

Ferguson,  [Sir]  Samuel 

Born  at  Belfast.  Ireland,  March  10, 

1810;  died  at  Howth,  County  of  Dublin, 

Ireland,  August  6,  1886. 

The  Forging  of  the  Anchor.    1606 
The  Pretty  Girl  of  Loch  Dan     779 

Ferrier,  Susan  Edmonstone 

Born  at  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  Sep- 
tember 7,  1782;  died  there,  November  5, 
1854. 

The  Laird  o   Cockpen 2 113 

Ficke,  Arthur  Davison 

Born  at  Davcnfiorl,  Iowa,  November 

in,  1883,  and  still  living  there. 

The  Oracle 266 

The  Three  Sisters 1090 

To  the  Harpies 3389 

Field,  Eugene 

Born  at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  iSso;  died 

in  Chicago  in  i8qs. 

Duel,  The 173 

Jes  'Fore  Christmas 220 

Little  Boy  Blue 298 

Seein'  Things 172 

Sugar-Plum  Tree,  The 60 

Wynken,  Blynken,  and  Nod  68 

Field,  Nathaniel 

Born  in  the  parish  of  St.  Giles,  Crip- 
plegale,  England,  in  1587;  died  there  in 
1633. 

Matin  Song 694 

Fielding,  Henry 

Born  at  Sharpham  Park,  Somerset- 
shire, England,  April  22,  1707;  died  in 
London,  October  8,  17 S4_. 

"A-Hunting  we  will  go".  .  .    1662 

Fields,  James  Thomas 

Born  at  Portsmouth,  N.  B.,  Decem- 
ber 31,  1816;  died  at  Boston,  Mass., 
April  24,  1881. 

Alarmed  Skipper,  The 2146 

Captain's  Daughter,  The. .  .      178 
Mabel,  in  New  Hampshire..     793 

Owl-Critic,  The 1881 

Turtle  and  Flamingo,  The. .    2058 


3870 


Index  of  Authors 


FiLSiNGER,  Mrs.  Ernest  B.,  see 
Teasdale,  Sara. 

Finch,  Anne  [Countess  of  Win- 
chelsea] 
An  English  writer;  dale  of  birlh  un- 
known; died,  August  20,  1720. 

To  Death 3407 

To  Sylvia 614 

Finch,  Francis  Miles 

Born  at  Ithaca,  N.  V.,  June  g,  1S27; 
died  there  in  1(107. 

The  Blue  and  the  Gray ....    2308 

Fink,  William  W. 

An  Irish  writer;  no  biographical  data 
available. 

Larrie  O'Dee 1961 

Finley,  John 

An  Irish  writer,  born  in  17 ()6,  died 
in  1866. 

Bachelor's  Hall 1970 

Fischer,  Jacob 

No  biographical  data  available. 
The  Lady  Poverty 2934 

Fisher,  A.  Hugh 

Born  in  London.  England,  in  1867, 
and  still  living  there. 

Ceylon 2638 

Fisher,  Mahlon  Leonard 

Born  at  Williamsport,  Pa.,  in  1874, 
and  still  lilting  there. 

"As  an  Old  Mercer" 1301 

November 1385 

On   a    Sculptured   Head   of 
the  Christ 375i 

Fitzgerald,  Edward 

Born  ncar'Woodbridge,  Sufolk.  Eng- 
land. March  31,  1S09;  died  at  Merton, 
Norfolk,  England,  June  14,  1S83. 

Because 788 

Chivalry  at  a  Discount.  .  .  .    1724 
The  Meadows  in  Spring .  .   .    1346 
The     Rubaiyat     of     Omar 
Khayyam 2875 

Flaccus.  Quintus  Horatius 
Born  at  Venusia,  Apulia,  December  8, 

65  B.  C;  died  in  Rome,  November  27, 

8  B.C.. 

Integer  Vitfe 3S28 

Persicos  Odi 3827 

Rectius  Vivas 3829 

Flagg,  Wilson  . 

Born  at  Beverly,  Mass.,  November  5,  . 
J  80s;  died  at  North  Cambridge,  Mass., 
May  6,  18S4. 

The  O'Lincon  Family 1530 

Flecker,  James  Elroy 

Born  in  London.  England.  Novem- 
ber 5. 1SS4;  died  at  Davos-Platz,  Switzer- 
land, January  _j,  7915. 

The  Ballad  of  Camden  Town  1058 


The  Queen's  Song 3214 

To  a  Poet  a  Thousand  Years 
Hence 3101 

Fletcher,  Giles 

Born  at  Watford.  Hertfordshire,  Eng- 
land, about  1549;  died  in  London, 
March  11,  161 1. 

Wooing  Song 47<^ 

Fletcher,  John 

Born  at   Rye,   Sussex,  England,   in 

December    1579;    died    in    London,    in 

Augttst,  1625. 

Aspatia's  Song 1064 

Drink  To-day 1991 

Love's  Emblems 482 

Melancholy 3349 

Power  of  Love,  The 482 

Sleep 3220 

"Take,  O  Take  Those  Lips 

Away" 683 

What  is  Love 48 1 

Women's  Longing 1903 

FoLLEN,  Mrs.  Eliza  Lee  [Cabot] 
Born    in    Massachusetts    in     1787; 
died  in  18^9. 

The  Moon 57 

Ford,  John 

Born  at  Islington,  Devonshire,  Eng- 
and,  in  April,  1586;  died  after  1639. 
Fancies 3142 

Foss,  Sam  Walter 

Born  at  Candia,  N.  E.,  June  19, 
185S;  died  at  Somerville,  Mass.,  Feb- 
ruary 26.  1911. 

Calf-Path,  The 1S96 

House   by   the   Side   of   the 

Road,  The 3040 

Then  Ag'in 1889 

Foster,  Stephen  Collins 

Born  at  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  July  4,  1826; 
died  in  New  York  City,  January  13, 

1864. 

My  Old  Kentucky  Home. .  .   3227 
The  Old  Folks  at  Home 3228 

Fowler,  [Hon.]  Ellen  Thornev- 
CROFT  [Mrs.  A.  L.  Felkin] 
An    English    writer',    born    in    1875; 
now  living  at  Eltham,  Kent. 

The  Wisdom  of  Folly 2045 

Fox-Smith,  Cecily 

Born  at  Lymm.  Cheshire,  England, 
in  1882,  and  now  living  in  London. 
Hastings  Mill 1S91 

Fraser,  John 

Born,  at  Tomnacloich,  Inverness-shire, 
Scotland,  in  1750;  died  in  London, 
April  26,  281 1. 

The  Maiden  and  the  Lily...    1880 

Freneau,  Philip 

Born  in  New   York  City,   in  1752; 


Index  of  Authors 


3871 


died  near  Freehold,  N.  J.,  December  iS, 

Song  of  Thyrsis 8,50 

The  Indian  Buo'inK-Ground  3438 
The  Wild  Honeysuckle 1488 

Frere,  John  Hookham 

Born  in  Lntulon.  England,  May  21, 
I76g;  died  at  Pield,  Valella,  Malta  (?), 
January  7,  1846. 

The  Boy  and  the  Wolf 121 

Frost,  Robert 

Born  in  San  Francisco,  Cat.,  March 

2(5,  tSy^;  nmv  living  at  Franconia,  N .  H. 

Storm  Fear 1385 

Mending  Wall 307S 

The  Telephone 658 

The  Tuft  of  Flowers 3074 

FxTLLER,  Margaret  Witter 

Born  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  jSyi, 
and  still  living  there. 

The  Passion-Flower 1053 

Furlong,  Alice 

Born  in  Ireland,  in  1875,  and  now 
living  in  County  Dublin. 

My  Share  of  the  World ...  .     628 

FiTRNESS,  William  Henry 

Born  al  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1802;  died 
there   in  iSg6. 

Evening  Hymn 2g68 

G 

Gale,  Norman 

An  English  writer,  born  in  1862,  and 

■now  living  near  Rugby. 

Bartholomew 20 

Content 11 70 

Countr>-  Faith,  The 1644 

Dawn  and  Dark 1328 

Fairy  Book,  The 231 

Pastoral.  A 744 

Second  Coming.  The 3054 

Shaded  Pool,  The.  .......  .     677 

Song,   "This  peach  is  pink 

with  such  a  pink " 574 

Song,    "Wait    but    a    little 

while" 1169 

Voice,  The Sq.S 

Galsworthy,  John 

An  English  writer  born  in  1867;  now 

living  at  Maiuiton.  Devonshire,  Englaml. 

Past 420 

Garland,  Hamlin 

Born  at  West  Salem.  Wis..  Septem- 
ber 16,  i860;  now  living  at  Chicago,  III. 
Do  You  Fear  the  Wind.  .  .  .    1684 

The  Herald  Crane 153.'! 

The  Toil  of  the  Trail 1684 

Garnett,  Richard 

Born  at  Lichfield,  England,  in  iSjj; 

died  in  London  in  1006. 

Ballad  of  the  Boat,  The 33q6 

Epigram 191S 


Epigram IQ18 

Fair  Circassian,  The 1903 

Garrick,  David 

Born  at  Hereford,  England,  Febru- 
ary iQ.  1717;  died  in  London,  January 
20,  I77Q. 

Epigram rg  18 

Heart  of  Oak 2280 

Garrison,  Theodosia  Pickering 

[Mrs.  Frederick  Faulks] 

Born  al  Newark.  N.  J.,  November  26, 

1S74;  now  living  in  New  Xork  City. 
Ballad  of  the  Angel,  The. . .    1015 

Stains 37S8 

The  Wife 394 

Garvin,  Margaret  Root 
No  biographical  data  available. 

To  Each  His  Own 3,i(>i 

Gascoigne,  George 

Born  in  Westmoreland,  England, 
about  153s;  died  at  Stamford,  England, 
October  7,  1577. 

A  Lover's  Lullaby 7  is 

Gates,  Ellen  M.  Huntington 

Born  at  Torrington,  Conn.,  in  1835; 
tww  living  in  New  York  City. 

'•1  Shall  Not  Cry  Return".    loSi 

Gautier,  Theophile 

Born  at  Tarbes,  France,  August  31, 
1811;  died  in  Paris,  October  23,  1872. 
L'Art 3482 

Gay,  John 

Born  at  Barnstable.  England,  in  Sep- 
tember, 1685;  died  in  London,  Decem- 
ber 4,  1732. 

Ballad,    "  'Twas   when    the 

seas  were  roaring" 1064 

Black-eyed  Susan 03  7 

Elegy  on  a  Lap  Dog,  An .  . .    1826 

Epigrams 1916 

Hare   With   Many   Friends, 

The I8S3 

Lion  and  the  Cub,  The 1852 

Song,  "O  ruddier  than  the 
cherry" •     SiS 

Gibson,  Wilfrid  Wilson 

Born  at  Hexam,  England,  in  1878, 

and  now  living  in  London. 

Marriage 119.'? 

On  Hampstead  Heath 516 

Tenants 3218 

The  Whisperers 3.579 

Gilbert,  Lady,  see  Mulholland 
Rosa. 

Gilbert,  [Sir]  William  Schwtnck 
Born  in  London,   England.  Novem- 
ber 18,  1836:  drowned.  May  zg,  iQii. 

Capl;iin  Reece 2180 

Ellen  M'Jones  Aberdeen...  .    2073 
To  the  Terrestrial  Globe.  .  .    207s 
Yarn  of  the  "Nancy  Bell," 
The 2177 


3872 


Index  of  Authors 


Gilder,  Joseph  B. 

Born  at  Flushing,  N.   Y .,  June  sg, 
iSs8;  present  address.  New  York  City. 
The  Parting  of  the  Ways.  .  .    2217 

Gilder,  Richard  Watson 

Born  at  Bordentawn,  N.  J.,  Febru- 
ary 8,  1844;  died  in  New  York  City, 
November  iS,  igog. 

"Ah,  Be  not  False" 349 

"  Call  Me  Not  Dead  " 3502 

"Great  Nature  is  an  Army 

Gay" 1298 

Midsum'mer  Song,  A 1366 

"My  Love  for  Thee" 1263 

"O,  Love  is  not  a  Summer 

Mood" 504 

On  the  Life-mask  of  Abra- 
ham Lincoln 3642 

Prelude    from    "The    New 

Day" 1307 

Song,     "Because    the    rose 

must  fade" 2841 

Song  of  Early  Autumn,  A.  .    1374 

Sonnet,  The 3107 

Sonnet,    "I   know   not   if   I 

love  her  overmuch" 1264 

Sonnet,   "I   like  her  gentle 
hand       that      sometimes 

strays" 1264 

V/oman's  Thought,  A 912 

"Woods  that  Bring  the  Sun- 
set Near,  The" 1400 

GiLFiLLAN,  Robert 

Born  at  Dunfermline,  Scotland, 
July  y,  lygS;  died  at  Leith,  Scotland, 
December  4,  i8$o. 

The  Exile's  Song 325S 

GiLLiLAN,  Strickland  W. 

Born  at  Jackson,  Ohio,  Oct.  g,  iS6g; 
present  address,  Jiutianapolis,  Ind. 

I'innigin  to  Flannigan 1979 

GiLMAN,      Charlotte     Perkins 
Stetson 
Born   at   Hartford,   Conn.,   July   3, 
i860;  present  address.  New  York  City. 

A  Conservative iSgo 

Similar  Cases iSgi 

Wedded  Bliss 1898 

Glasgow,  J.  Scott 

A  Scotch-American  writer,  now  living 
at  Portland.  Indiana. 

The  Pipes  o'  Gordon's  Men.   2307 

Glover,  Jean 

Born  at  Kilmarnock,  Ayrshire,  Scot- 
land, October  31,  1758;  died  at  Letter- 
kenny,  County  Donegal,  Ireland,  in 
1801. 

"Owre  the  Muir  amang  the 
Heather" 747 

Glover,  Richard 

Born  in  London,  England,  in  1712; 
died  there,  November  35,  1785. 

Admiral  Hosier's  Ghost ...  .   2415 


Going,  Charles  Buxton 

Born  in  Westchester  county,  N.  Y., 
April  5,  1863;  present  address,  New 
York  City. 

At  the  Top  of  the  Road. .  .  .   3577 
To  Arcady 664 

Goldsmith,  Oliver 

Born  at  Pallas,  County  Longford, 
Ireland,  November  10,  1728;  died  in 
London,  A  pril  4,  1774. 

Deserted  Village,  The 3262 

Elegy   on    Madame   Blaize, 

An 2092 

Elegy   on    the   Death   of   a 

Mad  Dog,  An 2091 

"  When      Lovely      Woman 
Stoops  to  Folly  " 1050 

GooDALE,  Dora  Read 

Born  at  Mt.  Washitigton,  Mass., 
October  2g,  1866;  now  living  at  Redding, 
Conn. 

Ripe  Grain 3575 

GooDCHiLD,  John  Arthur 

Born  at  Ealing,  Middlesex,  England, 
February  26,  1851;  now  living  at  Bor- 
dighera,  Italy. 

The  Firstborn 24 

Gordon,  Adam  Lindsay 

Born  at  Fayal,  Azores,  in  1833;  shot 
himself  at  Neiu  Brighton,  Australia, 
June  24,  1870. 

How  We  Beat  the  Favorite.   3344 

Gordon,  Alexander  Macgregor 
Rose,  see  Rose,  Alexander 
m.4cgregor. 

Gore-Booth,  Eva 

An  English  writer,  now  living  in 
London. 

The  Little  Waves  of  Breffny   2605 

Gorman,  Herbert  S. 

An  American  writer,  no  biographical 
data  available. 

The  Satyrs  and  the  Moon .      240 

Gosse,  Edmund  William 

Born  in  London,  England,  Sep- 
tember 21,  iS4g,  and  still  living  there. 

Impression 1759 

Labor  and  Love 2918 

Missive,  The 666 

Gould,  Gerald  Louis 
An  English  poet,  borti  in  iSSs;  died 

in  London,  in  June,  igi6. 

Lancelot  and  Guinevere. .  .  .    2813 
Wanderlust 1679 

Gould,  Hannah  Flagg 

Born  at  Lancaster,  Mass.,  in  178Q; 
died  at  Newbury  port,  Mass.,  Sep- 
tember 5,  iSd-;. 

The  Frost 1387 


Index  ot  Authors 


3^73 


Graham,  James  [First  Marquis 
OF  Montrose] 
Born  in  Scotland  in  1612;  died  May 
3J,  1650. 

"I'll     Never     Love     Thee 
More" 604 

Granville,  Charles 

An  English  writer,  no  biographical 
data  available. 

Traveller's  Hope 3478 

Graves,  Alfred  Perceval 
Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  July  22, 

1S46;  now  living  at  Wimbledon,  Eng- 

latid. 

Father  O'Flynn ig>7 

Irish  Lullaby,  An 88 

Little  Red  Lark,  The 713 

Gray,  David 

Born  at  Edinburgh,  Scotlaiul,  in  iS^y; 
died  in  New  York  State  in  iSSS. 

The  Golden  Wedding 1226 

Gray,  Thomas 

Born  in  London,  England,  Decem- 
ber 2j.  1716;  died  at  Cambridge,  Eng- 
latid,  July  .?o,  1771. 

Elegy  Written  in  a  Country 

Churchyard 35.52 

Ode  on  the  Spring,  An 1343 

On   a   Distant   Prospect   of 

Eton  College.  .  .  .'. 25S9 

On  the  Death  of  a  Favorite 
Cat,  Drowned  in  a  Tub  of 

Gold  Fishes 1S21 

Progress  of  Poesy,  The 3ogt 

Greene,  Albert  Gorton 

Born  at  Providence,  R.  I.,  February 
in,  1802;  died  at  Cleveland,  Ohio, 
January  4,  1868. 

Old  Grimes 2131 

Greene,  Homer 

Born  at  Ariel,  Pa.,  January  10,  1853; 

now  living  at  Honesdale.  Pa. 

My  Daughter  Louise ,522 

What  My  Lover  Said 1149 

Greene,  Robert 

Born    at    Norwich.    England,    about 

i^6n;  died  in  London,  September  ?,  1502. 
"Fair  is  my  Love,  for  April's 

in  Her  Face" 520 

Fawnia 583 

Macsia's  Song 2979 

Phyllis  and  Corydon 768 

Samela 521 

Sephestia's  Lullaby 74 

Shepherd's  Wife's  Song,  The  12 10 

Greene,  Sarah  Pratt  McLean 

Born   at   Simsbury,   Conn.,   July   5, 
18^6;  now  living  at  Lexington,  Mass. 
DeSheepfol' 3755 

Greenwell,  Dora 

Born  at  Greenwell  Ford,  Durham, 
Englantl,  December  6,  1821;  died,  March 
29,  1882. 

Home 1204 


Gregory,  The  Great,  Saint 

Born  at  Rome  about  $40;  died  there, 
March  12,  604,  liaving  been  Pope  Jrom 

Veni,  Creator  Spiritus 3823 

Grenfell,  Julian  Henry  Fran- 
cis 
A  captain  in  the  English  army;  died 
at   Boulogne  from   wounds   received   in 
front  of  Ypres,  May  26,  igis- 

The  Hills 1435 

Griffin,  Gerald 

Born  at  Limerick,  Ireland,  Decem- 
ber 12,  1803;  died  at  Cork,  Ireland, 
June  12,  1S40. 

Eileen  Aroon 549 

Maiden  Eyes 631 

"Place  in  Thy  Memory,  A"     871 

Griffith,  William 

Born  at  Memphis,  Mo.,  February  15, 
1876;  now  living  in  New  York  City. 
Pierrette  in  Memory 3388 

GuiNEY,  Louise  Imogen 

Born  at  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1861, 
and  now  living  at  Oxford,  England. 

■^        Kings,  The 2949 

Of  Joan's  Youth 1054 

Song,  "I  try  to  knead  and 

spin" 3361 

Tryste  Noel 209 

Wild  Ride,  The 3475 

Guiterman,  Arthur 

An  American  writer  born  in  Vienna, 
Austria,  November  20,  1871;  now 
living  in  New  York  City. 

Strictly  Germ-proof 2035 

GwYNN,  Stephen  Lucius 

Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  February  ij, 
iSS.f,  ami  still  living  there. 

Ireland 2266 

Gyles,  Althea 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Sympathy 923 

H 

IIarington,  William 

Born  at  IJindlip,  Worcestershire, 
England,  in  November,  160$;  died  there 
in  1654. 

Castara 531 

No.x  Nocti  Indicat  Scientiam  3786 
To    Roses  in  the  Bosom  of 
Castara 600 

Hagedorn,  Hermann 

Born  in  New   York  City,  July  18, 

1882,  and  still  lilting  there. 

Early  Morning  at  Bargis.  .  .    1645 

Song,  "  Song  is  so  old  " 674 

Troop  of  the  Guard,  A 3062 

Hale,  F.dvvard  Everett 

Porn  at  Boston,  Mass.,  Ap'il  3,  1822, 
died  there  in  igog. 


3874 


Index  of  Authors 


Lamentable    Ballad    of    the 

Bloody  Brook,  The 2406 

New  England's  Chevy  Chase  2426 

Hall,  Sharlot  M. 

Born  at  Prosser  Creek,  Kan.,  Oct.  27, 
1S70,  and  now  living  at  Dcwcy,  Arizona. 

The  Last  Camp-fire 3471 

The  Song  of  the  Colorado .  .    2571 

Halleck,  Fitz-Greene 

Born  at  Guilford,  Conn.,  July  8, 
lygo;  died  there,  November  ig,  1867. 

Marco  Bozzaris 2453 

On  the  Death  of  Joseph  Rod- 
man Drake 3608 

Halpine,  Charles  Graham 

Born  at  Oldcastle,  County  Meath, 
Ireland,  in  November,  1S2Q;  died  in 
New  York  City,  August  3,  1S68. 

Irish  Astronomy 1964 

Janet's  Hair 1113 

Halsham,  John 

An  English  writer;  no  biographical 
data  available. 

My  Last  Terrier 1827 

Hamilton,  Elizabeth 

Born  at  Belfast,  Ireland,  July  21, 
175^;  died  at  Ilarrowgate,  England, 
July  23,  1816. 

My  Ain  Fireside 3238 

Hamilton,  John 

Born  at  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  in  1761; 
died  there,  September  23,  1814. 

I  Love  My  Jean 947 

Hanrahan,  Agnes  I. 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Rosies g25 

Harding,  Ruth  Guthrie 

Born  at  Tunkhannock,  Pa.,  August 

20,  1882;  now  living  at  Paterson,  N.  J. 

Returning 3482 

The  Call  to  a  Scot 3261 

Threnody 1080 

Hardy,  Lizzie  Clark 

No  biographical  data  available. 

"  Some  Time  at  Eve  " 3468 

Hardy,  Thomas 

Born  in  Dorsetshire,  England,  June  2, 

1S40;  and  still  living  there. 

"Let  me  Enjoy" 2841 

Rain  on  a  Grave 1133 

Harington,  [Sir]  John 

Born  at  Kclston,  near  Bath,  England, 

in  1 561:  died  there,  November  20,  j6i2. 

Epigram igiS 

Harney,  William  Wallace 

Born  at  Bloomington,  Ind.,  June  20, 
1831;  now  living  at  Miami,  Florida, 
Adonais 914 


Harris,  Joel  Chandler 

Born  at  Eatonlon,   Ga.,  December  8, 
1848;  died  at  Atlanta,  Ga.,  in  igoS. 
Revival  Hymn 2037 

Harrison,  Virginia  Bioren 

An  American  writer  living  at  Bloom- 
field,  N.  J. 

Music  of  the  Dawn 13 10 

One  Gift  I  Ask 3734 

Harte,  Francis  Bret 

Born  at  Albany,  N.  ¥.,  August  25, 
1830;  removed  to  England  in  1885;  and 
died  there.  May  5,  jgo2. 

Dickens  in  Camp 3606 

Dow's  Flat 2171 

John  Burns  of  Gettysburg. .   2504 

Mrs.  Judge  Jenkins 1048 

Mountain  tieart's-ease,  The  1494 
Plain  Language  from  Truth- 
ful James 2174 

Reveille,  The 2487 

Second  Review  of  the  Grand 

Army,  A 2513 

Society  upon  the  Stanislaus, 

The 2170 

Songs  without  Sense. ......   2065 

Hastings,  Thomas 

Born  at  Washington,  Conn,  Octo- 
ber 75,  i7'S4;  died  in  New  York  City, 
May  13,  1872. 

In  Sorrow 3808 

Hawker,  Robert  Stephen 

Born  at  Stoke  Damerel.  Devonshire, 
England,    December    3,    1803;   died   at 
Plymouth,  England,  August  75,  1873. 
Are  they  not  all  Ministering 

Spirits 63 1 

The   Song   of    the   Western 
Men 2407 

Hawley,  Charles  B. 

Born  at  Brook  Held,  Conn.,  in  1858; 
now  living  in  Ne^v  York  City. 

My  Little  Love 989 

Hawthorne,  Hildeg.^rde 

Born  in  New  York  City,  and  still 
living  there. 

A  Song 1164 

Hay,  John 

_  Born  at  Salem,  Ind.,  October  8,  183S; 
died,  July  i,  1903. 

Jim   Bludso   of   the  Prairie 

Belle 3337 

Little  Breeches 3330 

Stirrup  Cup,  The 3507 

White  Flag,  The 796 

Woman's  Love,  A 1038 

Hayne,  Paul  Hamilton 

Born  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  January  i, 
1831;  died,  July  g,  1S86. 

Aspects  of  the  Pines 1400 

In  Harbor 3493 

"  Little  While  I  Fain  Would 

Linger  Yet,  A" 895 

Pre-e.\istence 2857 

Rose  and  Thorn,  The 1028 


Index  of  Authors 


3875 


Heath,  Ella 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Poetry 3086 

Heber,  Reginald 

Born  at  Matpas,  Cheshire,  England, 
April  21,  17S3;  died  at  Trichinopoly, 
British  Imlia,  April  2,  1826. 

" Brightest  and  Best  of  the 

Sons  of  the  Morning"..  .  .      210 
"From       Greenland's      Icy 

Mountains" 379S 

"Holy,  Holy,  Holy" 3793 

"If  Thou  Wert  by  my  Side, 

my  Love" 1209 

Providence 3726 

"The  Son  of  God  Goes  Forth 
to  War".  .  .'. 3794 

Hedge,  Frederic  Henry 

Born  at  Cambrid'gc,  Mass.,  in  l8n$; 
died  there  in  i8qo. 

"A  Mighty  Fortress  is  our 

God" 3S06 

Questionings 2970 

Helbuen,  Theresa 

Born  in  New  York  City  in  18S8, 
and  still  living  there. 

Mother 396 

Hemans,  Felicia  Dorothea 

Born  at  Liverpool,  England,  Sep- 
tember 2^,  I/0.3:  died  near  Dublin, 
Ireland,  May  16,  iSjS- 

Casablanca 2439 

Dirge 355i 

England's  Dead 2306 

Graves  of  a  Household,  The  3561 
"He Never  Smiled  .Again". .   2349 

Hour  of  Death,  The -34 n 

Landing     of     the     Pilgrim 
Fathers 2387 

Henderson,      Barbara      [Mrs. 
Archibald] 
Born  at  Lincotnton,  N .  C,  and  mrui 
living  at  Chapel  Hill.  N.  C. 

A    Chant   of   Hate   against 
England 2549 

Henderson,  Florence  L. 

No  biographical  data  available. 

The  Garden  That  I  Love..  .    3441 

Henley,  William  Ernest 

Born  at  Gloucester,  Englayid,  Au- 
gust 23,  184Q;  died  at  Woking,  England, 
June  II,  IQ03. 

"As    Like    the    Woman    as 

You  Can" 1900 

Ballade  of  Ladies' Names. . .    1761 

Blackbird,  The 1527 

Culture  in  the  Slums 1951 

"England,  My  England"..  .    2239 

Home 3229 

"I  Took  a  Hansom  on  To- 
day"      827 

Inter  Sodales 1986 

Invictus 3500 

"Late   Lark  Twitters  from 
the  Quiet  Skies,  A" 3501 


"Or     Ever     the     Knightly 

Years  Were  (Jonc" 65s 

Spirit  of  Wine.  The 2013 

Stanzas,      "Where     forlorn 

sunsets  flare  and  fade"  .  .    2862 
Villon's  Straight  Tip  to  all 

Cross  Coves 1857 

"What  is  to  Come" 3422 

With  Strawberries 1760 

Hensley,  Sophia  Almon 

Born  in  Nova  Scolia,  May  31,  1S66; 
now  living  in  New  York  City. 

"Because  of  You" 665 

Hepburn,    Thomas   Nicoll,    see 
Setoun,  G.\briel. 

Herbert,  George 

Born  at  Montgomery  Castle,  Wales, 
April  3,  i,';q3;  died  at  Bemcrton,  near 
Salisbury,  England,  in  February,  1633. 

Collar,  The 3719 

Discipline 3720 

Holy  Baptism 3721 

Life 2931 

Love 3718 

Pulley,  The 370 

Unkindness 3722 

Virtue 3720 

Herford,  Oliver 

Born  at  Manchester,  Englarul.  in 
December,  1S63;  now  living  in  New  York 
City. 

Child's  Natural  History. .  .  .    2082 
The  Elf  and  the  Dormouse.     234 

Herrick,  Robert 

Born  in  London.  England,  in  August, 
I5QJ;  died  at  Dean  Prior,  Devonshire, 
England,  in  October,  1674. 

Argument  of  His  Book,  The  3105 

Bracelet,  The:  to  Julia 596 

Ceremonies  for  Christmas.  .     223 
Corinna's  Going  A-Maying .    1359 

Delight  in  Disorder 378 

His    Litany    to    the    Holy- 
Spirit 3744 

His  Winding-sheet 3454 

Night-piece,  The:  to  Julia.  .     695 
"No  Fault  in  Women".  .  .  .    1901 

Primrose,  The 149.S 

Rubies  and  Pearls 528 

Ternarie  of  Littl&s.  A 1723 

Thanksgiving     to    God    for 

His  House,  A 3713 

To  /Enone 595 

To  Anthea,  Who  may  Com- 
mand Him  .Anything.  .  .  .      595 

To  Blossoms 1504 

To  DafTodills 1474 

To  Daisies,  Not  to  Shut  so 

Soon 1477 

To  Dianemc 8i6 

To  Elcctra 684 

To  Keep  a  True  Lent 3745 

To  Meadows 1439 

To   Music,   to    Becalm    His 

Fever 3123 

To    Primroses    Filled    with 
Morning  Dew 1496 


3876 


Indev  of  Authors 


To  the  Rose;  a  Song 931 

To    the    Viryins,    to    make 

Much  of  Time 328 

To  the  Western  Wind 596 

To  the  Willow-tree 1406 

To  Violets 1501 

Upon  Julia's  Clothes 529 

White  Island,  The 3698 

Hewitt,  Ethel  M. 

No  biiKraplikal  data  available. 

Wild  Wishes 664 

Heywood,  John 

Born  in  England  about  1497;  died  at 
Malines,  Belgium,  about  1580. 

A  Praise  of  His  Lady 378 

Heywood,  Thomas 

Born  in  Lincolnshire,  England,  date 

unknown;  died  about  1650. 

Matin-Sons 696 

Message,  The 598 

Valerius  on  Women 818 

HiGGiNSON,  Ella 

Born  at  Council  Grove,  Kansas,  in 

1862;  now  living  at  Bellingham,  Wash. 

Four-Leaf  Clover 1472 

The  Lamp  in  the  West 3473 

HiGGiNSON,  Thomas  Wentworth 
Born  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  Decem- 
ber 22,  1823;  died  there.  May  q,  191  i. 
Ode  to  a  Butterfly 1517 

Hill,  Aaron 

Born  in  London,  Englaiui,  February 
10,  168';:  died  there  in  1750. 

A  Strong  Hand 1902 

Hill,  Thom^vs 

Born  at  New  Brunswick,  N.  J., 
January  7,  j8i8;  died  at  Waltham, 
Mass.,  November  2,  1891. 

The  Bobolink 1531 

Hinds,  Samuel 

Born  in  Barbadoes  in  1793;  died  in 
London.  England,  February  7,  1S72. 
Baby  Sleeps 27 

Hinkson,  Katherine  Tynan,  see 
Tynan,  Katherine. 

Hodgson,  Ralph 

An  English  writer,  born  in  North- 
umberland about  forty  years  ago;  now 
living  in  London. 

Eve 2816 

Mystery,  The 3776 

Stupidity  Street 3061 

"Time,     You     Old     Gipsy 

Man" 2817 

Wood  Song,  A 1329 

Hoffman,  Charles  Fenno 

Born  in  New  York  City  in  j8o6;  died 

at  Harrisburgh,  Pa.,  June  7,  18S4. 

Monterey 2470 

"  Sparkling  and  Bright". . . .    2007 


Hoffmann,  August  Heinrich 

Born  at  Fallersleben,  Hanover,  Prus- 
sia, April  2,  i7q8;  died  near  Hoxtcr, 
Prussia,  January  20,  1S74. 

The  Story  of  Augustus  who 

would  not  have  any  Soup.      122 
The  Story  of  Little  Suck-a- 
Thumb 123 

Hogg,  James 

Born  at  Eltrick,  Selkirkshire,  Scot- 
land, in  1770;  died  at  F2ltrive  Lake, 
November  21,  183S.  The  "  Ettrick 
Shepherd." 

Boy's  Song,  A 128 

Kilmeny 3151 

"Love  is  Like  a  Dizziness".     750 

Moggy  and  Me* 1227 

"  M v  Love  She's  but  a  Lassie 

Yet" 543 

Skylark,  The _. 1566 

"There's      Gowd      in      the 

Breiist" 1 142 

When  the  Kye  Comes  Hame     77s 
Women  Folk,  The 749 

HoLCROFT,  Thomas 

Born   in   Loiulon,   England,   Decem- 
ber 10,  174^;  died  there.  Match  23,  i8og. 
Gaffer  Gray 1996 

Holland,  Josiah  Gilbert 

Born  at  BeUhcrlown,  Mass.,  July  24, 

iS 1 9;  died  in  New  York  Citv,  October  21, 

18S1. 

Cradle  Song 86 

Daniel  Gray 3327 

Gradatim 3707 

Lullaby 86 

Holmes,  Oliver  Wendell 

Born  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  August  29, 

1809;  died  there,  October  7,  1894. 
Ballad    of    the    Oysterman, 

The 2139 

Bill  and  Joe 3002 

Boys.  The 1745 

Brother  Jonathan's  Lament 

for  Sister  Caroline 24S5 

Chambered  Nautilus,  The.  .    2913 

Contentment 1743 

Crooked  Footpath.  The.  . .  .   3739 
Deacon's  Masterpiece,  The.    1871 

Dorothy  Q _ 1738 

Height    of    the    Ridiculous, 

The 2138 

La  Grisette ooq 

Last  Leaf,  The.  . 17  11 

My  Aunt 1740 

Old  Ironsides 2456 

Old  Man  Dreams,  The 461 

To  an  Insect.  . 1512 

Hood,  Thomas 

Born  in  London,  England,  May  23, 

1799;  died  there.  May  .5.  1845. 

Bridge  of  Sighs,  The 339° 

Death-bed.  The 3546 

Dream  of  Eugene  Aram,  The  2767 

Epigram 1919 

Fair  Inez 959 

Faithless  Nelly  Gray 2126 


Index  of  Authors 


3877 


Faithless  Sally  Brown 2128 

False  Poets  and  True 3085 

Flowers 1465 

"I  Remember,  I  Remember"  4.13 
I'm  Not  a  Single  Man". ..  .    1713 

No 2048 

Ode  to  Autumn 1376 

Parental  Ode  to  My  Son,  A.     268 
Please  to  Ring  the  Belle.. . .    2130 

Queen  Mab 237 

Ruth 332 

Serenade 704 

Song,  "A  lake  and  a  fairy 

boat" 630 

Song  of  the  Shirt,  The 33Q3 

To  Minerva 2048 

Water  Lady,  The 869 

Hood,  Thomas,  the  younger 

Born  at  Wanslead,  Essex,  England, 
January  ;y,  iSjS:  died  al  Peckliam  Rye, 
Surrey.  Englamt.  November  20,  1S74. 
Poets  and  Linnets 1938 

Hook,  Theodore  Edward 

Born  in  London,  Enriland,  Sepleni- 
hcr  22,  17SS;  died  at  Fulham,  England, 
August  24,  1S41. 

Cautionary  Verses  to  Youth 
of  Both  Sexes 2021 

Hooker,  William  Brian 

Born  in  Nrui  York  City.  November  s, 

1880,  atui  noi'j  living  at  Farmington, 

Conn. 

From  Life 3QO 

Portrait,  A 303 

Hooper,  Ellen 

An  American  writer  of  the  fir$t  half 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  concerning 
whom  no  biographical  data  are  available. 

Beauty  and  Duty 2972 

The  Straight  Road 2973 

Hope,    Laurence    [Mrs.    Mal- 
colm Nicholson] 
Born  at  Stoke  Bishop.  Gloucestershire, 

England,  April  0,  1865;  died  of  poison, 

self-administered,    at    Madras,    India, 

October  4,  11)04. 

Ashore 916 

Bride,  The. 1198 

Khristna  and  His  Flute.  .  .  .     gi6 
Masters,  The 2947 

HoPKiNSON,  Joseph 

Born  al  Phitiulelphia.  Pa.,  Novem- 
ber 12,  1770;  died  there,  January  is, 
1842. 

Hail  Columbi.1 2200 

Hopper,    Nora    [Mrs.    Wilfrid 
Hugh  Chesson| 
Born  at  Exeter,  Englarul.  January  2, 

1871;  died  ill  London,  April  14,  IQ06. 

Dark  Man,  The 910 

March 13.SI 

Marriage  Charm,  A II09 

Horace,   see  Flaccus,   Quintus 

HORATIUS. 


HoRNE,  Herbert  P. 

Born  in  London,  Englatul,  in  1864; 
now  living  al  Florence.  Ilalv. 

"If  She  be  Made  of  White 

and  Red" 570 

Nancy  Dawson 988 

HoRNE,  Richard  Hengist 

Born  in  Lomion,  England,  January  i, 
iSoj;  died  at  Margate,  England,  March 
13,  1884. 

The  Plow 1652 

Houghton,    Lord,    see   Milnes, 
Richard  Monckton. 

HousMAN,  Alfred  Edward 

An  English  writer,  born  March  26, 
i8sQ,  and  now  living  al  Cambridge. 
"Along    the    Field    as    We 

Came  by  " 856 

Blackbird,  The i,S26  ' 

"On  Wenlock  Edge" 1401 

Power  of  Malt,  The 2016 

"When     I     was     One-and- 
Twenty" 857 

HousMAN,  Laurence 

An  English  writer,  born  July  18, 
1867,  and  now  living  in  London. 

Comrades 3008 

The  Settlers 3536 

Hovell-Thurlow,  Edward  [sec- 
ond Baron  Thurlow] 
Born  in  London,  England,  June  10, 
1781;  died  al  Brighton,  Flngland,  June  4, 
1829. 

Heron,  The 1540 

May.  .  .  ._ ii(n 

"When     in     the    Woods    I 
Wander  all  Alone" 1399 

HovEY,  Richard 

Born  at  Normal,  III.,  in  1864;  did 
in  iQoo. 

Accident  in  Art 3112 

At  the  Crossroads 3009 

Barney  McGee 1980 

Chanson  de  Rosemonde.  . .  .     997 
Envoy   from    "  More   Songs 

from  Vagabondia" 3000 

Hunting  Song 1662 

Kavanagh,  The 2017 

Love  in  the  Winds 1269 

Sea  Gipsy,  The 1688 

Stein  Song,  A 1948 

Two  Lovers,  The 1044 

Unmanifest  Destiny 2209 

Wander-lovers,  The 1686 

Word    of    the    Lord    from 

Havana,  The 2535 

Howard,  Henry  [Earl  of  Sur- 
rey] 
Born    in    Norfolk.    England,    about 
1V7:  beheaded  on  Tower  Hill,  London, 
January  21 ,  1547. 

The  Means  to  Attain  Happy 
Life 2979 


3878 


Index  of  Authors 


HowARTH,  Ellen  Clementine 

Born  at  Coopcrslown,  N.  V.,  in  1827; 
died  there  in  iSog. 

"  'Tis   but   a   Little   Faded 
Flower" 3363 

Howe,  Julia  Ward 

Born  in  New  York  City,  May  27, 
iSiq;  died  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  October  17, 

IQW. 

Battle-Hymn  of  the  Republic  2206 

HowELLS,  Mildred 

An  American  wirier,  living  in  New 

York  City. 

God's  Will 3736 

Moral  in  Sevres,  A 1805 

HowELLS,  William  Dean 

Born  at  Martin's  Ferry,  Ohio,  March 
I,  1837,  and  now  living  in  New  York 
City. 

Song  the  Oriole  Sings,  The. .    1556 
Thanksgiving,  A 2933 

HowiTT,  Mary 

Born  at  Colcford,  Glo7uestcrshirc, 
England,  March  12, 17QQ;  died  at  Rome, 
January  30,  18SS. 

Broom  Flower,  The 1468 

Buttercups  and  Daisies.  .  .  .      117 
Fairies  of  the  Caldon-Low, 

The 238 

Rose  of  May.  The 1499 

Spider  and  the  Fly,  The  . . .     176 

Rowland,  Mary  Woolsey 

An  American  writer,  born  in  1832, 
died  in  1864. 

In  the  Hospital 3463 

Hueffer,  Ford  Madox 

An   English   writer,    born   in   1S73, 

and  now  living  in  London. 

Children's  Song 2S2 

Wisdom 512 

Hunt,  James  Henry  Leigh 

Born  at  Southgalc,  near  London, 
England.  October  10,  17S4;  died  at 
Putney,  England,  August  28,  18 SQ. 

Abou  Ben  Adhem 2999 

Cupid  Drowned 4SS 

Dearest  Poets,  The 308s 

Fairy  Son.c: 23'; 

Glove  and  the  Lions,  The.  .     833 

Jaffar 3013 

Jenny  Kissed  Me 687 

Nun,  The 624 

Sneezinc 2021 

To  the  Grasshopper  and  the 
Cricket IS  10 

Hunter,  Anne 

Rom  in  Scotland   in   1742;  died   in 
London,  Ennland.  .hinuary  7,  1821. 
"My  Mother  Bids  me  Bind 
my  Hair" 94 ^ 


Huntington,       Helen       [Mrs. 
Archer  Huntington] 
An  American  writer,  living  in  New 
York  City. 

The  Wayfarer 28.54 

Huston,  Francis 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Forty  Years  Ago 469 


Huxley,  Thomas  Henry 

Born  at  Ealing,  near  London,  Eng- 
larui.  May  4,  1825;  died  at  Eastbourne. 
England,  June  28,  i8gs- 

Tennyson 3636 

I  '' 

Ingalls,  John  James 

Born  at  Middlcton,  Mass.,  in  1833; 
died  in  IQOO. 

Opportunity 2921 

Ingelow,  Jean 

Born  at  Boston,  Lincolnshire,  Eng- 
land, March  17,  1820;  died  at  Kensing- 
ton, Ejtgland,  July  20,  i8q7. 

Divided 968 

High  Tide  on  the  Coast  of 

Lincolnshire,  The 3318 

"Like    a    Laverock    in    the 

Lift" 1200 

Long  White  Seam,  The.  .  .  .    16 13 
"One     Morning,     Oh!     so 

Early" ii44 

Singing-lesson,  The 147 

Song  of  the  Old  Love 1097 

Songs  of  Seven 426 

Ingram,  John  Kells 

Born  in  County  Donegal,  Ireland,  in 
1823;  died  in  1907. 

The  Memory  of  the  Dead .  .    2262 

Iris,  Scharmel 

No  biographical  data  available. 

After  the  Martyrdom 3736 

Ironquill,  see  Ware,  Eugene  F. 

Irving,  Washington 

Born  in  New  York  City,  April  3, 
1783;  died  at  Sunnyside,  near  Tarry- 
town,  N .  Y.,  November  28.  iSsq. 

A  Certain  Young  Lady 73 1 

Irwin,  Wall.'vce 

Born  at  Oneida,  N.   Y.,  March  13, 

1875,  and  now  living  in  Neiv  York  City. 
From  Romany  to  Rome. .  .  .  1683 
Grain  of  Salt,  A 2o8.>; 

J 

Jackson,  Helen  Hunt 

Born  at  Amherst,  Mass.,  October  18, 

1831;    died    at    San    Francisco,    Cal.. 

August  12,  1S85. 

Coronation 2085 

My  Legacy 3727 

Spinning 3467 


Index  of  Authors 


3  Syr 


Jago,  Richard 

Born  at  Beaudcsert,  Warnicksbire, 
England.  October  i.  1715;  died  at  Snit- 
terfield,  England,  May  8,  178 1. 

Absence 942 

Janvier,     Margaret    Thomson 
["Margaret  Vandegrift"] 

Born  at  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  1S4S, 
died  at  Norwood,  Mass.,  in  February, 

IQU- 

Little  Wild  Baby 1035 

The  Sandman 72 

jEiLicoE,  S.  Charles 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Advice  to  a  Lover 1171 

Jewett,  Sophie 

Born  at  Moravia,   N.    V..  June  3, 

iS6r;  died  at  Wellcslev,  Mass.,  in  iqoq. 

"If  Spirits  Walk" 1118 

Johns,  Orrick  G. 

Born  at  St.  Louis,  Mo..  June  2,  1887, 
and  still  living  there. 

The  Sea-lands 958 

Johnson,  E.  Pauline 

A  Canadian  writer  of  Indian  descent, 
born  in  1862;  died.  March  7,  IQIJ. 

The  Song  my  Paddle  Sings.    1676 

Johnson,  Lionel  Pigot 

Born  at  Broadstairs,  Kent,  Englarul, 
March  75,  1867;  died  in  London,  Oc- 
tober 4,  IQ02. 

By    the    Statue    of    King 

Charles  at  Charing  Cross .  3598 

Comrades 3006 

Friend.  A 3001 

Ireland 2253 

Precept  of  Silence. 3351 

Te  Martyrum  Candidatus. .  37s  t 

To  the  Dead  of  'g8 2261 

Johnson,  Robert  Underwood 

Barn  at  Washington,  D.  C.  Janu- 
ary 12,  iSsj;  now  living  in  New  York 
City. 

Dewey  at  Manila 2537 

English  Mother,  An 2242 

Irish  Love-Song,  An 741 

Italian  Rhapsody 2613 

"Love    Once    was    like    an 

April  Dawn  " 508 

Star  Song 673 

Ursula 576 

Johnson,  Samuel 

Born  at  Lichfield,  Englatui,  Sep- 
tember 18,  170Q;  died  in  London,  De- 
cember 13.  1784. 

Epigram 1916 

On  the  Death  of  Mr.  Robert 
Levet 3628 

Johnson,  Samuel 

,  Born  at  Salrm.  Mass..  October  in, 
1822;  died  at  North  Andover,  Mas%., 
February  iq.  iSSz. 

Inspiration 2973 


Johnson,  William  Samuel 

Born  at  Etlicvtlville,  N.  Y.,  in  1850; 
now  living  at  Mamaroneck,  N.  Y. 

Chiflfons! •. . .   178S 

Johnson-Cory,  William 

Born  al  Torringlon,  Devonshire.  Eng- 
laiul,  January  9.  1S23;  died  at  Hamp- 
stead,  Englatui,  June  11,  i8q2. 

Amaturus 4Q7 

Heraclitus 35^0 

Invocation,  An 3099 

Mimnermus  in  Church 1767 

"Oh,  Earlier  Shall  the  Rose- 
buds Blow" 3378 

Johnstone,  Henry  [Lord  John- 
stone] 
Born  at  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  Febru- 
ary 5,  1844,  and  still  living  there. 

The  Fastidious  Serpent.  ..  .    2070 

Jones,  Thomas  S.,  Jr. 

Born  at  Boonvillc,  N.  Y .,  November  6, 

1882;  now  living  at  Ulica,  N.  Y. 

Ave  atque  Vale 3668 

In  the  Fall  o'  Year 1131 

Little  Ghosts,  The 436 

Sometimes 436 

To  Song 3088 

Jones,  [Sir]  William 

Born  in  London,  England,  Septem- 
ber 28,  1746:  died  at  Calcutta,  India, 
April  27,  I7Q4. 

An  Ode  in  Imitation  of  AI- 

cjeus .   2236 

"On  Parent  Knees" 21 

JoNSON,  Ben 

Born  in  London.  England,  about  1573; 
died  there.  August  6.  1637. 

Epitaph  on  Elizabeth  L.  H.  3516 

Epitaph  on  Salathiel  Pavy. .  3516 

Her  Triumph 526 

Kiss.  The 682 

Noble  Nature,  The 2836 

On  the  Portrait  of  Shakes- 
peare   3<J.'52 

Queen  Mab 233 

Simple.t  Munditiis 377 

Song.    "O,   do   not  wanton 

with  those  eyes" 592 

Song:  That  Women  are  but 

Men's  Shadows 8ri 

Song:  To  Cynthia 1320 

To  Celia 591 

To  the  Memory  of  My  Be- 
loved     Master      William 

Shakespeare 3'J.';o 

V'enus'  Runaway 479 

Verses  over  the  Door  at  the 
Entrance  into  the  Apollo 

Room  at  the  Devil  Tavern  19SS 

Jordan,  Thomas 

Born  in  London,  England,  about  1612; 
died  there  in  168). 

Coroncmus  nos  Rosis  ante- 
quani  Marcescant 1992 


3880 


Index  of  Authors 


Joyce,  James 

Boni  ill  Dublin,  Ireland  on  February 
2,  1882;  now  living  in  London. 

"Bid  Adieu  to  Girlish  Days"  1170 

K 

Kadffman,  Reginald  Wright 
Born  at  Columbia,  Pa.,  Sepleinbcr  8, 

iSyy.  and  still  living  there. 

Call,  The 509 

Troia  Fuit 441 

Wastrel,  The 440 

Keats,  John 

Born  in  Lorulon,  England,  October  2p, 
1795;  (i't^d  at  Rome,  February  23,  182 1. 

Dove,  The 3379 

Eve  of  St.  Agnes,  The 3284 

Fairy  Song 237 

Human  Seasons,  The 2 

La  Belle  Dame  sans  Merci. .   1005 

Last  Sonnet 3489 

Lines     on     the     Mermaid 

Tavern 1989 

Ode  on  a  Grecian  Urn 3163 

Ode  to  a  Nightingale 1552 

Ode  to  Psyche.  . 3164 

On  First  Looking  into  Chap- 
man's Homer 3082 

On  Melancholy 3349 

On  the  Grasshopper  and  the 

Cricket is  10 

On  the  Sea _ 1588 

Stanzas  "  In  a  drear-nighted 

December" 339s 

To  Autumn 137S 

To  Fancy 3 166 

"To  one  Who  has  been  Long 

in  City  Pent" 1653 

To  the  Poets 3090 

"When  I  Have  Fears" 3488 

"Where  be  you  Going,  Yoii 
Devon  Maid" 732 

Keble,  John 

Born  at  Fairfield,  Gloucestershire, 
England,  April  25,  1702;  died  at 
Bournemouth,  Hampshire,  England, 
March  27,  1866. 

Effect  of  Example,  The.  .  . .    2924 

Holy  Matrimony 1 197 

"We    Need    not    Bid,    for 
Cloistered  Cell" 3747 

Kemble,  Frances  Anne 

Born  in  London,  England,  Novem- 
ber 27,  i8og;  died  there,  January  15, 
1893. 

Faith 2919 

Lament  of  a  Mocking-Bird .    1544 

Kemp,  Harry 

Born  in  Ohio  in  1883,  and  still  living. 

Conquerors,  The 3068 

Prayer,  A 2939 

Resurrection 3553 

Voice  of  Christmas,  The.. . .   375° 

Renyon,  James  Benjamin 

Born  at  Frankfort,  N.  Y .,  April  26, 
1S58:  now  living  in  New  York  City. 
The  Play 2854 


Kendall,  May 

Born  at  Bridlington,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, in  i86r.  and  stitl  living  there. 
Ballad,  He  said:  "The  shad- 
ows darken  down" 1090 

Keppel,  Caroline 

A  Scotch  writer,  born  in  173s;  date 
of  death  unknown. 

Robin  Adair 979 

Key,  Francis  Scott 

Born  in  Frederick  County,  Md,, 
August  Q,  1780,  died  at  Washington, 
D.  C.,  January  ir,  1843. 

The  Star-Spangled  Banner. .   2196 

Kilmer,  Joyce 

Born    at    New    Brunswick,    N.    J., 

December  6,   1886,  and  now  liinng  in 

New  York  City. 

Balladeof  my  Lady's  Beauty    575 

Gates  and  Doors 215 

King's  Ballad,  The 1123 

Trees 14°7 

Kimball,  Harriet  McEwen 

Born  at  Portsmouth,  N.  //.,  in  No- 
vember, 1834;  and  stilt  living  there. 

White  Azaleas 1467 

King,  Ben  [jamin  Franklin] 
Born  at  St.  Joseph,  Mich.,  March  17, 

1857;  died  at  Bowling  Green,  Ky.,  April 

7.  iSq4. 

How  Often 1950 

If  I  Should  Die  To-night. . .    1950 

King,  Georgiana  Goddard 

Born  August  5,  1871,  at  West  Colum- 
bia, W.  Va.;  now  living  at  Bryn  Mawr, 
Pa. 

"A   Man    Called    Dante,   I 

Have  Heard" 3084 

Song,  "Something  calls  and 
whispers" 1703 

King,  Henry 

Born  at  Worminghall,  Buckingham- 
shire, Englaiui,  in  January,  1392;  died 
at  Chichester,  England,  September  30, 
i66g. 

A  Contemplation  upon  Flow-  • 

ers 1466 

Exequy,  The 1228 

On  the  Life  of  Man 2837 

Kingsley,  Charles 

Born  in  Devonshire,  England,  June  I2, 
i8ig;  died  at  Eversley,  England,  Janu- 
ary 23,  1873. 

Airly  Beacon 1040 

Dolcino  to  Margaret 1215 

Farewell,  A 125 

Last  Buccaneer,  The 1630 

Margaret  to  Dolcino 1215 

Sands  of  Dee,  The 16 19 

Sing  Heigh-ho 735 

Song,    "Oh!    that    we    two 

were  Maying" 885 

Three  Fishers,  The 1620 

Tide  River,  The 141S 

Young  and  Old 417 


Index  of  Authors 


3881 


KiNGSLEY,  Henry 

Born  at  Barnack,  Norlhamplonshirc, 

Englatt't,  in  iSjo;  died,  May  24,  iS~6. 

Magdalen 3735 

Kinney,  Coates 

Bnrn  mar  Prnn  Van,  Vales  County. 
N.  v.,  November  s ;,  1826;  died  in 
Ohio  in  190  f. 

Rain  on  ihe  Roof 458 

Kipling,  Rudyard 

Born  at  Bombay,  India.  December  jo, 
jS6s;  now  living  in  Sussex,  England. 

Ballad  of  East  and  West,  The  2830 

Betrothed,  The 860 

Certain  Maxims  of  Hafiz. . .  igii 

Commonplaces 1946 

Conundrum    of    the    Work- 
shops, The 1S84 

Danny  Deever 2  2q3 

Dedication,  A 3816 

Foreloper.  The 1703 

"  Fuzzy-Wuzzy  " 2533 

General  Summary IQ19 

Gipsy  Trail,  The 1677 

Gunga  Din 2294 

Jane  Smith 1926 

Jam-pot,  The i939 

L'Envoi 3504 

Limerick,     "There     was    a 

small  boy  of  Quebec"..  .  .  2090 

Long  Trail,  The 1704 

Mandalay 2638 

Post  that  Fitted,  The 2046 

Recessional 2248 

Sons  of  Martha,  The.  .....  3072 

Vampire,  The 1045 

Knowles,  Frederic  Lawrence 

An  American  ivriler,  born  in  i86q, 
di     in  1005. 

"  If  Love  Were  Jester  at  the 

Court  of  Death  " 3474 

Last  Word,  The 675 

Laus  Mortis 3487 

Love  Triumphant 1153 

MemoPi'.  A 115; 

On    a    Fly-leaf    of    Burns's 

Songs 5S<i(> 

Song  of  Desire,  A 1589 

To  Mother  Nature 1299 

Knox,  William 

Born  at  firth.  RnxburRhshire,  Scot- 
land. August  17,  17S0;  died  at  Edin- 
burgh. November  12.  /fev. 

"Oh,  Why  Should  the  Spirit 
of  Mortal  Be  Proud" 3409 

Kobbe,  Gustav 

Born  in  New  York  City.  March  4, 

1S57;  present  address,  Babylon,  L.  I. 

From  the  Harbor  Hill 1041 

To  a  Little  Girl 267 

Kynaston,  [Sir|  Francis 

Born  at  Oleley.  Shropshire,  England, 
in  1587;  died  in  1O42. 

To  Cynthia  on  Concealment 
of  her  Beauty 529 


La  Conte,  Marie  R. 

An  American  writer  of  the  middle- 
nineteenth  century. 

Somebody's  Darling 2318 

Laighton,  Albert 

Born  at  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  in  1S2Q; 
died  there  in  1SS7. 

Under  the  Leaves 1401 

Laing,  Alexander 

Born  at  Brechin,  Forfarshire,  Scot- 
land, May  j.f,  1787;  died  there,  October 
14,  1857. 

My  am  Wife 1206 

Laird,  William  [Pseud,  of  Wil- 
liam Laird  Brown] 
Born  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  March  21, 
188S;  now  living  at  Lansdowne,  Pa. 
A  Very  Old  Song lo.-;  i 

Lamar,  Mirabeau  Buonaparte 

Born  at  Louisville,  Co.,  August  16. 
1798;  died  at  Richmond,  Texas,  De- 
cember iQ,  tSsq. 

The  Daughter  of  Mendoza  .     569 

Lamb,  Charles 

Born  in  London,  England,  Febru- 
ary 10.  T775;  died  at  Edmonton,  Eng- 
land, December  27,  1834. 

Anger 113 

Hester 3547 

Housekeeper,  The 15 14 

Old  Familiar  Faces,  The  . . .     453 

Lamb,  Mary  .\nn 

Born  in  London,  England,,  in  1764: 

died  in  1847. 

Anger 113 

Choosing  a  Name 14 

Landor,  Walter  Savage 

Born  at  Warwick.  Englan/l.  Janu- 
j(}^  1775;  died  at  Florence,  Italy, 
0\^(]J,i864. 

"^        PaulRcvu '71° 

Jsalmclc"^  Child" 356 

Ij,.,:^yY  f, 3491 

Defiai.t'    '^■'-   728 

Epigrams  '  " 19 16 

"Fault  is  not  Mine,  The". .  831 

"I  Strove  with  None" 349 1 

Late  Leaves 406 

Maid's  Lament,  The 1077 

"Mother,  1  Cannot  Mind  My 

Wheel" 1040 

Of  Clementina 729 

On  Music 313 1 

One  White  Hair,  The 362 

Plays. 1910 

Resignation 2993 

Rose  Aylmer 622 

Song,  "Often  I  have  heard  it 

said" 686 

Test,  The 831 

Time  to  be  Wise 1709 

To  Age 406 

To  the  Sister  of  Elia 3625 


3882 


Index  of  Authors 


To  Youth 354 

Under  the  Lindens 17 10 

Verse,    "Past    ruined    llioa 

Helen  lives" 3oSg 

Years 407 

Lang,  Andrew 

Born  at  Selkirk,  Scotland,  March  31. 

1844;  died,  London.  Eng.,  July  20,  IQ12 

Ballade  of  a  Friar 187^ 

Ballade  of  Dead  Ladies.  .  .  .    1784 

Ballade  of  Middle  Age 363 

Ballade  of  Summer 1769 

Ballade  of  the  Primitive  Jest  1708 

Homeric  Unity 3083 

Lost  Love 849 

Man  and  the  Ascidian i8gs 

Odyssev,  The 3°83 

Old  Tune,  An 920 

Romance 1120 

Scythe  Song I37i 

Villon's  Ballade 1858 

Lanier,  Sidney 

Born  at  Macon,  Ga.,  February  3, 
JS42;  died  at  Lynn,  N.  C,  September  S, 
1881. 

Ballad  of  Trees  and  the  Mas- 
ter, The 3776 

Marshes  of  Glynn,  The.  .  .  .    14^6 
Song  of  the  Chattahoochee.    1423 

Lanier,  Sidney  and  Clifford 
The  Power  of  Prayer 203S 

Lanigan,  George  Thomas 

Born  on  the  St.  Charles  river,  Canada, 
December  10, 1S45;  died  at  Philadelphia, 
Pa.,  February  5,  1SS6. 

A  Threnody 2069 

Larcom,  Lucy 

Boryi   at    Beverly,    Mass.,   in   1S24; 

died  at  Boston,  April  77,  i8q3. 

Brown  Thrush,  The lOS 

Hannah  Binding  Shoes.,.  . . .   1624 
Strip  of  Blue,  A i(>a~ 

Lathrop,  George  Parf^ 

Born   at   Oahu,    Sav^  -"^s, 

August  25.  j8i;i;  died  ir.. 

Child's  Wish  Grant^      ,„--.     320 
Keenan's  Charge. ...;.....    2497 

Lazarus,  Emma 

■  Born  in  New  York  City,  July  22, 
1849:  died  there  in  1S87. 

The    Crowing    of    the    Red 

Cock 3254 

The  World's  Justice 325S 

Le  Gallienn?;,  Richaed 

Born  at  Liverpool,  England,  January 
20,  1866;  now  living  in  New  York  City. 

Old  Man's  Song,  An _.     425 

Passionate    Reader    to   His 

Poet,  The 3102 

Second  Crucifi.xion,  The.-  .  .    3749 
Song,  "She's  somewhere  in 

the  sunlight  strong" 995 

Song,  "Take  it,  love" 510 

Songs  for  Fragoletta 12 


Spirit  of  Sadness 3362 

What -of  the  Darkness 351S 

Wife  from  Fairyland,  The.  .    1130 

Lea,     Fannie     Heaslip     [Mrs. 
Hamilton  Pope  Agee] 
Born  at  New  Orleans,  La.,  October  30, 
1884;  now  living  at  Honolulu,  Uawaii. 
The  Dead  Faith 3396 

Lear,  Edw.aed 

Born  in  London.  England,  May  12, 
1812;  died  at  San  Remo,  Italy,  in  18S8. 
Courtship   of    the   Yonghy- 

Bonghv-Bo,  The 2054 

Jumblics,  The 2050 

Nonsense  Verses 2057 

Owl  and  the  Pussy-cat,  The  2052-- 
Pobble  Who  Has  no  Toes, 
The 2053 

Learned,  Walter 

Born  at  New  Loiuion,  Conn.,  June  22, 

1847;  died  there  December  11,  igis- 

Growing  Old 742 

In  Explanation 743 

On  the  Fly-leaf  of  a  Book  of 

Old  Plays 1806 

Prime  of  Life,  The 805 

Time's  Revenge 743 

To  Critics 366 

Lecky,  William  Edward  Hart- 
pole 
Born  near  Dublin,  Ireland,  March  26, 
1838;  died  there  October  22,  1903. 

On  an  Old  Song 3087 

Ledoux,  Louis  V. 

Born  in  New  York  City,  Jwr  6, 
j88o,  and  still  living  there.  p.. 

At  Sunset.  , ii44 

Lee-Hamilton,  Eugene  Jacob 

Born  in  London.  England,  January  6, 
1845;  died  at  the  Bagni  di  Lucca,  Italy, 
September  y,  icjoy. 

Sonnets      from       "Mimma 
Bella" 323 

Lehmann,  Ritdolph  Chambers 

Born  near  Shejfield.  England.,  Janu- 
ary 3,  iSs6;  now  living  in  Bucks,  Eng- 
land. 

Middle  Age 363 

Leigh,  Henry  Sambrooke 

Born  in  London,  England.  March  20, 

1837;  died  there,  June  16,  1883. 

Only  Seven 1925 

'Twas  Ever  Thus 1930 

Twins,  The 2068 

Leland,  Charles  Godfrey 

Born  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  August  15, 
1824;  died  in  1Q03.  . 

El  Capitan-General 2026 

HL\ns  Breitmann's  Party.  .  .    2152 
The   Legend   of   Heinz  von 
Stein 2028 


Index  of  Authors 


3883 


Letts,  Winifred,  M. 

An  Irish  writer,  now  living  in  Dublin. 
The  Spires  of  Oxford 2560 

Lever,  Charles  James 
•   Bnrn  at  Dublin.  Ireland,  August  jr, 
1S06;  died  at  Tricst,  Austria-Hungary, 
June  I,  iSy2. 

"The    Pope    He    Leads    a 
Happy  Life" 2137 

The  Widow  Malone 1973 

Lewis,  Matthew  Gregory 

Born  in  London,  Englami,  July  Q, 
1775;  died  at  ^ca,  of  yellow  fever. 
May  J4,  1818. 

Allan  Water 1042 

Liddell,  Catherine  C. 

An  English  writer,  born  in  1S48. 
'  '  '    Jesus  the  Carpenter ,3768 

f.'-'  - 

Lindsay,  Nicholas  Vachel 

Born  at  Springfield,  III.,  November 
JO,  jSjQ,  atid  still  living  there. 

Eagle  that  is  Forgotten.  The  3587 
General      William      Booth 

Enters  into  Heaven 3593 

O.  Henry 3610 

LiPPMAN,  Julia  Mathilde 

Born  in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,  June  27, 
1S64;  now  livinK  in  New  York  City. 
Love  and  Life 924 

LissAUER,  Ernst 

A  German  writer,  born  in  1SS2,  and 
still  living. 

Hassgesang  gegen  England .    3846 

Litchfield,  Grace  Denio 

Born  in  New  York  City.  November  iq, 

i84g;  present  address.  Washington,  D.  C. 

My  Other  Me 436 

LocHORE,  Robert 

Born  at  Siratlmvcn,  Lanarkshire, 
Scotland,  July  7,  1762;  died  at  Glasgow, 
April  27,  1852. 

Marriage  and  the  Care  O't.     748 

Locker-Lampson,  Frederick 
Born  at  Greenwich,  Engla)ui.  May  2Q, 

1821;  died  at  Roufant,  England,  May  30, 

1805. 

At  Her  Window 708 

Cuckoo,  The 1537 

Garden  Lyric,  A 1732 

Love,  Time,  and  Death....   3458 

Mrs.  Smith 1733 

My  Mistress's  Boots 1730 

Nice  Correspondent,  A 1812 

Rhyme  of  One,  A 8 

St.  James's  Street 2599 

Skeleton   in   the   Cupboard, 

The 1734 

Terrible  Infant.  A 1736 

To  My  Grandmother 1728 

Widow's  Mile,  The.  ......    3554 


Lockhart,  John  Gibson 

Born  at  Cambusnelhan,  Scotland, 
July  14,  1704;  died  at  Abbotsjord, 
November  25.  1854. 

The     Wandering     Knight's 
Song 626 

Lodge,  Thomas 

Born,  probably  in  London,  Englamt, 
about  1558;  died  there  in  1625. 

Rosalind's  Madrigal 477 

Logan,  George  B.,  Jr. 

An  American  writer,  no  biographical 
data  available. 

Dawn 132S 

Logan,  John 

Born    at   Soutra,   Fala,  Midlothian, 

Scotlartd,    in    1748;   died   in    London, 

December  25.  17S8. 

The  Braes  of  Yarrow 1065 

To  the  Cuckoo 1536 

Longfellow,  Henry  Wadswortii 

Born  at  Portland.  Maine,  Febru- 
ary 27,  1807;  died  at  Ca'mbridge,  Mass., 
March  24.  1S82. 

Arrow  and  the  Song,  The..  .  292,5 
Arsenal  at  Springfield,  The.  3069 
Ballad  of  the  French  Fleet,  A  2421 

Beleaguered  City,  The 2863 

Belfry  of  Bruges,  The 2627 

Bridge,  The 33S6 

Children's  Hour,  The 252 

Christmas  Bells 2ir 

Day-break 3443 

"Day  is  Done,  The" 33.S5 

Divina  Commedia 3084 

Endymion 500 

Excelsior 291.'; 

Fire  of  Drift-wood,  The. .  . .   3236 

Flowers 1463 

God's  Acre 3439 

Hymn  to  the  Night 1327 

Maidenhood 327 

My  Lost  Youth 444 

Nature 1301 

Nuremberg 2632 

Old  Clock  on  the  Stairs,  The  3242 

Paul  Rcvere's  Ride 2422 

Psalm  of  Life.  A .    2914 

Rainy  Day,  The 3350  , 

Reaper  and  the  Flowers,  The  3418 

Resignation 3510 

Seaweed 3094 

Serenade  from   "The  Span- 
ish Student " 70s 

Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert 2368 

Skeleton  in  Armor,  The.  . . .  3323 
Song.  "Stay,  stay  at  home, 

ray  heart,  and  rest" 3232 

Song  of  the  Silent  Land ....   3456 

Three  Kings.  The 216 

Village  Blacksmith,  The.. . .  2916 
Warden  of  the  Cinque  Ports, 

The 3770 

Wreck  of  the  Hesperus,  The  2461 

Lovelace,  Richard 

Born  in  Kent,  England,  in  1618; 
died  in  London  in  1658. 

Rose,  The 696 


3884 


Index  of  Authors 


To  Althea,  from  Prison ....  6o.s 

To  Aramantha 5,5,5 

To  Lucasta,  Going  beyond 

the  Seas 933 

To   Lucasta,   Going   to   the 

Wars 933 

LovEMAN,  Robert 

Born  at  Clcvclaml,  Ohio,  April  it, 
1864;  present  address,  Dalton,  Ga. 

April  Rain 1442 

Lover,  Samuel 

Bnrn  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  February  24, 
1797;  died  at  St.  Ilclicrs,  Jersey,  July  6, 
1868. 

Ask  and  Have 754 

Birth  of  St.  Patrick,  The.  .  .  1966 
Father    Land    and    Mother 

Tongue 3259 

Father  Molloy 1958 

Low-backed  Car,  The 777 

Paddy  O'Rafther i960 

Rory     O'More,     or,     Good 

Omens 7,S3 

Widow  Machree 1974 

Low,  Benjamin  RobbinS  Curtis, 

Born  at  Fair  Haven.  Mass.,  Jtme  22, 

1S80,  and  now  living  in  New  York  City 

To-day 663 

Lowell,  Amy 

Born  in  Brooklinc,  Mass.,  February 

g,  1S74,  ami  still  living  there. 

Crowned 851 

Patterns 1I3-1- 

Lowell,  James  Russell 

Born  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  Febru- 
ary 22,  iSip;  died  there,  August  i2,  i8qi. 

Aladdin 357 

Auf  Wiedcrsehen 990 

Courtin',  The 736 

Debate  in  the  Sennit,  The. .    1840 

Fatherland,  The 3260 

First  Snow-fall,  The 315 

Hebe 852 

Heritage,  The 263 

In  the  Twilight 45° 

June 1367 

My  Love. 1213 

Ode  Recited  at  the  Harvard 

Commemoration 2518 

She  Came  and  Went 314 

To  the  Dandelion 1481 

Washers  of  the  Shroud.  The  2488 
What  Mr.  Robinson  Thinks  1839 
Without  and  Within 1764 

Lowell,  Maria  White 

Born  at  Watcrtoivn.  Mass.,  July  8, 
1821;  died  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  October 
2?,  1853- 

The  Mornmg-Glory 312 

Lowell,  Robert  Traill  Spence 
Born    at   Boston.    Mass.,   October   8, 
1816;    died    at    Schenectady,    N.     Y ., 
September  12.  i8qi. 

The  Relief  of  Lucknow 247  s 


Lucas,  Edward  Verrall 
An  Fnglish  writer,  born  in  1868  and 

now  living  in  Lorulon. 

Clay 176S 

Friends 3000 

Mr.  Coggs 162 

Lucas,  St.  John 

An  English  writer;  now  living  in 
London. 

Pain 3353 

Luce,  Morton 

Born  at  High  Wycombe,  Buckingham- 
shire,   ILnglatui,    May    7.    1840;    now 
living  at  Weslon-Super-Mare,  England. 
Sonnets  from  "Thysia". ...    1 273 

LiJDERS,  Charles  Henry 

Ati  American  writer,  born  in   1858; 

died  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  i8qi. 

A  Corsage  Bouquet 17S3 

The  Four  Winds 11 23 

Luluam,  Habberton 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Nested 1176 

Luther,  Martin 

Born  at  Eisleben,  Prussian  Saxony, 
November  10,  1483;  died  there,  Febru- 
ary 18,  1546. 

Y,m  Feste  Burg 3831 

Lyly,  John 

Born  in  the  Weald  of  Kent,  England, 
about  1554;  died  in  London  in  Novem- 
ber, 1606. 

Apollo's  Song 520 

Cupid  and  Campaspe 520 

Lyte,  Henry  Francis 

Born  al  Kelso,  Scotland,  June  i,  17Q3; 

died  at  Nice,  France,  November  20, 1847. 

"Abide  with  Me" 3802 

Lytle,  William  Haines 

Born  at  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  November  2 , 
1826;  killed  in  the  battle  of  Chickamauga, 
September  20,  1863. 

Antony  to  Cleopatra 2346 

Lyttelton,    Lucy    (Mrs.    C.    F. 
Masterman) 
An   English   writer,   born    in    1884, 
a)td  now  living  in  London. 

Simon  the  Cyrenean 3753 

Lyttleton,       George       [First 
B.ARON  Lyttleton] 
Born  at  Hagley,  Worcestershire,  Eng- 
land,  January    17,    170Q;   died   there, 
August  22  1773- 

"Tell  me,  my  Heart,  if  This 
be  Love" 535 

Lytton,  Edward  George  Earle 
Lytton       Bulwer       [First 
Baron  Lytton] 
Born  in  London,  England,  May  2f, 


Index  of  Authors 


3885 


1803;    died    at    Torquay,    Deronshirc, 
England,  January  18.  1873. 

Night  and  Love 710 

Lytton,  Edward  Robert  Lytton 
BuLWER  (First  Earl  of  Lyt- 
ton] [Owen  Meredith] 
Born  in  London,  Eng.,  Nov.  8,  1831; 

died  in  Paris,  France,  Nov.  24,  i8gi. 

Aux  Italicns 88g 

Chessboard,  The 888 

Portrait,  The 1025 

Since  we  Parted 64J 

M 

Macaulay,   Thomas   Babington 

[First  Baron  Macaulay] 

Born  in  Lciceilcrshirc.  Eng.,  0<t.  2$, 

1800;  died  in  London,  Dec.  28,  185Q. 

Armada,  The 2370 

Battle  of  Naseby,  The.  ....   2392 

Horatius  at  the  Bridge 2329 

Ivry 2374 

Last  Buccaneer,  The 163 1 

M.^cCarthy,  Denis  Aloysius 

Born  in  County  Tipperary,  Ire.,  1871; 
now  living  at  East  Cambridge,  Mass. 
"Ah,  Sweet  is  Tipperary" . .   260S 

MacCarthy,  Denis  Florence 

Born  at  Duhlin,  Ireland.  _May  26, 
18 1 7;  died  at  Blackrock,  near  Dublin, 
April  7,  1882. 

Summer  Longings 1363 

McCarthy,  Justin  Huntly 

Born  at  Liverpool,  England,  in  1S60; 
now  living  in  London. 

A  Ballad  of  Dead  Ladies. . .    178^ 
If  I  Were  King 1786 

McCreery,  John  Luckey 

Born  al  Sweden,  Monroe  County, 
N .  Y ..  December  21,  183s;  died  al  Dii- 
lulh.  Minn.,  September  8.  ignO. 

"There  is  no  Death" 3763 

MacDermott,  Martin 

Born  at  Duhlin,  Ire.,  April  8,  1823; 
died  at  Bristol.  Eng.,  April  2$.  1905. 
"Girl  of  the  Red  Mouth " .  .     568 

Macdonald,  George 

Born  at  lluntly.  West  Aberdeenshire, 
Scotland,  December  10,  1824;  died  at 
Ashlead,  England,  .September  j8,  ign$. 

Baby : 4 

Epigram iqi7 

Little  White  Lily 137 

Sir  Lark  and  King  Sun:  A 

Parable 180 

That  Holy  Thing 3774 

What  Christ  Said 3774 

Wind  and  the  Moon,  The.  .      133 

McGaffey,  Ernest 

A  Can<idian  poet,  horn  in  1861,  attd 
now  living  at  Victoria,  British  Columbia. 
"I  Fear  no  Power  a  Woman 
Wields" 1659 


McGee,  Thomas  D'Ascy 

Born  at  Carlingford,  County  Louth. 
Ireland,  A  pril  13,  182^;  came  to  A  merit  a 
in  1842;  murdered  at  Ottawa,  Canada, 
April  7,  1S88. 

The  Irish  Wife 1207 

McGiFFERT,  Gertrude  Hunting- 
ton 
An  American  writer,  now  living  in 
New  York  City. 

A  Maine  Trail 16S1 

McGroarty,  John  Steven 

Born  in  Luzerne  County,  Pa.,  Au- 
gust 20,  1862;  now  living  at  Los  Angeles. 
Cal. 

"Blow.  Bugles,  Blow" .   2316 

The  King's  Highway 1685 

The  Port  o'  Heart's  Desire .    1604 

Mackay,  Charles 

Born  at  Perth,  Scotland,  March  27, 

1814;  died   in  London,   December  24, 

1889. 

Little  and  Great 2925 

The  Miller  of  the  Dee 2982 

Mackay,  Isabel  Ecclestone 

An  A merican  writer,  no  biographical 
data  available. 

"When  as  a  Lad" 356 

Mackenzie,  H.  C.  Compton 

Born   at   West   Hartlepool.   England, 

January  17,  18S3;  now  living  in  London. 

A  Song  of  Parting 97s 

Mackintosh,  Newton 

Born  January  9, 1S58,  and  now  living 
at  Roxhury.  Mass. 

Lucy  Lake 1926 

Macleod,     Fiona,     see     Sharp, 
William. 

McLeod,  Irene  Rutherford 

An  English  writer,  now  living  in 
Lotvion. 

Song,  "How  do  I  love  you"     580 
"Where  My  Beloved  Sleep- 
ing Lies" 924 

MacManus,    Mrs,    Seumas,    see 
Carbery,  Ethna. 

M.\cManos,  Theodore  F. 

An  American  writer,  no  biographical 
data  available. 

Cave  Sedem 2036 

McMaster,  Guy  Humphreys 

Rom  al  Clyde.  N.  Y ..  January  31, 
1820:  died  at  Bath,  Steuben  county, 
N.  Y..  Stplcmher  13,  1S87. 

Carmen  Bellicosum 2433 

Maginn,  William 

Born  at  Cork,  Ireland,  July  10,  1793, 


3886 


Index  of  Authors 


died    at    Wallon-on-Thames,    England, 
August.  21.  1842. 

"I  Give  My  Soldier  Boy  a 
Blade" 2287 

The  Irishman  and  the  Lady  1962 

Mahony,     Francis     Sylvester 
[Father  Prout] 
Born  at  Cork,  Inland,  in  1804;  died 
at  Paris,  Frame,  May  18,  1S66. 

The  Bells  of  Shandon 2610 

The  Sabine  Farmer's  Sere- 
nade     197 1 

Maitland,  Dollie,  see  Radford 
]^RS.  Ernest. 

Malone,  Walter 

Born  in  Dc  Solo  county.  Miss., 
February  10,  1866;  died  at  Memphis, 
Tenn.,  May  18,  IQ15. 

Opportunity 2922 

Mangan,  James  Clarence 

Born  at  Dublin,  Irclaiui.  May  i,  1803; 

died  in  Mcalh  Hospital,  June  30,  184Q. 

Dark  Rosaleen 2249 

The  Nameless  One 336s 

Manning,  Frederic 

An  English  writer,  now  living  at 
Edcnham,  Bourne,  LiiKolnshire. 

Kore 1382 

Mansfield,  Richard 

Born  on  the.  island  of  Helgoland, 
May  24,  1857;  came  to  America  at  the 
age  of  seventeen;  died  in  1Q07. 

The  Eagle's  Song 2207 

Markham,  Edwin 

Born  at  Oregon  City,  Ore.,  April  23, 

1852;  now  living  at  West  New  Brighton, 

Staten  Island. 

Invisible  Bride,  The 113 2 

Joy  of  the  Morning 3100 

Lincoln,    the    Man    of    the 

People 3639 

The  Man  with  the  Hoe.  .  .  .   3041 
The  Wharf  of  Dreams 3224 

Marks,  Mrs.  L.  S.,  see  Peabody, 
Josephine  Preston. 

Marlowe,  Christopher 

Born    at    Canterbury.    England,    in 
February  1564;  killed  in  a  street  fight 
at  Deptjord,  England,  June  i,  151)3. 
The  Passionate  Shepherd  to 
his  Love 584 

Marot,  Clement 

Born  at  Cahors,  Prance,  in  I4Q$;  died 
it  Turin.  Italy,  in  1544. 

Ballade  de  Frere  Lubin ....   3838 

Marquis,  Don  (Robert  Perry) 

Born  at  Walnut,  Bureau  County, 
III.,  July  2Q,  1S7S;  now  living  in  New 
York  City. 

A  Little  While 29x1 


The  God-maker,  Man 3065 

The  Name 2868 

Marryat,  Frederick 

Born  in  London,  England,  July  10, 
1792;  died  at  Langham,  Norfolk,  Eng- 
land, August  Q,  1848. 

"The  Captain  Stood  on  the 
Carronade" 2125 

Marston,  Philip  Bourke 

Born  in  London.  England,  August  13, 

J850;  died  there,  February  13,  1887. 

After 898 

After  Summer 899 

At  the  Last '.  .  .    1261 

How  Mv  Songs  of  Her  Began  1260 

If  You  Were  Here 981 

Old  Churchyard  of  Bon- 
church,  The 3436 

Martin,  Ada  Louise 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Sleep 3222 

Martin,  Edw.ard  Sandford 

Born  at  Owasco,  N.   V..  January  z, 

1856;  now  living  in  New  York  City. 

A  Girl  of  Pompeii 280 

A  Little  Brother  of  the  Rich  1859 

Marvell,  Andrew 

Born  at  Winestcad,  in  Holdcrness, 
Yorkshire,  Englami,  March  31,  1621; 
died  in  Lomion,  August  18,  1678. 

Bermudas 2566 

Garden,  A 1448 

Garden,  The 1446 

Horatian  Ode  upon  Crom- 
well's Return  from  Ire- 
land, An 2400 

Nymph  Complaining  for  the 

Death  of  Her  Fawn.  .  .  .  .    1817 
Picture  of  Little  T.  C.  in  a 

Prospect  of  Flowers,  The     273 
To  His  Coy  Mistress 607 

Marzials,     THiioPHiLE     Julius 
Henry 
An  English  writer,  born  in  1S50. 

May  Margaret 114.? 

Pastoral,  A 1167 

Tragedy,  A 1040 

Twickenham  Ferry 761 

Masefield,  John 

Born    in    Shropshire,    Englatul,    in 

1874;  and  now  living  in  London. 

August.  igi4 2S47 

C.  L.  M 397 

Sea  Fever i,S90 

Seekers,  The 2863 

Sonnets 340i 

Mason,  Caroline  Atwater 

Born  at  Providence,  R.  I..  July  10, 
i8s3;  now  living  at  Beverly,  Mass. 

"En  Voyage" 2993- 

Massey,  Gerald 
Born  mar  Tring,  England,  May  2g, 


Index  of  Authors 


3887 


182S;  died  at  Soulli  Noru'ood,  Englarui. 

October  2q,  IQ07. 

England 2240 

His  Banner  Over  Me 3768 

"O,  Lay  Thy  Hand  in  Mine, 

Dear" 1228 

Our  Wee  White  Rose 26 

Parting 984 

Masterman,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  see 
Lyttelton,  Lucy. 

Maxwell,  [Sir]  Willl\m  Stir- 
ling, see  Stirling-Maxwell, 
Sir  William. 

May,  Curtis 
No  biographical  data  available. 

Tucking  The  Baby  In 03 

Mayne,  John 

Born  at  Dumfries.  Scotland.  March 
2(5,  i75q;  died  in  London,  England, 
March  14.  iSj6. 

Hallowe'en 2028 

Meredith,  George 

Born    in    Hampshire.    England,    in 

1828;  died  in  Lontion,  May  18,  igog. 

Juggling  Jerry 3312 

Lines 1153 

Love  in  the  Valley 556 

Lucifer  in  Starlight 3771 

Marian ^62 

Question  \\'hither,  The ....    2860 
Stanzas    from    "Modern 

Love" 1264 

Meredith,  Owen,  see  Lytton, 
Edward  Robert  Lytton 
Bulwer. 

Meredith,  William  Tucker 

An  American  writer,  born  in  1830. 
and  now  living  in  New  York  City, 

Farragut 2507 

Merivale,  Herman  Charles 

Born  at  Dawlish.  Devonshire,  Eng- 
land, November  S,  1806;  died  in  London, 
February  g,  1874. 

"  Ready,  Ay,  Ready  " 2234 

Merrick,  James 

Born  at  Rea<ling,  England,  in  1720; 
died  there  in  176Q. 

The  Chameleon 187s 

Messinger,  Robert  Hinckley 

Born  at  Boston,  Mass..  in  1811;  died 
at  Stamford.  Conn..  October  i,  1874. 
Give  Me  the  Old 2011 

Meynell,   [Mrs.]   Alice   Chris- 
tiana [Thompson] 
An  English  writer,  born  about  1853, 

and  now  living  in  London. 

At  Night 674 

In  Early  Spring I33S 


Ladv  Poverty.  The 2qu 

"My   Heart    Shall   be  Thy 

Garden" 673 

Renouncement.  . 1263 

San    Lorenzo    Giustiniani's 

Mother 377.'? 

Shepherdess,  The 393 

MicKLE,  William  Julius 

Born  at  Langholm.  Dumfriesshire, 
Scotlaiul.  September  28,  173s;  died  at 
Forest  Hill,  near  Oxford,  F.nglaml.  Octo- 
ber 28.  1788. 

The  Sailor's  Wife 1217 

Middleton,  Richard 

An  Engli.sh  writer,  born  in  1882; 
committed  suicide  in  Brussells  in  De- 
cember, igii. 

Any  Lover,  Any  Lass 578 

Dream  Song 236 

For  He  Had  Cireat  Posses- 
sions       886 

Lass  that  Died  of  Love,  The  1052 

Serenade 714 

Song  of  the  King's  Minstrel, 
The ios6 

Middleton,  Thomas 

Born,  probably  in  London,  England, 
about  I $70;  died  at  Newington  Butts, 
Englaiui,  in  1627. 

Lips  and  Eyes 682 

Mifflin,  Lloyd 

Born  at  Columbia,  Pa..  September  fi, 

18 16,  and  still  living  there. 

Flight,  The. 3575 

"Harvest  Waits,  The" 3734 

He  Made  the  Night 1326 

Sesostris 2847 

Sovereigns,  The 3105 

Millay,  Edna  St.  Vincent 
An  American  writer,  horn  in  1S02. 

and  living  at  Camden,  Me. 

Ashes  of  Life 920 

God's  World 1302 

Miller,  Emily  Huntington 

Born  at  Brooklvn.  Conn..  Ot toiler  22, 
183s;  died  at  St.  Paul,  Minn,  No- 
vember 2,  IQ13. 

The  Land  of  Heart's  Desire   t2o0 
The  Wood- Dove's  Note.  ..  .    1583 

Miller,   Joaquin    [Cincinnatus 
Hiner] 
Born  in   Wabash   District,   Indiana. 
November   to,    1841;  died  at  Oakland 
Heights.  Cat.,  February  17,  1Q13. 

Columbus 2366 

Defence  of  the  Alamo,  The.    2458 
Song.    "There    is    many    a 

love" 6o.? 

Tantalus — Texas 1007 

Miller,  William 

Born  at  Glasgow,  Scnilaml.  in  August, 
iSio;  died  there,  August  20,  1872. 

Willie  Winkie 72 


3888 


In4ex  of  Authors 


MiLUGAN,  Alice 

Born  at  Omaf.h,  Co.  Tyrone,  Ireland; 
and  now  living  in  Dublin. 

Fainne  Gael  an  Lae 2265 

MiLLiKiN,  Richard  Alfred 

Born  at  Casllemarlyr,  County  Cork, 
Ireland.  September  8,  1767;  died  at 
Cork,  December  16,  1815. 

The  Groves  of  Blarney 2609 

MiLNES,     Richard     Monckton 
(First  Baron  Houghton] 
Born  in  London,  Enitand,  June  IQ, 

i8og;  died  at  Vicliv,  France,  August  11, 

28S5. 

Brookside,  The 1147 

In  Memoriam 3545 

Palm-tree  and  the  Pine,  The     963 
Shadows 837 

Milton,  John 

Born  in  London,  England,  Decem- 
ber Q,  160S;  died  there,  November  8, 
i67i. 

At  a  Solemn  Music 3125 

Epitaph  on  the  Admirable 
Dramatic  Poet,  W.  Shake- 
speare     365.} 

11  Penseroso 3147 

L'Allegro 3143 

Lycidas 3519 

On  His  Blindness 2844 

On    the    Late    Massacre   in 

Piedmont 2404 

On  the  Morning  of  Christ's 

Nativity 233 

Song:  On  May  Morning..  .  .    1358 
Sonnet,    "How    soon    hath 
Time,  the  subtle  thief  of 

youth" 35Q 

Sonnet  on  His  Having  Ar- 
rived to  the  Age  of  Twenty- 
three 350 

To  the  Nightingale 155 1 

Mitchell,  Ruth  Comfort  (Mrs. 

William  Sanborn  Young) 
An   American   writer,    horn   in   San 
Francisco,  and  now  living  at  Los  Gatos, 
Calijornia. 

The  Night  Court 3055 

Mitchell,  S(ilas)  Weir 

Born  in  Philadelpliia,  February  75, 
i83g;  died  January  4,  IC114. 

Good-night 679 

Mitchell,  Walter 

Born  at  Nantucket,  Mass.,  January 

22,  1S26;  died  in  New  York  City  in  jgo8. 

Tacking  Ship  Off  Shore.  .  .  .   1595 

MoNKHOusE,  William  Cosmo 

Born  in  London,  England,  March  18, 
1840;  died  at  Skegness,  England,  July  2, 

IQOI. 

Dead  March,  A 3540 

Limerick 2089 


Song  of  the  Seasons,  A 1331 

To  a  New-born  Child 9 

Monro,  Harold 

An  English  writer,  born  in  iS~q,  and 
now  living  in  London. 

Dawn  of  Womanhood 390 

"She  Was  Young  and  Blithe 

and  Fair" 1051 

Suburb 859 

Youth  in  Arms 2555 

Monroe,  Harriet 

Born  in  1S60  at  Chicago,  Illinois, 
and  still  living  there. 

"  I  Love  mv  Life,  but  not  Too 

Well" 681 

Mountain  Song 3481 

Now 2573 

Shadow-Child,  The 288 

Montgomery,  James 

Born  at  Irvine,  Ayrshire,  Scotland, 
November  4,  1771;  died,  April  jo,  1854. 

At  Home  in  Heaven 3702 

Christ  Our  E.\ample  in  Suf- 
fering     3799 

Field  Flower,  A 1476 

Good  Tidings  of  Great  Joy  to 

all  People 3798 

Night,  r 1325 

Patriot's  Pass-word,  The. . .   2353 

Montgomery,  Mary,  .see  Fane, 
Violet. 

Montrose,     Marquis     of,     see 
Graham,  James. 

Moody,  William  Vaughn 

Born  at  Spencer,  Ind.,  July  8,  i86g; 
died  at  Colorado  Springs,  Col.,  October 
17,  JQW. 

An  Ode  in  Time  of  Hesita- 
tion     2211 

Gloucester  Moors 2569 

On  a  Soldier  Fallen  in  the 

Philippines 2210 

The  Serf's  Secret 667 

Moore,  Charles  Leonard 

Born  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  March  16, 
i8'^4;  and  ^lill  living  there. 

"The  Spring  Returns" 1339 

Moore,  Clement  Clarke 

Born  in  New  York  City,  July  15, 
i77q;  died  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  July  10, 
1863. 

A  Visit  from  St.  Nicholas. . .     221 

Moore,  Thomas 

Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  May  28, 
j77q;  died  at  Bromham,  near  Devizes, 
England,  February  25,  18^2. 

At  the  Mid  Hour  of  Night  1079 
"  Believe  Me,  if  all  those  En- 
dearing Young  Charms"  .      624 
"Bird,  Let  Loose  in  Eastern 
Skies,  The" 371S 


Index  of  Authors 


3889 


Canadian  Boat-song 1426 

Cupid  Stung 488 

Dear  Fanny 73° 

Epigrams 1918 

"Farewell!    But  Whenever"  3015 
"Fill  the  Bumper  Fair"..  .  .    2002 

Journey  Onwards,  The 3360 

Light  of  Other  Days,  The. .     454 

Love's  Young  Dream 864 

Minstrel  Boy,  The 2302 

My  Birth-day 3S8 

"Oh,      Breathe     Not     His 

Name" 3609 

"Peace     to     the     Slumber- 

ers" 2302 

"Row  Gently  Here" 700 

"She  is  Far  from  the  Land"  1078 

Snake,  The 831 

Sweet  Innisfallen 2607 

"Take     Back     the     Virgin 

Page" 623 

Temple  of  Friendship,  A.  .  .     832 
"This  World  is  all  a  Fleet- 
ing Show  " 3699 

"Time  I've  Lost  in  Wooing, 

The" 729 

"  'Tis  the  Last  Rose  of  Sum- 
mer"     iS°S 

To  Fanny 17  n 

When  I  Loved  You 832 

"Wreathe  the  Bowl" 2003 

"Young  May  Moon,  The".     699 

Morgan,  Bessie 

An  American  wrilcr;  no  biographical 
data  available. 

"Spacially  Jim" 2183 

Morris,  Charles 

Born,  probably  at  Bell  Bridge,  ttear 
Carlisle.    EniUDui,    in    1745;    died    at 
Brockham,  England,  July  11.  1838. 
"  A  Reason   Fair   to  Fill  my 
Glass" 1997 

Morris,  George  Pope 

Born  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  October  in, 
1802;  died  in  New  York  City,  July  6, 
1864. 

The  Retort 2175 

"Woodman,      Spare      that 
Tree" 1409 

Morris,  Harrison  Smith 

Born  at  Philnddphia.  Pa.,  October  4, 
iSs6,  and  still  living  there. 

June 1369 

Morris,  [Sir]  Lewis 

Born  at  Carmarthen,  Wales,  Janu- 
ary 23,  1833;  died  at  Penbyn,  Wales, 
November  12,  iQoy. 

The  Surface  and  the  Depths    4Q0 
To  a  Child  of  F'ancy 340 

Morris,  William 

Born  near  London.  Englaiui,  March 
24,  iSu;  died  in  London,  Oct.  3,  lSij6. 

March 135° 

Nvmph's    Song    to    Hylas, 
The 894 


Praise  of  My  Lady ^^62 

Shameful  Death 2746 

Singer's  Prelude,  The 3080 

Song,  "Fair  is  the  night,  and 

fair  the  day" 977 

Voice  of  Toil,  The 3017 

Morse,  Sidney  Henry 
No  biographical  data  available. 

The  Way 2973 

Morton,  David 

Born  at  Elklon,  Ky.,  February  21, 
1886;  noiv  living  at  Louisville,  Ky. 

Immortal  is 3401 

Motherwell,  William 

Born  at  Glasgow,  Scotland,  October  13, 
I7i)7;  died  there,  .November  I,  1S35. 

Cavalier's  Song,  The 2282 

Jeanie  Morrison 955 

Last  Verses 3496 

"Sing  on.  Blithe  Bird".  ..  .      102 

Moulton,  Louise  Chandler 
Born  at  Pomfrct,  Conn.,  April  jo, 

1S3S;  died  at  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1908. 

Laus  Veneris 913 

Love's  Resurrection  Day.  . .    1112 

Shadow  Dance,  The 854 

Somebody's  Child 345 

"Spring  is  Late,  The" 374i 

Summer  Wooing,  A 1032 

Tryst,  A mi 

"  Were  but  My  Spirit  Loosed 
Upon  the  Air" 1262 

Muhlenberg,   William   Augus- 
tus 
Born  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  Septem- 
ber 16.  1706;  died  in  New  York  City, 
Aprils,  1877. 

"I  Would  not  Live  Alway".  3476 

MULHOLLAND,    ROSA    [LaDY    GIL- 
BERT] 
Born  at   Belfast,  Ireland,  and   now 
living  at  Dublin. 

Love  and  Death .  .  ; 1104 

Munby,  Arthur  Joseph 

Born  in  Yorkshire,  Englaiui,  in  1828; 
died  near  Ripley,  Eng.,  Jan.  2q,  igio. 
Doris I20I 

Murray,     Ada     Foster     [Mrs. 
Henry  Mills  Alden 
An  American  writer,  now  living  in 

New  York  City. 

Above  Salerno 2616 

Her  Dwelling-place 11 29 

Old-fashioned  Poet,  An .  .  .  .   3089 

Prevision 1373 

Unguarded i4SS 

Murray,  Kenton  Foster 

An  .American  writer,   now   living  at 
Washington,  D.  C. 

Challenge 320 


3890 


Index  of  Authors 


Myers,  Frederic  William  Henry 
Born  at  Keswick,   Enslaii-d,   Febru- 
ary 6,  1843;  died  at  Rome,  January  17, 
igoi. 

The  Inner  Light 3730 

N 

Nadaud,  Gustave 

Born  at  Rouhaix,  France,  February 
20,  1820;  died  in  18Q3. 

Carcassonne 3S44 

Nairne,      Carolina      Oliphant 
[Baroness  Nairne] 
Born    in    Perthshire,    Scotland,    Au- 
gust 16,  1766;  died  there,  October  26, 
1845. 

Auld  House,  The 3234 

Caller  Herrin' 1622 

Heavenward 37°° 

Laird  o'  Cockpen,  The 2013 

Land  o'  the  Leal,  The 3699 

Lass  o'  Cowrie,  The 773 

Lullaby 81 

"Rest  is  not  Here" 370i 

Rowan  Tree,  The 3236 

Nashe,  Thomas 

Born  at  Lowestoft,  England,  in  1567; 

died  in  London  in  1601. 

Death's  Summons 3453 

Spring 1336 

Nason,  Emma  Huntington 

Born  at  Hallowcll,  Me.,  August  6, 
1845,  and  now  living  at  Augusta,  Me. 
The  Cricket's  Story 145 

Neal,  John 

Born  at  Falmouth,  Mass.,  August  25, 
1703;  died  there  June  21,  1876. 

Good  King  Wenceslas 3752 

Neale,  John  Mason 

An  English  jvriter,  born  about  j8i8; 
died  in  1866. 

Jerusalem 3689 

Neele,  Henky 

Born  in  London,  England,  January 
20,  I7q8;  suicided  there,  February  7, 
1828. 

"Moan,    Moan,    Ye    Dying 
Gales" 3351 

Neihardt,  John  Gneisenau 
Born  near  Sharpsburg,  III.,  January 

8,  1S81;  now  living  at  Bancroft,  Neb. 

Battle  Cry 2952 

Child's  Heritage,  The 279 

Envoi 3505 

Outward. IS99 

Prayer  for  Pain 2940 

When  1  Have  Gone  Weird 
Ways 349S 

Nerval,    Gerard    de    [Gerard 
Labrunie] 
Born  in  Paris,  May  21,  1808;  sui- 
cided there,  January  25,  185$. 

Fantaisie 3842 


Nesbit,    Edith    [Mrs.    Hubert 
Bland] 
Born  in  London,  England,  in  1858, 

and  now  living  in  Kent,  England. 

Baby  Seed  Song.  . 135 

Child's  Song  in  Spring 13s 

Tragedy,  A 1019 

Newbolt,  Henry  John 

Born  at  Bilston,  England,  June  6, 

1862;  now  living  in  London. 

Craven 2509 

Drake's  Drum 3607 

Fighting  Temeraire,  The.  ,  .  2444 

He  Fell  Among  Thieves. .. .  2797 

Messmates 1629 

Moss-rose,  The 3550 

Only  Son,  The 2324 

Newman,  John  Henry 

Born  in  London,  England,  February 
21,  1801;  died  at  Edgbaslon,  England, 
August  II,  i8go. 

The  Pillar  of  the  Cloud 3804 

Nicoll,  Robert 

Born  in  the  parish  of  Auchtergaven, 

Perthshire,  Scotland,  January  7,  1S14; 

died  near  Edinburgh,  December  7,  1837. 

The  Hero 3244 

"We  Are  Brethren  A'  " 303s 

Noel,  Roden  Berkeley  Wrioth- 

ESLEY 
An   English    writer,   born   in   lient, 
August  27,  1834;  died  at  Mainz,  Ger- 
many. May  26,  iSq4. 

A  Casual  Song. 1049 

"I  Flung  Me  Round  Him".  3213 

Noel,  Thomas 

Born  at  Kirhy-Mallory,  Leicester- 
shire, England.  May  11,  1790;  died  at 
Brighton,  Engtani,  Mav  16,  1861. 

Old  Winter 1386 

Norton,     Caroline     Elizabeth 
Sarah 
Born  in  London,  England,  in  1808; 

died,  June  15,  1S77. 

Bingen  on  the  Rhine 2634 

"I  do  not  love  Thee" 962 

King  of  Denmark's  Ride, The  1088 
Love  Not S71 

Norton,  Grace  Fallow 

An  American  writer  now  living  in 
Ulster  Co.,  New  York. 

Little  Gray  Songs  from  St. 

Joseph's 339Q 

"Love  is  a  Terrible  Thing".  1014 

O  Sleep 3224 

"O  World,  be  not  so  Fair" .   3483 
"This  is  my  Love  for  You"     681 

Noyes,  Alfred 

Born     in     Staffordshire,     England, 

September  16,  1880;  and  now  living  at 

Rottingdean,  Sussex. 

Barrel-organ,  The 3025 

Edinburgh 2693 


Index  of  Authors 


3891 


Highwayman.  The 280Q 

"In  the  Cool  of  the  Evening"  13x0 

Love's  Rosary 999 

Song  of  Sherwood,  A 2591 

Song,  "  1  came  to  the  door  of 

the  House  of  Love  " 511 

Unity 670 

"When  Spring  Comes  Back 

to  England 1348 

O 
O'CoNNER,  Michael 

Born  at  EasUhesier,  N.  Y.,  in  1837; 
died  at  Potomac  Station,  Fa.,  December 
28,  1862. 

Reveille 22S6 

O'Hara,  Theodore 

Born  at  Uanville.  Ky.,  in  1820;  died 
war  Gucrrvtnn.  Ala.,  in  1S67. 

The  Bivouac  of  the  Dead.. .   2310 

O'Keefe,  Adelaide 

An  English  writer,  born  in  1776, 
died  ahoiit  1855. 

The  Butterfly 116 

O'Neill,  Moira  (Pseud,  of  Mrs. 
Nesta  Higginson  Skrine) 
Born    at    Cushendall,    Co.    Antrim, 

Ireland,  and  still  living,  there. 

Birds 1521 

Corrymeela 2604 

"Forgettin"' 800 

Song  of  Glenann,  .\ 2605 

O'Reilly,  John  Boyle 

Born  at  Dowth  CasUc,  County  Meath, 
Ireland,  June  28,  1844;  exiled  to  Aii^:- 
tralia,  but  escaped  to  the  United  States 
in  iS6g;  died  at  Hull,  Mass.,  August  10, 
1890. 

Forever 357 1 

Lure,  The 190S 

What  is  Good 2918 

White  Rose,  A 657 

O'Shaughnessy,    Arthur    Wil- 
liam Edgar 
Born  in  London.  England,  March  14, 
1844.  died  there.  .January  30,  1884. 

Enchainment 1008 

"If  She  but  Knew" 978 

Love  Symphony,  A 647 

Ode.    "We   are   the   music- 
makers" 3128 

St.  John  Baptist 3740 

Song,    "Has   summer  come 

without  the  rose" 897 

Song,     "I     made     another 
garden,  yea" 896 

O  Sheel,  Shaemas 

Born  in  Ncil'  York  ( 'ilv.  September  ig, 
1886.  and  still  livrug  there. 

"He  Whom  a  Dream  Hath 

Possessed  " 2938 

Lover  Thinks  of  His  Lady 
in  the  North,  The 996 


Mary's  Baby 214 

"They  Went  Forth  to  Battle 
but  They  always  Fell" .  . .  2946 

O'SULLIVAN,  SeUMAS 

Born  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1878. 

My  Sorrow 3362 

Praise 582 

Oi.DMixoN,  John 

Born  at  Oldmixon,  near  Bridgewatcr, 
England,  in  1673;  died  in  London, 
July  0,  1742. 

"I  lately  ^'owed,  but  'twas 
in  Haste" 826 

Opdycke,  John  Baker  ("Oliver 

Opdyke  ") 

Born  at  Doylestown,  Pa.,  February 

28,  1878;  now  living  in  New  York  City. 

My  Road 657 

Oppenheim,  James 

Born  at  St.  Paul.  Minn.,  May  24, 

1SS2;  now  living  in  New  York  City. 

Immoral 2997 

Reason,  The 1164 

Staurday  Night 3024 

Orr,  P.atrick 

No  biographical  data  available.^ 
Annie    Shore    and    Johnnie 
Doon IOS7 

OSBORN,  SeI.LECK 

Born  at  Trumbull,  Conn.,  in  1783; 
died  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  October  1, 
1S26. 

A  Modest  Wit 1845 

Osgood,  Frances  S.\rgent 

Born  at  Boston.  Mass.,  June  18, 
1811;  died  at  Hingham,  Mass.,  May  12, 
1850. 

Calumny 2924 

Osgood,  Kate  Putnam 

Born  at  Freyburg,  Me..,  in  1841. 
Driving  Home  the  Cows 2517 

Otway,  Thomas 

Born  at  Trotton,  near  Midhur.tt, 
.Susse.x.  England.  March  3,  1632;  died 
in  Lotuion,  .\pril  14,  1685. 

The  Enchantment 613 

Outram,  George 

Born  at  the  Clyde  ironworks,  mar 
Glasgow.  Scotland,  March  25,  180^; 
died  at  Rosemore,  Scotland,  September 
15,  1S36. 

The  Annuity 2132 

0\VEN    Meredith,    see    Lytton, 
Edward  Robert  Lytton  Bul- 

WER. 

Oxford,  Earl  of,  see  Vere,  Ed- 
ward. 


3892 


Index   of  Authors 


Packard,  Winthrop 

Born    at    Boston,    Mass.,    March    7. 
1862,  and  still  living  there. 

The  Shoogy-Shoo 447 

Pai     Ta-Shun,     see     Peterson, 
Frederick. 


Parsons,  Thomas  William 

Born  at  Boston,  Mass.   August  18, 

i8iq;   died    at   Scituate,    Mass.,  Sep- 
tember 5,  iSgz. 

Dirge 2314 

Her  Epitaph 3545 

Obituary 278 

On  a  Bust  of  Dante 3604 

Saint  Peray 2005 


Pain,  Barry 

An  English  writer;  now  living  in 
London. 

The  Poets  at  Tea 1953 

Paine,  Albert  Bigelow 

Born  at  New  Befdord,  Mass.,  July  10, 
1861;  now  living  at  Redding,  Conn. 
The  Hills  of  Rest 3577 

Palgrave,  Francis  Turner 
Bom  at   Great    Yarmouth,   England, 

September   28,    1824;  died   at  Oxford, 

October  24,  iSq''. 

Crecy 2352 

"God  Save  Elizabeth" 2373 

Palmer,  Alice  Freeman 

Born  at  Colesville,  N.   Y.,  February 

21,    185s;  died   at   Cambridge,   Mass., 

December  6,  JQ02. 

Butterfly.  The 15 19 

Hallowed  Places 632 

Spring  Journey,  A 1147 

Palmer,  John  Williamson 

Born  at  Baltimore,  Md.,  April  4, 
1825;  died  there  in  igo6. 

Fight  at  San  Jacinto,  The.  .    2459 

For  Charlie's  Sake 308 

Maryland  Battalion,  The. .  .    2429 
Stonewall  Jackson's  Way. .  .    2288 

Palmer,  Ray 

Born  at  Little  Compton,  R.  1 .,  Novem- 

lier  12,   1S08;  died  at  Newark,  N.  J., 

March  2q,  1887. 

Faith 3810 

"I  Saw  Thee" 3769 

Palmer,  William  Pitt 

Born  at  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  Febru- 
ary 22,  180s;  died  at  Brooklyn,  N.  Y., 
May  2,  1884. 

The  Smack  in  School 2136 

Parker,  Theodore 

Born  at  Lexington,  Mass.,  August  24, 
1810;  died  at  Ploretue,  Italy,  May  10, 
i860. 

The  Higher  Good 2969 

The  Way,    the    Truth,    and 
the  Life 3730 

Parrish,  Randall 

Born  in  Henry  County,  Illinois, 
June  10,  1858;  now  living  at  Kewanee, 
Illi-nois. 

Your  Lad,  and  My  Lad.  . .  .    2563 


Partridge,  Sybil  F. 

An  English  writer;  now  Sister  Mary 
Xai'ier,  a  teacher  in  a  conventual  school 
at  Liverpool. 

"Just  for  Today" 3808 

Patmore,      Coventry     Kersey 
Dighton 
Born  at  Woodford,  Essex,  England, 
July  23,  1S23;  died  at  Lymington,  Eng- 
land, November  26,  i8g6. 

Departure 974 

Farewell,  A 974 

"  If  I  were  Dead  " 296 

Joyful  Wisdom,  The 2953 

Married  Lover.  The 1212 

Preludes  from  "The  Angel  in 

the  House" 384 

Toys,  The 296 

Payne,  John 

An  English  writer,  who  died  in  1800. 

Kyrielle 2840 

Rondeau  Redouble 542 

Payne,  John  Howard 

Born   in  New   York  City,  June  g, 
I7Q2;  died  at  Tunis,  April  10,  1852. 
Home,  Sweet  Home 3226 

Peabody,     Josephine     Preston 
[Mrs.  L.  S.  Marks] 
Born  in  New  York  City  in  1874,  and 

now  living  at  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Cradle  Song 88 

Singing  Man,  The 3045 

Spinning  in  April 1357 

Peacock,  Thomas  Love 

Born  at  Weymouth,  England,  Octo- 
ber 18,  1785;  died  in  London,  January 

23,  1866. 

Castles  in  the  Air 43.') 

Grave  of  Love,  The 865 

"  In  the  Days  of  Old  " 489 

Love  and  Age 790 

Song.  "Oh!  say  not  woman's 

heart  is  bought" 489 

Peale,  Rembrandt 

Born  in  Bucks  county,  Pa..  Febru- 
ary 22,  1778:  died  at  Philadelphia,  Pa  , 
October  3,  i860. 

"Don't  be  Sorrowful,  Dar- 
ling"     1220 

Peck,  Harry  Thurston 
Born  at  Stamford,  Conn.,  November 

24,  1856.  died  March  23,  1914. 

Heliotrope 1124 


Index  of  Authors 


3893 


Peck,  Samuel  Minturn 

Born  at  l^iiskalnosa.  Ala..  Novem- 
ber 4.  i8s4:  iTtI  ^lill  living  there. 

Captain's  Keathcr,  The.  .  .  .    2305 
My  Grandmother's  Turkey- 
tail  Fan 1804 

Peele,  George 

An  English  writer,  born  about  155S, 
died  about  1S07- 

A  Farewell  to  Arms 300 

Percival,  James  Gates 

Born  at  Berlin,  Conn.,  September  15, 
170s;  died  at  Hazel  Green,  Wis.,  May  2, 
iSs6. 

"It  is  Great  for  our  Country 
to  Die" 2303 

Percy,  Thomas 

Born  at  Brignorth,  England,  April  ij, 
iy2o;  died  at  Dromore,  Ireland,  Sep- 
tember _?o,  1811. 

Friar  of  Orders  Gray,  The. .   2710 
"O  Nancy,  Wilt  Thou  Go 
With  Me" 618 

Percy,  William  Alexander 

Born  in  Greenville,  Miss.,  May  14, 
i88s,  and  still  living  there. 

A  Little  Page's  Song iiS 

Perronet,  Edward 

Born  in  England  in  1721;  died  at 

Canterbury,  England,  January  8,  1792. 

•  Coronation 37Q2 

Perry,  Nora 

Born   at    Dudley,   Mass.,   in    1832; 

died  there  in  iSg6. 

Love-knot,  The 7g8 

Riding  Down 7g9 

"Some  Day  of  Days" 658 

Peterson,  Frederick 

Born  at  Faribault.  Minn..  March  1, 
iSso:  fi-ow  living  in  New  York  City. 

The  Bridge 3257 

Wild  Geese 1582 

Philips,  Ambrose 

An  English  writer,  born  about  1675; 
died  in  I74g. 

To  Charlotte  Pulteney 273 

Phillpotts,  Eden 

Born  at  Mount  Ahoo.  India.  Novem- 
ber 4.  i86z;  now  living  at  Torquay, 
England. 

Man's  Days 2910 

Piatt,  Sarah  Morgan  Bryan 

Born  at  Le.rington.  Ky..  August  ir, 
iSj6:  fcoii'  living  at  North  Bend,  Hamil- 
ton county.  Ohio. 

After  Wings ng 

Into  the  World  and  Out. ...        27 
Witch  in  the  Glass,  The 157 


Pickthall,     Marjorie     Lowry 
Christie 
Born  in  London,  England,  Septem- 
ber 14.  1883,  and  still  living  there. 

Child's  Song  of  Christmas,  A     219 

Duna 3241 

Lamp  of  Poor  Souls,  The. .  .   3552 
Little  Sister  of  the  Prophet, 

The 3071 

Lovers  of  Marchaid,  The. .  .     994 
Mother  in  Egypt,  A 3558 

Pierpont,  John 

Born  at  Litchfield.  Conn.,  April  6, 
17S5;  died  at  Medford,  Mass.,  Au- 
gust 27,  1S66. 

My  Child 318 

The  Pilgrim  Fathers 2390 

Warren's  Address  at  Bunker 
Hill 2428 

Pike,  Albert 

Born  at  Boston,  Mass.,  December  iq, 
i8oq;  died  at  Washington,  D.C.,  April  2, 
iSgi. 

Dixie 2219 

PiNKNEY,  Edward  Coate 

Born  in  Loiuion,  England,  October  i, 
1802;  brought  to  America  at  the  age  oj 
nine;  died  at  Baltimore,  Md.,  April  11, 
1828. 

Health.  A 387 

Serenade 704 

Song,  "We  break  the  glass, 
whose  sacred  wine  " 90s 

Piozzi,  Hester  Thrale 

Born  at  Bodvel,  near  Pwllheli,  Car- 
tiarvonshire,  Wales,  January  16,  1741; 
died  at  Bath,  England,  May  2,  1821. 
The  Three  Warnings 2102 

Plunkett,  Edward  John  Morl- 
TON    Drax      [i8th     Baron 
Dunsany] 
Born    at    Dunsany    Castle,    County 

Mcath,    Ireland,   July   24,    187S,    ami 

still  living  there. 

Songs  from  an  Evil  Wood.  .    2557 

Plarr,  Victor  Gustave 

.i  n  English  writer,  born  June  21 , 
iSoj,  and  ttow  living  in  London. 

Che  Sara  Sara 1170 

PoE,  Edgar  Allan 

Born  at  Boston,  Mass.,  Jaruary  ig, 

i8ng;  died   at   Baltimore,   Md.,  Octo- 
ber 7,  i84g. 

Annabel  Lee 1 105 

Bells,  The. 3174 

City  in  the  Sea,  The 3417 

Conqueror  Worm,  The 3416 

Eldorado 3397 

For  Annie Iip7 

Haunted  Palace,  The 3168 

Israfel 3077 

Raven.  The 3170 

To  Helen 551 

To  One  in  Paradise ttos 


3^94 


Index  of  Authors 


Pope,  Alexander 

Born  in  London,  England,  May  21, 
1688;  died  at  Twickenham,  England, 
May  30._  IT44- 

Dying  Christian  to  His  Soul, 

The 3489 

Elegy  to  the  Memory  of  an 

Unfortunate  Lady 3530 

Epigrams 1916,  igi8 

Ode  on  Solitude 1635 

On  a  Certain  Lady  at  Court     380 
Universal  Prayer 3788 

PouLSSoN,  Anne  Emilie 

Born  at  Cedar  Grnve,  N.  J.,  Septem- 
ber 8,  iSss,  now  living  at  Hopkinlon, 
Mass. 

Baby's  Breakfast 56 

Bed-time  Song 92 

Breakfast  Song,  The 42 

Lovable  Child,  The 99 

Pound,  Ezra 

Born  at  Haley,  Idaho,  October  30, 

1885;  now  living  on  London. 

Ballad  of  the  Goodly  Fere. .    2814 
Immorality,  An 452 

Powers,  Horatio  Nelson 

Born  at  Amenia,   Dutchess   county, 

N.  v.,  April  JO,  1826;  died  in  i8qo. 

Chimney  Swallows 1575 

Our  Sister 389 

Praed,  vv :".'.. ^ivi:  >iAcjvwOr^  q 
Born  in  London,  England,  July  ^6, 

1802;  died  there.  Jiilv  1$,  18 jg. 

Belle  of  the  Ball-room,  The  17 18 

Letter  of  Advice,  A 1809 

Newly-Wedded,  The II9S 

Talented  Man,  The 1807 

To 17 14 

To  Helen 791 

Vicar,  The 1715 

Pratt,  Anna  Maria 

Born  al  Chelsea,  Mass.,  and  later  a 
resident  oj  Cleveland,  Ohio. 

A  Mortifying  Mistake 166 

Prescott,  Mary  Newmarch 

Born  at  Calais,  Me.,  August  2,  184(1; 
died  in  1888. 

"in  the  Dark,  in  the  Dew"..   652 

Priest,  Nancy  Woodbltiy  [Wake- 
tield] 
An  American  writer,  born  in  iSj6, 
died  in  18.70. 

"Over  the  River" 3509 

Pringle,  Thomas 

Born  at  Blaiklaw,  Teviotdalc,  Rox- 
burghshire, Scotland,  January  5,  178Q; 
died  in  London,  England,  December  5, 
1834- 

"Afar  in  the  Desert" 1669 

Prior,  Matthew 

Born,  probably  in  East  Dorset,  Eng- 
land, July  21,  1664;  died  at  Wimpole, 


Cambridgeshire.  England.  September  18, 
1721. 

Epigrams 1917 

Female  Phston,  The 1904 

For  My  Own  Monument. . .  1861 
Reasonable  Affliction,  A. .  .  .  1907 
Remedy     Worse     than     the 

Disease,  The 1910 

Song,    "In    vain    you    tell 

your  parting  lover" 937 

Song,    "The    merchant    to 

secure  his  treasure" 720 

To  a  Child  of  Quality 276 

To  Chloe  Jealous 766 

Procter,  Adelaide  Anne 

Born  in  London,  England,  October  30, 

1825;  died  there,  February  3,  1864. 

Doubting  Heart,  A 2865 

Lost  Chord,  A 3398 

One  by  One 3761 

Woman's  Question,  A 1162 

Procter,  Bryan  Waller  [Barry 
Cornwall] 
Born  in  London,  England,  Novem- 
ber 21,  1787;  died  there,  October  4,  1874. 

Blood  Horse,  The 1520 

Poet's  Song  to  His  Wife,  The  1223 

Sea,  The 1592 

"Softly    Woo    Away     Her 

Breath" 3548 

Song  for  the  Seasons,  A .  . . .  1330 
Stormy  Petrel,  The 1572 

Proctor,  Edna  Dean 

Born  at  Eenniker,  N.  H.,  October  10, 

1838;  now  living  at  Framingham,  Mass. 

Forward 3733 

Heroes 2322 

Take  Heart 3732 

Proiit,    Father,    see    Mahony, 
Francis  Sylvester. 


Quarles,  Francis 

Born  at  Ramford,  Essex,  England, 
May  8,  1592;  died  in  London,  Sep- 
tember 8,  1644. 

Divine  Rapture,  A 3742 

QUILLER-COUCH,       [Sir]       ArTHUR 

Thomas 

Born  in  Cornwall.  England.  Novem- 
ber 21,  1S63,  and  still  living  there. 

Chant  Royal  of  High  Virtue  2957 

Sage  Counsel 2082 

Splendid  Spur,  The 2959 

R 

Radford,  Mrs.  Ernest  [Dollie 
Maitland] 
An  English  writer,  born  in  1858;  and 
now  living  in  London.  • 

Plymouth  Harbor 667 

Raleigh,  [Sir]  Walter 

Born  at  Hayes,  Devonshire,  England, 


Index  of  Authors 


3895 


aboul  1552;  beheaded  in  lite  Tower  nj 

London,  October  so.  161S. 

Conclusion,  The 3453 

His  Pilgrimage 345 1 

Lie,  The 3440 

"Now  What  is  Love" 47S 

Nymph's  Reply  to  the  Pas- 
sionate Shepherd,  The.  .  .     585 
"Wrong    Not,    Sweet    Em- 
press of  My  Heart" 586 

Ramsay,  Allan 

Born  at  Lcadliills,  parish  of  Craw- 
ford, Lanarkshire,  Scoilarul,  October  75, 
16S6;  died  at  Edinburgh,  January  7, 
1758. 

My  Peggy S34 

Lochaber  no  More q40 

Song,  "At  setting  day  and 

rising  morn" 94° 

Widow,  The 2020 

Rand,  Kenneth 

Born  at  Minneapnlis,  Minn.,  May  8, 
i8gi;  now  living  at  New  Uavcn,  Conn. 
The  Lonely  Road 893 

Randall,  Jaimes  Ryder 

Born  at  Ballimore,  Md.,  January  i, 
iSjq;  died  at  Augusta,  Ga.,  in  igoS. 
My  Maryland 2220 

Randolph,  Thom.\s 

Born  at  Nm'niiamcum-Badby,  Norlh- 
amptoHshire,  England,  June  ij.  1605; 
died  at  Blalherwick,  Englaiul,  in  March 

Devout  Lover,  A.  .^^,  .-:...     531 
Ode    to    Miister"*  Anthony 
Stafford,  An 1649 

Rands,  Willdvm  Briguty 

Born  in  London,  England,  Decem- 
ber 24,  1823;  died  at  East  Dulwich, 
Surrey,  England,  A  pril  23,  18S2. 

Fifst  Tooth,  The S6 

Peddler's  Caravan,  The.  ...     161 
Reformation      of      Godfrey 

Gore,  The 114 

Wonderful  World ,  The 126 

Rankin,  Jereml^h  Eames 

Born  at  Thornton.  N .  IL,  January  2, 
1828;  died  at  Washington,  D.  C,  in 
1904. 

The  Babie 19 

"The  Word  of  God  to  Ley- 
den  Came" 2386 

Raymond,   Rossiter  Worthing- 

TON 
Born  at  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  April  27, 
1840;  now  living  in  New  York  City. 
Christus  Consolator 3773 

Read,  Thomas  Buchanan 

Born  in  Chester  county.  Pa.,  March  12, 

1822;  died  in  New  Vork  City,  May  11, 

1872. 

Brave  at  Home,  The 2318 

Closing  Scene,  The 3419 


Drifting i6oq 

Sheridan's  Ride 2510 

Realf,  Richard 

Born  at  Eramjield,  Sussex.  England, 

June  14,  JS34;  came  to  the  United  States 

in  1854;  killed  himself  at  Oakland.  Cat.. 

October  28.  1S78. 

De  Mortuis  Nil  Nisi  Bonum.  3.367 

Indirection 2870 

Old  Man's  Idyl,  An 1222 

Reese,  Lizette  Woodworth 

Born  in  Baltimore  county,  Md.,  Janu- 
ary Q,  1856,  and  still  living  at  Balti- 
more. 

After 1 1 27 

"Love  Came  back  at  Fall  o' 

Dew" 1016 

"  Lydia  is  Gone  this  Many  a 

Year" 1126 

Road  of  Remembrance,  The     449 
Robert  Louis  Stevenson..  .  .   3657 

Tears 2855 

That  Day  You  Came 660 

Wise 3387 

Rhys,  Ernest 

Born  in  London.  Englatut,  July  17, 
1859;  and  still  living  there. 

Dagonet's  Canzonet 54 

Rice,  Cale  Young 

Born   at   Dixon,   Ky.,   Dec 
187 ?•  now  Iv  ■- c  at  T  '':;isvil!'    ' 

Chanson    01    the    uells    of 

Oseney 2, 

Kinchinjunga 143^ 

New  Dreams  for  Old 2S51 

On  the  Moor 307 

Rice,  Wallace  de  Groot  Cecil 
Born  at  Hamilton,  Canada,  Novem- 
ber 10,  i8s9;  now  living  in  Chicago,  111. 
Sweet  Clover 1472 

Rich,  Hiram 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Jerry  an'  Me 1 2ig 

Richards,  Laura  Elizabeth 
Born  at  Boston,  Mass.,  February  27, 

1850;  now  living  at  Gardiner,  Me. 

Bird  Song 1555 

Difference.  The 59 

In  Foreign  Parts 2084 

Nursery  Song,  A 165 

Owl   and    the   Eel   and   the 

Warming-pan,  The 47 

Prince  Tatters 155 

Riddell,  Henry  Scott 

Born  at  Sorbie,  Dumfriesshire.  Scot- 
land.   September    23,    I7g8;    died    al 
Teviolhead,  Scotland,  July  30,  1870. 
Scotland  Yet 2268 

Riley,  James  Whitcomb 

Born  at  Greenfield,  Lnd..  in  18^2; 
died  at  Indianapolis,  lnd  ,  July  22, 
1916. 

Life-Lesson,  A 340 


3896 


Index  of  Authors 


Little  Orphant  Annie 169 

Man  in  the  Moon,  The 168 

Old  Swimmin'  Hole,  The .  .  .  468 

Our  Hired  Girl 171 

Parting  Ouest,  A 3507 

Raggedy  Man,  The 166 

When  She  Comes  Home. .  .  .  1000 
"When  the  Frost  is  on  the 

Punkin" 1381 

Ri\-ES,  Amelie  [Princess  Trou- 
betzkoy] 
Born  at  Richmond,  Va.,  August  23, 
1S63,  and  now  living  at  Cobham,  Albe- 
marle county,  Va. 

My  Laddie 676 

Robert  II.  of  France 

Born  at  Orleans,  France,  in  gyi;  died 
at  Melun,  France,  in  1031. 

Veni,  Sancte  Spiritus 3822 

Roberts,       Charles       George 
Douglas 
Born   at   Douglas,   New  Brunswick, 

January  10,  1S60,  and  now  living  in 

New  York  City. 

Afoot 1682 

April  Adoration,  An 1 554 

Frosted  Pane,  The 1388 

Hawkbit,  The 1539 

Recessional.  The 3480 

'^'hen  the  Sleepy  Man  Comes      70 

George       Edward 

Aericton,  N.  B.,  in  iSy/, 
Mg  there. 
,  Mciid 2834 

jbertson,  Harrison 
Born  at  Murfrecshoro.  Tcnn.,  Janu- 
ary 16.  1856,  and  now  living  at  Louis- 
ville, Ky. 

Kentucky  Philosophy 2041 

Two  Triolets 1783 

Robertson,  W.  Graham 

An  English  writer  born  in  1867;  now 
living  in  London. 

Glad  Day 139 

Robinson,  Agnes  Mary  Frances 
(Madame  Duclaux] 
Born    at    Leamington,    Englarul,    in 
1857,  and  now  living  in  Paris,  France. 

Ballad  of  Orleans,  A 2364 

Dawn-Angels 1309 

Orchard  at  Avignon,  An..  .  .    I4r4 

Temple  Garlands 442 

Twilight 420 

Robinson,  Corinne  Roosevelt 

Born  in  New  York  City,  September 
27,  1861,  and  still  living  there. 

Life,  a  Question 2908 

Robinson,  Edwin  Arlington 

Born  at  Head  Tide,  Me.,  December  22, 
i86q;  now  living  at  Gardiner,  Me. 

Field  of  Glory,  The 3067 

Master,  The 3640 


Miniver  Cheevy 1881 

Old  King  Cole 1 797 

Twilight  Song 3011 

Roche,  James  Jeffrey 

Born     at     Mountmellick,      Queen's 

County,  Ireland,  May  31,  1S47;  came 

to  America  in  infancy;  died  at  Genoa, 

Italy,  in  IQ08. 

Andromeda 2253 

Don't 741 

If ; 740 

Net  of  Law,  The 1911 

V-a-s-e,  The 1886 

Rochester,  Earl  of,  see  Wilmot, 
John. 

Rood,  [Sir]  James  Rennell 

An  English  writer,  born  November  9, 
18^8,  and  now  living  in  Rome. 

A  Song  of  Autumn 98s 

Rodger,  Alexander 

Born  at  Mid-Calder,  Midlothian, 
Scotland,  July  16, 1784;  died  at  Glasgow, 
September  26,  1846. 

"Behave     Yoursel'     Before 
Folk" 751 

Rogers,  Robert  Cameron 

Born  at  Buffalo,  N.  ¥.,  January  7, 
1S62;  died,  April  20,  1Q12,  at  Santa 
Barbara,  Cal. 

The  Rosary 1 140 

J'^GgERS,  Samuel 

Bom-^f  Stoke  Newington,  England, 
Julv  30,  i/vj^-  died  in  London,  De- 
cember 18,  1S55. 

On  a  Tear ..?38o 

Sleeping  Beauty,  The 699 

Wish,  A .' 1634 

Rolleston,  Thomas  William 
Born  at  Glasshouse,  Shinrone,  King's 

County,  Ireland,  in  i8s7;  now- living  at 

Hampstead,  England. 

Dead  at  Clonmacnois,  The.    2607 
Night 3469 

Romanes,  George  John 

Born  at  Kingston,  Can.,  May  20, 
1S48;  died  at  Oxford,  Eng.  May  23, 
1S94. 

Simple  Nature 1658 

RooNEY,  John  Jerome 

Born  at  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  March 
ig,  1866;  now  living  in  Nau  York  City. 
The  Men  Behind  the  Guns .    2297 

Roscoe,  Willlam  Caldwell 

Born  at  Liverpool,  England.  Septem- 
ber 20,  1823;  died  at  Richmond,  Surrey, 
England,  July  30,  i8sq. 

For  Ever '990 

Rose,  Alexander  Macgregor 

Born  at  Tomantoul,  South  BanffsJiire, 
Sc.otla;td,  August,  17,  1846;  died  at  Mon- 
treal, Canada,  May_  10,  i8q8. 

HochI  der  Kaiser 1849 


Index  of  Authors 


3897 


Ross,  Alexander 

Born  in  the  parish  of  Kincardine 
O'Neil.  Aberdeenshire.  Scolhni.  April 
13,  1609;  died  at  Lochlee,  Angus,  Scot 
land.  May  20,  17S4. 

"Wooed   and    Married   and 
A'" 746 

RossETER,  Philip 

An  English  writer,  born  about  iS75: 
died  in  London.  May  5,  1623. 

All  is  Vanity 2838 

RossETTi,  Christina  Georgina 

Born  in  London,  England,  Dec.  5, 
J*  jo;  died  there,  Dec.  2p,  181)4. 

Better  Resurrection,  A 3461 

Bourne.  Tlie 34^5 

City  Mouse  and  the  Coun- 
try Mouse,  The 44 

C'onsiiler 3481 

J'irst  Day,  The 1223 

"Heaven  Overarches  Earth 

and  Sea" 37o6 

Holy  Innocents 85 

Meeting 1223 

Next  of  Kin 3460 

Paradise 37°S 

Remember 1224 

Rest 1224 

Song,    "When    I   am   dead, 

my  dearest" 1102 

Summer  is  Ended,  The 3462 

Tliree  Seasons 452 - 

Uphill 341S 

"Who  Has  Seen  the  Wind"     130 

RossETTi,  Dante  Gabriel 

Born  in  London,  England.  May  12, 

1S28;  died  at  Birchington,  near  Margate, 

England,  April  10,  1SS2. 

Ballad  of  Dead  Ladies,  The.  1783 

Blessed  Damozel,  The 3ig8 

Choice,  The 3S6S 

House  of  Life,  The,  sonnets 

from 123S 

One  Hope.  The 3473 

Song  of  the  Bower,  The.  . . .     go3 

Sonnet,  The 3107 

Sunset  \Vin:?s 337S 

SuiKTscriplion.  A 435 

Three  Shadows 640 

\ain  \  irtues 2866 

RossLYN,  Earl  of,  see  Erskjne, 
F.  R.  St.  C. 

RouGET  DK  Lisle,  Claude  Joseph 
Born  at  Monlaigu,  Loiis-le-Saulnier, 
France,  May  10, 1760;  died  at  Choisy-le- 
Roi,  near  Paris.  June  27,  1836. 

La  Marseillaise 3836 

The  Marseillaise 2271 

Rowlands,  Richard 

An  English  writer,  who  died  in  1620. 
A  Lullaby 78 

Ruskin,  John 

Born  in  LonJion,  Englarul,  February  8, 
18 ig;  died  at  Brantwood,  England. 
January  20.  iqoo. 

"Awake!    Awake" 301*^ 


Russell,    George   William    {.\. 
E.,  pseud.) 
.4n  Irish  poet  born  in  1867,  and  now 

living  in  Dublin. 

Gates  of  Dreamland,  The  .  .   3216 

Refuge 1 143 

The  Secret  Love 627 

Russell,  Irwin 
An  American  writer,  born  in  i8s3, 

died  in  1S79. 

De  Fust  Banjo 2190 

Nebuchadnezzar 2040 

Ryan,  Abram  Joseph 

Born  at   Norfolk,    Va.,   August   15, 

i8jo:  died  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  April  22, 

1S88. 

Conquered  Banner,  The 2515 

Rosary  of  My  Tears,  The. .    3381 
Sentinel  Songs 2322 

Ryan,  Richard 

Born  in  London,  England,  in  171)6; 
died  in  184.1). 

"O,  Saw  Ye  the  Lass" 1159 


Sackville,  Charles  [Sixth  Earl 
OF  Dorset  and  Middlesex] 
An  English  writer,  born  January  24, 
1638;  died  at  Bath,  England,  January 
2g,  1706. 

Song,  "To  all  you  ladies  now 
at  land" 935 

Salis-Seewis,  Johann   Gaudenz 

VON 
Born    in   the   Grisons,   Switzerlarul , 
December  26,  1762;  died  there,  January 
2Q,  1834. 

Lied,  "Ins  stilie  Land". .  .  .  3832 

Sangster,  Margaret  ELiZAsfer 

Born  at  New  Rochclle  ,N.  Y..  Febru- 
ary 22,  1838;  died  at  Glen  Ridge,  N ..Jt, 
June  4,  1Q12. 

Are  the  Children  at  Home. .  31I 
The  Building  of  the  Nest .  .  163 
The  Sin  of  Omission 20-'6 

Santayana,  George 

Born  in  Madrid,    Spain,   Decembir 

16,  1863;  now  tiring  in  England. 

Before  a  Statue  of  .Achilles  .  3212 

"O  World" 2907 

Rustic  at  the  Play,  The.  . .  .  2908 

"What  Riches  Have  You'  .  2907 

Sargent,  E^pks 

Born  at  Gloucester,  Mass  .  Septem- 
ber 27,  1813;  died  at  Boson,  Decem- 
ber V.  1880. 

"  Life  on  the  Ocean  Wave,  A '  i5Q4 
Deeds  of  Kindness nO 

Sawyer,  Frederick  William 

Born  at  Saco,  Me.,  April  22,  1810; 
died  III  lioston  Mass.,  about  187$. 

The  Recognition I93S 


3898 


Index  of  Authors 


Saxe,  John  Godfrey 

Born  at  Highgate.  V/..  June  2,  1816; 

died  at  Albany,  N.  I'.,  March  31,  1887. 
Blind  Men  and  the  Elephant, 

The 1877 

"Darling,  Tell  Me  Yes" .  .  .     650 

"  Do  I  Love  Thee  " 651 

Early  Rising 2024 

"Justine,  You  Love  Me  Not"    853 

My  Familiar 2151 

Puzzled  Census  Taker,  The.  2148 

Pyramus  and  Thisbe 2147 

To  Lesbia 690 

To  My  Love 690 

Too  Candid  by  Half igog 

Woman's  Will igro 

"Wouldn't     You     Like     to 
Know" 734 

SCHAUFFLER,  ROBERT  HaVEN 

Born   at    Brilnn,   Austria,   April   S, 
187Q;  now  living  at  Greenbicsh,  Mass. 
"Scum  o'  the  Earth" 3052 

SCHNECKENBURGER,  MaX 

Born  at  Thalheim,  Wurtemberg, 
Germany,  February  77,  i8iq;  died  at 
Burgdorf,  near  Bern,  Switzerland, 
May  3,  1S4Q. 

Die  Wacht  am  Rhein 3S33 

The  Watch  on  the  Rhine. . .    2268 

ScoLLARD,  Clinton 

Born  at  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  September  iS, 
i860,  and  still  living  there. 

"As   I    Came   Down    from 

Lebanon" 2637 

"Be  Ye  in  Love  with  April- 
tide" 670 

Cricket 3101 

Deeds  of  \'alor  at  Santiago.    2540 
If  Only  the  Dreams  Abide. .    2850 

King  of  Dreams,  The 2850 

Sleeper,  The 35S3 

There  is  a  Pool  on  Garda"  2623 

o  William  Sharp 3654 

lor  of  Ben  Milam,  The. . .   2457 

3C0TT,  Clement  Willl^m 

An  English  writer,  born  in  London,  in 
1841;  died  there  in  1904. 

Rus  in  Urbe 656 

ScoTT,  Dtjncan  Campbell 

Burn  at  Ottawa,  Canada,  August  2, 
1^62,  and  still  living  there. 

OS.  Riviere  du  Loup 1601 

Scott,  Frederick  George  • 

Born  at  Montreal,  Canada,  in  186 1, 
and  now  living  at  Quebec. 

^'an  Elsen 3574 

Scott,  [Sir',  Walter 

Born  at  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  Au- 
gust IS,  1771;  died  at  Abbolsford, 
September  21.  1S32, 

Alice  Brand 2716 

Bonnie  Dundee 8408 

Border  Ballad 2278 

Coronach 2351 

Jock  of  Hazeldean 786 


Lochinvar 784 

Lullaby  of  an  Infant  Chief  .  82 

Pibroch  of  Donald  Dhu.  . . .  2277 

Proud  Maisie 1076 

Rosabelle 2715 

Rover's  Adieu,  The 948 

"Soldier,    Rest,    Thy    War- 
fare O'er" 2301 

Song  from  "  Rokeby  " 2720 

Scott,  William  Bell 

Born  at  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  Sep- 
tember 12,  181 1 ;  died  at  Penhill  Castle, 
Ayrshire,  Scotland,  November  22,  i8qo. 

Glenkindie    2730 

Love's  Calendar 1203 

Sears,  Edmund  Hamilton 

Born  at  Sandisjield,  Mass.,  in  18 10; 
died  at  Weston,  Mass.,  January  14, 
1876. 

Christmas  Carols 206 

Sedley,  [Sir]  Charles 

Born  at  Aylesfnrd,  Kent,  Englaiul, 
about  163Q;  died  in  Loiuion,  August  20, 
1701. 

Phyllis _ 802 

Song,  "Love  still  has  some- 
thing of  the  sea  " 486 

To  Celia 610 

To  Chloris 720 

Seeger,  Alan 

Born  in  New   York  City,  June  22, 
1888;  killed  on  the  field  of  Belloy-en- 
Santerre,  France,  July  4,  IQ16. 
"I     Have     a     Rendezvous 

with  Death  " 2560 

To In  Church 581 

Selva,  Salomon  de  la 

A  Nicaraguan  poet,  born  in  i8qj, 
and  now  living  in  New  York  City. 

Tropical  Town 3374 

Ser\ice,  Robert  William 

Born  at  Preston,  England,  January 
16,  1874,  and  still  living. 

Carry  On 2941 

The  Law  of  the  Yukon.  ...    2575 

Setoun,        Gabriel        [Thomas 
NicoLL  Hepburn] 
Born    at    West    Wemyss,    Fifeshire, 

Scotland,  April  21,  1861;  now  living  at 

Edinburgh. 

Jack  Frost 151 

Wind's  Song,  The 131 

World's  Music,  The 127 

Shakespeare,  William 

Born  at  Stratford-on-Avon,  Warwick- 
shire, Englatui,  in  April,  1564;  died 
there,  April  2;,  1616. 

"Blow,  Blow,  Thou  Winter 

Wind  " 303Q 

"Crabbed  Age  and  Youth"     717 
Dirge  from  "  Cymbeline  ". . .   3431 

Fairy  Songs 231 

"Hark,  Hark,  the  Lark".  .  .     694 


Index  of  Authors 


3899 


"It  Was  a  Lover  and  His 

.V,^'     Lass" 717 

'v.  "Jog  on,  Jog  on  " 2978 

Love's  Perjuries 479 

Sea  Dirge,  A 3516 

"  Sigh  no  more,  Ladies  ". .  .  .  807 

Silvia 519 

Song   from    "Love's   Labor 

Lost". 2019 

Song,  ''O  mistress  mine '..  .  930 

Sonnets 1246 

"  I  nder      the      Greenwood 

Tree" 1636 

"When    Daffodils   begin   to 

Peer" I337 

"  When  that  I   Was  and  a 

Little  Tiny  Boy  " 400 

Shanly,  Ch.\rles  D.\wson 

Born  al  Dublin.  Ireland,  March  9, 
181 1, •  came  to  America  in  18^7;  died 
al  Arlington,  Fla.,  August  is,  1875. 

Civil  War 2492 

Kitty  of  Coleraine 750 

Sharp,  William  [Fiona  Macleod] 
Born  at  Paisley.   England,  Septem- 
ber  12.   iSss;  died  near  Mount  Etna, 
Sicily.  December  14.  IQ05. 

On  a  Nightingale  in  ApriL  .    X54S 

The  Mystic's  Prayer 2854 

The  White  Peace 2853 

SH.A.W,  John 

Born  in  Westmorelaiul,  Englaiui,  in 
1559;  died  at  Woking,  Surrey.  England, 
in  September,  162^- 

Song,  "Who  has  robbed  the 
ocean  cave  " S39 

Sheffield,  John  [First  Duke  of 
Buckintiham] 
Born  in  London.  England,  April  y, 
1648;  died  there.  February  24,  1721. 
Song,    "Come,    Celia,    let's 
agree  at  last" 612 

Shelley,  Percy  Bysshe 
Born  at  Field  Place,  tiear  Horsham, 

Sussex,    England,    August    4,  1792; 

drowned  in  the  Bay  of  Spczia,  Italy, 

July  8.  1822. 

Adonais 361 2 

Arethusa 1418 

Autumn:  a  Dirge 1380 

Chorus  from  "Hellas" 2623 

Cloud,  The 1440 

Dirge  for  the  Year 1396 

Flight  of  Love,  The loor 

From  the  Aral)ic 626 

Good-night 703 

Hymn  of  ApoUo 1306 

■,  ;-(,Hymn  of  Pan 3162 

"I  Fear  Thy  Kisses,  Gentle 

Maiden" 688 

Lines  to  an  Indian  Air 702 

Love's  Philosophy 688 

Mutability 3377 

Ode  to  the  West  Wind 1378 

Ozymandms  of  Egypt 2844 

Question,  The S67 

r  [ ,  Siong,  "  Rarely,  rarely  comest 

,          thou" 3364 


Time  Long  Past 442 

To- ,  "One  word  is  too 

often  profaned" 625 

To  a  Skylark 1569  ■ 

To  Jane:  the  Invitation ....  1667 

To  Night 1323 

With  a  Guitar,  to  Jane 3126 

Shenstone,  William 

Born  at  Hales  Owen,  England,  Octo- 
ber 18,  1714;  died  there,  February  11, 
1763. 

Written  at  an  Inn  at  Henley  2988 

Shepherd,  Nathaniel  Graham 

Born  in  Nezv  York  City  in  183s;  died 
there.  May  2  ?,  i86q. 

RoU-Call 2313 

Sheridan,  Helen  Selina  [Lady 
Duffer  in,  and  Countess  of 
Gifford[ 
Born  in  England  in  1S07;  died  in 
Loiulon,  June  13,  1S67. 

Lament   of   the  Irish   Emi- 
grant    1086 

"Love  Hath  a  Language". .     496 

Sheridan,     Richard     Brinsley 
Butler 
Born   at   Dublin,   Ireland,    Septem- 
br.r  30,  17  u;  died  in  London,  July  7, 
1816.  _ 

Air,    "I    ne'er    could    any 

lustre  see" 827 

Epigrams 1916 

"Let  the  Toast  Pass" 1999  ' 

Song,   "Had  I  a   heart  for 
falsehood  framed  " 620 

Shirley,  James 

Born  in  London,  England,  Septem- 
ber iS,  isq6;  died  there,  October  20, 
1666. 

Death's  Final    Conquest . . .   3404 
Death's  Subtle  Ways 3405 

Siin-ELL,  Paul 

Born  at  Indianapolis.  Iiul.,  Septem- 
ber 2i,  1874;  now  living  in  the  Stillwater 
valley,  near  Pleasant  Hill.  Ohio. 

"In  God's  Eternal  Studios"  2869 

Shorter,  Dora  Sigerson 

Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  and  now  liv- 
ing in  London. 

Mother's  Prayer,  The 304 

Piper  on  the  Hill,  The 132 

"Rose  Will  Fade,  A" 1047 

Sibley,  Charles 

A  Scotch  writer:  no  biographical  data 
available. 

The  Plaidie 75s 

Sickels,  Davh)  Banks 

Born  in  New  York  City,  February  8, 
1837,  and  now  living  at  Paterson,  N.  J. 
"It  Cannot  Be" 3712 


3900 


Index  of  Authors 


SiDGWICK,  HeNEY 

Born  at  Skipton.  Yorkshire,  England, 
May  31,  1838;  died  August  28,  1901. 
Goethe  and  Frederika 1055 

Sidney,  [Sir]  Philip 

Born  at  Penshurst,  Kent,  England, 
November  zg,  1554;  died  at  Arnhem, 
Netherlands,  October  7,  1586. 

Astrophel  and   Stella,  First 

Song  from 518 

Astrophel   and   Stella,   Son- 
nets from 123s 

"My   True-love    Hath    My 

Heart" 1141 

Philomela 1551 

"Truth    Doth    Truth    De- 
serve"     1212 

SiGERSON,    Dora,    see    Shorter, 
Dora  Sigerson. 

SiGERSON,  George 

Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  in  183Q, 
and  still  living  there. 

"My  Own  Cailin  Donn". . .    1165 

Sigourney,  Lydia  Huntly 
Born  at  Norwich.  Conn., September  i, 

17Q1;  died  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  June  10, 

1S65. 

Columbus 2365 

Irrdian  Names 2567 

Sill,  Edward  Rowland 

Born  at  Windsor,  Conn.,  April  2Q, 
1841;  died  at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  Febru- 
ary 27,  1887. 

Baker's    Duzzen    uv    Wize 

Sawz,  A 191S 

Fool's  Prayer,  The 3764 

Future,  The 2976 

Home 3711 

Lover's  Song,  The 571 

Opportunity 2923 

Sillery,  Charles  Doyne 

Born  at  Athlonc,  Ireland,  March  2, 
1S07;  died  at  Edinburgh,  Scotland, 
May  16,  1S37. 

"She  Died  in  Beauty" 3548 

SiMMS,  William  Gilmore 

Born  at  Charleston.  S.  C,  April  17, 

1806;  died  there,  June  11,  1870. 

Grape- Vine  Swing,  The ....     467 
Song  in  March 1351 

Simpson,  Henry 

Born  in  London,  England,  October  22, 
1868,  and  now  living  at  Wimbledon,  near 
London. 

In  February 574 

Skelton,  John 

Born    in    Norfolk,    England,    about 
1460;  died  in  London  in  152Q. 
To  Mistress  Margaret  Hus- 
sey 329 


Skipsey,  Joseph 

Born  at  Percy,  Tynemouth.  England, 
March  17,  1832;  died  at  Gateshead, 
England,  September  3,  IQ03. 

Mother  Wept 289 

Skrine,  Nesta  Higginson  (Mrs. 
Walter  Skrine),  see  O'Neill, 

MOIRA 

Smart,  Christopher 

Born  at  Shipbourne,  Kent,  England, 
April  II,  1722;  died  in  London,  May  iS, 
1771. 

Song  to  David 3783 

Smedley,  Menella  Bute 

An  English  writer  born  about  182s, 
died  about  1875. 

"Wind      Me      a      Summer 
Crown" 3388 

Smith,  Ada 
No  biographical  data  available. 

In  City  Streets 1674 

Smith,  Alexander 

Born  at  Kilmarnock,  Scotland,  De- 
cember 31,  1S30;  died  at  Wardie,  near 
Granton,  Midlothian,  Scotland,  Janu- 
ary 5,  1S67. 

Barbara 1 100 

Smith,  Charlotte 

Born  in  London,  England,  May  4, 
1749;  died  at  Telford,  near  Farnham, 
Surrey,  England,  October  28,  1806. 

The  First  Swallow 1573 

Smith,  Horace 

Born  in  London,  England,  December 
31,  1779;  died  at  Tunbridge  Wells,  Eng- 
land, July  12,  1849. 

Address  to  a  Mummy 21 16 

Smith,  Mary  Louise  Riley 
Born  at  Rochester,  N.  ¥.,  May  27, 

1842,  and  now  living  in  New  York  City. 

Sometime 3513 

Tired  Mothers 321 

Smith,  Samuel  Francis 

Born  at  Boston,  Mass.,  October  21, 
1808;  died  at  Newton  Center,  Mass., 
in  1895. 

America 2195 

Smith,  Sydney 

Born  at  Woodford,  Essex,  England, 
June  3,  1771;  died  in  London,  Febru- 
ary 22,  184;. 

A  Salad 1987 

Southesk,  Earl  of,  see  Carnegie 
James. 

SouTHEY,  Robert 

Born  at  Bristol,  England,  August  I2, 

1774;  died  at  Greta  Hall,  near  Keswick, 

Engla>ui,  March  21 ,  1843. 

Battle  of  Blenheim,  The  . .  .    2410 
Cataract  of  Lodore,  The  .  .  .    1420 


Index  of  Authors 


390T 


God's  Judgment  on  a  Wicked 

Bishop i8g 

Holly-Tree,  The 1407 

Inchcape  Rock,  The 1617 

"  My  Days  Among  the  Dead 

are  Passed " 2q20 

Old  Man's  Comforts.  The .  .  405 

Well  of  St.  Keyne,  The.  ...  2114 

Southwell,  Robert 

Born   in    Norfolk,     England,    about 
1561;  hanged  at  Tyburn,  February  21, 

IS95- 

Burning  Babe,  The 208, 

Child  My  Choice,  A 3747 

Times  Go  by  Turns 28,58 

Spalding,  John  LANC.'iSTER 

Born  at  Lebannn.  Ky.,  June  2,  1S40; 
now  living  at  Peoria,  III. 

The  Starry  Host 3729 

Spalding,  Susan  Marr 

Born  at  Bath.  Me.,  and  later  a  resi- 
dent of  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Fate .S02 

Spencer,  Caroline 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Living  Waters 3761 

Spenser,  Edmund 

Born    in    London,    Englaml,    about 

1552;  died  there,  January  13,  159Q. 
Amoretti,  Sonnets  from.  ...    1232 

Epithalamion 1 183 

Prothalamion 1178 

Sweet  and  Sour 2837 

Spingarn,  Toel  Elias 

Born  in  New   York  City,  May   17, 
fS;7^,  now  living  in  England. 

Spring  Pai:i-»B .%-.-,_ . 1 1 7 1 

Spofford,  Harriet  Prescott 

Born  at  Calais,  Me.,  April  ,?,  1835; 
tunu  living  at  Newburyport,  Mass. 
Ballad,     "In    the    summer 

even" 1621 

Hereafter 1012 

Only 3 

Sigh,  A loii 

Sprague,  Charles 

Born  at  Boston,  Mass.,  October  26, 

lygi;  died  there,  January  22,  1S7S. 

The  I'amily  Meeting 3562 

The  Winged  Worshippers..  .   37.S4 

Stanley,  Thomas 

Born  in   Hertfordshire,   England,   in 
1625;  died  in  London,  April  I2,  167S. 
A  Deposition  from  Beauty..     OoS 

St.^nton,  Frank  Lebby 

Born  at  Charleston,  S.  C.  February 

22,  1857:  and  now  living  at  Atlanta,  Ga. 

A  Plantation  IMtty 2043 

"  Wearyin'  fcr  You  " 993 

Starbuck,  Victor 

Born  at  Chuluola,  Plorida,  Novem- 


ber  16,   1887;  now  living  at  Orlando, 
Florida. 

Night  for  Adventures 1701 

Ste.\d,  William  Force 

An  American  writer,  now  living  in 
England. 

Sweet  Wild  April 1355 

Stedm.\n,  Edmund  Clarence 

Born  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  October  8. 
1833;  died  in  New  York  City  in  1Q08. 

Discoverer,  The 29S 

Doorstep,  The 794 

Falstafl's  Song 2014 

How  Old  Brown  Took  Har- 
per's Ferry 2479 

Hymn  of  the  West 2204 

Kearny  at  Seven  Pines 2493 

Morgan 2404 

Pan  in  Wall  Street ijsz 

Toujours  Amour 793 

"Voice     of     the     Western 
Wind" 446 

Stephen,  James  Kenneth 

Born  in  London,  England,  in 
died  there  in  i8q2, 

A  Grievance 

Sincere  Flattery .... 

Wordsworth 

Stephens,  Jamf^ 
A  n  Irish  writer. 
The  Waste  P 
The  Watcher 

Sterling,  Geoi 

Born  at  Sag  Hi 

ber  I,  iS6g;  now  I 

Black  Vulture  ^ ., 

In  E-xtremij.; 

Master  ^Jariner,  The 

Musical  twilight :•,>.„ 

'"^§un-rtraers,  The 3i94 

Three  Sonnets  on  Oblivion..   2847 

Stevenson,  Burton  Egbert 

Born  at  Chillicothe,  Ohio,  November  9, 
1872,  and  still  living  there. 

Henry  Hudson's  Quest 2382 

Stevenson,  Robert  Loms 

Born  at  Edinburgh.  Scotland,  Novem- 
ber 13,  1850;  died  at  Vailima,  near 
Apia,  Samoa.  December  4,  1894. 

Celestial  Surgeon,  The 3729 

Christmas  at  Sea 1602 

Envoy 3106 

Foreign  Lands 160 

Gardener,  The 160 

Good  and  Bad  Children ....  100 

Happy  Thought 98 

In  the  Highlands 167.S 

Lad  that  is  Gone,  A 438 

Land  of  Counterpane,  The.  158 

Land  of  Story-books,  The.  .  i.so 

My  Bed  is  a  Boat 161 

My  Shadow i.sS 

Requiem 348.'! 

Romance 6^.1 


3902 


Index  of  Authors 


"Trusty,      Dusky,      Vivid, 

True" 394 

Vagabond,  The 1674 

Whole  Duty  of  Children ...       98 

Stickney,  Joseph  Trumbull 

Born  at  Geneva,  Switzerland ,  June  20, 
J874;  died  in  Boston,  Mass.,  October  11, 
IQ04. 

Driftwood 2906 

"Love,  I  Marvel  What  You 
Are" 575 

Still,  John 

Boni  at  Grantham,  England,  about 
1543:  died,  Bishop  of  Bath  atui  Wells, 
at  Wells,  England,  February  26, 
1608. 

"Jolly  Good  Ale  and  Old"  .   1990 

STIRLING-MAX^VELL,      [Sir]      WIL- 
LIAM 
Born  at  Kenmure,  Scotland,  March  8, 
'^18;  died  at  Venice,  Italy,  January  15, 


'1  Anne. 


692 


Charles  Warren 
'•ester,  N.  Y .,  August  7, 
'terey,  Cal.,  April  24, 

3499 

Henry 

Mass.,  July  2, 
City  in  1903. 

121S 

1522 

ight      my 

p" 2014 

r III4 

[he 351 

....   1619 

^-  and  Ten.  ,  •  ■  •  ■     457 

.xjart,  Thomas  Tod 

Born  at  Edinburgh.  Scotland,  Feb- 
ruary 14,  iSio;  died  at  Kelso,  Scotland, 
November  21,  1880. 

The  Angler's  Invitation ....    1663 

Story,  William  Wetmore 

Born  at  Salem,  Mass.,  February  IQ, 

281(1;  died  at   Rome,  Italy,  October  t, 

i8q5. 

lo  Victis 294s 

Snowdrop 854 

The  Violet 1502 

Stowe,  Harriet  Beecher 

Born  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  June  14, 
iSii;  died  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  July  i, 
i8g6. 

The  Other  World 3708 

Stringer,  Arthur 
Born  at  London,  Ontario,   Canada, 

February  26,  1874;  now  living  in  New 

York  City. 

At  the  Comedy 926 

Memories 11 27 


Strong,  [Rev.]  George  Augustus 

Born  at  Norwich,  Conn.,  January  21,- 
1832;  died  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  March 
6,  igi2. 

The  Modern  Hiawatha 1950 

Suckling,  [Sir]  John 

Borii  at  Whitton,  Middlesex,  England, 
in  February,  i6og;  suicided  at  Paris, 
France,  in  June  1642. 

Ballad  upon  a  Wedding,  A.     763 

Constant  Lover,  The 818 

Doubt  of  Martyrdom,  A.  .  .      602 
Song,    "I   prithee   send   me 

back  my  heart" 763 

Song,    "Why    so    pale   and 

wan,  fond  lover" 820 

"When,     Dearest,     1     but 
Think  of  Thee" 601 

Surrey,  Earl  of,  see  Howard, 
Henry. 

Swain,  Charles 

Born  at  Manchester,  England,  Janu- 
ary 4,   jSoi;  died  at  Preslwich  Park, 
near  Manchester,  September  22,  1874. 
"  Smile  and  never  Heed  Me  "     630 
Song,  "A  violet  in  her  lovely 

hair" 548 

"Tripping  Down  the  Field- 
path" 870 

Sweeney,     (Mrs.)    Mildred    I. 
(McNeal) 
An  American  writer,  born  in  1871, 
and  still  living. 

Chavez 3600 

Swift,  Jonathan 

Born  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  November 
jr),  1667;  died  there,  October  ip,  1745. 
Epigram ..-,.,■.  ..•.'.   ^(ii? 

Swinburne,  Algernon  Charles 
Born  in  London,  England,  April  5, 
1837;  died,  April  10,  iqoq. 

At  Parting 978 

Balladof  Dreamland,  A.  ..  .      400 

Ballad  of  Life,  A 642 

"Before    the    Beginning    of 

Years" 36S 

Child's  Laughter,  A 254 

Etude  Realiste 16 

Forsaken  Garden,  A 1459 

Garden  of  Proserpine,  The.   3424 
Higher  Pantheism  in  a  Nut- 
shell, The 1935 

Hope  and  Fear 2844 

In  Memory  of  "  Barry  Corn- 
wall"   3647 

In  Memory  of  Walter  Savage 

Landor 3626 

Itylus 1576 

Leave-Taking,  A 64s 

Love  at  Sea IISQ 

Lyric,  A 646 

Madonna  Mia 565 

Mary  Beaton's  Song 1160 

Match,  A 641 

Nephelidia 1944 

Oblation,  The 903 


Index  of  Authors 


3903 


On  the  Deaths  of  Thomas 
Carlyle  and  George  Eliot  3596 

Rococo 900 

Rondel.  "Kissing  her  hair"  1146 
Rondel,  "These  many  years"    902 

Seven  Years  Old 255 

Singing  Lesson,  A 3086 

Stanzas,  "I  will  go  back  to 

the  great  sweet  mother".    1585 
"When     the     Hounds     of 
Spring" 1339 

Sylvester,  Joshua 

Born  in  Kcnl.  England,  tn  1563; 
died  at  Middlehiirg,  H-olland,  Septem- 
ber 28.  1618. 

A  Contented  Mind 2980 

"Were  I  as  Base  as  is  the 
Lowly  Plain" 1253 

Symonds,  John  Addington 

Born  at  Bristol,  Englatid,  October  5, 

J 840;  died  at  Rome,  Italy,  April  iq, 

1S93. 

Farewell 962 

Gaudeamus  Igitur 2895 

Lauriger  Horatius 2896 

Love  in  Dreams 895 

Night _ 1324 

On  a  Picture  by  Poussin  . .  .    1079 

Sonnet,  The 3 108 

Venice 2619 

Symons,  Arthur 

Born  in  Wales.  February  28,  186$; 
now  living  at  Witlersham,  Kent,  Eng- 
land. 

Emmy 1058 

Fisher's  Widow.  The 1622 

Last  Memory,  The 928 

Modern  Beauty 1004 

Roundel  of  Rest,  A 3423 


T 

Tabb,  John  Banister 

Born  in   Virginia,  March  22,  1845; 

died  at  Ellicolt  City,  Md.,  in  igog. 

Childhood 44° 

Evolution 2866 

Foot  Soldiers 59 

Fraternity 3036 

Overflow 1579 

To  a  Wood-Violet 1503 

White  Jessamine,  The 3549 

Talbot,  Ethel 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Give  Ijove  To-day 1115 

Tannahill,  Robert 

Born  at  Paisley,  Scotland,  June  3, 
1774;  drowned  himself  there.  May  17, 
1810. 

"By  Yon  Burn  Side" 1166 

Jessie,  the  Flower  o'   Dun- 
blane   ._ 544 

"Loudoun's  Bonnie   Woods 

and  Braes  ' 949 

"Midges  Dance  Aboon  the 
Burn,  The" 1652 


Tappan,  William  Bingham 

Born  at  Beverly,  Mass.,  October  26, 
I7Q4;  died  at  West  Needham,  Mass., 
June  18,  184Q. 

The  Hour  of  Peaceful  Rest .   3803 

Tate,  Nahum 

Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1652; 
died  in  London,  England,  August  12, 

1715- 

"While  Shepherds  Watched 
their  Flocks  by  Night".  .      205 

Taylor,  Ann  [Mrs.  Ann  GilbertI 
Born  in  London,  England,  January 

SO,  1782;  died  at  Nottingham,  England, 

December  20,  1866. 

Cow.  The 47 

Jane  and  Eliza log 

Meddlesome  Matty no 

Pin,  The 108 

Taylor,  Benjamin  Franklin 

Born  at  Lowville,  N.  Y.,  July  iq, 
i8iq;  died  at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  February 
24,  1887. 

The  Isle  of  the  Long  Ago..  .     417 

Taylor,  James  Bayard 

Born  at  Kenneth  Square,  Chester 
County,  Pa.,  January  11,  182$;  died  in 
Berlin.  Germany,  December  ig,  1878. 

Bedouin  Song 709 

Nubia 2640 

Promissory  Note,  The 1949 

Song  of  the  Camp,  The.  .  . .   2285 

Storm  Song 1614 

Story  for  a  Child.  A 175 

Taylor,  Jane 

Born  in  London,  Englattd,  September 
23,  1783;  died  at  Chigar,  Essex,  Eng- 
land, April  12,  1824. 

Contented  John 111 

Dirty  Jim 107 

Good-night 82 

"I  Like  Little  Pussy" 102 

Morning 116 

Philosopher's  Scales,  The. .  .    1879 

Star,  The 41 

Violet,  The 106 

T.\YL0R,  Jeffreys 

Born  at  Lavenham.  Suffolk,  England, 
October  311,  1792;  died  in  Loiulon,  Octo- 
ber 8.  7S5.3. 

The  Lion  and  the  Mouse. .  .     120 

Taylor,  Joseph  Russell 

Born   at   Circleville,   Ohio.   July   10, 

1S68,  ami  nmi'  living  al  Columbus.  Ohio. 

"Blow  Softly,  Thrush" 1581 

Breath  on  the  Oat 2541 

Dove's  Nest 266 

Taylor,  Rachel  Annai^ 

No  biographical  data  available. 

May-Music 1150 

The  Question 3742 


3904 


Index   of  Authors 


Taylor,  Tom 

Born    at    Bishop-Wearmoulh,    near 

Sunderland ,  England,  October  ig,  1817; 

died  at  Wandsworth.  England,  July  12, 

1880.  See  note  under  Brooks,  Shirley. 

Abraham  Lincoln 3642 

Taylor,  Viola 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Babylon 448 


Teasdale,    Sara    [Mrs.   Ernest 
B.  Filsinger] 
Bont  at  Si.  Louis,  Mo.,  August  8^ 

1S84,  and  still  living  there. 

"Child,  Child" 512 

Four  Winds 850 

"  I  Shall  Not  Care  " 1017 

Kiss,  The iig4 

Leaves 2856 

Look,  The Q23 

Mastery 2938 

To  Rose 272 

Tennyson,  Alfred  [First  Baron 
Tennyson] 

Born  at  Somersby,  Lincolnshire,  Eng- 
land, August  7.  i8og;  died  at  Aldsworth 

House,  near  Haslemere,  Surrey,  Eng- 
land, October  6,  i8q2. 

"Ask  Me  No  More" 875 

Beggar  Maid,  The 1143 

"Break,  Break,  Break".  . .  .  472 

Brook's  Song,  The 1416 

Bugle  Song 635 

Charge  of  the  Light  Brigade, 

The 2473 

"Come    Into    the    Garden, 

Maud" 706 

Crossing  the  Bar 3  504 

Death    of    the    Old    Year, 

The 1395 

Eagle,  The 1539 

Early  Spring 1333 

Farewell,  A 3354 

Flower,  The 2927 

( iodiva 2593 

Higher  Pantheism,  The.  .  .  .  2852 
"Home  They  Brought  Her 

Warrior  Dead" 1093 

In  Memoriam 2898 

In  the  Children's  Hospital.  .  292 

Lady  Clara  Vere  de  Vere.  .  .  83s 

Lady  Clare 2727 

Lady  of  Shalott,  The 31S8 

Letters,  The 1177 

Lilian 634 

Locksley  Hall 329S 

Lotos-Eaters,  The 3178 

Lullaby  from  "  The  Princess"  83 

Mariana _ S73 

Minnie  and  Winnie 92 

Morte  d'  Arthur 3181 

"O  Swallow,  Swallow,  Fly- 
ing South" 963 

Ode  on   the   Death   of   the 

Duke  of  Wellington 3672 

"Of  Old  Sat  Freedom  on  the 

Heights" 2235 

"Oh  "That  'twere  Possible".  1092 

Reconciliation,  The 1168 

"  Revenge, "  The 2377 


St.  Agnes'  Eve 3767 

Sir  Galahad 2724 

Song,    "It    is    the    miller's 

daughter" 633 

Song,     "O     let     the     solid 

ground" 497 

Song  of  tbc  Milkmaid 733 

Song:  the  Owl 1557 

Spring 1338 

"Tears,  Idle  Tears" 454 

Throstle,  The 1578 

Ulysses 3179 

"Voice   by   the   Cedar-tree, 

A" 552 

"What    Does   Little    Birdie 

Say".  .  .  : ISO 

Tennyson,  Frederick 

Born  at  Louth,  Ireland.  June  5,  1807, 

died  in  London,  England,  February  26, 

i8g8. 

Blackbird.  The 1523 

Skylark,  The 1567 

Thackeray,      William      Make- 
peace 
Born  at  Calcutta,   India,  July   18, 
181 1 ;  died  in  London,  England,  De- 
cember 24.  1863. 

Ad  Ministram 1987 

Age  of  Wisdom,  The 838 

At  the  Church  Gate 792 

Ballad  of  Bouillabaise,  The.  1726 

Cane-bottomed  Chair,  The .  3239 

Credo,  A 2022 

Garret,  The 463 

Jolly  Jack 1847 

King  of  Brentford,  The 1848 

Little  Billie 2140 

Mahogany  Tree,  The 2008 

Mr.    Molony's    Account   of 

the  Ball 1968 

Ronsard  to  His  Mistress  . .  .  635 

Sorrows  of  Werther 838 

Tragic  Story.  A 2049 

Willow-tree,  The 1936 

Thaxter,  Celia  Leighton 

Born  at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in  183$; 

died  at  the  Isles  of  Shoals,  August  28, 

i8g4. 

Compensation 1294 

Little  Gustava 154 

Nikolina 153 

Sandpiper,  The 1562 

Thayer,  Ernest  Lawrence 

An  American  writer;  no  biographical 
data  available. 

Casey  at  the  Bat 2185 

Thayer,  William  Roscoe 

Born  at  Boston,  Mass.,  January  16, 
18 SQ,  and  now  living  at  Cambridge, 
Mass. 

The  Last  Hunt 2799 

Tiiom,  William 

Born  at  Aberdeen.  Scotlarul.  about 
1780;  died  at  Hawkhill,  Dundee,  Scot- 
larul, February  20,  1S48. 

The  Mitherless  Bairn 283 

"They  Speak  o'  Wiles" ....     493 


Index  of  Authors 


3905 


Thomas,  Edith  Matilda 

Borti  at  Chatham,  Medina  antnly, 
Ohio,  August  13,  iSji4;  now  living  at 
West  New  Brighton.  .Statcn  Island. 

Evoe 30QS 

In  the  Lilac  Rain 3539 

Moly I4Q3 

Mother  England 2230 

Muses,  The 3097 

"^Music 3150 

Patmos 1303 

Triumph       of       Forgotten 
Things,  The 449 

Thomas,  Frederick  William 

An  American  writer,  a  native  of 
Rhode  Island,  horn  in  iSii,  died  in 
1S64. 

Song,   "  'Tis  said  that  ab- 
sence conquers  love".  . . .     983 

Thompson,  Francis 

Born  at  Preston,  England,  Dec.  18, 

iSsq;  died  in  London,  Nov.  13,  igo7. 

Daisy 34i 

Envoy 3 106 

Ex  Ore  Infantium 277 

Hound  of  Heaven,  The 3204 

May  Burden,  A 1358 

To  a  Snowflake 1391 

To  Daisies i479 

Veteran  of  Heaven,  The. ...   3770 

Thompson,  James  Maurice 

Born  at  Fairfield,  Ind.,  in  1844;  died 
in  iQOi. 

A  Prelude 3081 

Thompson,  John  Reuben 

Born  at  Richmond,  Va.,  October  23, 
,  1823;  died  in  New  York  City,  A  pril  30, 

1873- 

Carcassonne  [tr  | 438 

Music  in  Camp 2289 

Thompson,  Will  Henry 

Born   at   Calhoun.   Ga.,   March   10, 
1848;  now  tivin'i  at  .Seattle,  Wash. 
The  High  Tide  at  Gettys- 
burg     2502 

Thomson,  James 

Born  at  Ednam,  Roxburghshire,  Scot- 
land,  September    it,    i-nn;  died    near 
Richmond.  Englatui.  August  27,  1748. 
Rule,  Britannia 2232 

Thomson,  James 

Born    at    Port    Glasgow,    Scotland, 

November  23.   1834;  died  in  London, 

England.  June  3,  1882. 

E.  B.  B 3594 

Gifts 617 

Requiem,  A 3551 

Song,   "Let   my  voice  ring 
out  and  over  the  earth  " . .     616 

Vine.  The 487 

William  Blake 3589 

Thoreau,  Henry  David 

Born  at  Concord,  Mass.,  July  12, 
1817;  died  there.  May  6,  1862. 

Conscience 2960 


Great  Adventure.  The 2937 

Inspiration 2961 

My  Prayer 2961 

Nature 1295 

Thorley,  Wilfrid  Charles 

Born  in  Lomion,  England,  in  1878, 
and  still  living  there. 

Buttercups 1468 

Thornbury,  George  Walter 

Born  in  London.  England,  Novem- 
ber 13.  1828;  died  there,  June  11,  1876. 

The  Cavalier's  Escape 2742 

The  Court  Historian 1789 

The  Sally  from  Coventry.. .    2745 
The  Three  Troopers 2743 

Thorpe,  Rose  Hartwick 

Born  at  Mishawaka,  IiuL,  July  18, 
1850,  and  tiow  living  at  San  Diego,  Cal. 
"  Curfew    Must    Not    Ring 
To-Night" 3329 

Thrale,     Hester,     see     Piozzi, 
Hester  Thrale. 

Thurlow,    Lord,    see    Hovell- 
TiiuRLOw,  Edward. 

Tichborne,  Chidiock 

Born  at  Southampton,  England, 
about  1558;  executed  at  London,  for 
treason,  September  20,  1586. 

A  Lament 401 

TicKELL,  Thomas 

Born  at  Bridckirk,  Cumberland,  Eng- 
land, in  1686;  died  at  Glasnevin,  near 
Dublin,  Ireland,  April  23.  1740. 
To  the  Earl  of  Warwick  on 
the  Death  of  Mr.  Addison  3584 

TicKNOR,  Francis  Oeray 

Born   in    Baldwin   county,    Ga.,    in 

1S22;  died  near  Columbus,  Ga.,  in  1874. 

Little  Giffen 2320 

The  Virginians  of  the  Valley  2223 

TiLTON,  Theodore 

Born  in  New  York  City.  October  2, 
1835;  died  there  in  IQ07. 

"Even     This     Shall     Pass 
Away" 2845 

Timrod,  Henry 

Born  at  Charleston,  S.  C.  Decem- 
ber 8,  1820;  died  at  Columbia,  S.  C, 
October  6,  1867. 

Ode,  "  Sleep  sweetly  in  your 

humble  graves" 2320 

Serenade 705 

Sonnet,    "Most   men   know- 
love  but  as  a  part  of  life  "  3036 

Spring 1344 

Trifle,  A 654 

Tipple,  E.  H. 

An  English  writer,  living  in  India. 
Hot  Weather  in  the  Plains — • 
India 3230 


39o6 


Index  of  Authors 


TODHUNTER,  JOHN 

Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  December  30, 
183Q,  and  now  living  in  London,  Eng- 
land. 

Maureen 647 

TODI,  JOCOPONE  DA 

Born  al  Todi,  in  the  province  of 
Perugia,  Italy,  about  the  middle  0/  the 
thirteenth  century;  died  in  1306. 

Stabat  Mater  Dolorosa.  .  .  .    3891 

ToNNA,  Mrs.  "Charlotte  Eliza- 

;,         BETH" 

An  Irish  writer  born  October  j,  lygo; 
died  July  12,  1846. 

The  Maiden  City 2606 

Tooker,  L.  Frank 

Born  at  Port  Jefferson,  N.  Y.,  De- 
cember iS,  1855;  now  living  in  New 
York  City. 

"He   Bringeth   Them   Unto 
Their  Desired  Haven "..  .   3537 

Toplady,  Augttstus  Montague 

Born  at  Farnham,  Surrey,  England, 
November  4,  1740;  died  in  London, 
August  II,  1778. 

Rock  of  Ages 3797 

Torrence,  Frederic  Ridgeley 

Born  at  Xenia,  Ohio,  November  27, 
1875,  and  now  living  in  New  York  City.  ■ 
Conclusion    of    the    Whole 

Matter,  The 2897 

Evensong 893 

TowNE,  Charles  Hanson 

Born  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  February  2, 
1877:  now  living  in  New  York  City. 
Song,  "I  saw  the  day's  white 

rapture" 892 

The  Quiet  Singer 3665 

Townsend,  Mary  Ashley 

Born  at  Lyons,  N.  Y.,  in  1S32,  and 
died  in  igoi. 

Embryo 3079 

Traill,  Henry  Duff 

Born  at  Morden  Hill,  Blackhcalh, 
Englaiul,  August  14,  1842;  died  in  Lon- 
don, February  21,  igoo. 

After  Dilettante  Concetti..  .    1942 

Trench,  Herbert 

Born  at  Avoncore,  County  Cork,  Ire- 
land, in  November  186$,  arid  now  living 
at  Richmond  Hill,  Surrey,  England. 

A  Charge 2919 

"I  Heard  a  Soldier" 927 

Troubetzkoy,  Amelie  Rives,  see 
Rives,  .A.melie. 

Trowbrldge,  John  Townsend 

Born  at  Ogden,  Monroe  county,  N .  F., 
September  18,  1827;  died  at  Arlington, 
Mass.,  February  12,  IQ16. 

Cup,  The 1645 


Darius  Green  and  His  Fly-       i 

ing-Machine 2163 

Midsummer 1364 

Midwinter 1393 

Pewee,  The 1558 

Vagabonds,  The 3340 

Tucker,  St.  George 

Born  in  the  island  of  Bermuda, 
July  10,  1752;  died  at  Warminster, 
Nelson  county,  Va.,  November  10, 
1828. 

"Days  of  My  Youth" 352 

Turner,  Charles  Tennyson 

Born  at  Somersby,  Lincolnshire,  Eng- 
lattd,  July  4,  1808;  died  at  Cheltenham, 
England,  April  25,  iS'g. 

Letty's  Globe 265 

Mary  Queen  of  Scots 3646 

Turner,  Elizabeth 

A  n  English  writer  for  children,  who 
died  in  1846. 

Politeness 98 

Rebecca's  After-Thought . . .      100 

Tynan,  [Hinkson]  Katharine 
Born  at  Condalkin,  County  Dublin, 

Ireland,    in   186 1,   aiul   now   living   at 

Clanberg,    Shankill,    Comity     Dublin, 

Ireland. 

Beloved,  The 3727 

Chanticleer 149 

Dead  Coach,  The 3429 

Desire,  The 253 

Footpath  Way,  The 1679 

Little  Ghost,  The 302 

Of  an  Orchard 1414 

Quiet  Nights,  The 3222 

Sheep  and  Lambs 3759 

Turn  o'  the  Year. 1332 


U 

Untermeyer,  Louis 

Born  in  Neiv  York  City,  October  i, 
i88s;  and  still  living  there. 

Caliban  in  the  Coal-mines. .  3059 

Folk-song 1050 

Landscapes 3060 

Only  of  Thee  and  Me 625 

Prayer 2940 

Reveille 2562 

Upson,  Arthur  Wheelock 

Born  at  Camden,  N.  Y.,  January  in, 
1877;  drowned  in  Lake  Bermidji, 
Minn.,  February  12,  igo8. 

"Ex  Libris" 3466 

Failures 2950 

Old  Gardens 992 

Song,  "Flame  at  the  core  of 

the  world" 1151 

Vers  la  Vie 2856 

Upton,  James 

Born  at  Winslow,  Cheshire,  England, 
December  10,  1670;  died  at  Taunton, 
England,  August  13,  I74g. 

The  Lass  of  Richmond  Hill .     615 


Index  of  Authors 


3907 


Usher,  John 
No  biographical  dala  available. 

The  Pipe  of  Tobacco 1984 


Vandkgrift,  Margaret,  see  Jan- 
vier, Margaret  Thomson. 

Van  Dyke,  Henry 

Born  at  Germantown,  Pa.,  Novem- 
ber 10,  iSiS,  and  now  living  at  Priticc- 
ton,  N.J. 

C^hild  in  the  Garden,  The.. .     435 

Four  Things 2918 

Lover's  Envy,  A 672 

Maryland         Yellow-throat 

The 154.? 

My  April  Lady 572 

Valley  of  Vain  Verses,  The. .   2933 

Van  Rensselaer,  Mariana  Gris- 

WOLD 
Born  in  New  York  City  in  18 51,  and 
still  living  there. .  .  . 
,    Love's  Prisoner 925 

Vaughan,  Henry 

Born  at  NriClon-hJ^Usk^in  the  parish 

of      Llansaintfracd,       Brecknockshire, 

Wales,    April    17,    1622;    died    there, 

April  23,  i6q5. 

Eclipse,  The 3766 

Friends  Departed 350S 

Man 369 

Peace 369.'; 

Retreat,  The 434 

Song  to  Amoret,  A 615 

World,  The 3696 

Vautor,  Thomas 

A  household  musician  in  the  family  of 
Anthony  Beaumont,  of  Leicestershire, 
England,  from  about  15Q2  until  his 
death,  some  time  after  1620. 

"  Sweet  Suffolk  Owl" 1558 

Vaux,  Thomas,   [Second  Baron 
Vaux  of  Harrowden] 
An    English    writer,    born    in    1510; 
died  in  London,  in  October,  1556. 

On  a  Contented  Mind".  .  .  .    2978 

Venable,  William  Henry 

Born  in  Warren  County,  Ohio,  April 

20,  18 j6;  and  now  living  at  Ciminnati, 

Ohio.  $ 

My  Catbird 1533 

Vere,  see  also  De  Vere. 

Vere,  Edw.\sd  de  [Seventeenth 
Earl  of  Oxford] 

An  English  writer,  born  April  2, 
1550;  died  at  Ne^vington,  Middlesex, 
England.  June  24.  i6n.f. 

A  Renunciation 807 

Very, Jones 

Born  at  Salem,  Mass.,  August  28, 
1813;  died  there.  May  8,  1880. 

Nature 1293 


The  Idler 2970 

The  Tree 1403 

ViELE,  Herman  Knickerbocker 
Born  in  New  York  City,  January  31, 
1S56;  died  there  December  14,  igo8. 
The  Good  Inn ....'. ,    1700 

Villon,  Francois 

Born  in  Paris  in  1431;  died  about 
14S4. 

Ballade     dcs      Dames     du 
Temps  Jadis 3837 

w 

Waddington,  Samuel 

Born  at  Boston  .Spa,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, November  q,  1844,  and  tiow  living 
at  London. 

Mors  et  Vita 3422 

Wakefield,  Nancy    Priest,  see 
Priest,  Nancy  Woodbury. 

Waller,  Edmund 

Born  at  Coleshill,  Hertfordshire.  Eng- 
land, March  3,  1606;  died  at  Beacons 
field.  England,  October  21,  1687. 

"Go,  Lovely  Rose" 930 

Of  the  Last   Verses  in   the 

Book 401 

On  a  Girdle 531 

On  Her  Coming  to  London .     330 
To  Flavia 600 

Waller,  John  Francis 

Born  at  Limerick.  Ireland,  in  1810; 
died  at  Bishop  Slortford,  England, 
January  ig.  1804. 

Kitty  Neil 756 

Walsh,  William 

Born  at  Ahberley,  Worcestershire, 
Englattd,  in  1663;  died  in  London, 
March  18,  1708. 

Rivals 826 

\\^ALT0N,  IzaaK 

Born  in  Staffordshire,  England, 
August  Q,  1503;  died  at  Winchester, 
England,  December  /y,  1683. 

The  Angler's  Wish 1664 

Ward,  Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps 
Born  at   Boston,  Mass.,  August  31, 

1844:  died  there,  January  28,  igit. 

Afterwards 3SI2 

Lost  Colors,  The. . ., 2464 

Ward,  Lydia  Avery  Coonley 
Born  at  Lynchburg,  Va.,  January  31, 

1843.  and  now  living  at  Wyoming,  N .  V . 

Heredity 3731 

To-day    2932 

Ware,   Eugene,   Fitch   ("Iron- 
quill") 
Born  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  May  zq, 
1841;  died  at  Cascade,  Colo.,  July  i, 

IQII. 

The  Aztec  City 3211 


39o8 


Index  of  Authors 


Warner,  Charles  Dudley 

Born  at  Plainficld,  Mass.,  Scplcm- 
ber  13,  i82q;  died  at  Hartford,  Conn., 
October  20,  IQOO. 

Bookra 2854. 

Warren,  John  Byrne  Leicester 
[Third  Baron  de  Tabley] 
Born  in  Clicsliire,  England,  April  26, 
18.S5;  died  there  November  22,  iSg^. 
The     Churchyard     on     the 
Sands 1067 

Warton,  Thomas 

Born  at  Basingstoke,  England,  in 
I72S;  died  May  21,  i/QO. 

Inscription  in  a  Hermitage. .    1640 

Wasson,  David  Atwood 

Born  at  West  Brooksville,  Me., 
May  4,  1823;  died  at  West  Mcdjord, 
Mass.,  January  21,  1S87. 

Joy-Month 1570 

Wastell,  Simon 

Born,  probably  at  Wasdalc,  Cumber- 
land, England,  dale  unknown;  died  at 
Northampton,  England,  in  January, 
1632. 

Man's  Mortality 3405 

Waterman.  Nixon 

Born  at  Newark,  III.,  November  12, 
1830;  7WW  living  in  Boston,  Mass. 

Recompense 2929 

Rose  to  the  Living,  A 1800 

Watson,  Minor 

No  biographical  data  available. 

Constancy 3475 

Watson,  Rosamund  Marriott 
Born  in  London,  England,  in  186  j, 

died  tlicre  December  2q,  iqii. 

Ave  atque  Vale 3J3 

Omnia  Somnia 424 

Requiescat 1122 

Watson,  William 

Born  at  Burley-in-Wharfedale,  York- 
shire, England,  August  2,  1858;  now 
living  at  Lotuion. 

Dawn  on  the  Headland ....    1308 

Great  Misgiving,  The 3428 

Invention 3100 

Keyboard.  The 3132 

Lachrima"  Musarum 3650 

Leavetaking 366 

Song,  "April.  April" 1354 

Song,  "O,  like  a  queen's  her 

happy  tread " 577 

Sonnets    from    "Sonnets    to 

Miranda" 1271 

Woman  with  the  Serpent's 

Tongue,  The igo8 

Wordsworth's  Grave 36S2 

Watts,  Isaac 

Born  at  Southampton,  England,  July 
17.  1674;  died  at  Theobalds,  Herts,  Eng- 
land, November  25,  174S. 

Cradle  Hymn,  A 79 


"How  Doth  the  Little  Busy 
Bee" .* 104 

"O  God!  Our  Help  in  Ages 
Past" 3790 

Sluggard,  The 106 

Watts-Dunton,  Walter  Theo- 
dore 
Born  at  St.   Ives,  Huntingdonshire, 
England,    October    12,    1832;    died    at 
Putney  Hill,  England,  June  7,  igi4. 

Coleridge 3601 

First  Kiss,  The 689 

Sonnet's  Voice,  The 3106 

Waugh,  Edwin 

Born  at  Rochdale,  Lancashire,  Eng- 
laiul,  January  2g,  1817;  died  at  New 
Brighton,  England,  April  30,  iSgo. 
The  Dule's  i'  this  Bonnet  o' 
Mine" 757 

Weatherly,  Frederic  Edward 

Born  at  Portishead,  Somersetshire, 
England,  October  4,  184S,  aiul  now 
living  in  London. 

The  Dustman 73 

Webbe,  Charkes 

An  Englisli  writer,  living  in  the  latter 
half  of  the  seventeenth  century. 

Against  Indifference 615 

Webster,  Augusta 

Born    at    Poole,     Dorset,    England, 

January  3,  1S37;  died  at  Kcw,  England, 

September  5,  i8q4. 

The  Pine 1408 

The  Violet  and  the  Rose.  .  .    1503 

Webster,  John 

An  English  writer,  born  about  1580, 
and  died  about  1623. 

A  Dirge 3430 

Song,  "All  the  flowers  of  the 
spring" 3517 

Welby,  Amelia  Coppuck 

Born  at  Si.  Michael's,  Maryland, 
February  3,  i8iq;  died  in  Louisville, 
Ky.,  May  3,  1832. 

Twilight  at  Sea 13 17 

Wells,  Carolyn 

Born  at  Railway,  New  Jersey,  about 

1S6S,  ami  still  living  there. 

Four  Limericks 2088 

The  Poster-Girl 1941 

Welsh,  Robert  Gilbert 

Born  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  but  a 
resident  of  the  United  States  since 
childhood,  and  now  living  in  New  York 
City. 

.^zrael 3414 

Werner,  Alice 

Born  at  Trieste,  Austria-Hungary, 
June  26,  183Q,  and  now  living  in  Lon- 
don. 

A  Song  of  Fleet  Street 2597 


Index  of  Authors 


3909 


Wesley,  Charles 

Born  al  Epworllt,  Lincolnshire,  Eng- 
laml,  December  28.  1707;  died  in  Lon- 
don, March  2Q,  178S. 

"  A  Charge  to  Keep  I  Have  "   37g2 
"Jesus,  Lover  of  My  Soul".   370i 

West,  John  [First  Earl  de  la 
WarrI 
Born  in  Ennland,  April  4,  1603;  died 
in  London,  March  16,  1766. 

Fair  Hebe 721 

Westwood,  Thomas 

Born  at  Enfidtl.  England,  Novem- 
ber 26,  1814:  died  in  Belgium,  March  13, 
18S8. 

Little  Bell 259 

Under  My  Window 258 

Wheeler,  Edw.^rd  J. 

Born  in  Cleveland,  Ohio.  March  11, 
iSsq;  mnv  living  in  New  York  Cily. 
Night's  Mardi  (iras 1328 

Wheelock,  John  Hall 

Born  al  Far  Rockaway,  Long  Island, 
N.  Y.,  in  1S86,  and  now  living  at 
Morrislown,  N.  J. 

Sunday  Evening  in  the  Com- 
mon     3059 

White,    Gleeson    (Joseph  Wil- 
liam Gleeson) 
Born  at  Christ  Church,  England,  in 
1831;  died  in  London  in  jS()8. 

A  Primrose  Dame 740 

White,  Henry  Kirke 

Born  at  Nottingham,  England,  March 
21,  i~8s;  died  at  Cambridge,  England, 
October  IQ,  1806. 

The  Early  Primrose 1496 

White,  Hervey 

Born   at    New  London,  Li  .  Novem- 
ber 26,  1866;  now  living  in  Chicago,  III. 
"I  Saw  the  Clouds" 29S4 

White,  Joseph  Blanco 

Born  at  Seviltr,  Spain.  July  11,  1775; 
died  al  Liverpool,  Englawl,  May  20, 
1841. 

To  Night 1324 

Whitman,  Walt 

Born  al    West   mils.   Long  Island, 

N.  Y.,  May  5/,  iSkj:  died  al  Camden, 

N.  J.,  March  26,  i8g2. 

"As  Toilsome  I   Wandered 

Virginia's  Woo<ls 3004 

Beasts,  The 2996 

"  Darest  Thou  Now,  O  Soul"  3494 

Last  Invocation,  The 3494 

Mannahatta 2568 

"O  CapUiin!  My  Captain".  3629 
Song  for  All  Seas,  All  Ships, .    1584 
To  the  Man-of-War  Bird. . .    1542 
"When   Lilacs  Lust  in  the 
Dooryard  Bloomed  " 3630 


Whitney,       Adeline       Dutton 
Train 
Born  in  Boston,  Mass.,  September  13, 

1824;  died  al  Milton,  Mass.,  in  igo6. 

Equinoctial 367 

Humpty  Dumpty 2034 

Whitney,  Helen  Hay 

An  American  writer,  born  in  New 
York  City  ami  still  living  there. 
Song,  "  We  only  ask  for  sun- 
shine"    3386 

To  Diane 112S 

Whittaker,  Frederick 

An  American  writer,  born  in  1838, 
died  in  1017. 

Custer's  Last  Charge 2529 

Whittier,  John  Greenleaf 

Born  at  Haverhill,  Mass.,  Decem- 
ber 17,  1807;  died  al  Hampton  Falls, 
N.  //.,  September  7,  i8g2.  -^ 

Barbara  Frictchie 2494 

Barefoot  Boy,  The 261 

Bayard  Taylor 3658 

Brown  of  Ossawatomie 2484 

Frost  Spirit,  The 1388 

Henchman,  The 553 

Ichabod 1837 

Maud  Muller 905 

My  Playmate 972 

Proem 3078 

Skipper  Ireson's  Ride 2445 

Telling  the  Bees 1109 

Widdemer,  Margaret 

Born  al   Doylesiown,   Fa.,   and   now 

living  in  New  York  City. 

Factories,  The 3057 

(jrcek  Folk  Song 35o6 

Wilcox,  Ella  Wheeler 

Born  at  Johnson  Center,  Wisconsin, 
in  1 8 33;  now  living  at  Short  Beach, 
Conn. 

Interlude 3472 

Midsummer 922 

Solitude 2929 

Wilde,       Oscar       O'Flahertie 
Wills 

Born  al  Dublin,  Ireland,  October  13, 
1836;  died  in  Paris,  France,  November 
30,  1000. 

Ave  Imperatrix 2244 

Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol,  The  2773 

Endymion 1013 

Requiescat 1119 

Serenade 712 

Thcocritu.s 3664 

Wilde,  Richard  Henry 

Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland.  September 
24,  1780;  brought  to  United  States  in 
1707;  died  at  New  Orleans,  La.,  Sep- 
tember JO,  1847. _ 

"My  Life  is  Like  the  Sum- 
mer Rose" 3358 


39IO 


Index   of  Authors 


Wilkinson,  Florence  (Mrs.  Wil- 
frid MuiR  Evans) 
Born  at  Tarrytoum,  N.  Y.,  and  now 
living  at  Westport,  Conn. 

At  the  Salon 3373 

Students 1792 

WiLLARD,  Emma  Hart 

Born  at  Berlin,  Conn.,  February  27, 
1787;  died  at  Troy,  N.  Y .,  April  15, 
1870. 

"  Rocked  in  the  Cradle  of  the 
Deep" IS99 

Williams,    [Sir]    Charles   Han- 
bury 

Born,   probably  at  Pontypool,  Mon- 
mouthshire, England,  December  8,  1708; 
committed  suicide,  November  2,  i75g. 
"  Come,  Chloe,  and  Give  me 
Sweet  Kisses  " 685 

Willis,  Nathaniel  Parker 

Born  at  Portland,  Me.,  January  ^o, 
1806;  died  at  Idlcwild,  near  Newburgh, 
N.  Y.,  January  20,  1867. 

"  Chamber  Scene" 348 

Love  in  a  Cottage 732 

On  the  Picture  of  a  "Child 

Tired  of  Play" 280 

To  Laura  W — ,  Two  Years 

Old 270 

Unseen  Spirits 1032 

WiLLSON,  Byron  Forceythe 

Born  at  Little  Genesee,  Alleghany 
county,  N.  Y.,  April  10,  1837;  died  at 
Alfre'd,  N.  Y.,  February  2,  1867. 

Old  Sergeant,  The 3332 

WiLMOT,  John  [Second  Earl  of 
Rochester] 
Born  at  Ditchley,  Oxfordshire,  Eng- 
land, April  10, 1647; died  there,  July  26, 
1680. 

Constancy 611 

Epitaph  on  Charles  II 1911 

Love  and  Life 611 

Song,    "My    dear    mistress 

has  a  heart" 610 

Song,  "Too  late,  alas!  I  must 
confess" 612 

Wilson,      John      [Christopher 

North] 

Born  at  Paisley,  Scotland,  May  18, 

1785;  died  at  Edinburgh.  April  3,  1854. 

Evening  Cloud,  The 1320 

Wilson,  Robert  Burns 

Born  in  Washington  county,  Pa., 
October  jo,  1850;  now  living  at  Frank- 
fort, Ky. 

Passing  of  March,  The 1353 

"  Such  is  the  Death  the  Sol- 
dier Dies" 23 T7 

Winchilsea,    Countess   of,    see 
Finch,  Anne 

WiNKWORTH,  Catharine 

Born  at  Lotulon,  Englatul,  Seplem- 


her  I  J,  1827;  died  near  Geneva,  Switzer- 
land, July  I,  1878. 

Veni,  Sancte  Spiritus  [tr].  .  .  3780 

Winter,  William 

Born  at  Gloucester,  Mass.,  July  15, 
1S36;  died  at  New  Brighton,  Slaten 
Island,  N.  Y.,  June  JO,  1017. 

Age ■'. .     424 

Queen,  The 671 

Refuge. 921 

Rubicon,  The 3497 

Wisdome,  Robert 

Born,  tirobaUy  in  O.xfordshire,  Eng- 
land, about  isoo;  died  at  Wilburton, 
Englatul,  in  September,  1^68. 

A  Religious  Use  of  Tobacco  1983 

Wither,  George 

Born  at  Brenlwotth,  Hampshire,  Eng- 
latul, June  II,  1388;  died  in  Loiulon, 
May  2,  1667. 

"I  Loved  a  Lass" 718 

Lover's  Resolution,  The. .  .  .     813 

"Sleep,  Baby,  Sleep" 75 

Stolen  Kiss,  A 683 

WoLCOT,  John  [Peter  Pindar] 

Born  at  Dodbrnnke,  near  Kingshridge, 
Devonshire,  England,  May  p.  1738; 
died  at  Somers  Town,  England,  Janu- 
ary 14,  iSlQ. 

The  Razor-Seller 2101" 

To  a  Kiss 686 

Wolfe,  Charles 

Born  at  Blackhall,  County  Kildare, 
Ireland,  December  14,  17Q1:  died  at 
the  Cove  of  Cork,  Irelaiui,  February  si, 
1823. 

Burial   of   Sir  John   Moore 

after  Corunna 2448 

"Go,  Forget  Me" 9S3 

To  Mary 1082 

Woodberry,  George  Edward 
Born   at   Beverley,   Mass.,   May   12, 

i8s$;  and  still  living  there. 

At  Gibraltar 2229 

Comrades 3005 

"O,  Inexpressible  as  Svi^eet"     668 

Rose  of  Stars,  The 506 

Secret,  The 505 

Song  of  Eros 507 

Sonnets  Written  in  the  Fall 

of  1914 2S52 

"When  First  I  Saw  Her"  .  .     571 
Wild  Eden 3209 

Woods,  Margaret  Louisa 

Born  at  Rugby,  England  in  1856, 
atui  now  living  at  Oxford,  England. 

Genius  Loci 3110 

Young  Windebank 2325 

Woods,  William  Hervey 

Born  in  Green  county,  Ky.,  Novem- 
ber 17,  1832,  and  now  living  at  Balti- 
more, Md. 

The  Prayer  of  Beaten  Men .    2944 

WooDWORTH,  Samuel 

Born  alScituate,  Mass.,  January  13, 


Index  of  Authors 


3911 


775/;  died  in  New  York  Cily,  Decem- 
ber g.  1842. 

Bucket,  The 466 

Needle,  The 2120 

WooLSEY,  Sarah  Chauncey  [Su- 
san Coolidge] 
Born   at   Cleveland,   Ohio,   in    184$; 

died  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1905. 

Helen 1102 

How  the  Leaves  Came  Down     142 
When 3464 

WooLSON,  Constance  Fenimore 

Born  at  Claremont,  N.  //.,  in  1848; 

died  at  Venice,  Italy,  January  23,  18Q4. 

Yellow  Jessamine 1490 

Wordsworth,  Dorothy  [Mrs. 
Edward  Quillinan] 
Born  August  6,  1804;  the  second  child 
of  William  Wordsworth;  died  at  Rydal 
Mount,  Westmoreland,  England,  July  g, 
1847. 

The  Cottager  to  her  Infant.       84 

\\'ordsworth,  William 

Born  at  Cockermoulh,  Cumberlatul, 
England,  April  7,  7770;  died  at  Rydal 
Mount,  Westmoreland,  England,  April 
23'  1850. 

Character  of  the  Happy  War- 
rior, The 293s 

Elegiac  Stanzas 3587 

England,  1802 2237 

Expostulation  and  Reply. .  .    1657 

Green  Linnet,  The 1541 

"I  Wandered  Lonely  as  a 

Cloud  " 1473 

Inner  Vision,  The 3087 

"It  is  a  Beauteous  Evening, 

Calm  and  Free" 13 14 

Lines  Composed  a  Few  Miles 

above  Tintern  Abbey  ....  2578 
Lines     Written     in     Early 

Spring 1334 

Lucy 1073 

Lucy  Gray,  or.  Solitude.  .  . .     290 
"O  Nightingale,  Thou  Surely 

.        Art" IS4S 

'  Ode  on  the  Intimations  of 
Immortality  from  Recol- 
lections of  Early  Child- 
hood       371 

Ode  to  Duty 2955 

On    the    Extinction    of    the 

Venetian  Republic 26 rg 

Pass  of  Kirkstone,  The 2582 

Perfect  Woman 380 

Rainbow,  The 366 

Reverie  of  Poor  Susan,  The.     281 
"Scorn  Not  the  Sonnet".  . .   3109 

Small  Celandine,  The 1469 

Solitary  Reaper,  The ^i^ 

Sonnet,  "  Earth  has  not  any- 
thing to  show  more  fair".   2597 

Sle|)ping  Westward 398 

"Surprised  by  Joy" 3.s66 

Tables  'I'urned,  The 16  ii 

Three  Cottage,  Girls  The. . .     334 

To  a  Butterfly 1517 

Tc  a  Child 1 25 


To  a  Skylark 1565 

To  a  Skylark 1566 

To  Hartley  Coleridge 275 

To  Sleep 3221 

To  the  Cuckoo 1538 

To  the  Daisy 1478 

To  the  Small  Celandine.  .  .  .  1470 

Trosachs,  The 1430 

Two  April  Mornings,  The.  .  3564 

We  Are  Seven 316 

"Why  .^rt  Thou  Silent".  .  .  1254 
"With    Ships   the   Sea   was 

Sprinkled  " 1589 

"World  is  too  much  with  us, 

The" 1292 

Written  in  March 1352 

Yarrow  Unvisited 2584 

Yarrow  Visited 2586 

Wotton,  [Sir]  Henry 

Born  at  Boston,  Malherbe,  Kent, 
England,  in  IS^S;  died  at  Eton,  Eng- 
land, in  December,  163Q. 

Character  of  a  Happy  Life, 

The 29S6 

Elizabeth  of  Bohemia 523 

Wright,  Willard  Huntington 

Born  at  Charlottesville,  Va.,  and 
now  living  in  New  York  City. 

Song  against  Women 829 

Wyatt,  [Sir]  Thomas 

Born  in  Kent,  England,  about  /,;o?; 
died  at  Sherborne,  Dorsetshire,  England, 
October  10,  1542. 

"Forget  not  Yet" 583 

Wyndham  [Sir]  Charles  [Second 
Earl  of  Egremont] 
Born  in  Loiulon,  England,  August  ig, 
1710;  died  there,  August  21,  1763. 

The  Fair  Thief 536 


Yates,  Edmund 

Born  at  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  July  3, 
iS^i;  died  in  London,  Englattd,  May  20, 
1894. 

All  Saints' 1868 

Ybarra,  Thomas  Russell 

An  American  writer,  born  in  1S80, 
a)ul  now  living  in  New  York  City. 

Lay  of  Ancient  Rome 2044 

Yeats,  William  Butler 

Born  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  June  13, 
iS6$;  ami  now  living  in  London,  Eng- 
land. 

Ballad  of   Father  Gilligan, 

The 2803 

"Down  by  the  Salley  Gar- 
dens"       928 

Fiddler  of  Dooney,  The.  . . .    1965 

Into  the  Twilight 285s 

Lake  Isle  of  Innisfree.  The. .  1634 
"Never  (Jive  all  the  Heart"  511 
Rose  of  the  World,  The.  .  .  .  390 
"When  VouareOld" 636 

Young,  Mrs.  William  Sanborn, 
see  Mitchell,  Ruth  Comfort. 


INDEX  OF   FIRST  LINES 

A 

PAGE 

A  baby's  feet,  like  seashells  pink i6 

A  braver  swell,  a  swifter  sliding 971 

A  breathing  sigh,  a  sigh  for  answer cj6q 

A  bright  little  maid  of  St.  Thomas 2088 

A  canner,  exceedingly  canny 2088 

A  capital  ship  for  an  ocean  trip 2079 

A  certain  Pasha,  dead  five  thousand  years 2845 

A  cheer  and  salute  for  the  Admiral,  and  here's  to  the  Captain  bold. .  2297 

A  charge  to  keep  I  have 3792 

A  chieftain,  to  the  Highlands  bound 2723 

A  child  should  always  say  what's  true 98 

A  cloud  lay  cradled  near  the  setting  sun 1320 

A  cloud  possessed  the  hollow  field -.  2502 

A  country  life  is  sweet 1653 

"A  cup  for  hope!"  she  said 452 

A  dappled  sky,  a  world  of  meadows 969 

A  dillar,  a  dollar 32 

A  district  school,  not  far  away 2136 

A  farmer  went  trotting  upon  his  gray  mare 46 

A  fellow  in  a  market-town 2101 

A  fire-mist  and  a  planet 2867 

A. fleet  with  flags  arrayed 2421 

A  flock  of  merry  singing-birds  were  sporting  in  the  grove 1530 

A  flock  of  sheep  that  leisurely  pass  by 3221 

A  flying  word  from  here  and  there 3640 

A  fool  and  knave  with  different  views .      .  826 

A  fool  there  was  and  he  made  his  prayer 1045 

A  garden  is  a  lovesome  thing,  God  wot 1446 

A  good  sword  and  a  trusty  hand 2407 

A  happy  bit  hame  this  auld  world  would  be 303S 

A  Hindoo  died;  a  happy  thing  to  do 1899 

A  hundred  years  from  now,  dear  heart 661 

A  hut,  and  a  tree 2997 

A  is  an  angel  of  blushing  eighteen 2049 

A  jolly  fat  friar  loved  liquor  good  store 2112 

A  lady  red  upon  the  hill 1332 

A  lady  there  was  of  Antigua 2089 

A  lake  and  a  fairy  boat 630 

A  land  of  Dreams  and  Sleep — a  poppied  land 2640 

A  lark  in  the  mesh  of  a  tangled  vine 2840 

A  late  lark  twitters  in  the  quiet  skies 3501 

A  laughing  knot  of  village  maids 677 

A  life  on  the  ocean  wave 1594 

A  lily  in  my  garden  grew 1880 

A  lion  with  the  heat  oppressed. 120 

A  little  Boy  was  set  to  keep 121 

A  little  elbow  leans  upon  your  knee 321 

A  little  fairy  comes  at  night 237 

A  little  more  toward  the  light 361 

A  little  Saint  best  fits  a  little  Shrine 1723 

A  little  sun,  a  little  rain 2909 

A  little  time  for  laughter 898 

3913 


3914  Index  of  First   Lines 

PAGE 

A  little  while  (my  life  is  almost  set!) 895 

A  little  while  the  tears  and  laughter 291 1 

A  little  work,  a  little  play 2910 

A  lively  young  turtle  lived  down  by  the  banks 2058 

A  lovely  young  lady  I  mourn  in  my  rhymes.  .  ."yrcnrfriT/fT igig 

A  man  called  Dante,  I  have  heard r/'^: :.....-  f 3084 

A  man  of  words  and  not  of  deeds 64 

A  man  said  unto  his  Angel 2949 

A  man  should  live  in  a  garret  aloof 3103 

A  melancholy  little  man  was  seated  on  the  ground 2087 

A  mighty  fortress  is  our  God 3806 

A  mile  behind  is  Gloucester  town 2569 

A  mist  was  driving  down  the  British  Channel 3670 

A  monk,  when  his  rites  sacerdotal  were  o'er 1879 

A  nightingale  made  a  mistake 147 

A  nightingale,  that  all  day  long 179 

A  pitcher  of  mignonette i7g6 

A  place  in  thy  memory.  Dearest 871 

A  portly  wood-louse,  full  of  cares 1791 

A  pretty  good  firm  is  "Watch  and  Waite " 1 14 

A  pretty  task.  Miss  S ,  to  ask 7 13 

A  public  haunt  they  found  her  in 280 

A  queen  lived  in  the  South 545 

A  raven  sat  upon  a  tree 1854 

A  rose,  as  fair  as  ever  saw  the  North 1498 

A  rose  for  a  young  head 1089 

A  rose  to  the  living  is  more i8oo 

"A  sail!  a  sail!  oh,  whence  away" 3231 

A  sentinel  angel,  sitting  high  in  glory 1038 

A  shady  freshness,  chafers  whirring 970 

A  silly  young  cricket,  accustomed  to  sing 1 18 

A  simple  Child 316 

A  slumber  did  my  spirit  seal 1076 

A  soldier  of  the  legion  lay  dying  in  Algiers 2O34 

A  song  of  a  boat 43 1 

A  song  of  hate  is  a  song  of  Hell 2551 

A  song  to  the  oak,  the  brave  old  oak r?jo3 

A  sonnet  is  a  moment's  monument 3107 

A  star  is  gone!  a  star  is  gone 3746 

A  steed,  a  steed  of  matchless  speed 2282 

A  stone  jug  and  a  pewter  mug 2017 

A  street  there  is  in  Paris  famous 1726 

A  sudden  wakin',  a  sudden  weepin' 2910 

A  sunshiny  shower 66 

A  supercilious  nabob  of  the  East 1845 

A  swarm  of  bees  in  May 65 

A  sweet  disorder  in  the  dress 378 

"A  temple  to  Friendship,"  said  Laura,  enchanted 832 

A  thousand  miles  from  land  are  we 1572 

A  traveler  on  a  dusty  road 2925 

A  tutor  who  tooted  the  flute 2088 

A  viewless  thing  is  the  wind S07 

A  violet  in  her  lovely  hair S48 

A  voice  by  the  cedar  tree 5S2 

A  voice  from  the  sea  to  the  mountains 2972 

A  voice  resounds  like  thunder-peal 2269 

A  was  an  Archer,  who  shot  at  a  frog 60 

A  watch  will  tell  the  time  of  day 162 

"A  weary  lot  is  thine,  fair  maid" 948 

A  well  there  is  in  the  west  country 2114 

A  wet  sheet  and  a  flowing  sea ...;.,.. .-. .'. , .  •  •  1592 

A  whisper  woke  the  air .  .':.\".'.s.^.".' . .  ■  2924 


Index  of  First   Lines  39^5 

PAGE 

A  white  way  is  the  wind's  way ..'.....•..■.....  3374 

A  widow — she  had  only  one 3SS4 

A  wind  came  up  out  of  the  sea 3443 

A  woman  is  a  foreign  kind 387 

A  yellow  moon  in  splendor  drooping 970 

Abide  with  me!  Fast  falls  the  eventide 3802 

Abou  Ben  Adhem  (may  his  tribe  increase!) sggg 

About  Glenkindie  and  his  men 2730 

About  the  little  chambers  of  my  heart 3005 

Above  my  head  the  shields  are  stained  with  rust 3552 

Above  the  cloistral  valley 3553 

Above  the  pines  the  moon  was  slowly  drifting 3606 

Above  yon  sombre  swell  of  land 1652 

Accept,  thou  shrine  of  my  dead  saint 1228 

Across  the  Eastern  sky  has  glowed 3254 

Across  the  fields  of  yesterday 436 

Across  the  foaming  river 3257 

Across  the  grass  I  see  her  pass 573 

Across  the  hills  of  Arcady 664 

Across  the  narrow  beach  we  flit 1562 

Adieu,  farewell,  earth's  bliss 3453 

Ae  fond  kiss,  and  then  we  sever 945 

Afar  in  the  desert  I  love  to  ride 1669 

Affection's  charm  no  longer  gilds •; 2065 

After  such  years  of  dissension  and  strife 1919 

After  the  May  time  and  after  the  June  time 922 

Again  I  hear  that  creaking  step 2 151 

Again  rejoicing  Nature  sees 134 1 

Against  the  green  flame  of  the  hawthorn-tree 516 

Ah,  be  not  false,  sweet  Splendor 349 

Ah,  Chloris!  that  I  now  could  sit 720 

Ah,  Clemence!  when  I  saw  thee  last 909 

Ah,  did  you  once  see  Shelley  plain 3657 

Ah,  drops  of  gold  in  whitening  flame 1479 

Ah,  happy  youths,  ah,  happy  maid ■. 1079 

Ah,  here  it  is!  the  sliding  rail . 3730 

Ah,  how  sweet  it  is  to  love 485 

Ah!  marvel  not  if  when  I  come  to  die 886 

Ah  me,  dread  friends  of  mine, — ^Love,  Time,  and  Death 3458 

Ah!  my  heart  is  weary  waiting 1363 

Ah,  not  because  our  Soldier  died  before  his  field  was  won 3648 

Ah,  see  the  fair  chivalry  come,  the  companions  of  Christ 3751 

Ah,  sweet  is  Tipperary  in  the  springtime  of  the  year 2608 

"Ah,  sweet  Kitty  Neil,  rise  up  from  the  wheel" 756 

Ah,  sweet,  thou  little  knowest  how 704 

Ah!  there's  the  lily,  marble  pale 1499 

Ah,  wasteful  woman,  she  that  may 384 

Ah!  were  she  pitiful  as  she  is  fair 583 

Ah,  what  avails  the  sceptered  race 622 

Ah,  what  is  love?    It  is  a  pretty  thing 1210 

Ah,  yes,  I  wrote  the  "  Purple  Cow  " • .  jj  .,1 2086 

"Ahoy!  and  0-ho!  and  it's  who's  for  the  ferry" .  .  . '}:  .;.'■.■■ 761 

Airly  Beacon,  Airly  Beacon 1040 

Airy,  fairy  Lilian 634 

Alas,  how  soon  the  hours  are  over 1910 

Alas!  that  man  must  see 3574 

Alas,  that  my  heart  is  a  lute 620 

Alas,  the  moon  should  ever  beam 869 

Alexis,  here  she  stayed;  among  these  pines 1252 

Alike  to  her  who  Dines  both  Loud  and  Long 1922 

.All  alone  on  the  liillside ., 2291 

All  around  him  Patmos  lies v«<.'J. .  '.t;.. 1303 


39i6 


Index  of  First   Lines 


PAGE 

All  day  I  tell  my  rosary ggg 

All  day  long  on  the  highway 509 

All  day  the  stormy  wind  has  blown 3732 

All  French  folk,  wheresoe'er  ye  be 1786 

All  hail  the  power  of  Jesus'  name 3792 

All  hail!  thou  noble  land 2223 

All  in  our  marriage  garden 26 

All  in  the  April  evening 3759 

All  in  the  Downs  the  fleet  was  moored 937 

All  in  the  golden  weather,  forth  let  us  ride  to-day 1685 

All  in  the  leafy  darkness,  when  sleep  had  passed  me  by 3373 

All  in  the  lilac-rain 3S39 

All  June  I  bound  the  rose  in  sheaves 884 

All  last  night  I  had  quiet 674 

All  loved  and  lovely  women  dear  to  rhyme 3401 

All  moveless  stand  the  ancient  cedar-trees 3496 

All  my  past  life  is  mine  no  more 611 

All  Nature  seems  at  work.  Slugs  leave  their  lair 3373 

All  night  I  watched  awake  for  morning 1309 

"All  quiet  along  the  Potomac,"  they  say 2491 

All  Scottish  legends  did  his  fancy  fashion 3595 

All  that  he  came  to  give 3001 

All  that  I  know 1321 

All  the  bellsof  heaven  may  ring 254 

All  the  breath  and  the  bloom  of  the  year  in  the  bag  of  one  bee. .  .     689 

All  the  earth  a  hush  of  white 1166 

All  the  flowers  of  the  spring 3517 

All  thoughts,  all  passions,  all  delights 1173 

All  through  the  golden  weather 985 

All  through  the  sultry  hours  of  June 1580 

All  women  born  are  so  perverse 1903 

Allons,  enfants  de  la  Patrie 3836 

All's  over,  then:  does  truth  sound  bitter 848 

Along  a  river-side,  I  know  not  where 2488 

Along  the  garden  ways  just  now 647 

Along  the  field  as  we  came  by 856 

Along  the  lane  beside  the  mead 744 

Aloof  upon  the  day's  immeasured  dome 1581 

Although  I  enter  not 792 

Am  I  sincere?    I  say  I  dote 1755 

Amid  the  cloistered  gloom  of  Aachen's  aisle 3597 

Amid  the  fairest  things  that  grow 1129 

Amid  the  chapel's  chequered  gloom 11 24 

Among  his  books  he  sits  all  day 1019 

An  ancient  story  I'll  tell  you  anon 2707 

An  apple  orchard  smells  like  wine 3387 

An  Austrian  army,  awfully  arrayed 2072 

An  empty  sky,  a  world  of  heather 968 

An  evil  Spirit  (your  Beauty)  haunts  me  still 1243 

An  old  lane,  an  old  gate,  an  old  house  by  a  tree 3233 

And  all  is  well,  though  faith  and  form 2904 

And  all  the  songs  that  I  might  sing 2564 

And  are  ye  sure  the  news  is  true 1217 

And  did  thy  sapphire  shallop  slip 5 

And  is  this — Yarrow? — This  the  Stream 2586 

And  thou  hast  walked  about  (how  strange  a  story!) 2116 

"And  where  have  you  been,  my  Mary" 238 

"And  where  now.  Bayard,  will  thy  footsteps  tend" 3658 

"And  ye  sail  walk  in  silk  attire" 943 

And  yet  I  cannot  reprehend  the  flight 1240 

And  yet  I  know  past  all  doubting,  truly.  . ji  :^     971 

Angel,  hast  thou  betrayed  me?    Long  ago tui  i'l;.; .:  ,2(81:6 


Index  of  First   Lines  39^7 

PAGE 

Angels  from  the  realms  of  glory .    .  3798 

Anger  in  its  time  and  place 113 

"Annan  water's  wading  deep" 1062 

Annie  Shore,  'twas,  sang  last  night .  1057 

April,  April 1354 

Aramantha,  sweet  and  fair 533 

"Are  women  fair?"  Ay!  wondrous  fair  to  see  too igo2 

Arethusa  arose 14 18 

Ariel  to  Miranda: — Take 3126 

Around  the  child  bend  all  the  three 356 

Around  this  lo\ely  valley  rise 1364 

Art  thou  poor,  yet  hast  thou  golden  sluml)crs 2981 

As,  a  fond  mother,  when  the  day  is  o'er 1301 

As  a  naked  man  I  go 2819 

As  a  twig  trembles,  which  a  bird 314 

As  an  old  mercer  in  some  sleepy  town 1301 

As  an  unperfect  actor  on  the  stage 1247 

As,  at  a  railway  junction,  men 3037 

As  beautiful  Kitty  one  morning  was  tripping 751; 

As  beneath  the  moon  I  walked 3370 

As  doctors  give  physic  by  way  of  prevention 1861 

As  father  Adam  first  was  fooled 1919 

As  I  came  down  from  Lebanon .  2637 

As  I  came  round  the  harbor  buoy !* 1613 

As  I  in  hoary  winter's  night 208 

As  I  laye  a-thynkynge,  a-thynkyngc,  a-thynkynge 33SQ 

As  I  look  back  upon  your  first  embrace 1166 

As  I  was  going  to  St.  Ives 64 

As  I  was  walking  all  alane 2680 

As  I  was  walking  up  the  street 541 

As  I  went  down  by  Hastings  Mill  I  lingered  in  my  going 1591 

As  I  went  down  the  hill  I  heard 395 

As  I  went  through  a  garden  gap .  64 

As  I  wer  readen  ov  a  stwone ...  3569 

As  in  smooth  oil  the  razor  best  is  whet.  >,(,..  .;>.,,- 1915 

As  it  fell  upon  a  day ,...,,.) 1546 

As  Joseph  was  a-waukin' .■ 209 

"  As  like  the  Woman  as  you  can" 1900 

As  near  Portobello  lying 2415 

As  nestling  at  thy  feet  in  peace  I  lay 2231 

As  one  that  for  a  weary  space  has  lain 3083 

As  ships,  becalmed  at  eve,  that  lay .^ 3033 

As  slow  our  ship  her  foamy  track i,v:  .,y.-.  3360 

As  soft  as  silk,  as  white  as  milk : ;  ]■.•:■  [  .:      62 

As  the  sin  that  was  sweet  in  the  sinning .'......  1953 

As  through  the  land  at  eve  we  went 1168 

As  toilsome  I  wandered  Virginia's  woods 3004 

As  Tom  and  his  wife  were  discoursing  one  day 1909 

As  Tommy  Snooks  and  Bessy  Brooks 37 

As  when  the  shadow  of  the  .sun's  eclipse 2553 

Ask  if  I  love  thee?    Oh,  smiles  cannot  tell 1215 

Ask  me  no  more;  the  moon  may  draw  the  sea 875 

Ask  me  no  more  where  Jove  bestows 5,30 

Ask  me  why  I  send  you  here 149.S 

Ask  not  the  cause  why  sullen  Spring 934 

Ask  nothing  more  of  me.  Sweet 903 

At  Cato's  Head  in  Ru.ssell  Street 1806 

At  Cregy  by  Somme  in  Ponthieu 2352 

At  dawn,  when  England's  childish  tongue 1483 

At  evening  when  the  lamp  is  lit ISQ 

At  five  o'clock  he  milks  the  cow 42 

At  Flores  in  the  /Vzores  Sir  Richard  Grenville  lay 2377 


39^^ 


Index  of  First  Lines 


PAGE 

At  Haroun's  court  it  chanced,  upon  a  time i860 

At  her  fair  hands  how  have  I  grace  entreated 59g 

At  least  it  was  a  life  of  swords 3006 

At  midnight,  in  his  guarded  tent 2453 

At  night  when  sick  folk  wakeful  lie 3429 

At  Paris  it  was,  at  the  Opera  there 889 

At  setting  day  and  rising  morn 940 

At  sixteen  years,  she  knew  no  care 1032 

At  the  corner  of  Wood  street,  when  dayhght  appears 281 

At  the  gate  of  the  West  I  stand 3052 

At  the  king's  gate  the  subtle  noon 2985 

At  the  last,  tenderly 3494 

At  the  mid  hour  of  night,  when  stars  are  weeping,  I  fly 1079 

At  the  midnight,  in  the  silence  of  the  sleep-time 3503 

At  the  Midsummer,  when  the  hay  was  down 1099 

Attend,  all  ye  who  list  to  hear  our  noble  England's  praise 2370 

Augustus  was  a  chubby  lad 122 

Auld  Daddy  Darkness  creeps  frae  his  hole 71 

Avenge,  O  Lord,  thy  slaughtered  saints,  whose  bones 2404 

Awake,  ^Eolian  lyre,  awake 3091 

Awake!  awake!  the  stars  are  pale,  the  east  is  russet  gray 3016 

Awake,  my  heart,  to  be  loved,  awake,  awake 505 

Awake !  the  dawn  is  on  the  hills 700 

Awake  thee,'  my  lady-love 703 

Awake,  ye  nations,  slumbering  supine 2552 

Away,  away  in  the  northland 143 

Away!  let  naught  to  love  displeasing.  ...: 1221 

Away  with  your  fictions  of  flimsy  romance 686 

Ay,  tear  her  tattered  ensign  down 2456 

"Aye,  squire,"  said  Stevens,  "they  back  him  at  evens" 3344 

Azaleas — whitest  of  white 1467 

B 

Baa,  baa,  black  sheep,  have  you  any  wool 36 

Baby  wants  his  breakfast , 56 

Bachelor's  Hall!  what  a  quare-lookin'  place  it  is 1970 

Back  she  came  through  the  trembUng  dusk 1050 

Back  to  the  flower-town,  side  by  side 3626 

Backward,  turn  backward,  O  Time,  in  your  flight 465 

Balkis  was  in  her  marble  town 3215 

Baloo,  loo,  lammy,  now  baloo,  my  dear 8r 

Balow,  my  babe,  he  still  and  sleep 1037 

Barber,  barber,  shave  a  pig 34 

Bards  of  Passion  and  of  Mirth 3090 

Barney  McGee,  there's  no  end  of  good  luck  in  you 1980 

Bartholomew  is  very  sweet 20 

Be  it  not  mine  to  steal  the  cultured  flower 1658 

Be  kind  and  tender  to  the  Frog 2081 

Be  still,  my  heart,  and  listen 916 

Be  ye  in  love  with  April-tide j  .i.i:i!;i.i  .:67o 

Beat  on  the  Tom-toms,  scatter  the  flowers j/'j  .<-J'.  DiaigS 

Beating  Heart:  we  come  again 708 

Beauties,  have  ye  seen  this  toy 479 

Beautiful  Evelyn  Hope  is  dead 1094 

Beauty  calls  and  gives  no  warning 893 

Beauty  may  be  the  path  to  highest  good 2973 

Beauty,  sweet  Love,  is  like  the  morning  dew 1241 

Because  I  had  loved  so  deeply 3479 

Because  I  have  loved  life,  I  shall  have  no  sorrow  to  die 3479 

Because  the  rose  must  fade ;;  1 , .-  .  -.  ^ 2841 

Because  the  shadows  deepened  verily .  .  ..J  ji.>l  .•;j?,^«.:!Oii. 1261 


Index  of  First   Lines  39^9 

PAGE 

Because  you  passed,  and  now  are  not 2304 

Before  I  trust  my  fate  to  thee 1 162 

Before  my  light  goes  out  forever,  if  (lod  should  give  me  choice  of 

graces 917 

Before  the  beginning  of  years 368 

Before  the  solemn  bronze  Saint  Gaudens  made 2211 

Before  the  urchin  well  could  go 536 

Before  you  kissed  me,  only  winds  of  heaven 1194 

Behave  yoursel'  before  folk 751 

Behind  him  lay  the  gray  Azores 2366 

Behind  thy  pasteboard,  on  thy  battered  hack 2950 

Behold  her,  single  in  the  field ;}^;^ 

Behold  Pelides  with  his  yellow  hair 3212 

Believe  me,  if  all  those  endearing  young  charms 624 

Ben  Battle  was  a  soldier  bold 2126 

Bend  now  thy  body  to  the  common  weight 351 

Beneath  an  Indian  palm  a  girl 963 

Beneath  the  shadow  of  dawn's  aerial  cope 2844 

Beneath  the  softly  falling  snow 3427 

Beneath  the  warrior's  helm,  behold 1748 

Beneath  these  fruit-tree  boughs  that  shed 1541 

Beneath  this  stony  roof  reclined 1640 

Beside  the  dead  I  knelt  for  prayer 3773 

Best  and  Brightest,  come  away 1667 

Better  trust  all,  and  be  deceived 2919 

Between  the  dark  and  the  daylight 252 

Between  the  sunset  and  the  sea 1160 

Beware  the  deadly  Sitting  habit 2036 

Beyond  the  East  the  sunrise,  beyond  the  West  the  sea 1679 

Beyond  the  ferry  water 992 

Beyond  the  last  horizon's  rim 3577 

Beyond  the  low  marsh-meadows  and  the  beach 1590 

Beyond  the  smiling  and  the  weeping 3490 

Bid  adieu,  adieu,  adieu 1 170 

Bid  me  to  live,  and  I  will  live 595 

Bird  of  the  wilderness 1566 

Birds  are  singing  round  my  window 1522 

Blessings  on  thee,  little  man 261 

Blest  be  the  tie  that  binds 3801 

Blest  pair  of  Sirens,  pledges  of  Heaven's  joy 3125 

Blossom  of  the  almond  trees 1466 

Blossom  on  the  plum 1351 

Blow,  blow,  thou  winter  wind 3039 

Blow,  bugles,  blow,  soft  and  sweet  and  low 2316 

Blow  gently  over  my  garden 3727 

Blow  high,  blow  low!  let  tempest  tear 942 

Blow  out,  you  bugles,  over  the  rich  Dead 2545 

Blow  softly,  thrush,  upon  the  hush 1581 

Blow,  wind,  blow!  and  go,  mill,  go 37 

Blown  in  the  morning,  thou  shalt  fade  ere  noon 1500 

Blue  gulf  all  around  us 1626 

Blue,  pink  and  yellow  houses,  and,  afar 3374 

Blue  sky,  green  fields,  and  lazy  yellow  sun 1171 

Bobby  Shaftoe's  gone  to  sea 38 

Bobolink !  that  in  the  meadow 153 1 

Bonnie  wee  thing!  cannie  wee  thing 622 

Bonny  Kilmeny  gaed  up  the  glen 21151 

Boon  Nature  to  the  woman  bows 386 

Boot,  saddle,  to  horse,  and  away 2284 

Booth  led  boldly  with  his  big  i)ass  drum 3S93 

Bow  down,  my  song,  before  her  presence  high 1274 

Bowed  by  the  weight  of  centuries,  he  leans 3041 


39^0  Index  of  First   Lines 

PAGE 

Brave  as  the  firstborn  flame  upsprings  the  statue 337 3 

Brave  flowers — that  I  could  gallant  it  like  you 1466 

Break,  break,  break _. 472 

Breathless,  we  flung  us  on  the  windy  hill 1270 

Bright  be  the  skies  that  cover  thee 270 

Bright  Star  of  Beauty!  on  whose  eyelids  sit 1243 

Bright  Star!  would  I  were  steadfast  as  thou  art 3489 

Brightest  and  best  of  the  Sons  of  the  morning 210 

Bring  me  my  dead 3663 

Bring  me  wine,  but  wine  which  never  grew 2964 

Brothers  in  blood!    They  who  this  wrong  began 2562 

Brow  bender,  eye  peeper 58 

Brown's  for  Lalage,  Jones  for  Lelia 1761 

Burly,  dozing  humble-bee 15 15 

Bury  me  deep  when  I  am  dead 1122 

Bury  the  Great  Duke 3672 

But  do  not  let  us  quarrel  any  more 839 

"But,  Lord,"  she  said,  "my  shoulders  still  are  strong" 3577 

Buttercups  and  daisies 117  — 

By  copse  and  hedgerow,  waste  and  wall 1491 

By  day  my  timid  passions  stand 714 

By  every  light,  in  every  pose 2869 

By  Nebo's  lonely  mountain 3736 

By  orange  grove  and  palm-tree,  we  walked  the  southern  shore .  .  .  1436 

By  scattered  rocks  and  turbid  waters  shifting i494 

By  seven  vineyards  on  one  hill 680 

By  the  flow  of  the  inland  river 230S 

By  the  merest  chance,  in  the  twilight  gloom 1149 

By  the  old  Moulmein  Pagoda,  lookin'  eastward  to  the  sea 2638 

By  the  rosy  cliffs  of  Devon,  on  a  green  hill's  crest 659 

By  the  rude  bridge  that  arched  the  flood 2205 

By  the  waters  of  Life  we  sat  together 1222 

By  this  he  knew  she  wept  with  waking  eyes 1264 

By  what  word's  power,  the  key  of  paths  untrod 1255 

Bye,  baby  bunting 36 


CaU  for  the  Robin-redbreast  and  the  wren 3430 

Call  me  not  dead  when  I,  indeed,  have  gone 3502 

"  Call  Rose  Costara  " 3055 

Calm  on  the  bosom  of  thy  God 3551 

Calm  was  the  day,  and  through  the  trembling  air 11 78 

Came,  on  a  Sabbath  morn,  my  sweet 567 

Can  it  be  right  to  give  what  I  can  give 1278 

Canary-birds  feed  on  sugar  and  seed 2080 

Care-charmer  Sleep,  son  of  the  sable  Night 1242 

" Cassez-vous,  cassez-vous,  cassez-vous" 2087 

Catch  her  and  hold  her  if  you  can 728 

Charm  me  asleep,  and  melt  me  so 3123 

Cheeks  as  soft  as  July  peaches 10 

Chicken-skin,  delicate,  white 1781 

Child,  child,  love  while  you  can 512 

Children,  do  you  ever 436 

Children,  you  are  very  little 100 

Chloe,  why  wish  you  that  your  years 603 

Chloe's  a  nymph  in  flowery  groves 533 

Christmas  is  here 2008 

City  of  mist  and  rain  and  blown  gray  spaces 2603 

Clasp  her  and  hold  her  and  love  her ii44 

Clear  air  and  grassy  lea 1645 

Clear  and  cool,  clear  and  cool 141S 


Index  of  First  Lines  39^1 


PAGE 

Close  his  eyes;  his  work  is  done : . . .    2315 

Closes  and  courts  and  lanes 2598 

Clouds  spout  upon  her 1 133 

Clubby!  thou  surely  art,  I  ween 1822 

Cold  in  the  earth — and  the  deep  snow  piled  above  thee 10Q5 

Columbia,  Columbia,  to  glory  arise 2202 

"  Come  a  little  nearer,  doctor, — thank  you;  let  me  take  the  cup" .  .   3333 

Come,  all  ye  jolly  shepherds 775 

Come  and  see  her  as  she  stands 344 

Come,  bring  with  a  noise 223 

Come,  Celia,  let's  agree  at  last 612 

Come,  cheer  up,  my  lads!  'tis  to  glory  we  steer 2280 

Come,  Chloe,  and  give  me  sweet  kisses 685 

"Come,  come,"  said  Tom's  father,  "at  your  time  of  life" if)i8 

Come  cuddle  close  in  daddy's  coat 245 

Come,  dear  children,  let  us  away 102 1 

Come,  dear  old  comrade,  you  and  1 3002 

Come  down  at  dawn  from  windless  hills 1436 

Come  follow,  heart  upon  your  sleeve 1681 

Come  hither,  Evan  Cameron 2394 

Come,  Holy  Ghost,  thou  fire  divine 3780 

Come  in  the  evening,  or  come  in  the  morning 638 

Come  into  the  garden,  Maud 706 

Come,  let  us  plant  the  apple-tree 1411 

Come,  listen  to  another  song 2734 

Come,  Hsten  to  me,  you  gallants  so  free 2692 

Come  listen  to  the  story  of  brave  Lathrop  and  his  men 2406 

Come  little  babe,  come  silly  soul 1036 

"Come,  little  cottage  girl,  you  seem" 1954 

Come  live  with  me  and  be  my  Love 584 

Come  Micky  and  Molly  and  dainty  Dolly 2176 

Come,   see   the  Dolphin's   anchor   forged!   'tis  at  a  white   heat 

now. 1606 

Come,  Sleep,  and  with  thy  sweet  deceiving 3220 

Come  Sleep!  O  Sleep,  the  certain  knot  of  peace 1236 

Come,  spur  away 1649 

Come,  stack  arms,  men!  Pile  on  the  rails 2288 

Come  thou,  who  art  the  wine  and  wit 3454 

Come  to  me,  dearest,  I'm  lonely  without  thee 982 

Come  to  me  in  my  dreams,  and  then 967 

Come  unto  these  yellow  sands 233 

Come  walk  with  me  along  this  willowed  lane 1362 

Come  when  the  leaf  comes,  angle  with  me 1663 

Come  when  you're  called 99 

Comes  the  lure  of  green  things  growing 1682 

Comes  the  New  Year;  wailing,  the  north  winds  blow 1274 

Comfort  thee,  C)  thou  mourner,  yet  awhile 3625 

Comin'  through  the  craigs  o'  Kyle 747 

Comin'  through  the  rye,  poor  body 727 

Comrades,  leave  me  here  a  little,  while  as  yet  'tis  early  morn ....   3295 

Condemned  to  Hope's  delusive  mine 3628 

Confide  ye  aye  in  Providence 2902 

Conscience  is  instinct  bred  in  the  house 2960 

"Corporal  (ireen!"  the  orderly  cried 2313 

Could  love  for  ever 491 

Could  ye  come  back  to  me,  Douglas,  Douglas 1099 

Count  each  affliction,  whether  light  or  grave 3352 

"Courage!''  he  said,  and  pointed  toward  the  land 3178 

Crabbed  .\ge  and  Youth 717 

Creator  Spirit,  by  whose  aid 3782 

Creep  awa',  my  bairnie,  creep  afore  ye  gang 256 

Creep  into  thy  narrow  bed 2944 


39^2  Index  of  First  Lines 

PAGE 

Cricket,  chirping  in  the  autumn  twilight 3101 

Cupid  and  my  Campaspe  played 520 

Cupid  once  upon  a  bed 483 

Curled  up  and  sitting  on  her  feet 739 

Curly  locks!  Curly  locks 37 

Cut  your  nails  on  Monday,  cut  them  for  news 67 

D 

Da  spreeng  ees  com';  but  oh,  da  joy 306 

Damis,  an  author  cold  and  weak it)i7 

Barest  thou  now,  O  soul 3494 

Dark  as  the  clouds  of  even 2500 

Dark,  deep  and  cold  the  current  flows 3576 

Daughter  of  her  whose  face,  and  lofty  name 1271 

Daughter,  thou  art  come  to  die 1051 

Dawn — and  a  magical  stillness:  on  earth,  quiescence  profound.  .  .    1308 

Dawn  drives  the  dreams  away,  yet  some  abide 424 

Day  and  night  my  thoughts  incline 2014 

Day  of  my  life!  where  can  she  get 1771 

Day  of  wrath,  that  day  of  burning 3777 

Days  of  my  youth 352 

De  gray  owl  sing  fum  de  chimbly  top 2043 

De  massa  ob  de  sheepfol' 3755 

"De  mortuis  nil  nisi  bonum,"  when 3367 

Dead!  Is  it  possible!  He,  the  bold  rider 2529 

Dead!  One  of  them  shot  by  the  sea  in  the  east 3SSS 

Dear  Alice!  You'll  laugh  when  you  know  it 1807 

Dear  and  great  Angel,  wouldst  thou  only  leave 2620 

"Dear  as  remembered  kisses  after  death" 3475 

Dear  Chloe,  how  blubbered  is  that  pretty  face 766 

Dear  chorister,  who  from  those  shadows  sends 1548 

Dear  common  flower,  that  grow'st  beside  the  way 1481 

Dear  Erin,  how  sweetly  thy  green  bosom  rises 2263 

Dear  Italy!  The  sound  of  thy  soft  name 2613 

Dear  Lucy,  you  know  what  my  wash  is 1987 

"Dear  me!    what  signifies  a  pin " 108 

Dear  Mr.  Editor:  I  wish  to  say 1931 

Dear!  of  all  happy  in  the  hour,  most  blest 2545 

Dear,  they  are  praising  your  beauty 582 

Dear!  why  should  you  command  me  to  my  rest 1244 

Death,  be  not  proud,  though  some  have  called  thee 3348 

Death  stands  above  me,  whispering  low 3491 

Deep  on  the  convent-roof  the  snows 3767 

Der  Kaiser  of  dis  Faterland 1849 

Diaphenia  Uke  the  daffadowndilly 522 

Dictes-moy  ou,  n'en  quel  pays 3837 

Did  ye  he.ar  of  the  Widow  Malone 1973 

Dies  irae,  dies  ilia 3819 

Dip  down  upon  the  northern  shore 1338 

Dismal  and  purposeless  and  gray 3353 

Do  I  love  thee?    Ask  the  bee 651 

Do  not  conceal  those  radiant  eyes =     529 

Do  ye  hear  the  children  weeping,  O  my  brothers 283 

Do  you  ask  what  the  birds  say?    The  Sparrow,  the  Dove 141 

Do  you  fear  the  force  of  the  wind 1684 

Do  you  remember,  my  sweet,  absent  son 320 

Do  you  remember  when  you  heard 788 

Does  the  road  wind  up-hill  all  the  way? 34^5 

Dominic  came  riding  down,  sworded,  straight  and  splendid 994 

Don't  you  remember  sweet  Alice,  Ben  Bolt 47° 

Doth  it  not  thrill  thee,  Poet 3102 


Index  of  First  Lines  3923 

PAGE 

Doubt  you  to  whom  my  muse  these  notes  intendeth 518 

Down  around  the  quay  they  he,  the  ships  that  sail  to  sea 1604 

Down  by  the  sallej^  gardens  my  love  and  I  did  meet 928 

Down  in  a  green  and  shady  bed 106 

Down  in  the  bleak  December  bay 2389 

Down  the  world  with  Marna 1 686 

Down  toward  the  deep-blue  water,  marching  to  throb  of  drum .  . .  2563 

Dow's  Flat.    That's  its  name 2171 

Drake  he's  in  his  hammock  an'  a  thousand  mile  away 3607 

Draw  back  the  cradle  curtains,  Kate 22 

Dreamer,  waiting  for  darkness  with  sorrowful,  drooping  eyes 3733 

Drink  to  me  only  with  thine  eyes 591 

Drink  to-day,  and  drown  all  sorrow 1991 

Dull  and  hard  the  low  wind  creaks 859 

E 

Each  day,  when  the  glow  of  sunset 311 

Each  hath  his  drug  for  Sorrow 3363 

Earl  March  looked  on  his  dying  child 1077 

Earth  has  not  anything  to  show  more  fair 2597 

Earth  with  its  dark  and  dreadful  ills 3492 

Eat  thou  and  drink;  to-morrow  thou  shalt  die 3S68 

Edith,  the  silent  stars  are  coldly  gleaming 3217 

E'en  like  two  little  bank-dividing  brooks 3742 

Eight  bells!    Eight  bells!  their  clear  tone  tells 3760 

Eight  fingers 59 

Ein  feste  Burg  ist  unser  Gott 3831 

Elizabeth,  Lizzy,  Betsy  and  Bess. 63 

Emmy's  exquisite  youth  and  her  virginal  air 1058 

Enamored  architect  of  airy  rhyme 3083 

England,  I  stand  on  thy  imperial  ground 2229 

Enough!  we're  tired,  my  heart  and  1 1083 

Ere  the  long  roll  of  the  ages  end 2265 

Ere  the  steamer  bore  him  eastward,  Sleary  was  engaged  to  marry .  .  2046 

Es  braust  ein  Ruf  wie  Donnerhall 3833 

Escape  me 638 

Eternal  Spirit  of  the  chainless  Mind 3273 

Ethereal  minstrel!  pilgrim  of  the  sky 1566 

Eve,  with  her  basket,  was 2816 

Even  such  is  Time,  that  takes  in  trust 3453 

Evening  red  and  morning  gray 66 

Ever  let  the  Fancy  roam 3166 

Ev-er-y  child  who  has  the  use 2082 

Every  evening  Baby  goes 84 

Every  week  of  every  season  out  of  English  ports  go  forth 2242 

F 

Fain  would  I  change  that  note 487 

Faintly  as  tolls  the  evening  chime _.  1426 

Fair  are  the  flowers  and  the  children,  but  their  subtle  suggestion  is 

fairer 2870 

Fair  cousin  mine!  the  golden  days 1724 

Fair  Daffodils,  we  weep  to  see i474 

Fair  flower,  that  dost  so  comely  grow .,. , 1488 

Fair  Hebe  I  left,  with  a  cautious  design - . ... ,.  721 

Fair  is  my  Love,  and  cruel  as  she's  fair 123Q 

Fair  is  my  love  for  April's  in  her  face ■„  u„, 520 

Fair  is  the  night,  and  fair  the  day ;.'.....-.. 977 

Fair  pledges  of  a  fruitful  tree 1504 

Fair  stood  the  wind  for  France 2361 


39^4  Index  of  First  Lines 

PAGE 

Fairest  of  the  fairest,  rival  of  the  rose 7Q3 

False  though  she  be  to  me  and  love 613 

Fame  is  a  food  that  dead  men  eat 3013 

Fancies  are  but  streams 3142 

Far  beyond  the  sky-line,  where  the  steamers  go 3230 

Far  fall  the  day  when  England's  realm  shall  see 2552 

Fare  thee  well!  and  if  for  ever 950 

Farewell! — but  whenever  you  welcome  the  hour 3015 

Farewell!  if  ever  fondest  prayer 1002 

Farewell,  my  Youth!  for  now  we  needs  must  part 353 

Farewell,  rewards  and  fairies 244 

Farewell,  thou  busy  world,  and  may 1641 

Farewell  to  Lochaber,  an'  farewell  my  Jean g40 

Far-fetched  and  dear-bought,  as  the  proverb  rehearses 3086 

Farragut,  Farragut 2507 

Fast  falls  the  snow,  O  lady  mine 1171 

Father  and  I  went  down  to  camp 2ig8 

Father  calls  me  William,  sister  calls  me  Will 220 

Father,  I  will  not  ask  for  wealth  or  fame 2969 

Father  of  all!  in  every  age 3788 

Fear  death? — to  feel  the  fog  in  my  throat 3484 

Fear  no  more  the  heat  o'  the  sun 3431 

Few,  in  the  days  of  early  youth 408 

Fill  the  bowl  with  rosy  wine 1993 

Fill  the  bumper  fair 2002 

Finding  Francesca  full  of  tears,  I  said 278 

First  came  the  primrose 1462 

First  time  he  kissed  me,  he  but  only  kissed 1282 

Five-and-thirty  black  slaves 3132 

Five  years  have  passed;  five  summers  with  the  length 2578 

Flame  at  the  core  of  the  world 1151 

Fleet  Street!  Fleet  Street!  Fleet  Street  in  the  morning 2597 

Flour  of  England,  fruit  of  Spain 62 

Flow  down,  cold  rivulet,  to  the  sea 3354 

Flow  gently,  sweet  Afton,  among  thy  green  braes 1425 

Flower  of  the  medlar 1 167 

F'lowers  I  would  bring  if  flowers  could  make  thee  fairer 546 

Flowers, — that  have  died  upon  my  Sweet 3202 

Follow  a  shadow,  it  still  flies  you 811 

For  a  day  and  a  night  Love  sang  to  us,  played  with  us 978 

For  England,  when  with  favoring  gale 1632 

"For  ever  with  the  Lord" 3702 

For  every  evil  under  the  sun 65 

For  her  gait,  if  she  be  walking 528 

For  me  the  jasmine  buds  unfold 1 148 

For  the  sake  of  a  weathered  gray  city  set  high  on  a  hill 2621 

For  the  sole  edification 2022 

For  thee,  O  dear  dear  Country 3689 

For  want  of  a  nail,  the  shoe  was  lost .  .  . , 66 

Forget  not  yet  the  tried  intent ■.'..'. .',.'_; . ; . .  .'.'.T.'J;.. . .     583 

Formed  long  ago,  yet  made  today 63 

Forty  Viziers  saw  I  go 1903 

Forty  years  on,  when  afar  and  asunder 421 

Four  Seasons  fill  the  measure  of  the  year 2 

Four  things  a  man  must  learn  to  do 2918 

Four  winds  blowing  through  the  sky 850 

Four  years! — and  didst  thou  stay  above 1828 

Fragoletta,  blessed  one 12 

Free  are  the  Muses,  and  where  freedom  is 2541 

French  and  Russian  they  matter  not 2549 

Fresh  Spring,  the  herald  of  love's  mighty  king 1 234 

Friends  and  loves  we  have  none,  nor  wealth,  nor  blest  abode 2863 


Index  of  First  Lines  39-5 

PAGE 

Friendship,  like  love,  is  but  a  name 1853 

Frisky  as  a  lambkin 99 

From  Greenland's  icy  mountains 3795 

From  harmony,  from  heavenly  harmony 3112 

From  Stirhng  Castle  we  had  seen 2584 

From  the  depth  of  the  dreamy  decline  of  the  dawn  through  a  not- 
able nimbus  of  nebulous  moonshine 1944 

From  the  Desert  I  come  to  thee 709 

From  the  forests  and  highlands 3162 

From  the  heart  of  the  mighty  mountains  strong-souled  for  my  fate 

I  came 2571 

From  the  madding  crowd  they  stood  apart 18S6 

From  their  folded  mates  they  wander  far 3058 

Frown  the  Laird  on  the  Lord:  "So,  red-handed  I  catch  thee".  . .  .  781 

Frowning,  the  mountain  stronghold  stood 2464 

Full  fathom  five  my  father  lies 35 15 

Full  happy  is  the  man  who  comes  at  last 425 

Full  knee-deep  lies  the  winter  snow 1395 

Full  many  a  glorious  morning  have  I  seen 1248 

Full  many  a  project  that  never  was  hatched 2034 

Furl  that  Banner,  for  'tis  weary 2515 

G 

Gae  bring  my  guid  auld  harp  ance  mair 2268 

Gaily  bedight 3397 

Gamarra  is  a  dainty  steed 1520 

Gather  ye  rosebuds,  wliile  ye  may 328 

Gaudeamus  igitur 3829 

Gay,  guiltless  pair 3754 

Gay  little  Dandelion 136 

Genteel  in  personage 722 

Gently,  Lord,  oh,  gently  lead  us .  .  .  ._ 3808 

Get  up,  get  up  for  shame,  the  blooming  morn 1359 

Girl  of  the  red  mouth 568 

Git  ycr  little  sage  hens  ready 2187 

Give  a  man  a  horse  he  can  ride 617 

Give  a  rouse,  then,  in  the  Maytimc.  .  .  .Mui  -.ff^ 2016 

Give  all  to  love .' 502 

"  Give  mc  a  fillet.  Love,"  quoth  I 924 

Give  me  kisses!  Do  not  stay 690 

Give  me  more  love,  or  more  disdain 598 

dive  me  my  scallop-shell  of  quiet 345i 

Give  me  no  mansions  ivory  white. 253 

Give  place,  you  ladies,  and  begone 378 

Give  to  me  the  life  I  love 1674 

"Give  us  a  song,"  the  soldiers  cried 2285 

Glass  antique,  'twixt  thee  and  Nell 1766 

Glooms  of  the  live-oaks,  beautiful-braided  and  woven 1426 

Go  and  catch  a  falling  star 592 

Go  fetch  to  me  a  pint  o'  wine 946 

Go,  for  they  call  you.  Shepherd,  frorn  the  hill 3305 

Go,  forget  mc!    Why  should  sorrow ,....,.  ,.„;  .  t>53 

Go  from  me.    Yet  I  feel  that  I  shall  stand 1277 

Go,  happy  Rose,  and,  interwove 931 

Go,  little  book,  and  wish  to  all ." .  .  .   3106 

Go,  lovely  Rose 930 

Go,  patter  to  lui)bers  and  swabs,  do  ye  see 1597 

Go,  songs,  for  ended  is  our  brief,  sweet  play 3106 

Go,  Soul,  the  Body's  guest 3449 

Go  to  dark  Gethsemane 3799 

Go  to  liini,  ah,  go  to  him,  and  hft  your  eyes  aglow  to  him 1029 


3926 


Index  of  First  Lines 


PAGE 

Go  way,  fiddle!  folks  is  tired  o'  hearin'  you  a-squawkin' 2igo 

God  be  with  thee,  my  beloved, — God  be  with  thee g6o 

God  bless  the  King — I  mean  the  faith's  defender 1918 

"  God  bless  the  man  who  first  invented  sleep" 2024 

God  hath  been  patient  long.    In  eons  past 3734 

God  keep  you  safe,  my  little  love gSg 

God  made  my  lady  lovely  to  behold 1260 

God  makes  sech  nights,  all  white  an'  still 736 

God  meant  me  to  be  hungry 3736 

God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way 3796 

God  of  our  fathers,  known  of  old 2248 

God  prosper  long  our  noble  king 2695 

God  rest  you,  merry  gentlemen 201 

God  rest  you,  rest  you,  rest  you,  Ireland's  dead 2261 

God  save  our  gracious  King 223 

God  spake  three  times  and  saved  Van  Elsen's  soul 3574 

God,  though  this  life  is  but  a  wraith 2940 

God,  we  don't  like  to  complain 3059 

God  with  His  million  cares 1328 

Godfrey  Gordon  Gustavus  Gare 114 

God's  lark  at  morning  I  would  be 115 

God's  pity  on  poor  kings 2998 

Goethe  in  Weimar  sleeps,  and  Greece 3680 

Going  my  way  of  old 1 195 

Golden  slumbers  kiss  your  eyes 75 

Gone  are  those  three,  those  sisters  rare 1090 

Gone  were  but  the  winter  cold 3S6i 

Good-by,  good-by  to  Summer 1561 

Good-bye,  proud  world!  I  am  going  home 2995 

Good  is  an  Orchard,  the  Saint  saith 1414 

Good  King  Wenceslas  looked  out 37S2 

Good  little  boys  should  never  say g8 

"  Good  morrow,  my  lord! "  in  the  sky  alone 180 

Good  my  King,  in  your  garden  close 11 23 

Good-night?  ah!  no;  the  hour  is  ill 703 

Good-night,  dear  friend!    I  say  good-night  to  thee 1121 

Good-night.  Good-night.  Ah,  good  the  night 679 

Good-night!    I  have  to  say  good-night 711 

Good  people  all,  of  every  sort 2091 

Good  people  all,  with  one  accord 2092 

Goosey,  goosey,  gander 36 

"Got  any  boys?"  the  Marshal  said 2147 

Gr^ndraither,  think  not  I  forget,  when  I  come  back  to  town 1033 

Grandmother's  mother:  her  age,  I  guess 1738 

Great  God,  I  ask  thee  for  no  meaner  pelf 2961 

Great  men  have  been  among  us;  hands  that  penned 2238 

Great  nature  is  an  army  gay 1 298 

Great  truths  are  dearly  bought.    The  common  truth 3717 

Great,  wide,  beautiful,  wonderful  world 126 

Green  be  the  turf  above  thee . 3608 

Green  little  vaulter  in  the  sunny  grass 1510 

Grow  old  along  with  me 411 

Guvener  B.  is  a  sensible  man 1839 

H 

Ha'  we  lost  the  goodliest  fere  o'  all 2814 

Hack  and  Hew  were  the  sons  of  God 3139 

Had  I  a  heart  for  falsehood  framed 620 

Had  I  but  plenty  of  money,  money  enough  and  to  spare 1865 

Had  I  the  power 3214 

Had  we  but  world  enough,  and  time 607 


Index  of  First  Lines  39^7 

PAGE 

Hail,  beauteous  stranger  of  the  grove 1536 

Hail!  Columbia,  happy  laud 2200 

Hail,  old  October,  bright  and  chill 13S3 

Hail  to  thee,  blithe  spirit 1569 

Half  a  league,  half  a  league 2473 

Halfway  up  the  Hemlock  valley  turnpike 346 

Hame,  hame,  hame,  O  hame  fain  wad  I  be 3226 

Hamelin  Town's  in  Brunswick 192 

Hans  Breitmann  gife  a  barty 2152 

Happy  boy,  happy  boy 2555 

Happy  insect,  what  can  be 1509 

Happy  the  man,  whose  wish  and  care 1635 

Happy  those  early  days,  when  1 434 

Hark!  ah,  the  nightingale 1547 

Hark,  hark!  the  lark  at  heaven's  gate  sings 694 

Hark!  I  hear  the  tramp  of  thousands. 2487 

Hark,  my  soul!  it  is  the  Lord 3809 

Hark  you  such  sound  as  quivers?  Kings  will  hear 1385 

Has  summer  come  without  the  rose 897 

Has  there  any  old  fellow  got  mixed  with  the  boys 1745 

Hast  thou  a  charm  to  stay  the  morning-star 1430 

Hast  thou  named  all  the  birds  without  a  gun 3076 

Hath  this  world,  without  me  wrought 2970 

Hats  off 2208 

Have  dark  Eg>'ptians  stolen  thee  away 323 

Have  little  care  that  Life  is  brief 2858 

Have  you  ever  heard  of  the  Sugar-Plum  Tree 69 

Have  you  heard  of  the  wonderful  one-hoss  shay 1871 

Have  you  heard  the  story  that  gossips  tell ,..,...   2504 

Have  you  not  heard  the  poets  tell ..j  w,.»>(kUii.H.>-  i   izS 

Have  you  not  noted,  in  some  family ;..'...■,...!>.•  1256 

He  came  all  so  still 201 

He  came  and  took  me  by  the  hand 3776 

He  came  to  call  me  back  from  death 911 

He  came  to  the  desert  of  London  town 3589 

He  clasps  the  crag  with  crooked  hands iS39 

He  comes, — he  comes, — the  Frost  Spirit  comes!    You  may  trace  his 

footsteps  now 1388 

He  did  not  wear  his  scarlet  coat 2773 

He  found  her  by  the  ocean's  moaning  verge 1268 

He  gave  us  all  a  good-by  cheerily 1629 

He  had  been  singing — but  I  had  not  heard  his  voice 3665 

He  has  come  the  way  of  the  fighting  men  and  fought  by  the  rules 

of  the  Game 2942 

He  is  gone  on  the  mountain 2351 

He  is  the  despots'  Despot.    All  must  bide 3446 

He  killed  the  noble  Mudjokivis 1950 

He  lived  in  that  past  Georgian  day 1777 

He  liveth  long  who  livelh  well 37 16 

He  loves  not  well  whose  love  is  bold 671 

He  presented  his  bill 2085 

He  said:  "The  shaciows  darken  down" 1090 

He  sang  above  the  vineyards  of  the  world 3045 

He  that  is  down  needs  fear  no  fall 3714 

He  that  loves  a  rosy  cheek 817 

He  that  would  thrive .!;.. .,:.  1.;. 65 

He  thought  he  saw  an  Elephant j .  J 2060 

He  took  the  great  harp  wearily , 2823 

He  who  died  at  .-^zan  sends -J. 3582 

He  who  in  his  pocket  hath  no  money .1 1917 

He  whom  a  dream  hath  possessed  knoweth  no  more  of  doubting. .    2938 
Head  the  ship  for  England 1633 


39^8  Index  of  First  Lines 

PAGE 

Hear,  O  Self-Giver,  infinite  as  good 1276 

Hear  the  sledges  with  the  bells 3174 

Hear,  ye  ladies  that  despise 482 

Hearken,  the  feet  of  the  Destroyer  tread 2553 

Heart  free,  hand  free 1303 

Heart  of  my  heart,  my  life,  my  light ' 676 

Heart  of  my  heart,  the  world  is  young 670 

Hearts  good  and  true 124 

Hearts,  like  doors,  will  ope  with  ease.  . 98 

Heaven  is  lovelier  than  the  stars 2906 

Heaven  is  not  reached  at  a  single  bound 3707 

Heaven  overarches  earth  and  sea 3706 

Hector  Protector  was  dressed  all  in  green 36 

He'd  nothing  but  his  violin 1202 

Heigh-ho!  daisies  and  buttercups 429 

Helen,  thy  beauty  is  to  me 551 

Helen's  hps  are  drifting  dust 1153 

Hem  and  Haw  were  the  sons  of  sin 1887 

Hence,  all  you  vain  delights 3349 

Hence,  loathed  melancholy 3143 

Hence,  rude  winter!  crabbed  old  fellow 1394 

Hence,  vain  deluding  Joys 3147 

Her  arms  across  her  breast  she  laid 1143 

Her  eyes  are  like  forget-me-nots 267 

Her  eyes  have  seen  the  monoliths  of  kings 2847 

Her  eyes  the  glow-worm  lend  thee 695 

Her  face  was  very  fair  to  see 389 

Her  hair  was  tawny  with  gold,  her  eyes  with  purple  were  dark ...  3315 

Her  lips  were  so  near 743 

Her  suffering  ended  with  the  day .  3548 

Her  talk  was  qjl  of  woodland  things 1130 

Her  thoughts  are  like  a  flock  of  butterflies 390 

Here,  a  sheer  hulk,  lies  poor  Tom  Bowling 1628 

Here  doth  Dionysia  He 307 

Here  I  come  creeping,  creeping  everywhere 1487 

Here,  in  my  snug  little  fire-lit  chamber 460 

Here  in  the  country's  heart 1644 

Here  in  the  marshland,  past  the  battered  bridge 2326 

Here,  in  this  sequestered  close 1449 

Here  is  the  place:  right  over  the  hill 1109 

Here  is  the  place  where  Loveliness  keeps  house 1302 

Here  lie  I,  Martin  Elginbrodde 1917 

Here  lies  my  wife;  here  let  her  lie 1919 

Here  lies  our  Sovereign  Lord  the  King 191 1 

Here  lies,  whom  hound  did  ne'er  pursue 1S23 

Here  poise,  like  flowers  on  flowers,  the  butterflies 3597 

Here  shall  remain  all  tears  for  lovely  things 308S 

Here  sits  the  Lord  Mayor 58 

Here  sparrows  build  upon  the  trees 3233 

"Here  we  stan'  on  the  Constitution,  by  thunder" 1840 

Here,  where  the  world  is  quiet 34^4 

Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa' 2275 

Here's  a  mellow  cup  of  tea — golden  tea 19SS 

Here's  another  day,  dear i3Q 

Here's  the  garden  she  walked  across . .  ^ 964 

Here's  to  the  maiden  of  bashful  fifteen. 1999 

Here's  to  the  year  that's  awa' ; .'.  :k-:[l 2000 

Hey,  diddle,  diddle 33 

Hickory,  dickory,  dock 32 

Hide,  happy  damask,  from  the  stars 70s 

Hie  upon  Hielands 2714 

Higgleby,  piggleby,  my  black  hen 35 


Index  of  First  Lines  39^9 

PAGE 

High  grace,  the  dower  of  queens,  and  therewithal 1257 

Hills  o'  my  heart 2267 

His  golden  locks  Time  hath  to  silver  turned 3gg 

His  radiant  fingers  so  adorning 1328 

Ho,  pretty  page,  with  the  dimpled  chin 838 

"Ho,  sailor  of  the  sea" 1612 

"Hoi  why  dost  thou  shiver  and  shake" igg6 

Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  Almighty 3793 

Home  comes  a  lad  with  the  bonnie  hair 2307 

Home,  home  from  the  horizon  far  and  clear 674 

Home  they  brought  her  sailor  son ig3S 

Home  they  brought  her  warrior  dead iog3 

How  blest  the  maid  whose  heart — yet  free 334 

How  dear  to  this  heart  are  the  scenes  of  my  childhood 466 

How  deHcious  is  the  winning 4go 

How  do  I  love  thee?  let  me  count  the  ways 1282 

How  do  I  love  you 580 

"How  does  the  water" 1420 

How  doth  the  little  busy  bee 104 

How  falls  it,  oriole,  thou  hast  come  to  fly 1557 

How  fond  are  men  of  rule  and  place 1852 

How  good  to  lie  a  little  while 112 

How  green  the  earth,  how  blue  the  sky 3536 

How  happy  is  he  born  and  taught 2g86 

How  joyously  the  young  sea-mew 1563 

How  many  a  thing  wliich  we  cast  to  the  ground 1267 

How  many  kisses  do  I  ask 6g2 

How  many  paltry,  foolish,  painted  things 1244 

"How  many  pounds  does  the  baby  weigh " 15 

How  many  summers,  love 1223 

How  much  the  heart  may  bear,  and  yet  not  break 3382 

How  oft  against  the  sunset  sky  or  moon 1582 

How  often  in  the  summer-tide 801 

How  sad  if,  by  some  strange  new  law igo8 

How  seldom,  friend,  a  good  great  man  inherits 2860 

How  shall  I  tell  the  measure  of  my  love 1276 

How  sleep  the  brave,  who  sink  to  rest 2104 

How  slowly  creeps  the  hand  of  Time 3435 

How  soon  hath  Time,  the  subtle  thief  of  youth 3Sg 

How  still  this  quiet  cornfield  is  tonight 2547 

How  sweet  is  the  shepherd's  sweet  lot 153 

How  sweet  the  harmonies  of  afternoon 1523 

How  sweetlj'  on  the  autumn  scene 1530 

How  the  blithe  lark  runs  up  the  golden  stair 1567 

How  then  shall  man  so  order  life  that  when  his  tale  of  years  is 

told 28go 

How  vainly  men  themselves  amaze 1446 

Humpty  Dumpty  sat  on  a  wall 64 

Hush i57g 

Hush!  my  dear,  lie  still  and  slumber 7g 

Hush  your  prayers,  'tis  no  saintly  soul 3Soo 

I 

I  ain't  afeard  uv  snakes,  or  toads,  or  bugs,  or  worms,  or  mice.  .  . .  172 

I  am  a  woman — therefore  I  may  not gi2 

I  am  an  ancient  Jest 1708 

I  am  but  clay  in  thy  hands;  but  thou  art  the  all-loving  artist.  .  .  .  2g74 

I  am  content,  I  do  not  care 2g8g 

I  am  dying,  Egypt,  dying 2346 

I  am  far  frae  my  hame,  an'  I'm  weary  often  whiles 37 10 

I  am  fevered  with  the  sunset " 1688 


393°  Index  of  First   Lines 

PAGE 

I  am  gai.    I  am  poet.    I  dvell 2087 

I  am  his  Highness'  dog  at  Kew igi6 

I  am  jealous;  I  am  true 628 

I  am  just  two  and  two,  I  am  warm,  I  am  cold 685 

I  am  monarch  of  all  I  survey 3038 

I  am  the  key  that  parts  the  gates  of  Fame 3430 

I  am  the  reahty  of  things  that  seem 3086 

I  am  the  torch,  she  saith,  and  what  to  me'. 1004 

I  am  the  wind  that  wavers 680 

I  arise  from  dreams  of  thee ,     702 

I  ask  not  that  my  bed  of  death 3459 

I  asked  my  fair,  one  happy  day 726 

I  beg  you  come  to-night  and  dine 1986 

I  bring  fresh  showers  for  the  thirsting  flowers 1440 

I  bring  you  all  ray  olden  days 663 

I  came  into  the  city  and  none  knew  me 3748 

I  came  to  the  door  of  the  House  of  Love 511 

I  cannot  change  as  others  do 6ri 

I  cannot  eat  but  little  meat iggo 

I  cannot  make  him  dead 318 

I  cannot  put  the  Presence  by,  of  Him,  the  Crucified 375o 

I  care  not  for  these  ladies 524 

1  cast  these  lyric  offerings  at  your  feet 1272 

I  change,  and  so  do  women  too 1919 

I  clink  my  castanet 1337 

I  come  from  haunts  of  coot  and  hern 1416 

I  come  from  woods  enchanted 236 

I  dare  but  sing  of  you  in  such  a  strain 1271 

I  dare  not  ask  a  kiss 684 

I  did  but  look  and  love  awhile 613 

I  do  be  thinking,  lassie,  of  the  old  days  now 447 

I  do  confess  thou'rt  smooth  and  fair 808 

I  do  not  care  for  kisses.    'Tis  a  debt 1262 

I  do  not  count  the  hours  I  spend 1398 

I  do  not  love  thee! — no — I  do  not  love  thee 962 

I  do  not  own  an  inch  of  land 1647 

I  do  not  pray  for  peace  nor  ease 2940 

I  don't  go  much  on  religion 3339 

I  dreamed  that,  as  I  wandered  by  the  way 867 

I  drew  it  from  its  china  tomb 1814 

I  drink  of  the  ale  of  Southwark,  I  drink  of  the  ale  of  Chepe 2015 

I  dug,  beneath  the  cypress  shade 865 

I  envy  every  flower  that  blows 672 

I  envy  not  in  any  moods 2899 

I  envy  not  the  lark  his  song  divine 3 100 

I  fear  no  power  a  woman  wields i6S9 

I  fear  thy  kisses,  gentle  maiden 688 

I  feel  a  poem  in  my  heart  to-night 3079 

I  fill  this  cup  to  one  made  up 387 

I  fled  Him,  down  the  nights  and  down  the  days 3204 

I  flung  me  round  him 3213 

I  found  in  dreams  a  place  of  wind  and  flowers 642 

I  gaed  to  spend  a  week  in  Fife 2132 

I  gazed  upon  the  glorious  sky 3457 

1  give  my  soldier  boy  a  blade 2287 

I  give  thee  treasures  hour  by  hour ^.-/r-.'ivfl-;-  -m.-iiow/i't;    ^^^ 

I  had  a  dove,  and  the  sweet  dove  died .jp.,^.-,|.,.,;.,.|,..|.,^\,,^379 

I  had  a  little  Doggy  that  used  to  sit  and  beg.  .  . '.  .  j. ,.  .1 ..  T. . .'.       46 

I  had  a  little  husband .  . 43 

I  had  not  seen  my  son's  dear  face 3775 

I  hae  seen  great  anes  and  sat  in  great  ha's , 3238 

"I  hardly  ever  ope  my  lips,"  one  cries 1915 


Index  of  First   Lines  393^ 

PAGE 

I  have  a  little  kinsman.  .  .  .  .' . .  ..;.»•...  .s^i.^ 298 

I  ha\e  a  little  shadow  that  goes  in  and  out  with  me 158 

I  have  a  mistress,  for  perfections  rare 531 

I  have  a  name,  a  little  name 455 

I  have  a  rendezvous  with  Death 2560 

I  have  brought  the  wine 681 

I  have  got  a  new-born  sister 14 

I  have  had  playmates,  I  have  had  companions 453 

I  have  left  a  basket  of  dates 3071 

I  have  lived  and  I  have  loved 3221 

"I  have  no  name" 4 

I  have  no  wit,  no  words,  no  tears 3461 

I  have  not  where  to  lay  my  head 3481 

I  have  praised  many  loved  ones  in  my  song 3q6 

I  have  read,  in  some  old,  marvelous  tale 2863 

I  have  shut  my  little  sister  in  from  life  and  light 3057 

I  hear  a  whisper  in  the  heated  air 2638 

I  hear  in  my  heart,  I  hear  in  its  ominous  pulses 3475 

I  hear  you,  httle  bird , 3100 

I  heard  a  soldier  sing  some  trifle ,i,i,w  .jji.-. 927 

I  heard  a  thousand  blended  notes ..v....  ,.y.. 1334 

I  heard  men  saying.  Leave  hope  and  praying 3017 

I  heard  the  bells  on  Christmas  Day 211 

I  heard  the  trailing  garments  of  the  night 1327 

I  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  say 3810 

I  held  her  hand,  the  pledge  of  bliss 831 

I  held  it  truth,  with  him  who  sings 2899 

I  hid  my  heart  in  a  nest  of  roses 499 

I  hold  you  at  last  in  my  hand 15 19 

I  hope  there  is  a  resurrection  day 3553 

I  idle  stand  that  I  may  find  employ 2970 

I  in  these  flowery  meads  would  be 1664 

I  intended  an  ode 1782 

I  journeyed,  on  a  winter's  day 1926 

I  keep  walking  around  myself,  mouth  open  with  amazement 2997 

I  kneel  not  now  to  pray  that  thou 2939 

I  knew  a  much-loved  mariner 3537 

I  knew  his  house  by  the  poplar-trees 1054 

1  knew  she  lay  above  me 3549 

I  know  a  girl  with  teeth  of  pearl 734 

I  know  a  little  garden-close 894 

I  know  a  place  where  the  sun  is  like  gold. . .  .■ 1472 

I  know  a  secret,  such  a  one 667 

I  know  a  thing  that's  most  uncommon 380 

I  know,  Justine,  you  speak  me  fair 853 

I  know  not  but  in  every  leaf 3036 

I  know  not  if  I  love  her  overmuch 1264 

I  know  not  of  what  we  pondered 1736 

1  know  not  why,  hut  even  to  me 654 

1  know  that  these  poor  rags  of  womanhood 3469 

"I  know  what  you're  going  to  say,"  she  said 787 

I  know,  where  Hampshire  fronts  the  Night 1832 

I  know  you :  solitary  griefs 335 1 

1  lately  lived  in  quiet  ease 750 

I  lately  vowed,  but  'twas  in  haste 826 

I  lay  me  down  to  sleep 3463 

I  lay  upon  the  summer  grass 266 

I  leaned  out  of  window,  I  smelt  the  white  clover 428 

I  left  tiiee  last,  a  child  at  heart 1085 

I  like  a  church;  I  like  a  cowl 2966 

I  like  her  gentle  hand  that  sometimes  strays .^ ..,.;,  ,..,,.,,>  .isf>4 

I  like  little  Pussy,  her  coat  is  so  warm ;,lt,u  .\vvii;,.,  wflrf.,wS03 


393^  Index  of  First   Lines 

PAGE 

I  like  that  ancient  Saxon  phrase,  which  calls 3439 

I  like  the  hunting  of  the  hare 1638 

1  little  know  or  care. ggi 

I  looked  and  saw  your  eyes  in  the  shadow  of  your  hair 640 

I  love  my  life,  but  not  too  well 681 

I  love  the  old  melodious  lays 3078 

I  love  the  stony  pasture 1438 

I  love  thee  when  thy  swelling  buds  appear 1403 

I  love  Thy  Kingdom,  Lord 3797 

I  love  to  hear  thine  earnest  voice i5'i2 

I  loved  a  lass,  a  fair  one 718 

I  loved  him  not;  and  yet  now  he  is  gone 1077 

I  loved  thee  long  and  dearly 1117 

I  loved  thee  once;  I'll  love  no  more 809 

I  made  a  posy,  while  the  day  ran  by 2931 

I  made  another  garden,  yea 8g6 

I  made  the  cross  myself  whose  weight 3462 

I  make  my  shroud  but  no  one  knows 3478 

1  marvelled  why  a  simple  child 1925 

I  met  a  child  upon  the  moor 307 

I  met  a  little  Elf-man,  once 248 

I  met  a  traveler  from  an  anticiue  land 2844 

I  met  her  on  the  Umbrian  Hills 2934 

I  met  with  Death  in  his  country 2559 

1  mind  me  in  the  days  departed 1455 

1  mourn  "Patroclus,"  whilst  I  praise 1827 

I  move  amid  your  throng,  I  watch  you  hold 1272 

I  must  go  down  to  the  seas  again,  to  the  lovely  sea  and  the  sky.  .    1590 

I  must  not  grieve  my  Love,  whose  eyes  would  read 1241 

I  must  not  think  of  thee;  and,  tired  yet  strong 1263 

I  must  not  throw  upon  the  floor 104 

I  ne'er  could  any  luster  see 827 

"I  never  can  do  it,"  the  little  kite  .said 115 

I  never  gave  a  lock  of  hair  away 1 280 

I  never  prayed  for  Dryads,  to  haunt  the  woods  again 3099 

I  never  reared  a  young  gazelle 1930 

I  never  saw  a  moor 37 1 1 

I  never  saw  a  Purple  Cow : 2085 

I  pass  my  days  among  the  quiet  places 632 

I  played  with  you,  'mid  cowslips  blowing 790 

I  pray  for  peace;  yet  peace  is  but  a  prayer 2553 

I  pray  thee,  leave,  love  me  no  more 586 

I  prithee  send  me  back  my  heart 763 

I  read  last  night  of  the  Grand  Review 2513 

I  recollect  a  nurse  called  Ann 1736 

I  remember,  I  remember 443 

I  reside  at  Table  Mountain,  and  my  name  is  Truthful  James 2170 

I  rose  up  when  the  battle  was  dead 3008 

I  said,  "Let  me  walk  in  the  fields" 3774 

I  said — Then,  dearest,  since  'tis  so 877 

I  said  to  Lettice,  our  sister  Lettice 1208 

I  sat  beside  the  streamlet 987 

I  sat  with  Doris,  the  shepherd  maiden 1201 

I  sat  with  Love  upon  a  woodside  well 1258 

I  sat  with  one  I  love  last  night 954 

I  saw  Eternity  the  other  night 3696 

I  saw  fair  Chloris  walk  alone S23 

I  saw  him  once  before 1741 

I  saw  it  once  where  myriad  works  adorn 375 1 

I  saw  my  Lady  weep • 863 

I  saw  old  Autumn  in  the  misty  morn 1376 

I  saw,  one  sultry  night  above  a  swamp 1519 


Index  of  First   Lines  3933 

PAGE 

I  saw  the  clouds  among  the  hills U  r!  .>i[ 2084 

I  saw  tlie  Conquerors  riding  by 3068 

I  saw  the  day's  white  rapture 892 

I  saw  the  Son  of  God  go  by 3742 

I  saw  the  spires  of  Oxford 2560 

I  saw  the  twinkle  of  white  feet 852 

I  saw  thee  when,  as  twilight  fell 3769 

I  saw  two  clouds  at  morning 1 196 

I  saw  with  open  eyes 3061 

I  say  it  under  the  rose 1750 

I  sec  her  in  the  festal  warmth  to-nigiit 576 

I  see  thee  pine  like  her  in  golden  story 3O01 

I  sent  for  RatclitTe;  was  so  ill 1910 

I  sent  my  love  two  roses, — one 796 

I  sent  a  charm  upon  your  hurrying  breath 1199 

I  shall  not  cry  Return!  Return! 1081 

I  shall  not  see  the  faces  of  my  friends 3474 

I  shot  an  arrow  into  the  air 2923 

I  sing  no  longer  of  the  skies 1056 

I  sing  of  brooks,  of  blossoms,  birds,  and  bowers 3105 

I  sing  the  hymn  of  the  conquered,  who  fell  in  the  Battle  of  Life.  .  2945 

I  sleep  and  rest,  my  heart  makes  moan 430 

I  slept,  and  dreamed  that  life  was  beauty 2972 

I  slept  in  an  old  homestead  by  the  sea iS7S 

I  sometimes  think  that  never  lasts  so  long 1922 

I  spied  beside  the  garden  bed 138 

I  sprang  to  the  stirrup,  and  Joris,  and  he 2732 

I  stand  upon  the  summit  of  my  years 3499 

I  stood  in  Venice  on  the  Bridge  of  Sighs 2618 

I  stood  on  the  bridge  at  midnight 33S6 

I  strove  with  none;  for  none  was  worth  my  strife 3491 

I  struck  the  board,  and  cried  "No  more" 3719 

I  studied  my  tables  over  and  over,  and  backward  and  forward, 

too 166 

I  take  my  chaperon  to  the  play i7gS 

I  tell  thee,  Dick,  where  I  have  been 763 

I  tell  you,  hopeless  grief  is  passionless 3:^53 

I  that  tremble  at  your  feet 666 

I  think  he  had  not  heard  of  the  far  towns 3740 

I  think  I  could  turn  and  live  with  animals,  they  are  so  placid  and 

self-contained 2996 

I  think  it  is  over,  over 3493 

I  think  that  I  am  drawing  to  an  end 1953 

I  think  that  I  shall  never  see 1407 

I  think  thou  waitest,  Love,  beyond  the  gate 893 

I  thought  once  how  Theocritus  had  sung 1276 

I  took  a  hansom  on  today 827 

I  took  her  dainty  eyes,  as  well 576 

1  traveled  among  unknown  men 1074 

I  try  to  knead  and  spin,  but  my  life  is  low  the  while 3361 

I  wadna  gi'e  my  ain  wife 1 206 

I  waited  for  the  train  at  Coventry 2593 

I  walk  down  the  garden  paths 1134 

I  walked  beside  the  evening  sea 2S49 

I  walked  with  Maisie  long  years  back 1058 

I  wandered  by  the  brookside 1 147 

I  wandered  lonely  as  a  cloud 1473 

I  was  a  wandering  sheep 3757 

I  was  asking  for  something  specific  and  perfect  for  my  city 2568 

I  was  in  Margate  last  July,  I  walked  upon  the  pier 2120 

I  was  thy  neighbor  once,  thou  rugged  Pile 3587 

1  watch  beside  you  in  your  silent  room 1274 


3934  Index  of  First  Lines 

PAGE 

I  weep  for  Adonais — he  is  dead 3612 

I  weigh  not  fortune's  frown  or  smile 2980 

I  went  back  an  old-time  lane 1131 

I  went  out  to  the  farthest  meadow 1014 

I  went  to  her  who  loveth  me  no  more 1008 

I  went  to  turn  the  grass  once  after  one 3074 

I  who  am  dead  a  thousand  years 3101 

I  will  arise  and  go  now,  and  go  to  Innisfree 1634 

I  will  go  back  to  the  great  sweet  mother 1585 

I  will  make  you  brooches  and  toys  for  your  delight 654 

I  will  not  break  the  tryst,  my  dear iiii 

I  will  not  have  the  mad  Clytie 1465 

I  will  paint  her  as  I  see  her 338 

I  will  reach  far  down  in  the  pit  of  sorrow 2854 

I  wish,  because  the  sweetness  of  your  passing 664 

I  wish  I  could  remember  the  first  day 1259 

I  wish  I  lived  in  a  caravan 161 

I  wish  I  was  in  de  land  ob  cotton 2218 

I  wish  I  were  where  Helen  lies 1060 

I  wish  that  my  Room  had  a  Floor 2086 

I  wonder,  by  my  troth,  what  thou  and  1 1 142 

I  wonder  do  you  feel  to-day 882 

I  wonder  in  what  Isle  of  Bliss 1785 

I  would  not  give  my  Irish  wife 1 207 

I  would  not  have  a  god  come  in 2938 

I  would  not  live  alway — live  alway  below 3476 

"I  would,"  says  Fox,  "a  tax  devise" 1916 

I  would  that  air  men  my  hard  case  might  know 2189 

I  would  unto  my  fair  restore 1054 

I  write.    He  sits  beside  my  chair 269 

I  wrote  some  lines  once  on  a  time 2138 

I  wus  mighty  good-lookin'  when  I  wus  young 2183 

I'd  a  dream  tonight 301 

I'd  be  a  Butterfly  born  in  a  bower 1712 

I'd  rather  have  Fingers  than  Toes 2086 

I'd  "read"  three  hours.    Both  notes  and  text 1773 

If  a  man  who  turnips  cries 1Q16 

If  all  the  world  and  love  were  young 585 

If  all  the  world  were  apple-pie 33 

If  any  record  of  our  names 3000 

If  aught  of  oaten  stop,  or  pastoral  song 13 13 

If  doughty  deeds  my  lady  please 619 

If,  dumb  too  long,  the  drooping  Muse  hath  stayed 3584 

If  ever  there  lived  a  Yankee  lad 2163 

If  I  could  choose  my  paradise 895 

If  I  could  come  again  to  that  dear  place 34°2 

If  I  could  shut  the  gate  against  my  thoughts 3743 

If  I  had  as  much  money  as  I  could  spend 32 

If  I  had  chosen  thee,  thou  shouldst  have  been 851 

If  I  had  never  known  your  face  at  all 1273 

If  I  had  thought  thou  couldst  have  died 1082 

If  I  have  faltered  more  or  less 3729 

"If  I  may  trust  your  love,"  she  cried 1007 

If  I  shall  ever  win  the  home  in  heaven 33^7 

If  I  should  die,  think  only  this  of  me 2546 

If  I  should  die  to-night 1950 

If  I  was  drawn  here  from  a  distant  place 5S1 

If  I  were  dead,  and,  in  my  place 615 

"Ifl  were  dead,"  you'd  sometimes  say.  Poor  Child 296 

If  I  were  told  that  I  must  die  to-morrow 3464 

If  "ifs"  and  "ands" 65 

:  If  it  be  pleasant  to  look  on,  stalled  in  the  packed  serai 1911 


Index  of  First   Lines  3935 

PAGE 

If  life  be  as  a  flame  that  death  doth  kill 3499 

If  life  were  never  bitter i944 

If  love  be  life,  I  long  to  die 8i8 

If  Love  were  jester  at  the  court  of  Death 3474 

If  love  were  what  the  rose  is 641 

If  my  face  could  only  promise  that  its  color  would  remain Q15 

If  only  in  dreams  may  man  be  fully  blest 689 

If  rest  is  sweet  at  shut  of  day 3423 

If  rightly  tuneful  bards  decide 537 

If  she  be  made  of  white  and  red 570 

If  she  but  knew  that  I  am  weeping 978 

If  spirits  walk,  love,  when  the  night  climbs  slow 11 18 

If  the  quick  spirits  in  your  eye 597 

If  the  red  slayer  think  he  slays 2964 

If  the  sudden  tidings  came : 3255 

If  the  things  of  earth  must  pass 2850 

If  there  be  graveyards  in  the  heart 662 

If  they  hint,  O  Musician,  the  piece  that  you  played 1883 

If  thou  hast  squandered  years  to  grave  a  gem 2919 

If  thou  must  love  me,  let  it  be  for  naught 1280 

If  thou  shouldst  bid  thy  friend  farewell 3014 

If  thou  survive  my  well-contented  day 1 248 

If  thou  wert  by  my  side,  my  love 1 209 

If  to  be  absent  were  to  be ,.........,,, 933 

If,  wandering  in  a  wizard's  car 791 

If  wishes  were  horses ....• .(.  t.^flv,'  ■•iV!-  • 64 

If  with  light  head  erect  I  sing • .  . 2961 

If  women  could  be  fair,  and  yet  not  fond 807 

If  you  be  that  May  Margaret 1145 

If  you  become  a  nun,  dear 624 

If  you  had  lived  in  that  more  stately  time 1271 

II  est  un  air  pour  qui  je  donnerais 3842 

II  etait  un  roi  d' Yvetot 3840 

II  existe  une  espinstere  a  Tours 2087 

I'll  sing  you  a  good  old  song .•.■,j,i.,.s-.. ^721 

I'll  sing  you  a  song,  not  very  long -■•.-.-  -. 2076 

I'll  tell  you  a  story ..1.  i 31 

I'll  tell  you  a  story  that's  not  in  Tom  Moore 2130 

I'll  tell  you  how  the  leaves  came  down 142 

I'm  a  gay  tra,  la,  la 2066 

I'm  going  softly  all  my  years  in  wisdom  if  in  pain 448 

"I'm  growing  old,  I've  sixty  years" 438 

I'm  sittin'  on  the  stile,  Mary 1086 

I'm  wearin'  awa',  John 3699 

In  a  church  which  is  furnished  with  mullion  and  gable 1868 

In  a  coign  of  the  clitT  between  lowland  and  highland 1459 

In  a  drear-nighted  December 3395 

In  a  quiet  watered  land,  a  land  of  roses 2607 

In  a  valley,  centuries  ago 2859 

In  after  days,  when  grasses  high 3502 

In  all  the  land,  range  up,  range  down 3383 

In  an  old  book  at  even  as  I  read 3466 

In  Clementina's  artless  mien 729 

In  days  when  ( ieorge  the  Third  was  King 1802 

In  every  hne  a  supple  beauty 1794 

In  far  forests'  leafy  twilight,  now  is  stealing  gray   dawn's  shy 

light 1310 

In  form  and  feature,  face  and  limb 2068 

In  going  to  my  naked  bed,  as  one  that  would  have  slept 3031 

In  good  King  Charles's  golden  days 1835 

In  good  looks  I  am  not  a  star 2090 

In  green  old  gardens,  hidden  away 1450 


3936 


Index  of  First   Lines 


PAGE 

In  Heaven  a  spirit  doth  dwell 3077 

In  his  old  gusty  garden  of  the  North 3657 

In  Koln,  a  town  of  monks  and  bones iqii 

In  London  was  young  Beichan  born 2666 

In  marble  walls  as  white  as  milk 63 

In  May,  when  sea-winds  pierced  our  solitudes 1497 

In  our  old  shipwrecked  days  there  was  an  hour 1266 

In  petticoat  of  green 527 

In  praise  of  little  children  I  will  say 253 

In  Scarlet  town,  where  I  was  born 2704 

In  simpler  verse  than  triolets 3089 

In  slumbers  of  midnight  the  sailor-boy  lay 1615 

In  spite  of  all  the  learned  have  said 3438 

In  summer  I  am  very  glad 130 

In  summer,  when  the  grass  is  thick,  if  mother  has  the  time 231 

In  sunny  girlhood's  vernal  life 1758 

In  tangled  wreaths,  in  clustered  gleaming  stars 1490 

In  tattered  old  slippers  that  toast  at  the  bars 3239 

In  that  new  world  toward  which  our  feet  are  set 1294 

In  the  ancient  town  of  Bruges 2627 

In  the  cool  of  the  evening,  when  the  low  sweet  whispers  waken. .  .    1316 

In  the  Cross  of  Christ  I  glory 3802 

In  the  dark,  in  the  dew 652 

In  the  dark  womb  where  I  began 3Q7 

In  the  days  of  old 489 

In  the  down-hill  of  life,  when  I  find  I'm  declining 402 

In  the  garden  of  death,  where  the  singers  whose  names  are  death- 
less    3647 

In  the  greenest  of  our  valleys 3168 

In  the  highlands,  in  the  country  places 1675 

In  the  hour  of  my  distress 3744 

In  the  light  of  the  moon,  by  the  side  of  the  water 322- 

In  the  lonesome  latter  years 1946 

In  the  market-place  of  Bruges  stands  the  belfry  old  and  brown..  .    2629 

In  the  merry  month  of  May 716 

In  the  night 1433 

In  the  silent  midnight  watches 3811 

In  the  still  air  the  music  lies  unheard 37 17 

In  the  summer  even 1621 

In  the  valley  of  the  Pegnitz,  where  across  broad  meadow-lands..  .    2632 

In  the  wild  autumn  weather,  when  the  rain  was  on  the  sea 1104 

In  the  years  about  twenty 741 

In  their  ragged  regimentals 2433 

In  these  drear  wastes  of  sea-born  land,  these  wilds  where  none  may 

dwell  but  He.  .  . 2887 

In  these  restrained  and  careful  times 1759 

In  this  secluded  shrine 1503 

In  this  world,  the  Isle  of  Dreams 3698 

In  Tilbury  Town  did  old  King  Cole 1797 

In  vain  you  tell  your  parting  lover 937 

In  Xanadu  did  Kubla  Khan 3160 

Indeed  this  very  love  which  is  my  boast 1279 

Ins  stille  Land 3832 

Integer  vita;  scelerisque  purus 3828 

Into  a  ward  of  the  whitewashed  walls 2318 

Into  the  Devil  tavern 2743 

Into  the  Silent  Land 3456 

Into  the  woods  my  Master  went 3776 

Into  the  world  he  looked  with  sweet  surprise 27 

Into  these  Loves,  who  but  for  Passion  looks 1242 

Ireland,  oh  Ireland!  center  of  my  longings 2266 

"Is  it  a  sail? "  she  asked 1041 


Index  of  First   Lines  3937 

PAGE 

Is  it  true,  then,  my  girl,  that  you  meant  it 804 

Is  the  noise  of  grief  in  the  palace  over  the  river S55& 

"Is  there  anyljody  there?"  said  the  tra\cller 3219 

Is  there,  for  honest  Poverty 3034 

Is  there  no  voice  in  the  world  to  come  crying 2851 

Is  this  a  fast,  to  keep 3745 

Is  t  his  a  time  to  be  cloudy  and  sad ijg 

Is  this  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  this  loud  clown 3610 

"Isn't  this  Joseph's  son?" — ay,  it  is  He 3768 

It  came  upon  the  midnight  clear 206 

It  cannot  be  that  He  who  made 3712 

It  ended,  and  the  morrow  brought  the  task 1265 

It  fell  about  the  Lammas  tide 2356 

It  fell  about  the  Martinmas 268S 

It  is  a  beauteous  evening,  calm  and  free 1314 

It  is  a  place  where  poets  crowned  may  feel  the  heart's  decaying.  .   3601 

It  is  an  ancient  Mariner 2747 

It  is  creation's  morning 2573 

It  is  not  Beauty  I  demand 547 

It  is  not,  Celia,  in  our  power.  . 594 

It  is  not  growing  like  a  tree. 28j6 

It  is  not  raining  rain  for  me 1442 

It  is  not  to  be  thought  of  that  the  flood 2238 

It  is  the  miller's  daughter 633 

It  is  time  to  be  old 410 

It  isn't  the  thing  you  do,  dear 2926 

It  keeps  eternal  whisperings  around 1588 

It  lies  around  us  like  a  cloud 37ot^ 

It  lies  not  on  the  sunlit  hill 285,5 

It  little  profits  that  an  idle  king 3179 

It  once  might  have  been,  once  only 880 

It  owned  not  a  color  that  vanity  dons 1S04 

It  shifts  and  shifts  from  form  to  form 2868 

It  was  a'  for  our  rightfu'  king 2274 

It  was  a  friar  of  orders  gray 2710 

It  was  a  heavenly  time  of  life 357 

It  was  a  lordling's  daughter,  the  fairejt  one  of  three 725 

It  was  a  lover  and  his  lass 717 

It  was  a  merry  time 181 

It  was  a  summer  evening 24 10 

It  was  a  tall  young  oyster-man  lived  by  the  riverside 2139 

It  was  eight  bells  ringing 2444 

It  was  infill  a  pleasant  time 2643 

It  was  many  and  many  a  year  ago 1 105 

It  was  not  like  your  great  and  gracious  waj's 974 

It  was  nothing  but  a  rose  I  gave  her loir 

It  was  si.x  men  of  Indostan 1877 

It  was  the  autumn  of  the  year 1020 

It  was  the  calm  and  silent  night 204 

It  was  the  charming  month  of  May 540 

It  was  the  schooner  Hesperus 2461 

It  was  the  time  when  lilies  blow 2727 

It's  a  lonely  road  through  bogland  to  the  lake  at  Carrowmore. .  .  .   3216 

It's  easy  to  fight  when  everything's  right 2941 

It's  rare  to  see  the  morning  breeze 3239 

It's  we  two,  it's  we  two,  it's  we  two  for  aye 1200 

I've  found  my  bonny  babe  a  nest 88 

I've  heard  them  lilting  at  our  ewe-milking 2368 

I've  never  traveled  for  more'n  a  day 1605 

I've  oft  been  asked  by  prosing  souls 1997 

I've  plucked  the  berry  from  the  bush,  the  brown  nut  from  the  tree     102 
I've  wandered  east,  I've  wandered  west 955 


3 93  8  Index  of  First  Lines 


PAGE 

I  ve  wandered  to  the  village,  Tom,  I've  sat  beneath  the  tree 469 

I've  watched  you  now  a  full  half-hour 1517 

J  r 

Jack  and  Jill  went  up  the  hill ^^g 

Jack  and  Joan  they  think  no  ill 767 

Jack  Sprat  could  eat  no  fat 37 

Jaflar,  the  Barmecide,  the  good  Vizier 3013 

January  brings  the  snow 6i 

Je  me  fais  vieux,  j'ai  soixante  ans 3844 

Je  viens  revoir  I'asile  ou  ma  jeunesse 3839 

Jenny  kissed  me  when  we  met 687 

Jerusalem,  my  happy  home 3693 

Jest  a-wearj'in'  for  you gg3 

Jesus  lover  of  my  soul 3791 

Jim  Bowker,  he  said,  ef  he'd  had  a  fair  show ., 1889 

Jog  on,  jog  on  the  foot-path  way 2978 

John  Anderson  my  jo,  John 1224 

"John  Anderson,  my  jo,  John" 3S6o 

John  Brown  and  Jeanne  at  Fontainebleau 1792 

John  Brown  in  Kansas  settled,  like  a  steadfast  Yankee  farmer.  .  .    2479 

John  Brown  of  Ossawatomie  spake  on  his  dying  day 2484 

John  Bull  for  pastime  took  a  prance 1 850 

John  Gilpin  was  a  citizen 2093 

John  Grumlie  swore  by  the  light  o'  the  moon 2118 

Jphn-a-dreams  and  Harum-Scarum 1699 

Johnny  shall  have  a  new  bonnet 44 

Joseph,  mild  and  noble,  bent  above  the  straw 214 

Joy  is  the  blossom,  sorrow  is  the  fruit 1916 

Just  a  picture  of  Somebody's  child 345 

Just  as  I  am,  without  one  plea 3800 

Just  as  I  thought  I  was  growing  old 80s 

Just  for  a  handful  of  silver  he  left  us 1836 

Just  where  the  Treasury's  marble  front 1751 

K 

Kaclyevo's  slope  still  felt 253  r 

Kathleen  Mavoureen!  the  gray  dawn  is  breaking 979 

Kentish  Sir  Byng  stood  for  his  King 2  283 

Kind  are  her  answers 59 1 

King  Charles,  and  who'll  do  him  right  now 2284 

King  Francis  was  a  hearty  king,  and  loved  a  royal  sport 833 

Kiss  me  softly  and  speak  to  me  low 690 

Kiss  me,  though  you  make  believe 6gi 

Kissing  her  hair,  I  sat  against  her  feet 1 146 

Know,  Celia,  since  thou  art  so  proud S16 

L 

Labor  and  love!  there  are  no  other  laws 2918 

Ladies,  though  to  your  conquering  eyes 594 

Lady  Clara  Vere  de  Vere 835 

Lady,  very  fair  are  you 1899 

Langsyne,  when  life  was  bonnie 447 

Lars  Porsena  of  Clusium 23  29 

Last  night,  ah,  yesternight,  betwixt  her  lips  and  mine 918 

Last  night,  among  his  fellow  roughs 2478 

Last  night,  in  snowy  gown  and  glove :.j.ii,, !.;._...>  .,..:.;. 926 

Last  year  I  trod  these  fields  with  Di i;>vv.>v'i.  -I-h-j  i.- ^^733 


Index  of  First  Lines  3939 

PAGE 

Late  tired  with  woe,  even  ready  for  to  pine > 1237 

Laugh,  and  the  world  laughs  with  you a. n  . .  ju  2929 

Laurel-crowned  Horatius '.  1.  .'I '..'  ^  iSgfl 

Lauriger  Horatius ,38,si 

Lay  a  garland  on  my  hearse 1064 

Lay  mc  to  rest  in  some  fair  spot 3478 

Lay  me  to  sleep  in  sheltering  flame 2854 

Lead,  kindly  Light,  amid  the  encircling  gloom 3S04 

Lead  us,  heavenly  Father,  lead  us 3807 

Lear  and  Cordelia!  'twas  an  ancient  tale 2225 

"  Leave  all — and  follow,  follow  " 1686 

Leaves  have  their  time  to  fall 341 1 

Lend  me  thy  fillet,  Love 571 

Let  folly  praise  that  fancy  loves,  I  praise  and  love  that  child 3747 

Let  me  enjoy  the  earth  no  less 2841 

Let  me  not  to  the  marriage  of  true  minds 1251 

Let  my  voice  ring  out  and  over  the  earth 616 

Let  others  sing  of  Knights  and  Paladines 1242 

Let  that  which  is  to  come  be  as  it  may 3403 

Let  the  farmer  praise  his  grounds 2010 

Let  the  toper  regale  in  his  tankard  of  ale 1984 

Let  them  come,  come  never  so  proudly 2373 

Let  time  and  chance  combine,  combine 954 

Let  us  begin  and  carry  up  this  corpse 2871 

Let  us  drink  and  be  merry,  dance,  joke  and  rejoice.  , 1992 

Let  us  go  hence,  my  songs;  she  will  not  hear 645. 

Let  us  live  then,  and  be  glad 2895 

Let's  contend  no  more,  Love 876 

Life?  and  worth  living 2908 

Life!  I  know  not  what  thou  art 3491 

Life  is  a  jest,  and  all  things  show  it 19 16 

Life  is  not  dear  or  gay 1052 

Life  of  Ages,  richly  poured 2973 

Like  a  blind  spinner  in  the  sun 3467 

Like  apple-blossoms,  white  and  red 568 

Like  as  a  ship,  that  through  the  ocean  wide 1233 

Like  as  the  damask  rose  you  see 3405 

Like  as  the  waves  make  towards  the  pebbled  shore 1249 

Like  some  lone  miser,  dear,  behold  me  stand 1275 

Like  the  ghost  of  a  dear  friend  dead 442 

Like  the  violet,  which  alone 531 

Like  thee  I  once  have  stemmed  the  sea  of  life 3Si8 

Like  to  Diana  in  her  summer  weed 521 

Like  to  the  falling  of  a  star 2837 

Linger  not  long.    Home  is  not  home  without  thee 1216 

Listen,  my  children,  and  you  shall  hear i :  i-'i^j.J ., 2422 

Listen  to  the  water-mill .'; ; . ; . .  L 2930 

Lithe  and  long  as  the  serpent  train 467 

Little  baby,  lay  your  head 82 

Little  Bo-peep  has  lost  her  sheep 39 

Little  boy  blue,  come  blow  up  your  horn 34 

Little  brown  brother,  oh!  little  brown  brother 135 

Little  children,  never  give loi; 

Little  drojis  of  water 103 

Little  Ciustava  sits  in  the  sun 154 

Little  I  ask;  my  wants  are  few ...„  .-^ . .,. , .  1,74(3, 

Little  inmate,  full  of  mirth 4,.  i  j,.  i, j  .I5i>i1 

Little  Jack  Horner  sat  in  the  corner 33' 

Little  Jesus,  wast  Thou  shy 277' 

Little  lady  of  my  heart ' 997 

Little  Lamb,  who  made  thee 48 

Little  Miss  Mufifet 34 


3940  Index  of  First   Lines 

PAGE 

Little  Nanny  Etticoat 63 

Little  one,  come  to  my  knee 175 

Little  Orphant  Annie's  come  to  our  house  to  stay 169 

Little  Polly  Flinders 34 

Little  Prince  Tatters  has  lost  his  cap 155 

Little  Robin  Redbreast  sat  upon  a  tree 45 

Little  Sister  Rose-Marie 326 

Little  snatch  of  ancient  song 3087 

Little  thinks,  in  the  field,  yon  red-cloaked  clown 2962 

Little  White  Lily 137 

Lives  in  winter 63 

Lo!  Death  has  reared  himself  a  throne 3417 

Lo!  here  a  little  volume,  but  great  book 3723 

Lo,  if  some  pen  should  write  upon  your  rafter 3730 

Lo,  the  lilies  of  the  field 3726 

Lo!  'tis  a  gala  night 3416 

Lo,  what  wonders  the  day  hath  brought 1390 

Lo,  when  the  Lord  made  North  and  South 385 

Lo!  where  the  rosy-bosomed  Hours 1343 

Long  by  the  willow-trees 1936 

Long  from  the  lists  of  love  I  stood  aloof 744 

Long  legs,  crooked  thighs 63 

Long  long  ago,  when  all  the  glittering  earth 3401 

Long  time  a  child,  and  still  a  child,  when  years 408 

Look  at  me  with  thy  large  brown  eyes '.  .  .  21 

Look,  Delia,  how  we  esteem  the  half-blown  rose 1240 

Look  how  the  lark  soars  upward  and  is  gone 3085 

Look  how  the  pale  Queen  of  the  silent  night 1253 

Look  in  my  face;  my  name  is  Might-have-been 435 

Look  in  my  face.    My  name  is  Used-to-was 1643 

Look — on  the  topmost  branches  of  the  world 3059 

Look  out  upon  the  stars,  my  love 704 

Lord,  for  the  erring  thought 2933 

Lord,  for  to-morrow  and  its  needs 3808 

Lord  Gabriel,  wilt  thou  not  rejoice 88 

Lord,  make  me  coy  and  tender  to  offend 3722 

Lord,  not  for  light  in  darkness  do  we  pray 2951 

Lord  of  my  heart's  elation 2852 

Lord  Rameses  of  Egypt  sighed 3401 

Lord,  Thou  hast  given  me  a  cell 3713 

Lords,  Knights,  and  squires,  the  numerous  band 276 

Loud  mockers  in  the  roaring  street 3749 

"Loudoun's  bonnie  woods  and  braes" 949 

Love  bade  me  welcome;  yet  my  soul  drew  back 3718 

Love,  brave  Virtue's  younger  brother 484 

Love,  by  that  loosened  hair 577 

Love  came  back  at  fall  o'  dew 1016 

Love  comes  back  to  his  vacant  dwelling 868 

Love  comes  laughing  up  the  valleys 509 

Love  ere  he  bleeds,  an  eagle  in  high  skies 1267 

Love  for  such  a  cherry  lip 6S2 

Love  has  been  sung  a  thousand  ways 579 

Love  has  gone  and  left  me,  and  the  days  are  all  alike 929 

Love  hath  a  language  for  all  years 496 

Love  hath  his  poppy-wreath 895 

Love  heeds  no  more  the  sighing  of  the  wind 508 

Love,  I  marvel  what  you  are 575 

Love  in  fantastic  triumph  sate 824 

Love  in  my  bosom  like  a  bee 477 

Love  in  thy  youth,  fair  maid,  be  wise 609 

Love  is  a  little  golden  fish .■ '.  .  .■ '.  .  .  .  736 

Love  is  a  sickness  full  of  woes i'/'.HilC.'iK . .  478 


Index  of  First   Lines  394i 

PAGE 

Love  is  and  was  my  lord  and  king 2904 

Love  is  the  blossom  where  there  blows 476 

Love  me  or  not,  love  her  I  must  or  die 589 

Love  not,  love  not,  ye  hapless  sons  of  clay 871 

Love  not  me  for  comely  grace 601 

Love  once  was  like  an  April  dawn 508 

Love  still  a  boy  and  oft  a  wanton  is 1237 

Love  still  has  something  of  the  sea 486 

Love  took  my  life  and  thrilled  it 4gg 

Love,  when  all  the  years  are  silent,  vanished  quite  and  laid  to 

rest 1012 

Love  who  will,  for  I'll  love  none 817 

Love  within  the  lover's  breast iiS3 

"Love  your  neighbor  as  yourself" 806 

Love's  on  the  highroad 627 

Loving  in  truth,  and  fain  in  verse  my  love  to  show 1235 

Low,  like  another's,  lies  the  laureled  head . ,^6sg 

Lowly  the  soul  that  waits 1831 

Lullaby!  O  lullaby 83 

"Lured,"  little  one?    Nay,  you've  but  heard 1176 

Lydia  is  gone  this  many  a  year 1 126 

M 

Macphairson  Clonglocketty  Angus  M'Clan 2073 

Magdalen  at  Michael's  gate 3735 

Maid  of  Athens,  ere  we  part 951 

Maiden!  with  the  meek  brown  eyes 327 

Make  me  no  vows  of  constancy,  dear  friend 1116 

Make  me  over,  Mother  April 1689 

Make  three  fourths  of  a  cross 62 

"Make  way  for  Liberty! "  he  cried 2353 

]V?any  a  long,  long  year  ago 2146 

Many  are  the  wand-bearers 3098 

Many  love  music  but  for  music's  sake 3 131 

March,  march,  Ettrick  and  Teviotdale 2278 

March  winds  and  April  showers 66 

Margaret's  beauteous — Grecian  arts 544 

Marian  Drury,  Marian  Drury ggS 

Marina's  gone,  and  now  sit  I g3i 

Mark  where  the  pressing  wind  shoots  javelin-like 1268 

Marry  Monday,  marry  for  wealth 67 

Martial,  the  things  that  do  attain 2979 

Mary  had  a  little  lamb 40 

Mary!  I  want  a  lyre  with  other  strings 1 254 

Master  of  human  destinies  am  I 2921 

Maud  Muller  all  that  summer  day 1948 

]\Iaud  Muller  on  a  summer's  day 905 

Maxwelton  braes  are  bonnie 550 

May  I  fmd  a  woman  fair Sii 

May!  queen  of  blossoms 1361 

Meadows  with  yellow  cowslips  all  aglow 1583 

Men  call  you  fair,  and  you  do  credit  it 1235 

Men,  dying,  make  their  wills,  but  wives 1910 

Men  say  the  sullen  instrument 450 

Merrily  swinging  on  brier  and  weed 1528 

Merry  are  the  bells,  and  merry  would  they  ring 45 

Merry  it  is  in  the  good  greenwood 2716 

Merry  Margaret 329 

Methought  I  heard  a  butterfly 116 

'Mid  pleasures  and  palaces  though  we  may  roam 3226 

Midnight  past!  Not  a  sound  of  aught 1025 


394^  Index   of  First   Lines 

'  PAGE 

Mild  offspring  of  a  dark  and  sullen  sire 1496 

Milton!  thou  shouldst  be  living  at  this  hour 2237 

Mimi,  do  you  remember 1800 

Mine  are  the  night  and  morning 1296 

Mine  be  a  cot  beside  the  hill 1634 

Mine  eyes  have  seen  the  glory  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord 2206 

Mine  to  the  core  of  the  heart,  my  beauty 1161 

Miniver  Cheevy,  child  of  scorn 18S8 

Minnie  and  Winnie  slept  in  a  shell 92 

Miss  Flora  McFlimsey,  of  Madison  Square 2154 

Mr.  Finney  had  a  turnip 2071 

Mistress  Mary,  quite  contrary 31 

Moan,  moan,  ye  dying  gales 3357 

Monday's  child  is  fair  of  face 67 

Monsieur  the  Cure  down  the  street 1776 

Moon  in  heaven's  garden,  among  the  clouds  that  wander 1357 

Moon,  so  round  and  yellow 49 

More  love  or  more  disdain  I  crave 615 

More  than  half  beaten,  but  fearless 2952 

More  than  most  fair,  full  of  the  living  fire 1232 

Mortality,  behold  and  fear _ 3Si7 

Most  glorious  Lord  of  Life!  that  on  this  day 1234 

Most  Holy  Night,  that  still  dost  keep 3223 

Most  men  know  love  but  as  a  part  of  life 3036 

Most  sweet  it  is  with  unuplifted  eyes 3087 

Most  worthy  of  praise  were  the  virtuous  ways 2077 

Mother  and  maid  and  soldier,  hearing  best 393 

Mother,  I  cannot  mind  my  wheel 1040 

Mother  wept  and  father  sighed 289 

Mountain  gorses,  ever  golden i486 

Mowers,  weary  and  brown,  and  blithe 1371 

Much  have  I  traveled  in  the  realms  of  gold.  .^ 3082 

Music  I  heard  with  you  was  more  than  music 1 1 29 

Mussoorie  and  Chakrata  Hill I43S 

My  aunt!  my  dear  unmarried  aunt 1740 

My  bed  is  like  a  little  boat 161 

"My  birth-day" — what  a  different  sound 35^ 

My  child  came  to  me  with  the  equinox 20 

My  coachman,  in  the  moonlight  there 1764 

My  counterpane  is  soft  as  silk 219 

My  country,  'tis  of  thee 2 195 

My  Damon  was  the  first  to  wake 621 

My  Daphne's  hair  is  twisted  gold 520 

My  day  and  night  are  in  my  lady's  hand 542 

My  days  among  the  Dead  are  passed 2920 

My  dear  and  only  Love,  I  pray 604 

My  dear  mistress  has  a  heart 610 

My  dear,  the  time  has  come  to  say 975 

My  delight  and  thy  dehght 1158 

My  faint  spirit  was  sitting  in  the  light 626 

My  fairest  child,  I  have  no  song  to  give  you 125 

My  faith  looks  up  to  Thee 3810 

My  Feet  they  haul  me  'round  the  House 2086 

My  good  blade  carves  the  casques  of  men 2.724 

My  grandsire  sailed  three  years  from  home i799 

My  hair  is  gray,  but  not  with  years _ 3274 

My  heart  aches,  and  a  drowsy  numbness  pains 15S2 

My  heart  is  chilled  and  my  pulse  is  slow loio 

My  heart  is  like  a  fountain  true 77 

My  heart  leaps  up  when  I  behold 3*16 

My  heart  shall  be  thy  garden.    Come,  my  own 673 

My  heart  the  Anvil  where  my  thoughts  do  beat 1 244 


Index  of  First   Lines  3943 

PAGE 

My  heart's  in  the  Highlands,  my  heart  is  not  here 1669 

My  hero  is  na  decked  wi'  gowd 3244 

My  lady  seems  of  ivory 562 

My  lady  walks  her  morning  round 553 

My  Lady  Wind,  my  Lady  Wind 124 

My  Lady's  birthday  crowns  the  growing  year 57^4 

My  Lady's  presence  makes  the  Roses  red 1245 

My  Lesbia,  I  will  not  deny 1754 

My  letters!  all  dead  paper,  mute  and  white 1282 

My  life  is  like  the  summer  rose 33S8 

My  little  dears,  who  learn  to  read,  pray  early  learn  to  shun 2021 

My  little  lo\'e,  do  you  remember " 888 

My  little  Miidchen  found  one  day 300 

My  little  Son,  who  looked  from  thoughtful  eyes 296 

My  little  soul  I  never  saw 3400 

My  Lord  would  make  a  cross  for  me 3463 

My  love  and  I,  the  other  day 831 

My  Love  bound  me  with  a  kiss ,, '  ,  684 

My  love  comes  down  from  the  mountain 648 

My  Love  dwelt  in  a  Northern  land 1121 

My  love  for  thee  doth  march  like  armed  men 1263 

My  lo\e  gave  me  a  passion-flower 1053 

My  love  he  built  me  a  bonnie  bower 1063 

My  love  in  her  attire  doth  show  her  wit 522 

My  love  lies  in  the  gates  of  foam 1067 

My  love  she's  but  a  lassie  yet 543 

My  loved,  my  honored,  much-resf)ected  friend 3246 

My  mind  has  thunderstorms 3  no 

My  mind  to  me  a  kingdom  is 2987 

My  mistress'  eyes  are  nothing  like  the  sun 1 251 

My  mother  bids  me  bind  my  hair 942 

My  mother  bore  me  in  the  southern  wild 156 

'■  My  mother  saj-s  I  must  not  pass  " 157 

My  new-cut  ashlar  takes  the  light ." 3816 

My  ornaments  are  arms 626 

My  Peggy  is  a  young  thing 534 

My  poet,  thou  canst  touch  on  all  the  notes 1280 

My  prime  of  youth  is  but  a  frost  of  cares 401 

My  recollectest  thoughts  are  those 2071 

My  sheep  I  neglected,  I  broke  my  sheep-crook 617 

My  short  and  happy  day  is  done 3507 

My  silks  and  fine  array looi 

My  songs  to  sell,  good  sir 3 109 

My  sorrow  that  I  am  not  by  the  little  dun 3362 

My  soul,  there  is  a  country 3695 

My  soul  today 1609 

My  spotless  love  hovers,  with  purest  wings 1 239 

My  sweetest  Lesbia,  let  us  Hve  and  love 588 

My  temples  throb,  my  pulses  boil 2048 

My  tent  stands  in  a  garden 1452 

My  thoughts  by  night  are  often  filled 435 

My  true-love  hath  mj'  heart,  and  I  have  his 1141 

My  walls  outside  must  have  some  flowers 1644 

Myrtilla,  tonight ; 1783 

Mysterious  night!    Spread  wide  thy  silvery  plume 1324 

Mysterious  Night!  when  our  first  parent  knew 1324 

N 

Nae  shoon  to  hide  her  tiny  taes ig 

Nancy  Dawson,  Nancy  Dawson 988 

Nature,  in  thy  largess,  grant 1299 


3944  Index  of  First   Lines 

PAGE 

Nature  reads  not  our  labels,  "great"  and  "small" 3043 

Nay,  be  you  pardoner  or  cheat 1858 

Nay  but  j'ou,  who  do  not  love  her 553 

Nay,  tell  me  now  in  what  strange  air 1784 

Nay,  why  should  I  fear  Death 3487 

Nay,  you  wrong  her,  my  friend,  she's  not  ikkle;  her  love  she  has 

simply  outgrown 1017 

Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee 3805 

Needles  and  pins,  needles  and  pins 65 

Needy  knife-grinder!  whither  are  you  going 1856 

Never  give  all  the  heart,  for  love .      511 

Never  love  unless  you  can 810 

Never  mind  how  the  pedagogue  proses 1711 

Never  more  will  I  protest 812 

Never  sings  a  city-robin  on  the  gray-stone  window-ledges 3482 

Never  the  nightingale 1 130 

Never  the  time  and  the  place 885 

Nevermore 3065 

Nigh  to  a  grave  that  was  newly  made 3441 

Night  is  the  time  for  rest 1325 

Night  is  the  true  democracy.    When  day 1328 

Nightingale  I  never  heard 1533 

Nightingales  warble  about  it 505 

No  baby  in  the  house,  I  know 25 

No  coward  soul  is  mine 3486 

No  fault  in  women  to  refuse igoi 

No  longer  mourn  for  me  when  I  am  dead i24g 

No  matter  how  the  chances  are i2ig 

No  more,  my  Dear,  no  more  these  counsels  try 1237 

No  need  to  hush  the  children  for  her  sake .   3560 

No,  no!  go  not  to  Lethe,  neither  twist 3349 

No  slightest  golden  rhyme  he  wrote 3090 

No  stir  in  the  air,  no  stir  in  the  sea 1617 

No  sun — no  moon 2048 

No  truer  word,  save  God's,  was  ever  spoken igi6 

Nobles  and  heralds,  by  your  leave 1917 

Nor  force  nor  fraud  shall  sunder  us!  oh  ye 2225 

Not  a  drum  was  heard,  not  a  funeral  note 2448 

Not  a  sou  had  he  got — not  a  guinea  or  note ig33 

Not  as  all  other  women  are 1213 

Not  by  the  ball  or  brand 36og 

Not,  Celia,  that  I  juster  am 610 

Not  far  from  old  Kinvara,  in  the  merry  month  of  May 758 

Not  far  from  Paris,  in  fair  Fontainebleau 3646 

Not  I  myself  know  all  my  love  for  thee 1257 

Not  on  the  neck  of  prince  or  hound 2950 

"Not  ours,"  say  some,  "  the  thought  of  Death  to  dread" 3428 

Not  ours  the  vows  of  such  as  plight 865 

Not  she  with  traitorous  kiss  her  Saviour  stung 377 

"Not  to  be  tuneless  in  old  age" 3645 

Not  with  slow,  funereal  sound 3655 

Not  yet,  dear  love,  not  yet:  the  sun  is  high 985 

Now  ain't  they  utterly  too-too 1952 

Now  along  the  solemn  heights 3480 

Now  are  the  winds  about  us  in  their  glee i3Si 

Now  fades  the  last  long  streak  of  snow 1338 

"Now  for  a  brisk  and  cheerful  fight" 2459 

Now  gentle  sleep  hath  closed  up  those  eyes 683 

Now  glory  to  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  from  whom  all  glories  are 2374 

Now,  God  be  thanked  Who  has  matched  us  with  His  hour 2544 

Now  in  her  green  mantle  blithe  Nature  arrays 944 

Now  ill  thy  splendor  go  before  us 2546 


Index  of  First   Lines  3945 

PAGE 

Now  is  the  night,  foreshadowed  of  our  fears.  . 3590 

Now  many  are  the  stately  ships  that  northward  steam  away 996 

Now  one  and  all  you  Roses 1329 

Now  ponder  well,  you  parents  dear 1S5 

Now  poor  Tom  Dunstan's  cold 3018 

Now  that  we've  done  our  best  and  worst,  and  parted 1270 

Now  the  bright  morning-star,  day's  harbinger 1358 

Now  the  joys  of  the  road  are  chiefly  these 1 694 

Now  the  laborer's  task  is  o'er 3573 

Now  the  lusty  spring  is  seen 482 

Now  the  rite  is  duly  done 1195 

Now  the  Widow  McGee 1961 

Now  what  is  Love,  I  pray  thee,  tell 475 

"Now  where  are  ye  goin',  ses  I,  "wid  the  shawl" 760 

O 

O!  a  wonderful  stream  is  the  River  Time 417 

O  bitter  wind  toward  the  sunset  blowing 2324 

O  blithe  New-comer!    I  have  heard 1538 

O  Brignall  banks  are  wild  and  fair 2720 

O  Captain!  my  Captain!  our  fearful  trip  is  done 3629 

O  Captain  of  the  wars,  whence  won  "S'e  so  great  scar.i 377o 

''O  come  and  be  my  mate!"  said  the  Eagle  to  the  Hen 1808 

"O  crikey,  Bill!"  she  ses  to  me,  she  ses 1951 

O  days  and  hours,  your  work  is  this 2903 

O  death,  when  thou  shalt  come  to  me loSo 

O,  dinna  ask  me  gin  I  lo'e  ye 1 163 

O,  do  not  wanton  with  those  eyes 592 

O  don't  be  sorrowful,  darling 1220 

O  earth,  lie  heavily  upon  her  eyes 1260 

O  faint,  delicious,  spring-time  violet 1502 

O,  Falmouth  is  a  fine  town  with  ships  in  the  bay 3229 

O,  father's  gone  to  market-town,  he  was  up  before  the  day 1366 

O  for  some  honest  lover's  ghost 602 

O  Friend!  I  know  not  which  way  I  must  look 2237 

O  gentle,  gentle  summer  rain 1443 

O  God!  our  help  in  ages  past 3790 

O  Goddess!  hear  these  tuneless  numbers,  wrung 3164 

O  happy  Sleep!  thou  bear'st  upon  thy  breast '. 3222 

O  happy  Thames  that  didst  my  Stella  bear 1238 

O  hush  thee,  my  babie,  thy  sire  was  a  knight 82 

O,  inexpressible  as  sweet . 668 

0,  it  is  great  for  our  country  to  die,  where  ranks  are  contending..  2303 

O  joys  of  love  and  joys  of  fame 1 295 

O  King  of  Terrors,  whose  unbounded  sway 3407 

O,  lay  thy  hand  in  mine,  dear 1228 

O  leave  this  barren  spot  to  me 14 10 

O  lend  to  me,  sweet  nightingale 569 

O,  let  the  solid  ground 497 

0,  like  a  queen's  her  happy  tread 577 

O  listen,  listen,  ladies  gay 2715 

O  little  self,  within  whose  smallness  lies 3402 

O  little  town  of  Bethlehem 203 

O  living  will  that  shalt  endure 2905 

O  lonesome  sea-gull,  floating  far 1522 

O,  look  at  the  moon 57 

O  Love,  if  you  were  here 981 

O,  love  is  not  a  summer  mood 504 

O  Love,  whose  patient  pilgrim  feet 1226 

"O  Mary,  go  and  call  the  cattle  home" 1619 

O  melancholy  Bird,  a  winter's  day 1540 


3946 


Index  of  First   Lines 


PAGE 

O  Mary,  at  thy  window  be 6g7 

O  merry  may  the  maid  be 772 

O  mistress  mine,  where  are  you  roaming 930 

O  moon,  O  hide  thy  golden  light 3483 

O  my  dark  Rosaleen 2  24Q 

O,  my  luve's  hke  a  red,  red  rose 946 

O,  Nancy,  wilt  thou  go  with  me 618 

O  nature!  I  do  not  aspire 1295 

O,  never  say  that  I  was  false  of  heart 1 251 

O  nightingale  that  on  yon  bloomy  spray 1551 

O  nightingale!  thou  surely  art 1545 

O,  Paddy  dear,  and  did  ye  hear  the  news  that's  goin'  round 2249 

O  Paradise,  O  Paradise 3605 

O  Queen,  awake  to  thy  renown 384 

O  reader!  hast  thou  ever  stood  to  see 1407 

O  rowan  tree,  O  rowan  tree,  thou'lt  aye  be  dear  to  me 3236 

O  ruddier  than  the  cherry 535 

O  sairly  may  I  rue  the  day 749 

O  saw  ye  bonny  Lesley 331 

O  saw  ye  not  fair  Ines 959 

O,  saw  ye  the  lass  wi'  the  bonnie  blue  een iiS9 

O  say,  can  you  see,  by  the  dawn's  early  light 2196 

O  say  what  is  that  thing  called  Light 157 

O  ship  incoming  from  the  sea 1601 

O  singer  of  Persephone 3664 

O  singer  of  the  field  and  fold 3664 

O  spring,  I  knov;  thee!    Seek  for  sweet  surprise I335 

O  still,  white  face  of  perfect  peace 3S7S 

O  Swallow,  Swallow,  flying,  flying  South 963 

O  swan  of  slenderness 713 

O  sweet  delight,  O  more  than  human  bliss 1141 

O  sweet  wild  April 1355 

O  swift  forerunners,  rosy  with  the  race 13 11 

O  tell  me,  Httle  children,  have  you  seen  her 153 

O  that  joy  so  soon  should  waste 682 

O  that  the  chemist's  magic  art 3380 

O  that  the  pines  which  crown  yon  steep 13 15 

O  that  those  Hps  had  language!    Life  has  passed 3251 

O  that  'twere  possible 1092 

O  the  gallant  fisher's  life 1665 

O  the  green  things  growing,  the  green  things  growing 1461 

O  the  Raggedy  man!    He  works  fer  Pa 166 

O  Thou  great  Friend  to  all  the  sons  of  men 3730 

O  Thou  unknown  Almighty  Cause 3455 

O  thou!  whose  fancies  from  afar  are  brought 275 

O  Thou,  whose  glorious  orbs  on  high 2204 

O  Thou  with  dewy  locks,  who  lookest  down.  .  .  .' 1342 

O  Time,  who  know'st  a  lenient  hand  to  lay 3352 

O  Twilight,  Twilight!  evermore  to  hear 3131 

O  waly,  waly  up  the  bank 1042 

O  well  I  love  the  Spring 1217 

"O  well  is  me,  my  gay  gos-hawk" 2671 

O  were  my  Love  yon  lilac  fair 621 

"O  wha  will  shoe  my  bonny  foot" 2660 

O  what  a  plague  is  love 722 

O  what  can  ail  thee,  Knight-at-arms 1005 

"O  where  hae  ye  been.  Lord  Randal,  my  son" 2681 

O  white  priest  of  Eternity,  around 1434 

O,  whither  sail  you.  Sir  John  Franklin 2465 

O  wild  West  Wind,  thou  breath  of  Autumn's  being 1378 

O  will  ye  choose  to  hear  the  news 1968 

O  winds  that  blow  across  the  sea 131 


Index  of  First  Lines  39-^7 

PAGE 

O  world,  be  nobler,  for  her  sake 652 

O  world,  I  cannot  hold  thee  close  enough 1302 

O  world,  thou  choosest  not  the  better  part 2907 

O,  yet  we  trust  that  somehow  good 2900 

O,  you  plant  the  pain  in  my  heart  with  your  wistful  eyes 647 

O,  young  Lochinvar  is  come  out  of  the  west 784 

Och,  when  we  li\ed  in  ould  Glenaun 2605 

October  gave  a  party 152 

Of  a'  the  airts  the  wind  can  blaw 947 

Of  a'  the  festivals  we  hear 2028 

Of  Adam's  first  wife,  Lilith,  it  is  told 1258 

Of  all  the  birds  from  East  to  West 149 

Of  all  the  girls  that  are  so  smart 769 

Of  all  the  rides  since  the  birth  of  time 2445 

Of  all  the  ships  upon  the  blue 2180 

Of  all  the  torments,  all  the  cares 826 

Of  all  the  thoughts  of  God  that  are 3412 

Of  all  the  wimraing  doubly  blest 2085 

Of  deepest  blue  of  summer  skies 11 

Of  Heaven  and  Hell  I  have  no  power  to  sing 3080 

Of  my  ould  loves,  of  their  ould  ways 11 27 

Of  Nelson  and  the  North 2441 

Of  old  sat  Freedom  on  the  heights 2235 

Of  old  the  Muses  sat  on  high 3097 

Of  priests  we  can  offer  a  charming  variety 1957 

Of  this  fair  volume  which  we  World  do  name 1293 

Of  worthy  Captain  Lovewell  I  purpose  now  to  sing 2412 

Off  with  3'our  hat  I  along  the  street 1843 

Oft  has  it  been  my  lot  to  mark 1875 

Oft  have  I  seen  at  some  cathedral  door 3084 

Oft  have  I  walked  these  woodland  paths 1401 

Oft  I  had  heard  of  Lucy  Gray 290 

Oft  in  the  after  days,  when  thou  and  1 396 

Oft  in  the  stilly  night 454 

Often  I  have  heard  it  said 686 

Often  I  think  of  the  beautiful  town 444 

Often  rebuked,  yet  always  back  returning 2928 

Oh,  a  dainty  plant  is  the  Ivy  green 1489 

Oh,  bless  the  law  that  veils  the  Future's  face 325 

Oh,  breathe  not  his  name!  let  it  sleep  in  the  shade 3609 

Oh,  days  of  Ijeauty  standing  veiled  apart i373 

Oh!  Death  will  find  me,  long  before  I  tire 1269 

Oh,  did  you  see  him  riding  down 79Q 

Oh,  earlier  shall  the  rosebuds  blow 3378 

Oh,  East  is  East,  and  West  is  West,  and  never  the  twain  shall 

meet 2830 

Oh,  England  is  a  pleasant  place  for  them  that's  rich  and  high.  .  .  .  1630 

Oh,  for  an  hour  when  the  day  is  breaking 653 

Oh  for  one  hour  of  youthful  joy 461 

Oh  Galuppi,  Baldassare,  this  is  very  sad  to  find 3133 

Oh  grieve  not,  ladies,  if  at  night 857 

Oh,  hark  the  pulses  of  the  night 1 164 

Oh,  hark  to  the  brown  thrush!  hear  how  he  sings 1579 

Oh,  heard  ye  yon  pibroch  sound  sad  in  the  gale 2722 

Oh,  if  the  world  were  mine,  Love 74° 

Oh,  if  you  love  her 1171 

Oh,  it's  twenty  gallant  gentlemen 2799 

Oh!  leave  the  past  to  bury  its  own  dead 1261 

Oh,  loosen  the  snood  that  you  wear,  Janette ■  ■  1112 

Oh!  lose  the  winter  from  thine  heart,  the  darkness  from  thine 

eyes 1150 

"Oh,  love  is  fair,  and  love  is  rare,"  my  dear  one  she  said 1055 


3948 


Index  of  First  Lines 


PAGt 

"Oh!  Love!"  they  said,  "is  King  of  Kings" 580 

Oh,  lovely  Mary  Donnelly,  it's  you  I  love  the  best 554 

Oh,  masters,  you  who  rule  the  world 2947 

Oh  may  I  join  the  choir  invisible 3485 

Oh  mother  of  a  mighty  race 2  203 

Oh,  my  laddie,  my  laddie 676 

Oh,  Peterkin  Pout  and  Gregory  Grout 165 

"Oh!  rise  up,  Willy  Reilly,  and  come  alone  with  me" 2678 

Oh!  rosy  as  the  lining  of  a  shell 324 

Oh!  say  not  woman's  heart  is  bought 489 

Oh!  sa3'  you  so,  bold  sailor 1535 

Oh  seek  me  not  within  a  tomb 3505 

Oh  sing  unto  my  roundelay 1070 

Oh!  snatched  away  in  beauty's  bloom 10S2. 

Oh,  talk  not  to  me  of  a  name  great  in  story 354 

Oh,  that  last  day  in  Lucknow  fort 2475 

Oh!  that  we  two  were  Maying 8S5 

Oh,  the  auld  house,  the  auld  house 3234 

Oh  the  Broom,  the  yellow  Broom 1468 

Oh!  the  days  are  gone,  when  Beauty  bright 864 

Oh,  the  littles  that  remain 11 27 

Oh!  the  old  swimmin'-hole!  wharc  the  crick  so  still  and  deep 468 

Oh,  the  Roman  was  a  rogue 2044 

Oh,  the  sweet  contentment 1636 

Oh,  there  are  those,  a  sordid  clan 279 

Oh,  'tis  little  Mary  Cassidy's  the  cause  of  all  my  misery 759 

"Oh,  'tis  time  I  should  talk  to  your  mother" 754 

Oh,  to  be  in  England 1353 

Oh,  to  come  home  once  more,  when  the  dusk  is  falling 297 

Oh,  to  feel  the  fresh  breeze  blowing 1696 

Oh  wha  are  sae  happy  as  me  an'  my  Moggy 1227 

Oh,  whar  shill  we  go  w'en  de  great  day  comes 2037 

Oh,  what  a  set  of  vagabundos 2404 

"Oh,  what  hae  ye  brought  us  hame  now,  my  brave  lord" 782 

Oh,  what  know  they  of  harbors 667 

Oh  where!  and  oh  where!  is  your  Highland  laddie  gone 2276 

Oh!  where  do  fairies  hide  their  heads 235 

Oh,  where  do  you  come  from 48 

Oh,  where  will  be  the  birds  that  sing 3470 

Oh,  wherefore  come  ye  forth,  in  triumph  from  the  North 2392 

,0h!  who  is  that  poor  foreigner  that  lately  came  to  town 939 

Oh,  who  will  follow  old  Ben  Milam  into  San  Antonio 2457 

Oh,  who  would  stay  indoor,  indoor 1662 

Oh,  why  left  I  my  hame 3258 

Oh,  why  should  the  spirit  of  mortal  be  proud 3409 

Oh,  wilt  thou  have  my  hand,  dear,  to  lie  along  in  thine 872 

Oh,  Wing  Tee  Wee 1S03 

Oh  ye  wha  are  sae  guid  yoursel' 1869 

Old  Birch,  who  taught  the  village  school 2175 

Old  Books  are  best!    With  what  delight 1759 

Old  England's  sons  are  English  yet 2234 

Old  Grimes  is  dead;  that  good  old  man 2131 

Old  King  Cole  was  a  merry  old  soul 36 

Old  Mother  Hubbard 51 

Old  Mother  Twichett  had  but  one  eye 63 

Old  Sorrow  I  shall  meet  again 440 

Old  wine  to  drink 201 1 

Old  Winter  sad,  in  snowy  clad 1386 

On  a  day,  alack  the  day 479 

On  a  starred  night  Prince  Lucifer  uprose 3771 

On  either  side  the  river  lie 3188 

On  gossamer  nights  when  the  moon  is  low.  . . .  .^,,j.',|,,,'.., 243 


Index  of  First   Lines  3949 

PAGE 

On  his  death-bed  poor  Lubin  Hes o  iwu  ...".'. ..'. . .', .,'.  ......  igo; 

On  Linden,  when  the  sun  was  low 2440 

On  long,  serene  midsummer  days 1498 

On  parent  knees,  a  naked  new-born  child 21 

On  Richmond  Hill  there  lives  a  lass 616 

On  the  banks  of  Allan  Water 1042 

On  the  Coast  of  Coromandel .- 2054 

On  the  eighth  of  March  it  was,  some  people  say 1966 

On  the  Sabbath-day iioo 

On  the  sea  and  at  the  Hogue,  sixteen  hundred  ninety-two 2804 

On  these  white  cliffs,  that  calm  above  the  flood 3257 

On  wan  dark  night  on  Lac  St.  Pierre 2033 

On  Wenlock  Edge  the  wood's  in  trouiile.  . 1401 

Once  did  she  hold  the  gorgeous  East  in  fee 2619 

Once  in  a  dream  I  saw  the  flowers 3705 

Once  in  a  golden  hour 2927 

Once  in  Persia,  reigned  a  King 2845 

Once  more  the  Heavenly  Power 1333 

Once  on  a  time  I  used  to  dream 1507 

Once  on  a  time,  once  on  a  time 517 

Once  upon  a  midnight  dreary,  while  I  pondered,  weak  and  weary.  3170 

Once,  when  I  was  little,  as  the  summer  night  was  falling 440 

One  by  one,  like  leaves  from  a  tree 2856 

One  by  one  the  sands  are  flowing ■  3761 

One  cup  for  my  self-hood 1956 

One  day,  I  mind  me,  now  that  she  is  dead 325 

One  day  I  wrote  her  name  upon  the  strand 1235 

One  day,  it  thundered  and  lightened 848 

One  day,  mamma  said,  "Conrad  dear" 123 

One  day,  through  the  primeval  wood r. ....  i8g6 

One  for  her  Club  and  her  own  Latch-key  fights. .  .^ -...■< ^'J .ciUii. . . .  1921 

One  honest  John  Tomkins,  a  hedger  and  ditcher iii 

One  lesson,  Nature,  let  me  learn  of  thee — 1300 

One  little  minute  more,  Maud 650 

One  misty,  moisty  morning .■;.':.-. 33 

One  more  unfortunate 3390. 

One  morning,  oh!  so  early,  my  beloved,  my  beloved.  . 1144' 

One  night  came  on  a  hurricane 2105 

One  night  came  Winter  noiselessly  and  leaned 1388 

One  night  I  lay  asleep  in  Africa 2854 

One  other  bitter  drop  to  drink 3497 

One  pale  November  day 1048 

One  sweetly  solemn  thought 3813 

One,  two 58 

One  ugly  trick  has  often  spoiled no 

One,  who  is  not,  we  see:  but  one,  whom  we  see  not,  is 1935 

One  word  is  too  often  profaned 625 

Only  a  baby  small 3 

Only  a  touch;  and  nothing  more :. .  1 1  l.ju 649 

Only  of  thee  and  me  the  night  wind  sings ......'; 625 

Only  tell  her  that  I  love 613 

Only  to  find  Forever,  blest n  12 

Onward,  Christian  soldiers 3814 

Open  the  old  cigar-box,  get  me  a  Cuba  stout 860 

Or  ever  the  knightly  years  were  gone ; . .  655 

Orphan  hours,  the  year  is  dead 1396 

O'Ryan  was  a  man  of  might 1964 

Others  abide  our  question.    Thou  art  free 3653 

Oui,  I'cx'uvre  sort  plus  belle 3842 

Our  band  is  few,  but  true  and  tried 2432 

Our  bugles  sang  truce,  for  the  night-cloud  had  lowered 2281 

Our  camp-fires  shone  bright  on  the  mountains 2512 


395*-'  Index  of  First  Lines 

PAGE 

Our  doctor  had  called  in  another,  I  never  had  seen  him  before.  .  .  292 

Our  Father  Land!  and  wouldst  thou  know 3259 

Our  hired  girl,  she's  'Lizabuth  Ann 171 

Our  youth  began  with  tears  and  sighs 363 

Our  youth  is  like  a  rustic  at  the  play 2908 

Out  from  the  harbor  of  Amsterdam 2382 

Out  I  came  from  the  dancing-place 916 

Out  in  the  south,  when  the  clay  is  done 2381 

Out  of  the  clover  and  blue-eyed  grass 2517 

Out  of  the  dusk  a  shadow 2866 

Out  of  the  focal  and  foremost  fire 2320 

Out  of  the  hills  of  Habersham 1423 

Out  of  the  night  that  covers  me 3Soo 

Out  rode  from  his  wild,  dark  castle 2028 

Out  upon  it,  I  have  loved 819 

Out  where  the  handclasp's  a  httle  stronger 2574 

Out-worn  heart,  in  a  time  out-worn 2855 

Ov  all  the  birds  upon  the  wing 1527 

Over  a  pipe  the  Angel  of  Conversation 1986 

Over  here  in  England  I'm  helpin'  wi'  the  hay 2604 

Over  hill,  over  dale 23 1 

Over  his  keys  the  musing  organist 1367 

Over  the  grass  we  stepped  unto  it 968 

Over  the  mountains 494 

Over  the  plains  where  Persian  hosts 668 

Over  the  river,  on  the  hill 3442 

Over  the  river  they  beckon  to  me 3509 

Over  the  seas  our  galleys  went 3192 

Over  the  shoulders  and  slopes  of  the  dune 1478 

Over  the  turret,  shut  in  his  ironclad  tower 2509 

Over  the  wintry  threshold 1349 

P 

Pack,  clouds,  away,  and  welcome,  day 696 

Paddy,  in  want  of  a  dinner  one  day i960 

Paddy  McCabe  was  dying  one  day ■. . 1958 

PaUid  with  too  much  longing 913 

Pansies,  liUes,  kingcups,  daisies 1470 

Pass,  thou  wild  light 366 

Passing  I  saw  her  as  she  stood  beside 344 

"Passion  o'  me!"  cried  Sir  Richard  Tyrone 2745 

Past  ruined  Ilion  Helen  lives 3089 

Peace,  Shepherd,  peace!    What  boots  it  singing  on 3 no 

Peace  to  the  slumberers 2302 

Pease-pudding  hot 33 

Perhaps  it  is  no  matter  that  you  died 2908 

Persicos  odi 3827 

Peter,  Peter,  pumpkin  eater 31 

Peter  Piper  picked  a  peck  of  pickled  peppers 37 

Phillis  kept  sheep  along  the  Western  plains 768 

Phillis  took  a  red  rose  from  the  tangles  of  her  hair 693 

Philosopher,  whom  dost  thou  most  affect 191S 

Phoebus,  arise 1305 

Pibroch  of  Donuil  Dhu 2277 

Pierrette  has  gone,  but  it  was  not 3388 

Pious  Selinda  goes  to  prayers 721 

Piped  the  blackbird  on  the  beechwood  spray 259 

Piping  down  the  valleys  wild 126 

Pitch  here  the  tent,  while  the  old  horse  grazes 3312 

Play  me  a  march,  low-toned  and  slow — a  march  for  the  silent  tread  3540 

Poets  are  singing  the  whole  world  over 656 


Index  of  First  Lines 


3951 


PAGE 

Poor  lone  Hannah '.":!vi:"i .". .'.;'.;'". I-.'. ''1624 

Poor  Lucy  Lake  was  overgrown 1926 

Poor  soul,  the  centre  of  my  shiful  earth 1252 

Pour  courir  en  poste  a  la  ville 3838 

Pour,  varlet,  pour  the  water 1953 

Preach  wisdom  unto  him  who  understands 1 170 

Prithee  tell  me,  Dimple-Chin 793 

Proud  Maisie  is  in  the  wood 1076 

Proud  of  you,  fond  of  you,  clinging  so  near  to  you 1200 

Pussy-cat,  pussy-cat,  where  have  you  been 35 

Q 

Queen  and  huntress,  chaste  and  fair 1320 

Quoth  Rab  to  Kate,  my  sonsy  dear 748 

R 

Rabia,  sick  upon  her  bed 2953 

Rain  before  seven 66 

Rain  on  the  face  of  the  sea 1946 

Rainbow  at  night 66 

Rarely,  rarely  comest  thou 3364 

"Read  out  the  names!"  and  Burke  sat  back 2298 

Receive,  dear  friend,  the  truths  I  teach 2991 

Rectius  vives,  Licini,  neque  altum 3829 

Remarkable  truly,  is  Art 2086 

Remember  me  when  I  am  gone  away 1 260 

Ride  a  cock-horse  to  Banbury  Cross 36 

"Rifleman,  shoot  me  a  fancy  shot" 2492 

Right  on  our  flank  the  crimson  sun  went  down 2472 

Ring  out,  wild  bells,  to  the  wild  sky 2902 

Ring-ting!  I  wish  I  were  a  Primrose 138 

Rise,  Lady  Mistress,  rise 694 

"Rise  up,  rise  up.  Lord  Douglas,"  she  says 2653 

Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me 3797 

Rock-a-bye,  baby,  thy  cradle  is  green 38 

Rockaby,  lullaby,  bees  in  the  clover 86 

Rocked  in  the  cradle  of  the  deep 1599 

Roll  forth,  my  song,  like  the  rushing  river 3365 

Roll  on,  thou  ball,  roll  on 2075 

Room  after  room 637 

Room  for  a  Soldier!  lay  him  in  the  clover 2314 

Rose  kissed  me  to-day 1800 

Rose  o'  the  World,  she  came  to  my  bed 910 

Rose,  when  I  remember  you 272 

Roses  are  beauty,  but  I  never  see 3402 

Round  among  the  quiet  graves 1112 

Round  the  cape  of  a  sudden  came  the  sea 1 157 

Row  gently  here 700 

Rub-a-dub-dub 31 

Run,  shepherds,  run  where  Bethlehem  blest  appears 207 

S 

Sad  is  our  youth,  for  it  is  ever  going 416 

Said  God,  "You  sisters,  ere  you  go" 3368 

Said  the  Raggedy  Man,  on  a  hot  afternoon 168 

Said  the  Wind  to  the  NIoon:  "I  will  blow  you  out" 133 

St.  Agnes'  Eve — Ah,  bitter  chill  it  was 3284 

St.  James's  Street,  of  classic  fame 2599 

St.  Michael's  Mount,  the  tidal  isle 2596 


395-  Index   of  First   Lines 


PAGE 

St.  Patrick  was  a  gentleman .if,. :,.,.".;....  ,  ig66 

St.  Stephen's  cloistered  hall  was  proud 2365 

Sally  Salter,  she  was  a  young  teacher  who  taught 2067 

Sang  the  sunrise  on  an  amber  morn i354 

Santa  Ana  came  storming,  as  a  storm  might  come .  2458 

Sargon  is  dust,  Semiramis  a  clod .  2848 

Sarsfield  went  out  the  Dutch  to  rout 2410 

Say,  is  it  day,  is  it  dusk  in  thy  bower CJ03 

Say  not  the  struggle  naught  availeth 2839 

Say  over  again,  and  yet  once  over  again 1281 

Scar  not  earth's  breast  that  I  may  have 3471 

Scorn  not  the  sonnet;  Critic,  you  have  frowned ^. 3109 

Scots  who  hae  wi'  Wallace  bled /. 2350 

Season  of  mists  and  mellow  fruitfulness .'.,.  ;  ^iT^. .  . ;  ;.,:.  ,■  1375 

I  Seated  one  day  at  the  Organ 3398 

See  a  pin  and  pick  it  up 66 

See,  children,  the  Fur-bcar-ing  Seal 2083 

See,  from  this  counterfeit  of  him 3604 

See  how  the  flowers,  as  at  parade .!-,;J....-.f. :. ,:( ..i.'.  .  .  1448 

See,  see,  she  wakes!    Sabina  wakes 697 

ISee  the  chariot  at  hand  here  of  Love 526 

See  with  what  simplicity 273 

Seldom  "cant"'. 99 

Send  home  my  long-strayed  eyes  to  me 593 

Serene,  I  fold  my  hands  and  wait 3495 

Set  in  the  stormy  Northern  sea 2244 

Set  your  face  to  the  sea,  fond  lover 921 

Seven  weeks  of  sea,  and  twice  seven  days  of  storm 2230 

Seven  white  roses  on  one  tree .  255 

Sez  Corporal  Madden  to  Private  McFadden i977 

Shall  I  compare  thee  to  a  Summer's  day 1246 

Shall  I  (like  a  hermit)  dwell 814 

Shall  I  say  that  what  heaven  gave 3553 

Shall  I  tell  3'ou  whom  I  love 815 

Shall  I,  wasting  in  despair 813 

Shall  we  meet  no  more,  my  love,  at  the  binding  of  the  sheaves.  .  .  914 

Shame  upon  you,  Robin 733 

She  can  be  as  wise  as  we 562 

She  died  in  beauty, — like  a  rose 3548 

She  dwelt  among  the  untrodden  ways 1074 

She  has  a  primrose  at  her  breast . 740 

"She  has  beauty,  but  you  must  keep  your  heart  cool" 730 

She  has  gone, — she  has  left  us  in  passion  and  pride 2485 

She  has  laughed  as  softly  as  if  she  sighed 495 

She  is  a  rich  and  rare  land . 2265 

She  is  a  winsome  wee  thing 1208 

She  is  all  so  slight 581 

"She  is  dead!"  they  said  to  him.    "Come  away" .  .  3579 

She  is  far  from  the  land  where  her  young  hero  sleeps 1078 

She  is  not  fair  to  outward  view 548 

She  is  not  old,  she  is  not  young 1908 

She  kissed  me  on  the  forehead 887 

She  loved  the  Autumn,  I  the  Spring 3362 

She  made  a  little  shadow-hidden  grave 33Q6 

She  passed  away  like  morning  dew 355° 

She  rose  from  her  untroubled  sleep 348 

She  sang  of  lovers  met  to  play 1049 

She  sat  and  wept  beside  His  feet;  the  weight 3387 

She  sees  her  image  in  the  glass 856 

She  smiles  and  smiles,  and  will  not  sigh 639 

She  stood  alone  amidst  the  April  fiekls 374i 

She  stood  breast  high  among  the  corn 332 


Index   of  First   Lines  3953 

PAGE 

She  that  denies  me  I  would  have 8i8 

She  that  I  pursue,  still  tlics  me 825 

She  walks  in  beauty,  like  the  night 383 

She  walks,  the  lady  of  my  delight 3g3 

She  wanders  in  the  April  woods 1046 

She  was  a  beauty  in  the  days 1765 

She  was  a  pliantom  of  delight 380 

She  was  a  queen  of  noble  Nature's  crowning 381 

She  was  only  a  woman,  famished  for  loving 1040 

She  was  young  and  blithe  and  fair 105 1 

Shed  no  tear!    O,  shed  no  tear 237 

Shemuel,  the  Bethlehemite 3578 

Sherwood  in  the  twilight,  is  Robin  Hood  awake 25Q1 

She's  loveliest  of  the  festal  throng 1028 

She's  somewhere  in  the  sunlight  strong 995 

Shock's  fate  I  mourn;  poor  Shock  is  now  no  more 1826 

Short  and  sweet,  and  we've  come  to  the  end  of  it 828 

Should  auld  acquaintance  be  forgot 464 

Shout  for  the  mighty  men 2345 

Shut  not  so  soon;  the  dull-eyed  night 1477 

Sigh  no  more,  ladies,  sigh  no  more 807 

Silence  instead  of  thy  sweet  song,  my  bird 1544 

Silvery  the  olives  on  Ravello's  steeps 2616 

Silvia,  let  us  from  the  crowd  retire 614 

Simple  Simon  met  a  pieman •    42 

Since,  Lord,  to  Thee 3721 

Since  there's  no  help,  come,  let  us  kiss  and  part 1245 

Since  we  parted  ycster  eve 641 

Sing  a  song  of  sixpence 41 

Sing  a  song  of  Si:)ring-time 133 1 

Sing  again  the  song  you  sung 868 

Sing  lullaby,  as  women  do 715 

Sing  me  a  song  of  a  lad  that  is  gone 438 

Sing  me  a  sweet,  low  song  of  night 1 164 

Sing  the  old  song,  amid  the  sounds  dispersing 866 

Sing  we  for  love  and  idleness 452 

Sir,  I  admit  your  general  rule 1917 

Sir  Lancelot  beside  the  mere 2813 

Sister,  awake!  close  not  your  eyes 1361 

Six  little  mice  sat  down  to  spin 38 

'Skeeters  am  a  hummin'  on  de  honeysuckle  vine 91 

Skies  to  the  West  are  stained  with  madder 13 15 

Slayer  of  winter,  art  thou  here  again i3So 

Sleep,  angry  beauty,  sleep  and  fear  not  me 694 

Sleep,  baby,  sleep!  what  ails  my  dear 75 

Sleep,  little  Baby,  sleep 85 

Sleep,  my  baby,  while  I  sing 92 

Sleep  on,  and  dream  of  Heaven  awhile 699 

Sleep,  Silence'  child,  sweet  father  of  soft  rest 3220 

Sleep,  sleep,  beauty  bright 81 

Sleep  softly  .  .  .  eagle  forgotten  .  .  .  under  the  stone 3587 

Sleep  sweetly  in  your  humble  graves 2321 

Slowly  by  (lod's  hand  unfurled 2968 

Slowly  England's  sun  was  setting  o'er  the  hilltops  far  away -3329 

Small  service  is  true  service  while  it  lasts 125 

Small  traveler  from  an  unseen  shore 9 

Sneeze  on  a  Monday,  you  sneeze  for  danger 67 

Snow  and  stars,  the  same  as  ever 424 

So  all  day  long  the  noise  of  battle  rolled 3181 

"So  careful  of  the  type?"  but  no .  .  2901 

So  fair,  so  dear,  so  warm  upon  my  bosom ...  24 

So  fallen!  so  lost!  the  light  withdrawn ...  1837 


3954  Index  of  First  Lines 

PAGE 

So  far  as  our  story  approaches  the  end 1029 

So  hath  he  fallen,  the  Endymion  of  the  air 3600 

So  here  hath  been  dawning 2920 

So  many  worlds,  so  much  to  do 2902 

So  nigh  is  grandeur  to  our  dust 290 

So  oft  as  I  here  beauty  do  behold 1233 

So  sang  I  in  the  springtime  of  my  years 1275 

So  sweet  love  seemed  that  April  morn 920 

So  that  soldierly  legend  is  still  on  its  journey 2493 

So,  we'll  go  no  more  a  roving 866 

Soft  child  of  love,  thou  balmy  bliss. , 686 

Soft,  gray  buds  on  the  willow 1 158 

Soft  little  hands  that  stray  and  clutch 20 

Soft  on  the  sunset  sky 923 

Softly  now  the  light  of  day 3815 

Softly,  O  midnight  Hours 701 

Softly  woo  away  her  breath 3548 

Soldier,  rest!  thy  warfare  o'er 2301 

Sole  Lord  of  Lords  and  very  King  of  Kings 2847 

Solomon  Grundy 45 

Sombre  and  rich,  the  skies 3598 

Some  asked  me  where  the  rubies  grew 528 

Some  day,  some  day  of  days,  threading  the  street 658 

Some  find  Love  late,  some  find  him  soon 504 

Somq  must  delve  when  the  dawn  is  nigh 2850 

Some  reckon  their  age  by  years 3381 

Some  say  that  kissing's  a  sin 692 

Some  talk  of  Alexander,  and  some  of  Hercules 2280 

Some  ten  or  twenty  times  a  day 1874 

Some  winter  night,  shut  snugly  in 635 

Some  years  ago,  ere  Time  and  Taste 17 15 

Something  calls  and  whispers,  along  the  city  street 1703 

Something  there  is  that  doesn't  love  a  wall 3075 

Something  to  live  for  came  to  the  place 3 

Sometime  at  eve  when  the  tide  is  low 3468 

Sometime  it  may  be  you  and  1 927 

Sometime,  when  all  life's  lessons  have  been  learned 3513 

Sometimes  when  fragrant  summer  dusk 1701 

wmetimes  wind  and  sometimes  rain 282 

jomewhat  back  from  the  village  street 3242 

Somewhere  beneath  the  sun 497 

"Somewhere,"  he  mused,  "its  dear  enchantments  wait" 1206 

Somewhere  lost  in  the  haze 2557 

Son  of  the  ocean  isle 2306 

Song  is  so  old 674 

Soon  as  the  day  begins  to  waste 774 

Sorrow  has  a  harp  of  seven  strings 3360 

Souls  of  Poets  dead  and  gone 1989 

Southrons,  hear  your  country  call  you 2219 

Southward  with  fleet  of  ice 2368 

Spake  full  well,  in  language  quaint  and  olden 1463 

SparkUng  and  bright  in  liquid  light 2007 

Speak  low  to  me,  my  Saviour,  low  and  sweet 3766 

"Speak!  speak!  thou  fearful  guest" 3323 

Spirit  of  Twilight,  through  your  folded  wings 13 17 

Spirit  that  moves  the  sap  in  spring 3081 

Spring  comes  laughing  down  the  valley i349 

Spring,  the  sweet  Spring,  is  the  year's  pleasant  king 1336 

Spring,  with  that  nameless  pathos  in  the  air i344 

Spruce  Macaronis,  and  pretty  to  see 2429 

Squire  Adam  had  two  wives,  they  say 575 

Stabat  mater  dolorosa 3821 


Index  of  First   Lines  3955 

PAGE 

Stand  here  by  my  side  and  turn,  I  pray 1391 

Stand!  the  ground's  you  own,  my  braves 2428 

Star  that  bringest  home  the  bee 13 19 

Stars  of  the  summer  night 705 

Stars  trembhng  o'er  us  and  sunset  before  us 1597 

Stay,  stay  at  home,  my  heart,  and  rest 3232 

Stella  1  since  thou  so  right  a  Princess  art 1238 

Stern  Daughter  of  the  Voice  of  God 2955 

Still  on  the  tower  stood  the  vane ii77 

Still  to  be  neat,  still  to  be  dressed 377 

Stop! — not  to  me,  at  this  bitter  departing 966 

Stood  the  afflicted  mother  weeping 3779 

Strange  fits  of  passion  have  I  known 1073 

Strange  wares  are  handled  on  the  wharves  of  sleep 3224 

Streets  of  the  roaring  town 2210 

Strephon  kissed  me  in  the  spring 923 

Strew  on  her  roses,  roses ioq8 

Strong  Son  of  God,  immortal  Love 2898 

Sublime — invention  ever  young 3783 

Such  is  the  death  the  soldier  dies 2317 

Such  special  sweetness  was  about 660 

Suddenly,  out  of  dark  and  leafy  ways 3218 

"Summer  is  coming,  summer  is  coming" 1578 

Sunset  and  evening  star 3504 

Superintindint  wuz  Flannigan 1979 

Suppose  the  little  cowslip 119 

Suppose  you  sereeve?  or  go  cheap- jack 1857 

Sure  maybe  ye've  heard  the  storm-thrush 1521 

Surprised  by  joy — impatient  as  the  Wind 3566 

Surrounded  by  unnumbered  foes 3768 

Swallow,  my  sister,  O  sister  swallow 1576 

Swans  sing  before  they  die — 'twere  no  bad  thing 1917 

Sweet  and  low,  sweet  and  low 83 

Sweet  are  the  thoughts  that  savor  of  content 2979 

Sweet  Auburn!  loveliest  village  of  the  plain 3262 

Sweet,  be  not  proud  of  those  two  eyes 816 

Sweet  day,  so  cool,  so  calm,  so  bright 3720 

Sweet  have  I  known  the  blossoms  of  the  morning 665 

Sweet  in  her  green  dell  the  flower  of  beauty  slumbers 628 

Sweet  Innisfallen,  fare  thee  well 2607 

Sweet  is  the  rose,  but  grows  upon  a  brier 2837 

Sweet  is  the  time  for  joyous  folk 3772 

Sweet  is  the  voice  that  calls 1371 

Sweet  love  has  twined  his  fingers  in  my  hair 925 

Sweet  Nea! — for  your  lovely  sake 788 

Sweet  Robin,  I  have  heard  them  say 1561 

Sweet,  serene,  sky-like  flower 696 

Sweet  si-xteen  is  shy  and  cold 742 

Sweet  stream,  that  winds  through  yonder  glade 332 

Sweet  Suffolk  owl,  so  trimly  dight 1558 

Sweet,  sweet,  sweet 1370 

Sweet  western  wind,  whose  luck  it  is 596 

Swiftly  walk  o'er  the  western  wave 1323 

"Sylvia,  hush!"  I  said,  "Come  here" 266 

Take  back  the  Virgin  Page 623 

Take  hand  and  part  with  laughter 900 

Take  it,  love 510 

Take  me  upon  thy  breast 3224 

Take,  O  take  those  lips  away 683 


3956 


Index  of  First   Lines 


PAGE 

Take  your  meals,  my  little  man .  ■. 103 

Tall,  sombre,  grim,  against  the  morning  sky 1400 

Teach  me  the  secret  of  thy  loveliness 1503 

Tears,  idle  tears,  I  know  not  what  they  mean 454 

Tell  me,  dearest,  what  is  love 481 

Tell  me  not,  in  mournful  numbers 2914 

Tell  me  not.  Sweet,  I  am  unkind g^^ 

Tell  me  now  in  what  hidden  way  is 1783 

Tell  me  what  is  that  only  thing 1903 

Tender-handed  stroke  a  nettle : 1902 

Thank  Heaven !  the  crisis 1 107 

Thank  you,  pretty  cow,  that  made 47 

That  gusty  spring,  each  afternoon 1203 

That  man's  a  fool  who  tries  by  art  and  skill igio 

That  time  of  year  thou  may'st  in  me  behold 1249 

That  which  her  slender  waist  confined 531 

That's  my  last  Duchess  painted  on  the  wall 846 

The  Al)bot  of  Inisfalen 2739 

"The  Ancestor  remote  of  Man" 1895 

The  angels  in  high  places 3414 

The  Antiseptic  Baby  and  the  Prophylactic  Pup 2035 

The  apple  trees  are  hung  with  gold 1013 

The  April  rain,  the  April  rain 1443 

The  Assyrian  came  down  like  the  wolf  on  the  fold 2327 

The  auld  wife  sat  at  her  ivied  door 1939 

The  autumn  seems  to  cry  for  thee 1102 

The  baby  wept 27 

The  bairnies  cuddle  doon  at  nicht 95 

The  bark  that  held  the  prince  went  down 2349 

The  bells  of  Oseney 2818 

The  bird,  let  loose  in  eastern  skies 37^5 

The  blessed  damozel  leaned  out 3198 

The  blessed  Poster-girl  leaned  out 1941 

The  blush  is  on  the  flower,  and  the  bloom  is  on  the  tree 1165 

The  boats  go  out  and  the  boats  come  in 1622 

The  bonnie,  bonnie  bairn  who  sits  poking  in  the  ase 257 

The  boy  stood  on  the  burning  deck 2439 

The  braggart  March  stood  in  the  season's  door 1353 

The  breaking  waves  dashed  high 2387 

The  bride  cam'  out  o'  the  byre 746 

The  bubbling  brook  doth  leap  when  I  come  by 1293 

The  butterfly,  an  idle  thing 116 

The  Captain  stood  on  the  Carronade — "First  lieutenant,"  said  he  2125 

The  carrier  cannot  sing  today  the  ballads 3332 

The  chain  I  gave  was  fair  to  view 1031 

The  characters  of  great  and  small i734 

The  Christ-child  lay  on  Mary's  lap 212 

The  churchyard  leans  to  the  sea  with  its  dead 3436 

The  city  mouse  lives  in  a  house .■.•■■■       44 

The  clear  cool  note  of  the  cuckoo  which  has  ousted  the  legitimate 

nest  holder iQSi 

The  clocks  are  chiming  in  my  heart 420 

The  clouds  are  scudding  across  the  moon : . . .;.-.  ,■. .  j  ... . ,   1614 

The  Cock  is  crowing ...I  -".Idiu.)-  ,i,iviJ^S-2 

The  color  gladdens  all  your  heart 923 

The  common  street  climbed  up  against  the  sky 3021 

The  conference-meeting  through  at  last 794 

The  cosy  fire  is  bright  and  gay •  ■    i953 

The  countless  stars,  which  to  our  human  eye 3729 

The  cup  I  sing  is  a  cup  of  gold 164S 

The  curfew  tolls  the  knell  of  parting  day 3532 

The  cynics  say  that  every  rose 2045 


Index  of  First   Lines  3957 

PAGE 

The  dames  of  France  are  fond  and  free 986 

The  dark-fringed  eyelids  slowly  close 93 

The  dawn  is  lonely  for  the  sun 997 

The  day  is  cold,  and  dark,  and  dreary 3350 

The  day  is  done,  and  the  darkness 3355 

The  day  returns,  my  bosom  burns 945 

The  days  are  cold,  the  nights  are  long 84 

The  days  grow  shorter,  the  nights  grow  longer 3472 

']'he  days  of  Bute  and  Grafton's  fame 1756 

The  deep  seclusion  of  this  forest  path 1406 

The  despot's  heel  is  on  thy  shore 2220 

The  dew  is  on  the  heather 2305 

The  dews  are  heavy  on  my  brow 2066 

The  door  was  shut,  as  doors  should  be 151 

The  dule's  i'  this  bonnet  o'  mine 757 

The  dusky  night  rides  down  the  sky 1662 

The  elm  lets  fall  its  leaves  before  the  frost 1408 

The  endless  mime  goes  on;  new  faces  come 2854 

The  face  of  all  the  world  is  changed,  I  think 1278 

The  fair  Pamela  came  to  town 802 

The  fault  is  not  mine  if  I  loved  you  too  much 831 

The  ferries  fly  like  shuttles  in  a  loom 13 18 

The  fiddles  were  playing  and  playing 1 145 

The  fire  is  out,  and  spent  the  warmth  thereof 422 

The  flower  that  smiles  today 3377 

The  forward  youth  that  would  appear 2400 

The  fountains  mingle  with  the  river 688 

The  fray  began  at  the  middle  gate 2364 

The  Frost  looked  forth,  one  still  clear  night 1387 

The  frugal  snail,  with  forecast  of  repose 1514 

The  gallows  in  my  garden,  people  say 1 787 

The  garden  beds  I  wandered  by 1890 

The  Garden  that  I  love  is  full  of  light 3441 

The  gardener  does  not  love  to  talk 160 

The  gay  belles  of  fashion  may  boast  of  excelling 2120 

The  gifts  that  to  our  breasts  we  fold 2929 

The  gingham  dog  and  the  calico  cat 173 

The  girt  woak  tree  that's  in  the  dell 1404 

The  glories  of  our  blood  and  state 3404 

The  glow  and  the  glory  are  plighted 1812 

The  God  of  Music  dwelleth  out  of  doors 3130 

The  good  Lord  gave,  the  Lord  has  taken  from  me 304 

The  gorse  is  yellow  on  the  heath 1573 

The  grand  road  from  the  mountain  goes  shining  to  the  sea 2605 

The  grass  that  is  under  me  now 1 114 

The  gray  sea  and  the  long  black  land 1 157 

The  great  guns  of  England,  they  listen  mile  on  mile 2558 

The  Great  Sword  Bearer  only  knows  just  when  He'll  wound  my 

heart, — not  I 2897 

The  (Irenadiers  of  Austria  are  proper  men  and  tall 2436 

The  grief  that  is  but  feigning 2933 

The  groves  of  Blarney,  they  look  so  charming 2609 

The  gull  shall  whistle  in  his  wake,  the  blind  wave  break  in  fire.  .  .    1703 

The  handful  here,  that  once  was  Mary's  earth 3545 

The  high  and  mighty  lord  of  (dcndarc 145 

The  hills  are  white,  but  not  with  snow 1414 

The  hours  I  spent  with  tlicc,  dear  heart 1 140 

The  Indian  weed  now  withered  quite 1983 

The  isles  of  Greece!  the  isles  of  (Jreece.  . . ....  .J .;;  jil'.  .' 2625 

The  Jackdaw  sat  on  the  Cardinal's  chair.  .  .  :■;  .'.'.'.'■:. 2141 

The  Jam-pot — tender  thought 1939 

The  King  sits  in  Dunfermline  toun 2685 


395^ 


Index  of  First  Lines 


PAGE 

The  King  was  on  his  throne 2328 

The  knightliest  of  the  knightly  race 2223 

The  ladies  of  St.  James's 1775 

The  Lady  Poverty  was  fair 2934 

The  Laird  o'  Cockpen,  he's  proud  and  he's  great 2 113 

The  lark  is  up  to  meet  the  sun 116 

The  lark  now  leaves  his  watery  nest 695 

The  last  and  greatest  Herald  of  Heaven's  King 3741 

The  leaves  are  falling;  so  am  1 406 

The  lights  of  Saturday  night  beat  golden,  golden  over  the  pillared 

street 3024 

The  lilies  lie  in  my  lady's  bower 1955 

The  linnet  in  the  rocky  dells 1096 

The  lion  and  the  unicorn 37 

The  lion  is  the  beast  to  fight 2082 

The  lioness  whelped  and  the  sturdy  cub 2207 

The  listening  Dryads  hushed  the  woods 1558 

The  little  Dreams  of  maidenhood 394 

The  Httle  gate  was  reached  at  last 990 

The  little  rose  is  dust,  my  dear 1 139 

The  little  toy  dog  is  covered  with  dust 298 

The  lopped  tree  in  time  may  grow  again 2838 

The  lovely  lass  o'  Inverness 2420 

The  lover  of  child  Margery 1041 

The  lover  of  her  body  said 1044 

The  low- voiced  girls  that  go 1 132 

The  Magic  Mirror  makes  not  nor  unmakes 2849 

The  magpies  in  Picardy 2556 

The  maid  who  binds  her  warrior's  sash 2318 

The  man  of  life  upright 2912 

The  melancholy  days  are  come,  the  saddest  of  the  year 1505 

The  merchant,  to  secure  his  treasure 720 

The  midges  dance  aboon  the  burn 1652 

The  Minstrel  Boy  to  the  war  has  gone 2302 

The  mistletoe  hung  in  the  castle  hall 2837 

The  Mistress  of  the  Roses 1455 

The. Monk  Arnulphus  uncorked  his  ink 1789 

The  Moods  have  laid  their  hands  across  my  hair 3102 

The  more  we  live,  more  brief  appear 407 

The  morning  is  cheery,  my  boys,  arouse 2286 

The  morns  are  meeker  than  they  were 1381 

The  morn's  my  constant  mistress 3142 

The  moth's  kiss,  first 688 

The  mountain  and  the  squirrel 19.09 

The  mourners  came  at  break  of  day 35 14 

The  mufBed  drum's  sad  roll  has  beat 2310 

The  murmur  of  the  mourning  ghost 2736 

The  Muse,  disgusted  at  an  age  and  clime 2565 

The  nests  are  in  the  hedgerows 340 

The  net  of  law  is  spread  so  wide : 191 1 

The  night  has  a  thousand  eyes 863 

The  night  is  late,  the  house  is  still 308 

The  night  throbs  on;  O,  let  me  pray,  dear  lad 303 

The  Night  walked  down  the  sky 1152 

The  night  was  dark,  though  sometimes  a  faint  star 1307 

The  night  was  thick  and  hazy 2184 

The  night  when  last  I  saw  my  lad 800 

The  Nightingale,  as  soon  as  April  bringeth 1551 

The  nightingale  has  a  lyre  of  gold 1527 

The  north  wind  doth  blow 35 

The  Northern  Star  sailed  over  the  bar. 1621 

The  old  mayor  climbed  the  belfry  tower .t:i  .•  ii^.jjK;. .  3318 


Index  of  First   Lines  3959 

PAGE 

The  old  priest  Peter  Gilligan 2803 

The  old  rude  church,  with  bare,  bald  tower,  is  here 3682 

The  old  wind  stirs  the  hawthorne  tree 449 

The  outlook  wasn't  brilliant  for  the  Mudville  nine  that  day 2185 

The  owl  and  the  eel  and  the  warming-pan 47 

The  Owl  and  the  Pussy-cat  went  to  sea 2052 

The  Ox  he  openeth  wide  the  Doorc 209 

The  Pilgrim  I'athers — where  are  they 2390 

The  pines  were  dark  on  Ramoth  hill 972 

The  Pobble  who  has  no  toes 2053 

The  poetry  of  earth  is  never  dead 15 10 

The  poor  benighted  Hindoo 2089 

The  Pope  he  leads  a  happy  life 2137 

The  poplars  are  felled;  farewell  to  the  shade 1411 

The  primrwose  in  the  shea.de  do  blow 3J6 

The  Queen  of  Hearts 39 

The  rain  set  early  in  to-night 1003 

The  rain  was  over,  and  the  brilliant  air 3060 

The  red  rose  whispers  of  passion 657 

The  reivers  they  stole  Fair  Annie 2656 

The  rich  man's  son  inherits  lands 263 

The  rising  moon  has  hid  the  stars 500 

The  robin  and  the  red-breast loi 

The  robin  sings  of  willow-buds 1555 

The  Rose  in  the  garden  slipped  her  bud 3378' 

The  roses  in  my  garden 1138 

The  rosy  clouds  float  overhead 72 

The  royal  feast  was  done;  the  King 3764 

The  ruddy  poppies  bend  and  bow 11 28 

The  sacred  Kepe  of  Ilion  is  rent 3083 

The  Saviour  came,  with  trembling  lips 3054 

The  sea  hath  many  thousand  sands 483 

The  sea  is  calm  to-night 2595 

The  sea!  the  seal  the  open  sea 1592 

The  sense  of  the  world  is  short 474 

The  shades  of  eve  had  crossed  the  glen 779 

The  shades  of  night  were  falling  fast 2915 

The  shadows  gather  round  me,  while  you  are  in  the  sun 3460 

The  shadows  lay  along  Broadway 1032 

The  shape  alone  let  others  prize 537 

The  sheets  were  frozen  hard,  and  they  cut  the  naked  hand 1602 

The  silver  birch  is  a  dainty  lady 135 

The  silver  moon's  enamored  beam 538 

The  sleepless  Hours  who  watch  me  as  I  lie 1306 

The  snow  had  begun  in  the  gloaming 315 

The  Son  of  God  goes  forth  to  war 37Q4 

The  song  of  the  sea-adventurers,  that  never  were  known  to  fame .  2827 

The  songs  I  sing  at  morning 3085 

The  Sonnet  is  a  fruit  which  long  hath  slept 3 108 

The  Sonnet  is  a  world,  where  feelings  caught 3109 

The  Sons  of  Mary  seldom  bother 3072 

The  soul  of  man  is  larger  than  the  sky 3652 

The  South  wind  brings  wet  weather 66 

The  sovereign  beauty  which  I  do  admire 1232 

The  spacious  firmament  on  high 3787 

The  speckled  skj'  is  dim  with  snow 1393 

The  Spirit  of  Wine 2013 

The  splendor  falls  on  castle  walls 635 

The  Spring  returns!    What  matters  then  that  War 1339 

The  stars  began  to  peep 302 

The  stream  was  smooth  as  glass,  we  said,  "Arise  and  let's  away".  3396 

The  summer  and  autumn  had  been  so  wet 189 


3960 


Index  of  First   Lines 


PAGE 

The  sun  descending  in  the  West 1321 

The  sun  had  set 2497 

The  sun  has  gane  down  o'er  the  lofty  Benlomond 544 

The  sun  of  life  has  crossed  the  line 367 

The  sun  rises  bright  in  France 3250 

The  sun  shines  bright  in  the  old  Kentucky  home 3227 

The  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the  seas,  the  hills  and  the  plains.  .  .  2852 

The  sun  was  shining  on  the  sea 2062 

The  thirsty  earth  soai<s  up  the  rain 1993 

The  three  ghosts  on  the  lonesome  road 3758 

The  time  for  toil  is  past,  the  night  has  come 3731 

The  time  I've  lost  in  wooing 729 

The  tree  of  deepest  root  is  found 2103 

The  turtle  on  yon  withered  bough 830 

The  twilight  hours,  like  birds,  flew  by 1317 

The  violet  in  the  wood,  that's  sweet  to-day 1503 

The  violet  is  much  too  shy 14S8 

The  voice  that  breathed  o'er  Eden 1197 

The  wanton  troopers  riding  by 1817 

The  warm  sun  is  failing;  the  bleak  wind  is  wailing 1380 

The  waves  about  lona  dirge 3654 

The  weather-leech  of  the  topsail  shivers 1595 

The  western  wind  is  blowing  fair 712 

The  white  goat  Amaryllis 247 

The  white  moth  to  the  closing  vine 1677 

The  white-rose  garland  at  her  feet 35Q4 

The  white  rose  tree  that  spend  its  musk 992 

The  widow  can  bake,  and  the  widow  can  brew 2020 

The  wind  from  out  the  west  is  blowing 1400 

The  wind  is  awake,  pretty  leaves,  pretty  leaves 1049 

The  wind  was  a  torrent  of  darkness  among  the  gusty  trees 2S09 

The  wind  went  wooing  the  rose 1032 

The  winding  road  lies  white  and  bare 1679 

The  window  has  Four  little  Panes 20S6 

The  winds  that  once  the  Argo  bore 2323 

The  winds  were  yelling,  the  waves  were  swelling 163 1 

The  wine  of  Love  is  music 487 

The  wintry  west  extends  his  blast 1386 

The  wisdom  of  the  world  said  unto  me 2995 

The  wisest  of  the  wise 362 

The  wish,  that  of  the  living  whole 2900 

The  word  of  God  to  Leyden  came 2386 

The  world  goes  up  and  the  world  goes  down 1215 

The  world  is  great:  the  birds  all  fly  from  mc 323 

The  world  is  so  full  of  a  number  of  things 98 

The  world  is  too  much  with  us;  late  and  soon 1292 

The  world  was  wide  when  I  was  young 441 

The  World's  a  bubble,  and  the  life  of  Man 399 

The  world's  a  very  happy  place 127 

The  world's  great  age  begins  anew 2623 

The  year's  at  the  spring i333 

The  yellow  moon  is  a  dancing  phantom 1548 

The  young  girl  questions,  "VVhether  were  it  better" 512 

'I'he  young  May  moon  is  beaming,  love 699 

■'Thee,  Mary,  with  this  ring  I  wed" 1225 

Their  mouths  have  drunken  the  eternal  wine 284S 

Them  ez  wants,  must  choose .  ig^S 

Then,  lady,  at  last  thou  art  sick  of  my  sighing 669 

Then  let  the  chill  Sirocco  blow 1994 

There  are  gains  for  all  our  losses 35 1 

There  are  hermit  souls  that  live  withdrawn 3040 

There  are  some  hearts  like  wells,  green-mossed  and  deep 3761 


Index  of  First   Lines  39^1 

PAGE 

There  be  none  of  Beauty's  daughters 546 

'J'here  came  a  ghost  to  Marg'ret's  door 2676 

There  came  an  ancient  man  and  slow 3261 

There  came  to  port,  last  Sunday  night 1928 

There  came  to  the  beach  a  poor  exile  of  Erin 2252 

There  dwelt  a  miller,  hale  and  bold 2982 

There  fared  a  mother  driven  forth 213 

There  hath  come  an  host  to  see  Thee 218 

There  in  the  fane  a  beauteous  creature  stands 377 

There  is  a  bird  that  comes  and  sings 1556 

There  is  a  bird,  who  by  his  coat 1S40 

There  is  a  clouded  city,  gone  to  rest 32 11 

There  is  a  flower,  a  little  Hower 1476 

There  is  a  flower,  the  lesser  Celandine 1469 

There  is  a  garden  enclosefl 3209 

There  is  a  garden  in  her  face 524 

There  is  a  green  hill  far  away 3812 

There  is  a  jewel  which  no  Indian  mines 2980 

There  is  a  lady  sweet  and  kind 523 

There  is  a  pity  in  forgotten  things 449 

There  is  a  pleasure  in  the  pathless  woods 1586 

There  is  a  pool  on  Garda 2623 

There  is  a  Reaper,  whose  name  is  Death 3418 

There  is  a  river  clear  and  fair •.  .  1923 

There  is  a  shrine  whose  golden  gate 395 

There  is  a  sound  that's  dear  to  me 2023 

There  is  a  temple  in  my  heart 442 

There  is  an  air  for  which  I  would  disown 920 

There  is  an  hour  of  peaceful  rest 3803 

There  is  heard  a  hymn  when  the  panes  are  dim 214 

There  is  many  a  love  in  the  land,  my  love 693 

There  is  no  death!  the  stars  go  down 3763 

There  is  no  flock,  however  watched  and  tended 35  10 

There  is  no  God,  as  I  was  taught  in  youth 3403 

Tliere  is  no  light  in  any  path  of  Heaven 355Q 

There  is  no  mood,  no  heart-throb  fugitive 3108 

There  is  no  unbelief 3762 

There  is  no  vacant  chair.    The  loving  meet 3512 

There  is  no  wrath  in  the  stars 2557 

There  is  none,  O  none  but  you 589 

There  is  something  in  the  autumn  that  is  native  to  my  blood ....  1689 

There  lies  a  little  city  in  the  hills 371 1 

There!  little  girl,  don't  cry .- 349 

There  lived  a  sage  in  days  of  yore 2049 

There  lived  a  wife  at  Usher's  Well 2650 

There  must  be  fairy  miners 1468 

There  once  was  a  wood,  antl  a  verj^  thick  wood 56 

There  she  sits  in  her  Island-home 2240 

There  sits  a  bird  on  every  tree 735 

There  sits  a  piper  on  the  hill 132 

There  they  are,  my  fifty  men  and  women 12S4 

There  was  a  captain-general  who  ruled  in  Vera  Cruz 2026 

There  was  a  crooked  man,  and  he  went  a  crooked  mile 34 

There  was  a  gentle  hostler 315 

There  was  a  girl  in  our  town 62 

There  was  a  jolly  miller  once  lived  on  the  river  Dee 163 

There  was  a  King  in  Brentford 1848 

There  was  a  knicht  riding  frae  the  east 2683 

There  was  a  lady  lived  at  Leith 1962 

There  was  a  little  girl,  who  had  a  little  curl 1 13 

There  was  a  little  man 32 

There  was  a  man  of  our  town 34 


3962 


Index  of  First   Lines 


PAGE 

There  was  a  rover  from  a  western  shore 2230 

There  was  a  small  boy  of  Quebec 2090 

There  was  a  snake  that  dwelt  in  Skye 2070 

There  was  a  sound  of  revelry  by  night 2450 

There  was  a  time  when  meadow,  grove,  and  stream 371 

There  was  a  young  fellow  named  Tait 2088 

There  was  a  young  girl  of  Lahore 2089 

There  was  a  young  lady  of  Niger 2089 

There  was  a  young  lady  of  Wilts 2089 

There  was  a  young  man  so  benighted 2090 

There  was  a  youth,  and  a  well-beloved  youth 2705 

There  was  an  Old  Man  in  a  boat 2058 

There  was  an  Old  Man  in  a  tree 2057 

There  was  an  old  man  of  Nantucket 2090 

There  was  an  old  man  of  Tarentum 2089 

There  was  an  Old  Man  who  said  "Hush" 2058 

There  was  an  Old  Man  with  a  beard 2057 

There  was  an  Old  Man  with  a  poker 2058 

There  was  an  old  woman,  and  what  do  you  think 32 

There  was  an  old  woman  lived  under  a  hill 35 

There  was  an  old  woman  who  lived  in  a  shoe 31 

There  was  once  a  little  animal 1891 

There  was  one  little  Jim 107 

There  was  twa  sisters  in  a  bower 2648 

There  were  four  of  us  about  the  bed 2746 

There  were  ninety  and  nine  that  safely  lay 37s6 

There  were  three  kings  into  the  east 2000 

There  were  three  ravens  sat  on  a  tree 2680 

There  were  three  sailors  of  Bristol  city 2140 

There  were  three  young  women  of  Birmingham 2089 

There  were  two  blackbirds  sitting  on  a  hill 35 

There  were  two  little  girls,  neither  handsome  nor  plain 109 

There's  a  barrel-organ  caroling  across  a  golden  street 3025 

There's  a  certain  young  lady 73 1 

There's  a  city  that  lies  in  the  Kingdom  of  Clouds 37o6 

There's  a  dear  little  plant  that  grows  in  our  isle 2264 

There's  a  grass-grown  road  from  the  valley 1080 

There's  a  merry  brown  thrush  sitting  up  in  the  tree 105 

There's  a  road  to  heaven,  a  road  to  hell 657 

There's  a  rosie-show  in  Derry ■  •     925 

There's  a  whisper  down  the  field  where  the  year  has  shot  her  yield  1704 
There's  a  woman  like  a  dewdrop,  she's  so  purer  than  the  purest .  .    1156 

There's  gowd  in  the  breast  of  the  primrose  pale 1142 

There's  nae  lark  loves  the  lift,  my  dear 646 

There's  naught  but  care  on  every  han' 727 

There's  no  dew  left  on  the  daisies  and  clover 426 

There's  not  a  joy  the  world  can  give  like  that  it  takes  away 355 

There's  not  a  nook  within  this  solemn  Pass 1430 

There's  trampling  of  hoofs  in  the  busy  street 3062 

These  are  the  best  of  him 3596 

These  are  the  days  when  birds  come  back i373 

These  hearts  were  woven  of  human  joys  and  cares 2545 

These  many  years  since  we  began  to  be 902 

They  all  were  looking  for  a  king 3774 

They  are  all  gone  into  the  world  of  light 35o8 

They  are  not  long,  the  weeping  and  the  laughter 3404 

They  bade  me  to  my  spinning 2821 

They  bear  no  laurels  on  their  sunless  brows 2950 

They  chained  her  fair  young  body  to  the  cold  and  cruel  stone. .  .  .    2253 

They  do  me  wrong  who  say  I  come  no  more 2922 

They  do  neither  plight  nor  wed 344° 

They  find  the  way,  who  linger  where ^973 


Index  of  First   Lines  39^3 


PAGE 

They  grew  in  beauty,  side  by  side 3561 

They  made  the  chamber  sweet  withi  flowers  and  leaves 1259 

They  may  talk  of  love  in  a  cottage 732 

They  nearly  strike  me  dumb i730 

They  seemed,  to  those  who  saw  them  meet 837 

They  shot  young  Windebank  just  here 2325 

They  sit  at  home  and  they  dream  and  dally 3012 

They  speak  o'  wiles  in  woman's  smiles 493 

They  stood  above  the  world 1172 

They  stood  on  the  bridge  at  midnight 1950 

They  that  wash  on  Monday 65 

They  threw  a  stone,  you  threw  a  stone 3736 

They  told  me,  Heraclitus,  they  told  me  you  were  dead 3529 

They  told  me  I  was  heir:  I  turned  in  haste 3727 

They  went  forth  to  battle,  but  they  always  fell 2946 

They  went  to  sea  in  a  sieve,  they  did 2050 

They  who  create  rob  death  of  half  its  stings 3105 

They'll  come  again  to  the  apple  tree 163 

Think  thou  and  act;  tomorrow  thou  shalt  die 3565 

Thirty  days  hath  September 61 

Thirty  white  horses  upon  a  red  hill 63 

This  ae  nighte,  this  ae  nighte 2652 

This  bronze  doth  keep  the  very  form  and  mold 3642 

This,  children,  is  the  famed  Mon-goos 2083 

This  figure,  that  thou  here  seest  put .■:■: 3652 

This  house,  where  once  a  lawyer  dwelt 1916 

This  I  beheld,  or  dreamed  it  in  a  dream 2923 

This  is  Mab,  the  ISlistress-Fairy 233 

This  is  my  faith,  and  my  mind's  heritage 2554 

This  is  the  Arsenal.    L'rom  floor  to  ceiling 3069 

This  is  the  height  of  our  deserts 2909 

This  is  the  house  that  Jack  built 49 

This  is  the  law  of  the  Yukon,  and  ever  she  makes  it  plain 2575 

This  is  the  month,  and  this  the  happy  morn 223 

This  is  the  ship  of  pearl,  which,  poets  feign 2913 

This  is  the  tale  from  first  to  last 3753 

This  is  the  time  when  bit  by  bit 1332 

This  is  the  Yak,  so  neg-li-gee 2083 

This  kiss  upon  your  fan  I  press 1783 

This  little  child  so  white,  so  calm 320 

This  little  pig  went  to  market 58 

This  peach  is  pink  with  such  a  pink 574 

This  Relative  of  mine 1728 

This  tragical  tale,  which,  they  say,  is  a  true  one 2148 

This  was  the  woman;  what  now  of  the  man 1265 

This  was  your  butterfly,  you  see 119 

This  world  is  all  a  fleeting  show 3699 

Thomas  a  Tattamus  took  two  T's 63 

Those  we  love  truly  never  die 3571 

Thou  art  to  all  lost  love  the  best 1406  - 

Thou  blossom  bright  with  autumn  dew 1484 

Thou  dreamer  with  the  million  moods 1589 

Thou  goest;  to  what  distant  place 962 

Thou  happy,  happy  elf 268 

Thou  hast  lived  in  pain  and  woe 3551 

Thou  lingering  star,  with  lessening  ray 1072 

Thou  little  bird,  thou  dweller  by  the  sea 1522 

Thou  lovely  and  beloved,  thou  my  love 1256 

Thou  must  be  true  thyself 2932 

Thou  spark  of  life  that  wavest  wings  of  gold 1517 

Thou  still  unravished  bride  of  quietness 3163 

Thou  that  hast  a  daughter 1625 


3964 


Index  of  First   Lines 


PAGE 

Thou  too  hast  traveled,  little  fluttering  thing 1573 

Thou  wast  all  that  to  me,  love 1 105 

Thou  who  hast  slept  all  night  upon  the  storm 1542 

Thou  who,  when  fears  attack 1983 

Thou  wilt  not  look  on  me 929 

Thou  youngest  Virgin-daughter  of  the  skies 3524 

Though  I  met  her  in  the  summer  when  one's  heart  lies  round  at  ease  1906 

Though  love  repine,  and  reason  chafe 2959 

Though  singing  but  the  shy  and  sweet 1170 

Though  when  I  loved  thee  thou  wert  fair 608 

Though,  when  other  maids  stand  by 630 

Thought  is  deeper  than  all  speech 2975 

Three  fishers  went  sailing  away  to  the  West 1620 

Three  Kings  came  riding  from  far  away 216 

Three  little  words,  you  often  see 60 

Three  Poets,  in  three  distant  ages  born 3647 

Three  score  o'  nobles  rade  to  the  King's  ha' 783 

Three  wise  men  of  Gotham 35 

Three  words  fall  sweetly  on  my  soul 3244 

Three  years  she  grew  in  sun  and  shower 1075 

Thrice  at  the  huts  of  Fontenoy  the  English  column  failed 2417 

Thrice  happy  he,  who  by  some  shady  grove 1635 

Thrice  with  her  lips  she  touched  my  lips 990 

Through  all  the  wind-blown  aisles  of  May 1451 

Through  meadow-ways  as  I  did  tread 1358 

Through  the  fierce  fever  I  nursed  him,  and  then  he  said 1035 

Through  the  night,  through  the  night i6ig 

Through  the  shine,  through  the  rain 301 1 

Through  the  silver  mist 1363 

Through  this  our  city  of  delight 1788 

Through  weary  days  and  sleepless  nights 3734 

Throw  away  Thy  rod 3720 

Thunder  of  riotous  hoofs  over  the  quaking  sod 2834 

Thus  Kitty,  beautiful  and  young 1904 

Thus  piteously  Love  closed  what  he  begat 1268 

Thus  spake  the  Lord 2535 

Thus  will  I  have  the  woman  of  my  dream 391 

Thy  braes  were  bonnie,  Yarrow  stream 1065 

Thy  sorrow,  and  the  sorrow  of  the  sea 2253 

Thy  voice  is  on  the  rolling  air 2905 

Tiger!  Tiger!  burning  bright 140 

Till  dawn  the  Winds'  insuperable  throng 3466 

Till  Eve  was  brought  to  Adam,  he 387 

Time  goes,  you  say?  Ah,  no 423 

Time,  you  old  gipsy  man 2817 

Timely  blossom.  Infant  fair 273 

Tiny  slippers  of  gold  and  green 1 762 

Tired  of  play!  Tired  of  play 280 

'Tis  a  dull  sight 1346 

'Tis  all  the  way  to  Toe-town 59 

'Tis  bedtime;  say  your  hymn,  and  bid  "Good-night " 97 

'Tis  but  a  little  faded  flower.  . 3363 

'Tis  highly  rational,  we  can't  dispute 1918 

'Tis  not  her  birth,  her  friends,  nor  yet  her  treasure 606 

'Tis  not  your  beauty  can  engage 600 

'Tis  right  for  her  to  sleep  between 3545 

'Tis  said  that  absence  conquers  love 983 

'Tis  sweet  to  hear  of  heroes  dead 2937 

'Tis  sweet  to  hear  the  merry  lark 1 554 

'Tis  the  last  rose  of  summer 3505 

'Tis  the  voice  of  a  sluggard;  I  heard  him  complain 106 

'Tis  time  this  heart  should  be  unmoved 360 


Index  of  First   Lines  39^5 


PAGE 

To  all  you  ladies  now  at  land 935 

To  bear,  to  nurse,  to  rear 43 1 

To  draw  no  envy,  Shakespeare,  on  thy  name 3650 

To  eastward  ringing,   to  westward  winging,   o'er  mapless  miles 

of  sea • 2543 

To  fair  Fidele's  grassy  tomb 3436 

To  grass,  or  leaf,  or  fruit,  or  wall 1514 

To  him  who  in  the  love  of  Nature  holds 3444 

To  kiss  a  fan .  . 1783 

To  live  in  hell,  and  heaven  to  behold 1 246 

To  live  within  a  cave — it  is  most  good 2999 

To  make  this  condiment,  your  jioet  begs 1987 

To  market,  to  market,  to  buy  a  fat  pig 38 

To  me,  fair  friend,  you  never  can  be  okl 1250 

To  meath  of  the  pastures i6g8 

To  one  who  has  been  long  in  city  pent 1653 

To  put  new  shingles  on  old  roofs 1859 

To  sea,  to  sea!    The  calm  is  o'er iS93 

To  take  things  as  they  be 2983 

To  the  Lords  of  Convention  'twas  Claver'se  who  spoke 2408 

To  thee,  fair  freedom,  I  retire 2988 

To  what  new  fates,  my  country,  far 2209 

To  write  as  your  sweet  mother  does 17 10 

To-day  a  rude  brief  recitative 1584 

To-day  I  have  grown  taller  from  walking  with  the  trees 1301 

To-day  I  saw  the  shop-girl  go 3021 

Toll  for  the  brave 2435 

Tommy's  tears,  and  Mary's  fears 65 

To-night  retired,  the  queen  of  heaven i549 

To-night,  this  sunset  spreads  two  golden  wings 3375 

Too  fair,  I  may  not  call  thee  mine 984 

Too  late,  alas!  I  must  confess 612 

T'other  day,  as  I  was  twining 488 

Trample!  trample!  went  the  roan 2742 

Traveler,  pluck  a  stem  of  Moly i493 

Tread  lightly,  she  is  near 11 19 

Treason  doth  never  prosper;  what's  the  reason 1918 

Tripping  down  the  field-path 870 

Triumphal  arch,  that  fiU'st  the  sky i444 

Trochee  trips  from  long  to  short 3111 

True  Thomas  lay  on  Huntlie  bank 2641 

Trusty,  dusty,  vivid,  true 394 

'Twas  a  Jacqueminot  rose 745 

'Twas  a  jolly  old  pedagogue,  long  ago 1746 

'Twas  at  the  royal  feast  for  Persia  won 3 114 

'Twas  brillig,  and  the  slithy  toves 2059 

'Twas  ever  thus  from  childhood's  hour 1929 

'Twas  in  the  prime  of  summer  time 2767 

'Twas  on  a  Holy  Thursday,  their  innocent  faces  clean 174 

'Twas  on  a  lofty  vase's  side 182 1 

'Twas  on  a  Monday  morning 2273 

'Twas  on  a  simmer's  afternoon 773 

'Twas  on  a  windy  night i97 1 

'Twas  on  the  shores  that  round  our  coast 2177 

'Twas  the  body  of  Judas  Iscariot 2791 

'Twas  the  dead  of  the  night.    By  the  pine  knot's  red  light 2426 

'Twas  the  night  before  Christmas,  when  all  through  the  house.  .  .  221 

'Twas  the  very  verge  of  May 2537 

'Twas  when  the  seas  were  roaring 1064 

Twilight,  a  timid  fawn,  went  glimmering  by 1143 

Twin  songs  there  are,  of  joyance,  or  of  pain 1273 

Twinkle,  twinkle,  little  star 41 


3966 


Index  of  First  Lines 


PAGE 

Two  armies  covered  hill  and  plain •. .  2289 

Two  birds  within  one  nest 1204 

Two  hands  upon  the  breast 3572 

Two  bonder  year  ago  de  worl'  is  purty  slow 2031 

Two  legs  sat  upon  three  legs 64 

Two  little  feet,  so  small  that  both  may  nestle 17 

Two  little  girls  are  better  than  one 164 

Two  lovers  by  a  moss-grown  spring • 1204 

Two  shall  be  born,  the  whole  wide  world  apart 502 

Two  souls  diverse  out  of  our  human  sight 3596 

Two  springs  she  saw, — two  radiant  Tuscan  springs 324 

Two  voices  are  there:  one  is  of  the  deep I9S6 

TutI  Bahl  We  take  as  another  case 1954 

Tying  her  bonnet  under  her  chin 798 

U 

Un  marin  oaufrage  (de  Doncastre) 2087 

Under  a  spreading  chestnut  tree 2916 

Under  a  toadstool  crept  a  wee  Elf 234 

Under  dusky  laurel  leaf 3506 

Under  green  apple  boughs 565 

Under  my  keel  another  boat 437 

Under  my  window,  under  my  window 258 

Under  the  greenwood  tree 1636 

Under  the  lindens  lately  sat 17 10 

Under  the  wide  and  starry  sky 3485 

Under  yonder  beech-tree  single  on  the  green-sward 556 

Underneath  the  growing  grass 34  iS 

Underneath  this  sable  hearse 3518 

Unlike  are  we,  unlike,  O  princely  Heart 1277 

Unmindful  of  my  low  desert 3222 

Unto  the  Prison  House  of  Pain  none  willingly  repair 3386 

Untrammelled  Giant  of  the  West 2217 

Up  from  the  meadows  rich  with  corn 2494 

Up  from  the  South,  at  break  of  day 2510 

Up  into  the  cherry  tree 160 

Up!  quit  thy  bovver!  late  wears  the  hour 698 

Up  the  airy  mountain 24 1 

Up  to  her  chamber  window 711 

Up!  up!  my  friend,  and  quit  your  books 1657 

Up  with  me!  up  with  me  into  the  clouds 1565 

Upon  a  cloud  among  the  stars  we  stood 3575 

Upon  a  showery  night  and  still 1483 

Upon  ane  stormy  Sunday 755 

Upon  my  lap  my  sovereign  sits 78 

Upon  my  mantel-piece  they  stand 1805 

Upon  the  road  to  Romany 1683 

Urbs  beata  Hierusalem 3826 

Urbs  Syon  aurea,  patria  lactea,  cive  decora 3824 

V 

Vanity,  saith  the  preacher,  vanity 1862 

Vast  Chaos,  of  eld,  was  God's  dominion 1326 

Veni,  Creator  Spiritus 3823 

Veni,  Sancte  Spiritus 3822 

Venice,  thou  Siren  of  sea-cities,  wrought 2619 

Venus  has  lit  her  silver  lamp 3473 

Verse,  a  breeze  'mid  blossoms  straying 403 

Victorious  men  of  earth,  no  more 34^5 

Vital  spark  of  heavenly  flame ...    3489 


Index  of  First  Lines  39^7 

PAGE 

Vivamus,  mea  Lesbia,  atque  amemus '. 3827 

Voice  of  summer,  keen  and  shrill 15 12 

Voice  of  the  western  wind 446 

W 

Wait  but  a  little  while 1169 

Wake!  For  the  Sun  who  scattered  into  flight 2875 

Walking  to-day  in  your  garden,  O  gracious  lady 355° 

Wall,  no!    I  can't  tell  whar  he  lives 3337 

Wander,  oh,  wander,  maiden  sweet 1055 

War  shook  the  land  where  Levi  dwelt 3067 

Was  ist  des  Deutschen  Vaterland 3834 

Was  it  worth  while  to  paint  so  fair 1494 

Was  schiert  uns  Russe  und  Franzos 3846 

Watch  thou  and  fear;  to-morrow  thou  shalt  die 3569 

Watchman,  watchman,  what  of  the  night 2561 

Way  down  upon  de  Suwanee  Ribber 3228 

We  are  all  here 3562 

We  are  as  mendicants  who  wait 1692 

"We  are  but  clay,"  the  preacher  saith 1768 

We  are  in  love's  land  to-day 1 159 

We  are  the  fallen,  who,  with  helpless  faces 2944 

We  are  the  music-makers 3128 

We  are  two  travelers,  Roger  and  1 3340 

We  are  very  slightly  changed 1919 

We  bear  sealed  orders  o'er  Life's  weltered  sea 3478 

We  break  the  glass,  whose  sacred  wine 905 

We  cannot  kindle  when  we  will 3376 

We  have  loitered  and  laughed  in  the  flowery  croft 1732 

We  heard  it  calling,  clear  and  low 1537 

We  journeyed  through  broad  woodland  ways 1147 

We  know  not  what  it  is,  dear,  this  sleep  so  deep  and  still 3S70 

We  know  not  yet  what  life  shall  be 3422 

We  meet  'neath  the  sounding  rafter 3566 

We  met  but  in  one  giddy  dance 1714 

We  need  not  bid,  for  cloistered  cell 3747 

We  only  asked  for  sunshine 3386 

We  pledged  our  hearts,  my  love  and  1 726 

We  sat  within  the  farm-house  old 3236 

We  scatter  seeds  with  careless  hand 2924 

We  see  them  not — we  cannot  hear 631 

We,  sighing,  said,  "Our  Pan  is  dead" 3667 

We  the  Fairies;  blithe  and  antic 235 

We  walked  along,  while  bright  and  red 3564 

We  watched  her  breathing  through  the  night 3546 

We  were  crowded  in  the  cabin 178 

We  were  eight  fishers  of  the  western  sea 3194 

We  were  not  many,  wc  who  stood 2470 

We  wreathed  about  our  darling's  head 312 

Weak  and  irresolute  is  man 2861 

Weak-winged  is  song 2518 

Weary  of  myself,  and  sick  of  asking 2843 

Wee,  modest,  crimson-tipped  flower 1474 

Wee,  sleekit,  cow'rin',  tim'rous  beastie 1507 

Wee  Willie  Winkie  rins  through  the  town 72 

Weel,  gin  ye  speir,  I'm  no  inclined 1955 

Weep  not,  my  wanton,  smile  upon  my  knee 74 

Weep  with  me,  all  you  that  read 3516 

Weighing  the  steadfastness  and  state , 369 

Welcome  all  who  lead  or  follow .; 1988 

VVelcome,  maids  of  honor 1501 


3968 


Index  of  First  Lines 


PAGE 

Welcome,  old  friend!    These  many  years 406 

Welcome,  welcome,  do  I  sing 527 

Well!    If  tlie  Bard  was  weather-wise,  who  made 336g 

Well  met,  pretty  nymph,  says  a  jolly  young  swain 771 

Well  then,  I  now  do  plainly  see 1655 

We'll  meet  beside  the  dusky  glen,  on  yon  burn  side 1166 

We'll  not  weep  for  summer  over 899 

Were  but  my  spirit  loosed  upon  the  air 1262 

Were  I  as  base  as  is  the  lowly  plain 1253 

Were  I  to  name,  out  of  the  times  gone  by 3085 

Were  my  heart  as  some  men's  are,  thy  errors  would  not  move  me     590 

Werther  had  a  love  for  Charlotte 838 

West  wind,  blow  from  your  prairie  nest 1676 

We've  fought  with  many  men  acrost  the  seas 2533 

We've  trod  the  maze  of  error  round 403 

Wha'U  buy  my  caller  herrin' 1622 

"Wharefore  sou'd  ye  talk  o'  love 941 

What  a  moment,  what  a  doubt 2021 

What  a  plague  is  this  o'mine 94 

"What  are  the  bugles  blowin'  for?"  said  Files-on-Parade 2293 

"What  bait  do  you  use,"  said  a  saint  to  the  devil 1905 

What  beckoning  ghost  along  the  moonlight  shade 3S30 

What  can  I  give  thee  back,  O  liberal , 1278 

What  care  if  the  day ....._ 1700 

What  conscience,  say,  is  it  in  thee S9S 

What  constitutes  a  state 2236 

What  delightful  hosts  arc  they 3507 

What  do  we  plant  when  we  plant  the  tree 1402 

What  does  little  birdie  say 15° 

What  essences  from  Idumean  palm 325 

What  have  I  done  for  you 2239 

What  have  I  g;uned  by  the  toil  of  the  trail 1684 

What  heart  could  have  thought  you 1301 

What  heroes  from  the  woodland  sprung 2431 

What  is  a  sonnet?    'Tis  the  pearly  shell 3io7 

What  is  an  epigram?  a  dwarfish  whole 191S 

What  is  death?    'Tis  to  be  free 34°^ 

What  is  Hope?    A  smiling  rainbow 3377 

What  is  it  to  grow  old 4^8 

What  is  the  little  one  thinking  about 86 

"What  is  the  real  good " 2918 

What  is  the  sorriest  thing  that  enters  Hell 2866 

What  is  the  voice  I  hear 2226 

What  is  this  life  if,  full  of  care 2998 

What  is  to  come  we  know  not.    But  we  know 3422 

What  magic  halo  rings  thy  head 1768 

What  may  we  take  into  the  vast  Forever 2976 

What  needs  mv  Shakespeare  for  his  honored  bones 3653 

What  of  the  bow 2241 

What  of  the  darkness?    Is  it  very  fair 3SiS 

What  painter  has  not  with  a  careless  smutch 3112 

What  pleasure  have  great  princes 1654 

What  riches  have  you  that  you  deem  me  poor 2907 

"What?  rise  again  with  all  one's  bones" iQiS 

What  shall  we  do  for  Love  these  days 5i3 

What  soul  would  bargain  for  a  cure  that  brings 1266 

What  sudden  bugle  calls  us  in  the  night 2562 

What  voice  did  on  my  spirit  fall 2471 

What  was  he  doing,  the  great  god  Pan 3124 

What,  what,  what 2069 

What  would  it  mean  for  you  and  me »30o 

"What,  you  are  stepping  westward?"— Yea 398 


Index  of  First   Lines  39^9 

PAGE 

What's  hallowed  ground?    Has  earth  a  clod 34S2 

What's  love,  when  the  most  is  said?    The  flash  of  the  lightning 

fleet 3423 

What's  she,  so  late  from  Pcnshurst  come 330 

What's  this  dull  town  to  me 979 

What's  this  vain  world  to  me 3701 

When  a'  other  bairnies  are  hushed  to  their  hame 283 

When  all  is  done  and  said 2978 

When  all  the  world  is  young,  lad 417 

When  and  how  shall  I  earliest  meet  her 649 

When  Andre  rode  to  Pont-du-lac 2801 

When  April  rains  make  flowers  bloom 1501 

When,  as  a  lad,  at  break  of  day 356 

When  as  the  chill  Sirocco  blows 1989 

When  banners  are  waving,  and  lances  are  pushing 2279 

When  Britain  first,  at  Heaven's  command 2232 

When  cats  run  home  and  light  is  come 1557 

When,  Celia,  must  my  old  day  set 609 

When  chapman  billies  leave  the  street 2106 

When  daffodils  begin  to  peer .',(.  ly!, .' .'.' 1337 

When  daisies  pied,  and  violets  blue . . ." 2019 

When  de  fiddle  gits  to  singin'  out  a  al'  Vahginny  reel 2043 

When,  dearest,  I  but  think  of  thee 601 

When  Death  to  either  shall  come 1168 

When  Delia  on  the  plain  appears 535 

When  descends  on  the  Atlantic 3094 

When  do  I  see  thee  most,  beloved  one 1255 

When  doctrines  meet  with  general  approbation 1918 

When  down  the  stair  at  morning 572 

When  Earth's  last  picture  is  painted,  and  the  tubes  are  twisted  and 

dried 3504 

When  Eve  upon  the  first  of  men ,.,..,,, ... , . ,, 1918 

When  falls  the  soldier  brave ,.,.,.-.,.. .-'..^ .,:,.  ,,..-■    2322 

When  fierce  political  debate 1847 

When  first  I  saw  her,  at  the  stroke 571 

When  first  I  saw  sweet  Peggy 777 

When  first  the  bride  and  bridegroom  wed 12 15 

When  Freedom,  from  her  mountain  height 2197 

When,  full  of  warm  and  eager  love 854 

When  God  at  first  made  Man 370 

When  good  King  Arthur  ruled  this  land 46 

When  I  am  dead  and  over  me  bright  April 1017 

When  I  am  dead  and  sister  to  the  du.st 3So6 

When  I  am  dead,  my  dearest 1 102 

When  I  am  living  in  the  midlands 2601 

When  I  am  old,  and  think  of  the  old  days.  ...  928 

When  I  am  standing  on  a  mountain  crest 1269 

When  I  behold  that  beauty's  wonderment 1233 

When  I  beneath  the  cold  red  earth  am  sleeping 3496 

When  I  consider  how  my  light  is  spent 2844 

When  I  consider  Life  and  its  few  years 2855 

When  I  ha'e  a  saxpence  under  my  thoom 2009 

When  I  have  borne  in  memory  what  has  tamed.  .  .  .    2238 

When  I  have  fears  that  I  may  cease  to  be .  .   34S8 

When  I  have  finished  with  this  episode .   3498 

When  1  have  folded  up  this  tent 675 

When  I  lived  in  Singapore. 2084 

When  I  loved  you,  I  can't  but  allow 832 

When  I  i>lay  on  my  fiddle  in  Dooney .    1965 

When  I  saw  you  last,  Rose 1782 

When  I  survey  the  bright ,<  .„.|.»,,j.^  .,,,, ., 3786 

When  I  was  a  bachelor 43 


397^  Index  of  First  Lines 

PAGE 

When  I  was  a  beggarly  boy 357 

When  I  was  a  little  lad 3241 

When  I  was  just  as  far  as  I  could  walk 658 

When  I  was  one-and-twenty 857 

When  I  was  seventeen  I  heard 366 

When  I  was  sick  and  lay  a-bed 158 

When  I  was  ten  and  she  fifteen 743 

When  I  was  young  the  twilight  seemed  too  long 420 

When  icicles  hang  by  the  wall 2019 

When,  in  disgrace  with  fortune  and  men's  eyes 1247 

When  in  the  chronicle  of  wasted  time 1250 

When  in  the  woods  I  wander  all  alone I3Q9 

When  Jessie  comes  with  her  soft  breast 887 

When  late  in  summer  the  streams  run  yellow 1374 

When  leaves  turn  outward  to  the  light 3089 

When  Letty  had  scarce  passed  her  third  glad  year 265 

When  like  the  early  rose 549 

When  lilacs  last  in  the  dooryard  bloomed 3630 

When  Httle  Fred 99 

When  love  in  the  faint  heart  trembles 507 

When  Love,  our  great  Immortal 506 

When  Love  with  unconfined  wings 605 

When  lovely  woman  stoops  to  folly 1050 

When  lovely  woman  wants  a  favor 1923 

When  maidens  such  as  Hester  die 3S47 

When  May  bedecks  the  naked  trees 1543 

When  men  shall  find  thy  flower,  thy  glory  pass 1240 

When  Molly  smiles  beneath  her  cow 725 

When  mother  takes  the  Fairy  Book 246 

When  music,  heavenly  maid,  was  young 3119 

When  my  beloved  sleeping  lies 924 

When  our  two  souls  stand  up  erect  and  strong '. 1281 

When  Psyche's  friend  becomes  her  lover 849 

When  she  comes  home  again!    A  thousand  ways 1000 

When  smoke  stood  up  from  Ludlow 1526 

When  sparrows  build,  and  the  leaves  break  forth 1097 

When  Spring  comes  back  to  England 1348 

When  Spring  comes  laughing 797 

When  stars  are  in  the  quiet  skies 710 

When  strawberry  pottles  are  common  and  cheap 1769 

When  sunset  flows  into  golden  glows 673 

When  that  I  was  and  a  little  tiny  boy 400 

When  that  my  days  were  fewer 363 

When  the  British  warrior  queen 2348 

When  the  bubble  moon  is  young 1369 

When  the  flush  of  a  new-born  sun  fell  first  on  Eden's  green  and  gold  1884 
When  the  frost  is  on  the  punkin'  and  the  fodder's  in  the  shock.  .  .  .    1381 

When  the  golden  sun  he  knelt .• 2983 

When  the  grass  shall  cover  me 1 1 14 

When  the  hounds  of  spring  are  on  winter's  traces 1339 

When  the  humid  shadows  hover 458 

When  the  lamp  is  shattered looi 

When  the  lessons  and  tasks  are  all  ended 250 

When  the  merry  lark  doth  gild 1330 

When  the  lean,  gray  grasses 11 15 

When  the  Norn  Mother  saw  the  Whirlwind  Hour 3639 

When  the  pods  went  pop  on  the  broom,  green  broom 1659 

When  the  sheep  are  in  the  fauld,  and  the  kye  at  hame 1009 

When  the  Sleepy  Man  comes  with  the  dust  on  his  eyes 70 

When  the  Sultan  Shah-Zaman 854 

When  the  time  comes  for  me  to  die 3469 


Index  of  First  Lines  397 1 

PAGE 

When  the  toys  arc  growing  weary 73 

When  the  voices  of  children  are  heard  on  the  green 151 

When  the  ways  are  heavy  with  mire  and  rut 1770 

When  the  wayside  tangles  blaze 1485 

When  the  white  flame  in  us  is  gone 1 137 

When  the  wind  works  against  us  in  the  dark 1385 

When  the  young  hand  of  Darnley  locked  in  hers 3646 

When  thin-strewn  memory  I  look  through 1750 

When  this,  our  rose,  is  faded 660 

When  thistle-blows  do  lightly  float 1384 

When  thou  must  home  to  shades  of  underground 850 

When  thou,  poor  Excommunicate 597 

When  to  any  saint  I  pray 2005 

When  to  her  lute  Corinna  sings 590 

When  to  the  garden  of  untroubled  thought 435 

When  to  the  sessions  of  sweet  silent  thought 1247 

When  vain  desire  at  last  and  vain  regret 3473 

When  we  are  parted  let  me  lie 987 

When  we  for  age  could  neither  read  nor  write 401 

When  we  have  thrown  off  this  old  suit 2860 

When  we  two  parted 952 

When  we  were  idlers  with  the  loitering  rills 3015 

When  weight  of  all  the  garnered  years 2977 

When  wintry  weather's  all  a-done 1347 

When  you  are  old  and  gray,  and  full  of  sleep 636 

Whenas  in  silks  my  Julia  goes 529 

Whence  not  unmoved  I  see  the  nations  form 2554 

Where  are  the  friends  that  I  knew  in  my  Maying 3005 

Where  are  the  loves  that  we  loved  before 3429 

W'here  are  the  swallows  fled 2865 

W'here  are  they  gone,  and  do  you  know 436 

Where  art  thou  gone,  light-aniled  youth 354 

Where  be  you  going,  you  Devon  maid 732 

Where  did  you  come  from,  baby  dear 4 

Where  forlorn  sunsets  flare  and  fade 2862 

Where  Foyle  his  swelling  waters  rolls  northward  to  the  main 2606 

Where  is  the  true  man's  fatherland 3260 

Where  lies  the  land  to  which  the  ship  would  go 3414 

Where  runs  the  river?    Who  can  say 2842 

Where  she  her  sacred  bower  adorns 587 

Where  the  bee  sucks,  there  suck  1 233 

Where  the  pools  are  bright  and  deep ^ 128 

Where  the  quiet-colored  end  of  evening  smiles ^154 

Where  the  remote  Bermudas  ride 2566 

Where  the  thistle  lifts  a  purple  crown 341 

Where  weary  folk  toil,  black  with  smoke 3058 

Where'er  there's  a  thistle  to  feed  a  linnet 1938 

Where's  he  that  died  o'  Wednesday 2014 

Whether  men  do  laugh  or  weep 2838 

Whether  on  Ida's  shady  brow 3096 

Which  I  wish  to  remark 2174 

Which  is  the  German's  fatherland 2270 

Which  is  the  way  to  Babyland 55 

Which  is  the  weakest  thing  of  all 3385 

Whichever  way  the  wind  doth  blow 2993 

While  sauntering  through  the  crowtled  street 2857 

While  shepherds  watched  their  flocks  by  night 205 

Whilst  Adam  slept.  Eve  from  his  side  arose 1918 

White  little  hands 90 

Whither  away,  O  Sailor!  say 1599 

Whither  is  gone  the  wisdom  and  the  power 3096 

Whither,  midst  falling  dew 1582 


397^  ■  index  of  First   Lines 

PAGE 

Whither,  O  splendid  ship,  thy  white  sails  crowding 1600 

Whither,  O  whither  didst  thou  fly 3766 

Who  cries  that  the  days  of  daring  are  those  that  are  faded  far.. . .  2540 

Who  doth  desire  that  chaste  his  wife  should  be 1212 

Who  dreamed  that  beauty  passes  like  a  dream 390 

Who  drives  the  horses  of  the  sun 2994 

Who  fears  to  speak  of  Ninety-Eight 2262 

Who  has  robbed  the  ocean  cave 539 

Who  has  seen  the  wind _ 130 

"  Who  is  it  knocking  in  the  night' ' 1015 

Who  is  she  here  that  now  I  see 6 

Who  is  Silvia?    What  is  she 519 

Who  is  the  happy  Warrior?    Who  is  he 2935 

Who  killed  Cock  Robin 5.3 

Who  killed  Kildare?    Who  dared  Kildare  to  kill 1917 

Who  lives  in  suit  of  armor  pent 2957 

Who  reach  their  threescore  years  and  ten 457 

Who  remains  in  London 1672 

"Who  says  that  the  Irish  are  fighters  be  birth" 1976 

"Who  stuffed  the  white  owl?"    No  one  spoke  in  the  shop 1881 

Who  wins  his  love  shall  lose  her 849 

Who  would  true  valor  see 37i5 

Whoe'er  she  be 820 

Whose  furthest  footstep  never  strayed 3000 

Why  are  her  eyes  so  bright,  so  bright 578 

Why  art  thou  silent?    Is  thy  love  a  plant 1254 

Why  bowest  thou,  O  soul  of  mine 37,U 

Why  do  the  wheels  go  whirring  round 288 

Why  do  ye  weep,  sweet  babes?    Can  tears 1496 

"Why  do  you  wear  your  hair  like  a  man" 1942 

"Why  does  your  brand  sae  drop  wi'  blade" 2682 

Why  fear  to-morrow,  timid  heart 2932 

Why  have  the  mighty  lived — why  have  they  died 2452 

Why,  having  won  her,  do  I  woo 1212 

Why  I  tie  about  thy  wrist 596 

Why,  if  'tis  dancing  you  would  be 2016 

Why  is  there  in  the  least  touch  of  her  hands 9^9 

Why,  lovely  charmer,  tell  fne  why 614 

Why  should  I  sing  of  women 829 

Why  so  pale  and  wan,  fond  lover 820 

"Why  weep  ye  by  the  tide,  ladie" 786 

Why,  why  repine,  my  pensive  friend 2993 

"Why,  William,  on  that  old  gray  stone" 1656 

Widow  Machree,  it's  no  wonder  you  frown i974 

"Will  you  walk  a  httle  faster?"  said  a  whiting  to  a  snail i934 

"Will  you  walk  into  my  parlor?"  said  the  Spider  to  the  Fly 176 

"Willy's  rare,  and  Willy's  fair" 1061 

Wilt  Thou  forgive  that  sin  where  I  begun 3759 

"Wind  me  a  summer  crown,"  she  said 33S8 

Wind  of  the  North 1123 

With  all  my  will,  but  much  against  my  heart 974 

With  an  honest  old  friend  and  a  merry  old  song i995 

With  blackest  moss  the  flower-pots .  873 

With  breath  of  thyme  and  bees  that  hum 347 

With  cassock  black,  baret  and  book 3399 

With  death  doomed  to  grapple i9i7 

With  deep  affection  and  recollection 2610 

With  fingers  weary  and  worn 3393 

With  fore-cloth  smoothed  by  careful  hands 374° 

With  how  sad  steps,  O  Moon,  thou  climb'st  the  skies 1236 

With  leaden  foot  Time  creeps  along 942 

With  lifted  feet,  hands  still 129 


Index  of  First  Lines  3973 

PAGE 

With  little  here  to  do  or  see 1478 

With  pensive  eyes  the  little  room  I  view 46.? 

With  rakish  eye  and  plenished  crop 1536 

With  ships  the  sea  was  sprinkled  far  and  nigh 1589 

With  strawberries  we  filled  a  tray 1760 

Within  his  sober  realm  of  leafless  trees 341Q 

Within  the  mind  strong  fancies  work 2582 

Within  the  wood  behind  the  hill 249 

Within  what  weeks  the  melilot 1472 

Woman!  experience  might  have  told  me 8.54 

Women  there  are  on  earth,  most  sweet  and  high 382 

Woodman,  spare  that  tree 140Q 

Word  was  brought  to  the  Danish  King 1088 

Words,  for  alas  my  trade  is  words,  a  barren  burst  of  rhyme 3482 

Worn  with  the  battle  of  Stamford  town 2227 

Would  I  were  on  the  sea-lands 958 

Would  that  the  structure  brave,  the  manifold  music  I  build 3135 

Would  Wisdom  for  herself  be  wooed 2953 

Would  you  be  young  again 37co 

Wouldst  thou  hear  what  man  can  say 35 16 

Wreathe  no  more  lilies  in  my  hair 3462 

Wreathe  the  bowl ;  .•..,  j;. : 2003 

Wrong  not,  sweet  empress  of  my  heart i  ^. 586 

Wynken,  Blynken,  and  Nod  one  night :...., 68 

Y 

Yaw,  dot  is  so!    Yaw,  dot  is  so 2030 

Ye  are  young,  ye  are  young 425 

Ye  banks  and  braes  and  streams  around 1071 

Ye  banks  and  braes  o'  bonnie  Doon 1044 

Ye  blushing  virgins  happy  are 600 

Ye  distant  spires,  ye  antique  towers 2589 

Ye  happy  swains,  whose  hearts  are  free SoS 

Ye  have  been  fresh  and  green 1439 

"Ye  have  robbed,"  said  he,  "ye  have  slaughtered  and  made  an 

end" 2797 

Ye  Highlands  and  ye  Lawlands 2276 

Ye  learned  sisters,  which  have  oftentimes 1183 

Ye  little  birds,  that  sit  and  sing 598 

Ye  mariners  of  England 2233 

Ye  Nymphs!  if  e'er  your  eyes  were  red 1824 

Ye  say,  they  all  have  passed  away 2567 

Ye  sons  of  freedom,  wake  to  glory 2271 

Yea,  she  hath  jMssed  hereby,  and  blessed  the  sheaves 1382 

Years,  many  parti-colored  years 407 

Years,  years  ago,  ere  yet  my  dreams 17 18 

"  Yes,"  I  answered  you  last  night 632 

Yes;  I  write  verses  now  and  then 1709 

Yes:  in  the  sea  of  life  enisled 966 

Yes;  when  the  ways  oppose 3140 

Yesterday  it  blew  alway 343 

Yesterday,  Rebecca  Mason 100 

Yet  love,  mere  love,  is  beautiful  indeed 1279 

Yet  once  more,  O  ye  Laurels,  and  once  more 3519 

Yon  silvery  billows  breaking  on  the  beach 3106 

Yonder  in  the  heather  there's  a  bed  for  sleeping 1674 

You  and  I  have  found  the  secret  way 627 

"You  are  old.  Father  William,"  the  young  man  cried 405 

"You  are  old.  Father  William,"  the  young  man  said 1927 

You  ask  me  "  Why  I  like  him.  '    Nay 3000 

You  beat  your  pate,  and  fancy  wit  will  come 19 16 


3974  Index  of  First   Lines 

PAGE 

You  bells  in  the  steeple,  ring,  ring  out  your  changes 427 

You  bid  me  try,  Blue  Eyes,  to  write 3111 

You  brave  heroic  minds 2384 

You  came  to  me  bearing  bright  roses 851 

You,  Damon,  covet  to  possess 541 

You,  Dinah!    Come  and  set  me  whar  de  ribber-roads  does  meet..  2038 

You  found  the  green  before  the  Spring  was  sweet 3668 

You  from  Givenchy,  since  no  years  can  harden 2326 

You  know,  we  French  stormed  Ratisbon 2449 

You  lay  a  wreathe  on  murdered  Lincoln's  bier 3642 

You  may  give  over  plow,  boys 3542 

You  may  talk  o'  gin  an'  beer 2294 

You  meaner  beauties  of  the  night 525 

You,  Nebuchadnezzah,  whoa,  sah 2040 

You  never  bade  me  hope,  'tis  true 631 

You  promise  heavens  free  from  strife 1767 

You  sleep  upon  your  mother's  breast 8 

You  spotted  snakes  with  double  tongue 232 

You  take  a  town  you  cannot  keep 834 

You  taught  me  v/ays  of  gracefulness  and  fashions  of  address 267 

You  tell  me  you're  promised  a  lover 1809 

You  to  the  left  and  I  to  the  right 3009 

You  were  always  a  dreamer.  Rose — red  Rose 1047 

You  who  with  birch  or  laurel 3389 

You  Wi'yum,  come  'ere,  suh,  dis  minute.    Wut  dat  you  got  under 

dat  box 204 1 

You  would  have  understood  me,  had  you  waited 11 20 

You'll  love  me  yet! — and  I  can  tarry 736 

Young  Ben  he  was  a  nice  young  man 2128 

Young  Rory  O'More  courted  Kathleen  Bawn 753 

Your  eyes  were  made  for  laughter 741 

Your  ghost  will  walk,  you  lover  of  trees 261 1 

Your  hands  lie  open  in  the  long  fresh  grass 1256 

Youth  hath  many  charms 421 


INDEX  OF  TITLES 


PAGE 

Abbot  of  Inisfalen,  The, 

William  Allingham  2739 
"Abide  With  Me".  . .  U.  F.  Lyle  3802 
Abou  Ben  Adhem.  .Leigh  Uunl  2999 
Above  Salerno.  .  .  .A.  F.  Murray  2616 
Abraham  Lincoln. .  .Tom  Taylor  3642 

Absence Richard  J  ago     942 

Abt  \'og\eT.  ..  .Robert  lirowning  3135 
Accident  in  Art.  .  .  Richard  Hovey  3112 
Across  the  Door.  .Padraic  Colum  1145 
"Across  the  Fields  to  Anne" 

Richard  Burton    801 
Ad  Chloen,  M.  A., 

Mortimer    Collins  1899 
Ad  Domnulani  Suani 

Ernest   Dawson    997 

Ad  Matrem Julian  Fane    396 

Ad   Alinistram Thackeray  1987 

Adam,  Lilith,  and  Eve 

Robert   Browning    848 
Address  to  a  Mummy 

Ilorace     Smith  2 116 
Address  to  the  Unco  Guid,  or  the 
Rigidly  Righteous 

Robert  Burns  i86g 

Adieu Thomas  Carlyle    954 

Admiral  Hosier's  Ghost 

Richard    Clover  2415 
Adonais,  "I  weep  for  Adonais — 

he  is  dead" Shelley  3612 

Adonais,  "  Shall  we  meet  no  more, 
my  love,  at  the  binding  of  the 

sheaves" W.  W.  Ilarncy     914 

Adventurers,  The .  .  .  .May  Byron  3012 

Advice IF.   .S.   Landor  1710 

Advice  to  a  Girl Campion    8io 

Advice  to  a  Lover,  "Oh,  if  you 

love  her" S.  C.  Jellicoe  1171 

Advice  to  a  Lover,  "The  sea  hath 
many  thousand  sands" 

Unknown  483 
"Ae  Fond  Kiss".  .  .Robert  Burns  94s 
"Afar  in  the  Desert".  .  .  .Pringle  i66q 
Affaire d'Amour .  .  .A/.  W .  Delnnd  1048 

Afoot C.G.D.  Roberts  1682 

After,  "A  little  time  for  laugh- 
ter"   P.  B.  Marslon     898 

After,  "Oh,  the  littles  that  re- 
main"  L.W.  Reese  1127 

After  Death  in  Arabia.  .  .  .Arnold  3582 
After  Dilletante  Concetti.  .Traill  1942 
After  Summer.  .  .  P.  B.  Marston  899 
After  the  Martyrdom 

Scharmel   Iris  3736 
After    Two    Years.  . .  .Aldington    581 

After  Wings S.  M.  B.  Piatt     119 

Afterward E.  S.  P.  Ward  3512 

Afterwards Violet  Fane  3469 

Against  Indifference Wcbbe    615 

Agatha Alfred   Austin  104(3 

Age William  Winter    424 


PAGE 

Age  of  Wisdom,  The. . Thackeray    838 

Agincourt Michael  Drayton  2361 

"Ah,  be  not  False  ". .  R.  W.  Gilder  349 
"Ah,  how  Sweet  it  is  to  Love" 

John  Dryden  485 
"Ah,  Sweet  is  Tipperary" 

D.  A.  McCarthy  2608 
"A-Hunting  We  Will  Go" 

Ilenry  Fielding  1662 
Air,  "  I  ne'er  could  any  luster  see  " 

R.  B.  Sheridan     827 
Airly  Beacon. .  .Charles  Kingslcy  1040 

Aladdin /.  R.  Lowell     357 

Alarmed  Skipper,  The 

J.  T.  Fields  2146 
Alexander's  Feast,  John  Dryden  3114 
"Ale.xis,  Here  She  Stayed". 

William  Drummond  1252 

Alice Uerbcrt  Bashjord      11 

Alice  Brand Walter  Scott  2716 

All  is  Vanity Philip  Rosselcr  2838 

"All  Last   'ii\^ht" .  .Abcrcrombie     674 

All  Saints' Edmu>id  Yates  1868 

Allah's  Tent Arthur  Colton  3740 

Allan  Water M.  G.  Lenvis  1042 

All's  Well /•'.  W.  Bourdillon  2561 

"All's  Well" W.A.  Butler  3760 

Almond  Blossom.  .Edwin  Arnold  1466 
Alone  by  the  Hearth.  .  ,  .Arnold  460 
"Along  the  Field  as  we   Came 

by" A.  E.  Housman    856 

Alphabet,  The.  .  .C.  S.  Calverley  2049 
Amantium  Ira;,  "In  going  to  my 
naked  bed,  as  one  that  would 
have  slept".  .Richard  Edtvards  3031 
Amantium  Ine,  "When  this,  our 
rose,  is  faded.  .Ernest  Dowson     65o 

Amarillis Thomas  Campion    524 

Amaturus,  William  Johnson-Cory  497 
America,   "My  country,   'tis  of 

thee" S.  F.  Smith  219s 

America,  "Nor  force   nor  fraud 

shall  sunder  us,"  Sydney  Dobell  2225 
America  to  Great  Britain. /l//.?to«  2223 
American  Flag,  The,  J .  R.  Drake  2197 

Amoret Mark  Akenside    537 

Amoretti,  Sonnets  III,  VIII, 
XXIV,  XXXIV.  L\'.  LXVIII, 
LXX,  LXXV,  LXXIX 

Edmutul  Spenser  1232 

Amynti Gilbert  Elliot    617 

Andrea  del  Sarto Browning    839 

Andre's  Ride A.  IL  Beesly  2801 

Andromeda J.J.  Roche  2253 

Angel  in  the  House,  The.  Pre- 
ludes from.  .  .Coventry  Palmare    384 

Angelina P.    L.    Dunbar  2043 

Angels,  The,  William  Drummoitd     207 

Angelus,  The F.  E.  Coales  3646 

Anger.  .  .Charles  and  Mary  Lamb     113 

Angler,  The John  CItalkhill  1665 

Angler's  Invitation,  The,  Stoddart  1663 


3975 


3976 


Index  of  Titles 


PAGE 

Angler's  Wish,  The,  Isaac  Walton  1664. 

Annabel  Lee E.  A.  Poc  1105 

Annan    Water Unknown  1062 

Annie  Laurie.  .  .William  Douglas  550 
Annie  Shore  and  Jolmnie  Doon 

On  1057 
Annuity,  The.  .'.  .George  Outram  2132 
Answer  to  a  Child's  Question 

S.   T.  Coleridge     141 
Ant  and  the  Cricket,  The 

Unknown  iiS 
Antony  to  Cleopatra .  IF.  U.  Lytle  2346 
Any  Lover,  Any  Lass,  Middlelon  S7^ 
Apollo's  Song  from  "  Midas"  Lyly  520 
April  Adoration,  An ....  Roberls  1354 
April   Rain,    "It   is  not   raining 

rain  for  me".  .  .Robert  Loveman  1442 
April  Rain,  "The  April  rain,  the 

April  rain  " .  . .  .  Mat/tilde  Bli)ui  1443 
"Are  the  Children  at  Home" 

Margaret  Sangsler    311 
Are   They    not    all    Ministering 

Spirits R.  S.  Hawker    631 

"Are  Women  Fair" Davison  1Q02 

Arethusa P.  B.  Shelley  141S 

Argument  of  His  Book,  The 

Robert  Her  rick  3105 
Armada,  The,  T.  B.  Macaulay  2370 
".Ground  the  Q\\\\A."W.S.La>idor  356 
Arrow  and  the  Song.  The 

H.  W.  Longfellow  2023 

Ars  Victrix Austin  Dobson  3140 

Arsenal  at  Springfield,  The 

H.  W.  Longfellow  3o6g 

Art Theophilc  Gautier  3482 

"As  an  Old  Mercer"  M.  L.  Fisher  1301 
"As  I  Came  Down  from  Leba- 
non"  Clinton  Scollard  2637 

"As  I  Laye  a-Thynkynge" 

R.  H.  Barham  335g 
"As  Like   the  Woman   as  You 

Can" W.  E.  Henley  igoo 

"As  Toilsome  I  Wandered  Vir- 
ginia's Woods"  Walt  Whitman  3004 

Ashes   of   Life Millay    g2r) 

Ashes  of  Roses.  .  .E.  G.  Eastman    g23 

Ashore Laurence  Hope    gi6 

Ask  and  Have Samuel  Lover    754 

"Ask  Me  no  More".  .  .Tennyson  875 
Aspatia's  Song  from  "The  Maid's 

■Tragedy John  Fletcher  1064 

Aspects  of  the  Pincr.,  P.  H.  Hayne  1400 
Astrophel  and  Stella,  Sonnets  I, 
XXXI,  XXXIX,  LXII,  LXIV, 

Lxxiii,  cm,  evil 

Philip  Sidney  1235 
At  a  Cowboy  Dance.  . .  .Adams  2187 
At  a  Solemn  Music,  John  Milton  312s 
At  Gibraltar.  .  .0.  E.  Woodberry  222g 
At  Her  Window 

Fredcritk  Lockcr-Lampson    708 
At  Home  in  Heaven 

James  Montgomery  3702 

At  Last R.  B.  Stoddard  1215 

At  Night Alice  Meynell     674 

At  Parting A.  C.  Swinburne    gyS 

At  Sunset Louis  V.  Lednux  1144 

At  the  Church  Gate.  .Thackeray  702 
At  the  Comedy,  Arthur  Stringer  g26 
At  the  Crossroads,  Richard  Hovey  3oog 
At  the  Grave  of  Champernowne 

John  Albee  3597 


PAGE 

At  the  Last P.B.  Marston  1261 

"At  the  Mid  Hour  of  Night" 

Thomas  Moore  1079 

At  the  Salon Wilkinson  3373 

At  the  Top  of  the  Road 

Charles  Buxton  3577 
Aucassin  and  Nicolete 

F.  W.  Bourdillon  1768 
Auf  Wiedersehen. .  .7.  R.  Lowell    990 

August,  igi4 Masejicld  2547 

Auld  Daddy  Darkness 

James  Ferguson  71 
Auld  House,  The. Caro/;«a  iV<Ji>«fi  3234 
Auld  Lang  Syne.  .  .  .  Robert  Burfis  464 
Auld  Robin  Gray,  Anne  Barnard  1009 

Autumn Emily  Dickinson  1381 

Autumn:  a  Dirge.  ..P.B.  Shelley  1380 
Autumn  Garden,  An 

Bliss  Carman  14.';  2 

Aux  Italiens Bulwer  Lytton     8S9 

Ave  Atque  Vale,  "Farewell,  my 
Youth!  for  now  we  needs  must 

part" R.  M.  Watson    353 

Ave  Atque  Vale,  "You  found  the 
green   before   the   Spring   was 

sweet" T.  S.  Jones.  Jr.  3668 

Ave  Imperatrix Oscar  Wilde  2244 

"Awake!  Awake!"  John  Ruskin  3016 
"Awake,  My  Heart". . .  .Bridges    505 

Azrael R.  G.  Welsh  3414 

Aztec  City,  The.  . .  .Eugene  Ware  3211 

B 

Babes  in  the  Woods. .  .  Unknown  183 

Babie,  The J .  E.  Rankin  19 

Baby George  Macdonald        4 

Baby  at  Play Unknown  58 

Baby  Bell T.  B.  Aldrich  28 

Baby -land George  Cooper  55 

Baby  May W.  C.  Bennett  10 

Baby  Seed  Song Edith  Ncsbit  13s 

"  Baby  Sleeps" ....  Samuel  Hinds  27 

Babylon Viola  Taylor  448 

Baby's  Breakfast Poulssoi:.  56 

Bacchus R.  W.  Emerson  2964 

Bachelor's  Hall John  Finley  1970 

Bailiff's   Daughter   of   Islington, 

The Unknown  2705 

Baker's  Duzzen  uv  Wize  Sawz.  A 

E.  R.  Still  igiS 

Balkis   Abercrombie  3215 

Ballad,  "He  said:  'The  shadows 

darken  down'".  .May  Kendall  1090 
Ballad,  "In  the  summer  even" 

H.  P.  Spofford  162 1 
Ballad,  "The  auld  wife  sat  at  her 

ivied  door".  .  .  .5.  C.  Calverlcy  1939 
Ballad:  "The  roses  in  my  garden" 

Maurice  Baring  113S 
Ballad,   "  'Twas  when   the  seas 

were  roaring" John  Gay  1064 

Ballad  of  Bouillabaise,  The 

W.  M.  Thackeray  1726 
Ballad  of  Cassandra  Brown,  The 

H.  G.  Cone  igo6 
Ballad  of  Camden  Town,  The 

James  Elroy  Flecker  105S 
Ballad  of  Dead  Ladies,  A 

J.  H.  McCarthy  1785 
Ballad  of  Dead  Ladies,  The 

D.  G.  Rossetli  1783 


Index  of  Titles 


3977 


PAGE 

Ballad  of  Dreamland,  A 

A .  C.  Swinhurnc    499 
Ballad  of  East  and  West,  The 

Rudyard  Kipling  2S30 
Ballad  of  Father  Gilligan,  The 

W.  B.  Yeats  2803 

Ballad  of  Heroes,  A Dobson  2304 

Ba!lad  of  Imitation,  The,  Dobson  1S83 
Ballad  of  Judas  Iscariot,  The 

Robert  Buchanan  2791 
Ballad  of  Keith  of  Ravelston,  The 

Sydney  Dnbcll  2736 

Ballad  of  Life,  A Svjinburne    642 

Ballad  of  Low-Lie-Dovvn  Cawein  i6y9 
Ballad  of  Orleans,  A .  .  .  Robinson  2304 
Ballad  of  Prose  and  Rhyme,  The 

Austin  Dobson  1770 
Ballad  of  Reading  Gaol.  The 

Oscar  Wilde  2773 
Ballad  of  Sars6eld,  A.  .  .De  Vere  2410 
Ballad  of  Sir  John  Franklin,  A 

G.  H.  Bokcr  246s 
B.illad  of  the  AnRel,  The,  Garrison  loi , 
liallad  of  t!ie  Boat.  The,  GarncU  3396 
Ballad  of  tlic  French  Fleet,  A 

//.  IF.  Longfellow  2421 
Ballad  of  the  Goodly  Fere 

Ezra  Found  2814 
Ballad  of  the  Oysterman.  The 

O.  W.  Holmes  2139 
Ballad  of  Trees  and  the  Master 

Sidney  Lanier  3776 
Ballad  Upon  a  Wedding,'  A 

John  Suckling  763 
Ballade  de  Frfere  Lubin. .  .Marot  3838 
Ballade  dcs  Dames  du  Temps 

Jadis Frangois  Villon  3837 

B.xllade  of  a  I'riar,  Andrew  Lang  1S74 
Ballade  of  Dead  Ladies.  . .  .Lang  1874 
Ballade  of  Ladies'  Names 

W .  E.  Henley  176: 
Billade  of  Middle  Age.  .  .  .Lang  363 
Ballade  of  My  Lady's  Beauty 

Joyce  Kilmer  57,^ 
Ballade  of  Suicide,  A  Cliesierlon  1787 
Ballade  of  Summer,  A  ndrenii  Lang  1 769 
Ballade  of  the  Primitive  Jest 

Andrew  Lang  1708 

Barbara Alexander  Smith  iioo 

Barlxira  Allen's  Cruelty,  Unknnu<n^^o\ 

Barbara  Frietchie Whittier  2494 

Barefoot  Boy,  The Whittier     261 

Barney  McGee. .  .Richard  Uovey  1980 
Barrel  Organ,  The,  Alfred  Noyes  3025 

Bartholomew Norman  Gale       20 

Battle  Cry J.  G.  .\cihardt  2952 

Battle-hymn    of    the    Republic 

J.  W.  HoTve  220(1 
Baltic  of  Blenheim.  The,  Southey  2410 
Battle  of  N'ascliy,  The,  Macaulay  2392 
Battle  of  Otterburn,The 

Unknown  2356 
Battle  of  the  Hnhk. .  .Campbell  2441 
Bayard  Taylor.  .   J.  G.  Whittier  3658 

^e  True Horatius  Bonar  2932 

"Be  Ye  in  Love  with  .Xpril-Tide" 

Clinton  Scnllard     670 

Beasts,  The Walt  Whitman  2996 

Beauty  and  Duty.  Ellen  Hooper  2072 

Because Edward  Fitzi^erald     ;88 

"Because  of  You,"  S.  A.  Henley  665 
Bedouin  Song Bayard  Taylor    709 


PAGE 

Bedtime.  . .  .F.  R.  St.  C.  Erskine      97 

Bed-time  Song Poidsson      92 

Beech  Tree's  Petition,  The 

Thomas  Campbell  1410 
Before  a  Statue  of  Achilles 

George  Santayana  3212 
"Before  the  Beginning  of  Years" 

A.  C.  Swinburne  368 
Beggar  Maid,  The.  ..  .Tennyson  1143 
"Behave  Yoursel'  before  Folk" 

Alexander  Rodger  751 
Behold  the  Deeds  H.  C.  Bunner  21S9 
Beleaguered  City,  The 

H.  W .  Longfellow  2863 
Belfry  of  Bruges,  The 

//.  IF.  Longfellow  2627 
"Believe  Me,  if  all  Those  En- 
dearing Young  Charms" 

Thomas  Moore     624 
Belle  of  the  Ball-Roora,  The 

W.  M.  Pracd  1718 

Bells,  The E.  A.  Poc  3174 

Bells  of  Shandon,  The 

F.  S.  Mahony  2610 

Beloved,  The Tynan  3727 

Ben  Bolt T.  D.  English    470 

Benedictine  Garden,  A 

Alice  Brown  1451 

Bermudas Andrnv  Marvell  2566 

Best  Firm.  The W.  G.  Doty     114 

Betrothed,  The .  Rudyard  Kipling  860 
Better  Resurrection,  A,.  .Rossetti  3461 
"Beyond    the   Smiling   and    the 

Weeping" Horatius  Bonar  3490 

"Bid   Adieu    to    Girlish    Days" 

James  Joyce  1 1 70 
Biftek  au.x  Champignons.  .Beers  iSoo 

Bill  and  Joe 0.  IF.  Holmes  3002 

Bingen  on  the  Rhine. .  .  .Norton  2634 
"Bird.    Let    Loose    in    Eastern 

Skies,  The Thomas  Moore  3715 

Bird  Song.  . .  .Laura  E.  Richards  1555 

Birds Moira    O'Neill  1521 

Birds R.  H.  Stoddard  1522 

Birth-bond,  The.  .  ..D.  G.  Ro.'setli  1256 
Birth  of  St.  Patrick,  The.  .Lover  1966 

Birthright John  Drinkwater  3401 

Bishop  Orders  His  Tomb  at  Saint 
Praxed's  Church,  The 

Robert  Browning  1862 
Bivouac  of  the  Dead.  O'Hara  2310 
Black  Regiment,  The.  C.  H.  Boker  2500 

Black   Slieep Richard  Burton  305S 

Black  \ulture.  The Sterling  1581 

Blackbird.  The,  "How  sweet  the 
harmonics  of  afternoon" 

Frederick  Tennyson  i.';23 
Blackbird,  The,  "Ov  al  the  birds 

upon  the  wing" Barnes  ^$2^ 

Blackbird,  The.  "The  nightingale 

has  a  lyre  of  gold". .  .  .Henley  1527 
Blackbird,   The,    "When   smoke 
stood  up  from  Ludlow" 

A.  E.  Hflusman  1528 
Black -eyed  Susan .... /o/(«  Gay  937 
Blackmwore  Maidens.  . .  Barnes  336 
Blessed  DamoscI,  The.  Rossetti  3198 
"Blest  be  the  Tie  that   Binds" 

John   Fawcetl  3801 
Blind  Boy,  The. .  .  .Cotley  Gibber     157 
Blind    Men   and    the    Elephant, 
The I.e.  Saxe  1S77 


3978 


Index  of  Titles 


PAGE 

Blood  Horse,  The.  .  B.  W.  Procter  1520 
"Blow,     Blow,     Thou     Winter 

Wiad".  .  .William  Shakespeare  3039 
"Blow,   Bugles,   Blow," 

McGrnarly  2316 
"Blow  High!   Blow   Low," 

Dibdin  Q42 
"Blow  Softly,  Thrush".  ..Taylor  1581 
Blue  and  the  Gray,  The.  .  .Finch  2308 
Blue  Bells  of  Scotland,  The 

Unknown  2276 

Boadicea:  An  Ode Cowper  234S 

Bobolink,  The Thomas  Hill  1531 

Body's  Beauty.  . .  .D.  G.  Rossctli  1258 

Bonnie  Doon Robert  Burns  1044. 

Bonnie  Dundee Walter  Scott  240S 

Bonnie  George  Campbell 

Unknown  2714 
"Bonnie  Wee  Thing". .  .  .Burns  622 
Bonny  Earl  of  Murray,  The 

Unknown  2276 
Book  of  the  World,  The 

William  Drtimmond  1293 

Bookra C.  D.  Warner  2854 

Boot  and  Saddle..  .  .R.  Browning  2284 

Border  Ballad Walter  Scott  2278 

Bourne,  The C.  G.  Rossctli  3415 

Boy  and  the  Wolf,  The.  . .  .Frere     121 

Boys,  The O.W.  Holmes  174S 

Boy's  Song,  A James  Hogg     128 

Bracelet:  To  Julia,  The,  Hcrrick     Sq6 

Braes  of  Yarrow,  The Logan  1065 

Brahma R.  W.  Emerson  2964 

Brave  at  Home,  The,  T.  B.  Read  2318 
Brave  Old  Oak,  The.  .  .  .Charley  1403 
"Break,  Break,  Break,"  Tennyson  472 
Breakfast  Song,  The.  .Poiilsson  42 
Breaking,  The,  M.  S.  Anderson  351 
Breath  on  the  Oat.  ./.  R.  Taylor  2541 

Bride,  The Laurence  Hope  1198 

Bridge,  The.  .  .H.  W.  Longfellow  3356 
Bridge,  The.  .Frederick  Peterson  3257 

Bridge  of  Sighs,  The Hood  3390 

"Brightest  and  Best  of  the  Sons 

of  the  Morning" Hebcr     210 

Bringing  Our  Sheaves Akers  3731 

British  Grenadiers,  The, 

Unknown  2280 
Brook's  Song,  The.  .  .  .Tennyson  1416 
Brookside,  The.  .  ..R.  M.  Milnes  1147 

Broom  Flower,  The Howitt  1468 

Brother  Jonathan's  Lament  for 

Sister  Caroline.  .0.  W.  Holmes  2485 
Brown  of  Ossawatoraie,  Whitlier  2484 
Brown  Thrush,  The ....  Larcom     105 
Bmce  to  His  Men  at  Bannock- 
burn..  .  .'. Robert  Burns  2350 

Bucket,  The.  .Samuel  Woodworth  467 
Bugle  Song  from  "The  Princess" 

Alfred  Tennyson     635 
Building  of  the  Nest,  The 

Margaret  Songster  163 
Burial  of  Moses,  The,  Alexander  3736 
Burial  of  Sir  John   More   after 

Corunna,  The.  .  .Charles  Wolfe  2448 
Burial  of  the  Dane,  The 

H.   H.   Brownell  1626 
Burning  Babe,  The.  .  .  .Southwell     208 

Busy  Heart,  The Brooke  1270 

Buttercups Wilfrid  Thorley  1468 

Buttercups  and  Daisies ..  ffoWK  117 
Butterflies John  Davidson  1032 


PAGE 

Butterfly,  The O'Keefe     116 

Butterfly,  The A.  P.  Palmer  15 19 

Butterfly  and  the  Bee,  The 

W.  L.  Bowles     116 
By  the  Statue  of  King  Charles  at 

Charing  Cross.  .Lionel  Johnson  3598 
"By  Yon  Burn  Side,"  Tannahill  1166 


C.  L.  M John  Masefield    397 

Calf-Path,  The 5.  W.  Foss  1896 

Caliban  in  the  Coal  Mines 

Louis  Untermeyer  3059 

Call,  The R.  W.  Kaufman     509 

"Call  Me  Not  Dead" Gilder  3502 

Call  to  a  Scot,  The.  . .  .Harding  3261 
Caller  Herrin'.  .  .Carolina  Nairne  1622 

Calumny F.  S.  Osgood  2924 

Canadian  Boat-Song Moore  1426 

Candor H.  C.  Bunner     787 

Cane-bottomed  Chair,  The 

W .  M.  Thackeray  3239 

Captain  Reece W.  S.  Gilbert  2180 

"Captain  Stood  on  the  Carron- 

ade.  The".  .Frederick  Marryat  2125 
Captain's  Daughter,  The,  Fields  178 
Captain's  Feather,  The.  .  .  .Peck  2305 
Carcassonne,  "I'm  growing  old, 

I've  si.\ty  years".  .  .Thompson  438 
Carcassonne,  "Je  me  fais  vieux, 

j'ai  soixante  ans".  . .  .Nadaud  3844 

Care V.W.  Cloud  3373 

Careless  Content.  .  .John  Byrom  2989 
Carmen  Bellicosura.  .  . McA/as/er  2433 
Carol,  A,  "He  came  all  so  still" 

Unknown     201 

Carry  On R.  W.  Service  2941 

Casablanca F.  D.  Hemans  2439 

Casey  at  the  Bat. .  .E.  L.  Thayer  2185 

Castara William  Habington    531 

Castles  in  the  Air,  "My  thoughts 

by  night  are  often  filled" 

T.  L.  Peacock  43s 
Castles  in  the  Air,  "The  bonnie, 

bonnie  bairn  who  sits  poking 

in  the  ase".  .James  Ballantine  257 
Casual  Song,  A.  .  .  .Roden  Noel  1049 
Cataract  of  Lodore,   The, 

Southcy  1420 
Cautionary  Verses  to  Youth  of 

Both  Sexes T.  E.  Hook  2021 

Cavalier  Tunes . /(loifr/  Browning  2283 
Cavalier's  Escape,  The 

Walter  Thornbury  2742 
Cavalier's  Song 

Robert  Cunninghame-Graham    619 
Cavalier's  Song,  The,  Motherwell  2282 

Cave  Sedem MacManus  2036 

Celestial  Surgeon,  The,  Stevenson  3729 
Ceremonies  for  Christmas 

Robert  Her  rick  223 
Certain  Maxims  of  Hafiz,  Kipling  igii 
Certain  Young  Lady,  A.  .Irving     731 

Ceylon A.  H.  Fisher  2638 

Challenge K.  F.  Murray    320 

"  Chamber  Scene  "..N.P.  Willis  348 
Chambered  Nautilus,  The 

O.  W.  Holmes  2913 
Chameleon,  The.  .James  Merrick  1875 
Changing  Road,  The,  K.  L.  Bates  3427 
Chanson  de  Kosemonde.  .Hovey    997 


Index  of  Titles 


3979 


PAGE 

Chanson  of  the  Bells  of  Oseney 

Cale  Young  Rice  2818 
Chant  of  Hate  against  England, 

A Barbara    Henderson  2549 

Chant  of  Love  for  England,  A 

Helen  Gray  Cone  2551 
Chant  Royal  of  High  Virtue 

A.  T.  Quiller-Couck  2957 

Chanted  Calendar,  A Dobell  1462 

Chanticleer.  .  .  .Katharine  Tynan  149 
Chaperon,  The.  .  .  .H.  C.  Bunner  1795 
Character  of  a  Happy  Life,  The 

Henry  Wollon  29S6 
Character  of  the  Happy  Warrior 

William  Wordsworth  2935 

Charge,  A Herbert  Trench  2919 

Charge  of  the  Light  Brigade,  The 

Alfred  Tennyson  2473 
"Charge  to  Keep   I   Have,   A" 

Charles  Wesley  3792 
"  Charlie  is  My  Darling  " 

Unknown  2273 

Chartless Emily  Dickinson  3  7 1 1 

Chavez.  .Mildred  McN.  Sweeney  3600 

Che  Sara  Sara Victor  Plarr  11 70 

Cherr>'-Ripe.  ..r//o»ws  Campion  524 
Chess-board,  The,  Bulwer  Lytton    888 

Chevy-Chase Unknown  269'; 

Chiffons W.  S.  Johnson  1788 

"Child.    Child," Teasdale    512 

Child  in  the  Garden,  The, 

Henry  Van  Dyke     435 
"Child  My  Choice,  A,"  Southwell  3747 

Childhood J.  B.  Tabb     440 

Children,  The.  .  .C.  M.  Dickinson  250 
Children's  Hour,  The,  Longfellow     252 

Children's    Song Huejfer     282 

Child's  Heritage,  The.  .Neihardt  279 
Child's  Laughter.  A,.  .Swinburne  254 
Child's  Natural  History,  Herford  2082 
Child's  Song  in  Spring. . .  .Nesbit  135 
Child's  Song  of  Christmas,  A 

Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall     219 
Child's  Wish  Granted,  The 

G.  P.  Lathrop  320 
Chimney  Swallows,  H.  N.  Powers  1575 
Chivalry  at  a  Discount, 

Edward  Fitzgerald  1724 

Chloe Robert  Burns     540 

Chloe  Divine  .  .Thomas  D'Urfey  533 
Chloris  in  the  Snow.  .  .  Unknown     523 

Choice,  The D.  G.  Rossctti  3568 

Choosing  a  Name .  .  .  Afary  Lamb  14 
Chorus  from  "Hellas".  .  .Shelley  2623 
Christ  Our  E.\ample  in  Suffering 

James  Montgomery  3799 
Christmas  at  Sea,  R.  L.  Stevenson  1602 
Christmas  Bells,  //.  W.  Longfellow  211 
Christmas  Carol,  "  As  Joseph  was 

a-waukin' " Unknown     209 

Christmas  Carol,  A.  "The  Christ- 
child  lay  on  Mary's  lap," 

G.  K.  Chesterton     212 
Christmas  Carols,  "It  came  upon 

the  midnight  clear  " Sears     206 

Christmas  Hymn,  A Domett     204 

Christus  Consolator.  .  ./f(jy»w«(/  3773 
Chrysalis.  A.  .  .Mary  E.  Bradley    300 

Churchyard,  The Buchanan  3435 

Churchyard  on  the  Sands.  The 

Lord  de  Tabley  1067 
City  in  the  Sea,  The.E.  A.  Poe  3417 


P.\GE 

City    Mouse    and    the    Garden 

Mouse,  The,.  .  .  .C.  G.  Rossetli      44 
City  of  the  Dead,  The. .  .Burton  3440 

Civil  War CD.  Slianly  2492 

Clay E.  V.  Lucas  1768 

Closing  Scene,  The.  .T.  B.  Read  3419 

Cloud,  The P.  B.  Shelley  1440 

Coleridge,  Theodore  Watts-Dunton  3601 

Collar,  The George  Herbert  3719 

Cologne S.   T.  Coleridge  191 1 

Columbia Timothy   Dwight  2202 

Columbus,  "Behind  him  lay  the 

gray  Azores".  .Joaquin  Miller  2366 
Columbus,  "St.  Stephen's  clois- 
tered hall  was  proud" 

L.  H.  Sigourney  2365 
"Come,    Chloe,    and    Give    me 

Sweet  Kisses".  .C.  H.  Williams    685 
"Come  into  the  Garden,  Maud" 

Alfred  Tennyson  706 
"Come  to  Me,  Dearest,"  Brenan    982 

Comfort E.  B.  Browning  3766 

"Comin'  Through  the  Rye" 

Robert  Burns  727 
Commemoration  Ode  /.  R.  Lowell  25 18 
Common  Street,  The.//.  G.  Cone  3021 
Commonplaces . /J«(/3'ar(/  Kipling  1946 

Companions C.  S.  Calverley  1736 

Compensation.  .  .P.  L.  Dunbar  ^^yg 
Compensation  ..  .Cf/ia  Thaxter  1294 
Complete  Lover,  The... Browne  528 
Comrades,  "  At  least,  it  was  a  life    • 

of  swords".  .  .  .Lionel  Johnson  3006 
Comrades,  "I  rose  up  when  the 

battle  was  dead  " . .  . //owswan  3008 
Comrades,  "  Where  are  the  friends 
that  I  knew  in  my  Maying" 

G.  E.  Woodberry  3005 
Conclusion,  The.  .Walter  Raleigh  3453 
Conclusion  of  the  Whole  Matter, 

The F.  R.  Torrence  2897 

Concord  Hymn.  .R.  W.  Emerson  2205 
Conquered  Banner,  The.  ..Ryan  2515 
Conqueror  Woim,  The,  E.  A .  Poe  3416 
Conquerors,  The.  .  .  .  Harry  Kemp  3068 

Conscience //.  D.  Thoreau  2960 

Conservative,  A. .  C.  P.  S.  Oilman  1S90 
Constancy,    "'Dear   as   remem- 
bered kisses  after  death ' " 

Minor  Watsott  3475 
Constancy,  "I  cannot  chanw  as 

others  do" John  Wilmot     611 

Constant  Lover,  The.  .  .Suckling  818 
Constant    Swain    and    Virtuous 

Maid,  The Unknown     774 

Contemplation  upon  Flowers.  A 

Henry  King  1466 

Content Norman  Gale  11 70 

Contented  John.  . .  .Jane  Taylor  m 
Contented  Mind,  A.  .  .  .Sylvester  2980 

Contentions Unknown     72s 

Contentment 0.  W.  Holmes  1743 

Conundrum   of   the   Workshops, 

The Rudyard   Kipling  1884 

Coridon's  Song.  .  .John  Chalkhill  1636 
Corinna's  Going  a-Maying 

Robert  Hcrrick  1359 

Coronach Waller  Scott  2351 

Coronation,  "All  hail  the  power 

of  Jesus'   name Pcrronel  3792 

Coronation,  "At  the  King's  gate 
the  subtle  noon" Jackson  2985 


398o 


Index  of  Titles 


Coronemus  nos  Rosis  Antequam 
Marcescant.  .  .r/wOTfli  Jordan  igQ2 

Coriymeela Moira   O'Neill  2604 

Corsage  Bouquet,  A Lilders  1783 

Cottager    to    her    Infant,    The 

Dorothy  Wordsworllt       84 
Cotter's  Saturday  Night,  The 

Robert  Burns  3246 

Counsel Mary   E.   Davis  3014 

Country  Faith,  The  Norman  Gale  1644 
Country  Wedding,  The  Unknown  771 
Court  Historian,  The,  Thornbury  1789 
Court  Lady,  A.  .£.  B.  Browning  3315 

Courtin',  The J.  R.  Lowdl     736 

Courtship,  Merry  Marriage,  and 
Picnic  Dinner  of  Cock  Roljin 
and  Jenny  Wren,  The  Unknown    iSi 
Courtship  of  the  Yonghy-Bonghy- 

B6,  The Edward  Lear  2054 

Cow,  The Ann  Taylor       47 

Cowper's  Grave,  E.  B.  Browning  3601 
"Crabbed  Age  and  Youth" 

William  Shakespeare     ■Jl^ 
Cradle   Hymn,    A,    "Hush!    my 
dear,  lie  still  and  slumber" 

Isaac   Watts       7g 

Cradle  Song J.  P.  Pcabody       83 

Cradle    Song,    A,    "  Come    little 

babe,  come  silly  soul".  .Breton  1036 
Cradle     Song,      "Sleep,     sleep, 

beauty  bright,"  William  Blake      81 
Cradle  Song,  "What  is  the  little 
one  thinking  about,"  Holland      85 

Craven Henry  Ncwholt  25og 

Cregy F.  T.  Palgrave  2332 

Credo,  A W .  M .  Thackeray  2022 

Creep  afore  ye  Gang,  Ballantinc     256 

Cremona A.  C.  Doyle  2436 

Cricket Clinton    Scollard  3101 

Cricket,  The.  .  .  .  William  Cowper  1511 

Cricket's  Story,  The Nason     145 

Crooked  Footpath,  The,  Holmes  3739 

Crossing  the  Bar Tennyson  3504  • 

Crow,  The William  Canton  15  \6 

Crowing  of  the  Red  Cock,  The 

Emma   Lazarus  3254 

Crowned Amy    Lowell    851 

Crui.skeen  Lawn,  The.  .  Unknown  2010 
Crust  of  Bread,  The.  .  .  Unknown  104 
Cry  of  the  Children,  The 

E,.  B.  Browning  283 
Cuckoo,  The,  F.  Lockcr-Lampson  15.57 
Cuddle  Doon,  Alexanier  A  nderson     gs 

Cui  Bono Thomas  Carlylc  3377 

Culture  in  the  Slums Henley  1051 

Cup,  The -/.  T.  Trowbridge  i6}5 

Cupid  and  Campaspe .  .  Jolm  Lyly     520 

Cupid  Drowned Leigh  Hunt    48S 

Cupid  Stung Thomas  Moore     4S8 

Cure's  Progress,  The Dobson  1776 

"Curfew    Must    Not    Ring   To- 
night"  R.  H.  Thorpe  $->,2c, 

Cushia  Ma  Chree.  J.  P.  Curran  2203 
Custer's  Last  Charge,  Whittakcr  2.';  20 
Cyclamen,  The Arlo  Bates     668 

D 

Da  Capo H.  C.  Bunner    828 

Dagonet's    Canzonet Rhys    S4S 

Daisies Bliss  Carman  1478 

Daisy Francis  Thompson    341 


PAGE 

Damclus'  Song  of  His  Diaphenia 

Henry  Constable     522 
Dance  of  Death,  The. . .  .Dobson  3446 

Dandelion A.  R.  Annan  1483 

Dandelions,  The H.  G.  Cone  1483 

Daniel  Gray J.  G.  Holland  3327 

Danny  Decver.  .  Ricdyard  Kipling  2293 
"Darest  Thou  now  O  Soul" 

Wall  Whitman  3494 
Darius   Green   and   His   Flying- 
machine J .  T.  Trowbridge  2163 

Dark  Glass,  The.  .D.  G.  Rossetti  1257 
Dark  Man,The.  .  .  .A''ora /7o/)/)cr  910 
Dark  Road,  The.  .Ethel  Clijfnrd  3559 
Dark  Rosaleen.  .  .J.  C.  Mangan  2249 
"Darling,  Tell  me  Yes".  .  .  .Saxc  650 
Daughter  of  Mendoza,  The 

M.  B.  Lamar    569 

Dawn Geo.   B.   Logan,  Jr.  1328 

Dawn  and  Dark.  .  .Norman  Gale  1328 
Dawn-angels,  W .  M .  F.  Robinson  1309 
Dawn  of  Womanhood.  .  .Mo«ro  390 
Dawn  on  the  Headland,  Watson  1308 
"Day  and  Night  My  Thoughts 

Incline" R.  H.  Stoddard  2014 

— SiDay  is  Done,  The,"  Longfellow  3355 

" Day  Returns,  The" Burns    945 

Daybreak //.  W .  Longfellow  3443 

"Days  of  my  \o\ith." ..  .Tucker  352 
Days  of  the  Month ....  Unknown  61 
De  Brevitate  Vitas. .  . .  Unknown  3829 
"De  Gustibus — -" . .  R.  Browning  2611 
"De  Mortuis  Nil  Nisi  Bonum" 

Richard  Rcalf  3367 
Deacon's  Masterpiece,  The 

0.   W.  Holmes  187 1 

Dead,  The Rupert  Brooke  2545 

Dead  at  Clonmacnois.  The 

T.  W.  Rolleston  2607 

Dead  Coach,  The Tynan  3429 

Dead  Faith,  The F.H.Lca  3396 

Dead  Letter,  A. .  .Austin  Dohson  1814 

Dead  March,  A Monkhouse  3540 

Dear  Fanny Thomas  Moore     730 

Dearest  Poets,  The.  .Leigh  Hunt  3085 
Death,  "Death  stands  above  me, 

whi.ipering  low,"  iV.  S.  Landor  3491 
Death,  "I  am  the  Key  that  parts 

the  pates  of  Fame" Coatcs  3430 

Death  and  Burial  of  Cock  Robin, 

The Unknown       53 

"Death,  Be  not  Proud,"  Donne  3.348 
Death-bed,  A.  .  .  .James  Aldrich  3548 
Death-bed,  The.  .  .Thomas  Hood  3546 
Death  of  the  Flowers,  The 

W.  C.  Bryant  1505 
Death  of  the  Old  Year,  The 

Alfred  Tennyson  1395 
Death's  Final  Conquest,  Shirley  3404 

Death's  Subtle  Ways Shirley  3405 

Death's  Summons Nashe  3453 

Debate  In  the  Sennit,  The  Lowell  1840 
Dedication,  A.  .Rudyard  Kipling  3816 

Deeds  of  Kindness Sargent     119 

Deeds  of  \'alor  at  Santiago 

Clinton  Scollard  2540 
Defence  of  the  Alamo,  The,  Miller  2458 

Defiance W.  S.  Landor     728 

Dejection:  An  Ode 

5.  T.  Coleridge  3369 

Delight  in  Disorder Herrick    378 

Departure Coventry  Palmare    974 


Index  of  Titles 


PAGE 

Deposition  from  Beauty,  A 

Thomas  Stanley  60S 
Deserted  Garden,  The,  Browning  1455 
Deserted  Pasture,  The,  Carman  1438 
Deserted  Village,  The,  Goldsmith  3262 

Deservings Unknown  2goy 

Desire,  The..  .  .Katharine  Tynan  253 
Destruction  of  .Sennacherib.  The 

Lord  Byron  2327 
Deutschen  \'altnland,  Des,  Arndt  3834 

Devout  Lover.  .\ Ramiolph     531 

Dewey  at  Manila,  R.  U .  Johnson  2537 
Dialogue  from  Plato,  A.  Dobson  1773 
Diana,  Sonnets  IX,  LXII 

Henry  Constable  1 245 
Dickens  in  Camp.  .  .  .Bret  II arte  3606 
Dies  Ira;,  "Day  of  wrath,  that 

day  of  burning" A.  Coles  3777 

Dies  Ir£e,  "Dies  irae  dies  ilia" 

■.  Tommdso  di  Celano  3819 
Difference,  The.  . .  L.  E.  Richards  59 
"Dinna  Ask  Me".  .John  Dunlop  1163 

Diogenes Max  Eastman  2997 

Dirge, Adelaide  Craps^y  1139 

Dirge,  A,   "Call  for   the  robin- 
redbreast  and  the  wren" 

John  Webster  3430 
Dirge,  "Calm  on  the  Bosom  of 

thy  God" /'".  D.  Ilemans  3551 

Dirge,  "Fear  no  more  the  heat  o' 

the  sun  " .  .  William  Shakespeare  343 1 
Dirge  for  a  Soldier.  G.  II.  Boker  2315 
Dirge  for  One  Who  Tell  in  Battle 

T.  W.  Parsons  2314 
Djrge  for  the  Year.  .P.  B.  Shelley  1396 

Dirge  in  Cymbeline Collins  3431 

Dirty  Jim. Jane  Taylor     107 

Disaster C.  S.  Calverlcy  1929 

Discipline George  Herbert  3720 

Discoverer,  The.  .  .  E.  C.  Stcdman     298 

Disdain  Returned Carew     817 

Dispraise  of  Love,  and  Lovers' 

Follies Francis  Davison    818 

Diverting  History  of  John  Gil- 
pin. The William  Cow  per  2093 

Divided Jean  Ingelow    968 

Divina  Commedia 

H.  W.  Longfellow  3084 

Divine  Rapture,  A Quarks  3742 

Di\ie,  "  I  wish  1  was  in  de  land  ob 

cotton" D.  D.  Emmelt  2218 

Dixie,     "Southrons,    hear    your 

countrj-  call  you."  Albert  Pike  2219 
"Do  I  Love  Thee".  .  .J.G.  Saxc  651 
Do  you  Fear  the  Wind.  .Garland  16S4 
"  Do  You  Remember,"  T.  Bayly  788 
Dolcino  to  Margaret.  .  .Kingsley  1215 

Don  Qui.xote Austin  Dobson  2950 

Don't J.J.  Roche     741 

"Don't  be  Sorrowful,   Darling" 

Rembrandt  Peale  1220 
Doorstep,  The.  .  .E.  C.  Stedman     794 

Doris A.J.  Munby  1201 

Dorothy  Q O.  W.  Holmes  1738 

Doubt  of  Martyrdom,    A 

John  Suckling  602 
Doubting  Heart.  .\.  A.  A.  Procter  2865 
Douglas  Tragedy,  The,  Unkmrwn  2651, 

Dove,  The John  Keats  337^ 

Dover  Beach .  . .  Matthciv  A  mold  2 

Dover  Cliffs W.  L.  Bowles 

Dove's  Nest /.  R.  Tayl- 


"Down  by  the  Salley  Gardens" 

W.  B.  Veals     928 

Dow's  Flat Bret  Ilarle  21 71 

I^rake's  Drum..  .  .Henry  Xewboll  3607 
Dream  of  Eugene  Aram,  The 

Tliomas  Hood  2767 

Dream  Song Middlclon     236 

Dream-bearer,  The  M.  C.  Davies  3058 

Dregs Erncsl  Dowson    422 

Drifting T.  B.  Read  1609 

Driftwood.  .  .  .  Trumbull  Slickncy  2906 

Drink  To-day John  Fletcher  ujgi 

Drinking Abraham  Cowley  1903 

Driving  Home  the  Cowi.  .Osgood  2517 

Drover,  A Padraic  Cohim  i6g8 

Duel,  The Eugene    Field     173 

"Dulc's  i'  this  Bonnet  o'  Mine, 

The" Edwin  Waugh     757 

Duna.  .  .Marjoric  L.  C.  Picklliall  3241 

Dust. Rupert  Brooke  1137 

Dust  Dethroned,  The.  .  .Sterling  2848 
Dustman,  The . .  .F.  E.  Wealhcrly       73 

Duty R  .W.  Emerson     290 

Dying  Christian  to  His  .Soul,  The 

Alexander  Pope  3489 

Dying  Hymn Alice  Cary  3492 

Dying  Lover,  The 

R.  n.  Stoddard  11 14 
Dying  Reservist,  The Baring  3474 

E 

E.  B.  B James  Thomson  3594 

Each  and  All R.  W.  Emerson  2962 

Each  in  His  Own  Tongue,  Carrulh  2867 

Eagle,  The Alfred  Tennyson  1539 

Eagle  that  is  Forgotten,  The 

Vachcl  Li)idsay  3587 

Eagle's  Song,  The Mansfield  2207 

Earl  Mar's  Daughter.  .Unknown  264,5 
Earl  Mertoun's  Song  from  "The 
Blot  in  the  'Scutcheon  " 

Robert  Browning  1156 
Early  Death. .  .  .Hartley  Coleridge  3550 
Early  Morning  at  Bargis 

Hermann  Hagedorn  1645 

Early  Rising J.G.  Saxe  2024 

Early  Spring. .  .Alfred  Tennyson  1333 
Earth  and  Man,  The.  .  .  .Brooke  2909 

Ebb  and  Flow G.W.  Curtis  2849 

Eclipse,  The.  . .  .Henry  Vauglian  3766 

Ediflburgh il.O-ed  Noyes  2603 

Edith W.  E.  Channing  3217 

Edom  o'  Gordon Unknown  2688 

Edward,  Edward Unknown  2682 

Edwin  Booth Alice  Brown  3590 

Effect  of  Example,  Thit..Keble  2924 

Egyptian  Serenade Curtis    86S 

Ejght-Day  Clock,  The,  Cochrane  1756 

Eileen  Aroon Gerald  GrifUti    S49 

Ein  Feste  Burg.  .  .Martin  Luther  3831 
El  Capitan-General.  C.  G.  Lelaml  2026 

Eldorado E.  A.  Poe  3397 

Elegiac  Stanzas..    .  .Wordsworth  3587 
Elegy  on  a  Lap-Dog,  An.  .  .Gay  1826 
Elegy  on  That  Glory  of  Her  Sex, 
Mrs.  Mary  Blaize,  An 

Oliver  Goldsmith  2092 
Elegy  on  the  De.ath   of  -t    Marl 


Index  of  Titles 


PAGE 

Written    ia    a    Country 

aurchyard Thomas  Gray  3532 

.1  and  the  Dormouse,  The 

Oliver  Ilerford  234 
Elizabeth  of  Bohemia.  .  .  .  Wollon  525 
Ellen  M'Jones  Aberdeen,  Gilbert  2073 

Embryo M.  A.  Townsend  3079 

Emilia S.    N.    Clegliorn    346 

Emmy Arthur  Symons  1058 

"En  Voyage "....C.  A.  Mason  2993 
"Enamored    Architect    of    Airy 

Rhyme" T.  B.  Aldrich  3083 

Enchainment.  .  .  .  O'Shaiighnessy  1008 
Enchantment. .  .Madison  Cawein  1406 

Enchantment,  The Olway    613 

Endurance Elizabeth  Akcrs  3382 

Endymion,  "The  apple  trees  are 

hung  with  gold".  .Oscar  Wilde  101$ 
Endymion,  "The  rising  moon  has 

hid  the  stars  " Longjellow    500 

England Gerald  Massey  2240 

England,  1802 Wordsworth  2237 

"England,  My  England,"  Uenley  2239 
England's  Dead../^.  D.  Hemans  2306 
English  Mother,  An.  .  .  .Johnson  2242 

Envoi J .  G.  Neihardl  3305 

Envoy,  "Go  little  book,  and  wish 

to  all" R.  L.  Stevenson  3106 

Envoy,  "Go,  songs,  for  ended  is 
our  brief,  sweet  play" 

Francis  Thompson  3ro6 
Envoy,   "Have   little   care   that 

Life  is  brief".  . .  .Bliss  Carman  2858 
Envoy,   "If   any   record   of  our 

names" Richard  Ilovey  2856 

Envoy,  "Whose  furthest  footstep 

never  strayed."  Richard  Hovcy  1993 
EpicJre,  The. .  .Abraham  Cowley  1993 
Epigrams.  .  .S.T.  Coleridge,  et  al. 

191S,  1916,  1917,  1918,  1919 
Epitaph  on  Salathie!  Pavey 

Ben  Jonson  z^i6 

Eve Ralph  flodgson  2816 

Eve  of  St.  Agnes,  The Keats  3284 

Eve  of  Waterloo,  The  ...  Byron  2450 
Evelyn  Hope.  .Robert  Browning  1094 
"Even  This  Shall  Pass  Away" 

Theodore  Tilton  2845 

Epilogue Abercrombie    513 

Epilogue  from  "Asolando" 

Robert  Browning  3503 

Epitaph,  An G.  J.  C-ayley  1919 

Epitaph   Intended   for   Himself, 

An James  Bealtie  3518 

Epitaph  of  Dionysia.  .Unknown     307 

Epitaph  on  a  Hare Cowpcr  1823 

Epitaph  on  Charles  II.  .  .Wilmot  1911 
Epitaph  on  the  Admirable  Dra- 
matic Poet,  W.   Shakespeare, 

An John   Milton  3653 

Epitaph  on  the  Countess  Dow- 
ager of  Pembroke Browne  3518 

Epitaphs Ben  Jonson  3516 

Epithalamion  .  ,  .Edmund  Spenser  1183 
Equinoctial.  .  .A.  D.  T.  Whitney     367 

Eros R.  W.  Emerson    474 

fitude  Realiste.  A.  C.  Swinburne       16 

Eurvdice F.  W.  Bourdillon    91  r 

Evening (^  w^    " ■'°-- 


Evensong ....  Ridgcley  Torrcnce 

Evoe Edith  M.  Thomas 

Evolution J.  B.  Tabb, 

"Ex   Libris" Arlhur   Upson 

Ex  Ore  Infantium 

Francis  Thompson 
Excelsior.  .  .  .H.  W.  Longfellow 
E.xchange,  The.  .  ..S.  T.  Coleridge 
Execution  of  Montrose,  The 

W.  E.  Aytotin 

Exequy,  The Henry  King 

Exile  of  Erin .  .  .  Thomas  Campbell 

Exile's  Song,  The Gilfillan 

Expostulation  and  Reply 

William  Wordsworth 
Exultation Jean  Ingelow 

F 

Fable if.  W.  Emerson 

Face  to  Face . .  Frances  Cochrane 
Factories,  The 

Margaret  Widdemer 

Failures Arthur  Upson 

Fainne  Gael  an  Lae.  .  .  .Milligan 

Fair  Annie Unknown 

Fair  Circassian,  The Garnctt 

Fair  Hebe John  West 

Fair  Ines Thomas  Hood 

"Fair  is  my  Love  for  April's  in 

her  Face" Robert  Greene 

Fair  Thief,  The Wyndkam 

Fairies,  The Altingham 

Fairies  of  the  Caldon-Low,  The 

Mary  Howitt 

Fairy  Book,  The.../4.  F.  Brown 

Fairy  Book,  The. .  .Norman  Gale 

Fairy  Folk,  The Robert  Bird 

Fairy  Song,   "Shed   no  tear!   O, 

shed  no  tear" John  Keats 

Fairy    Song,    "We    the    Fairies, 

blithe  and  antic".  .Leigh  Hunt 

Fairy    Songs,    "Over    hill,    over 

dale,"    "  You    spotted    snakes 

with  double  tongue,"  "Come 

unto     these     yellow     sands," 

"Where  the  bee  sucks,   there 

suck  ["..William  Shakespeare 

Fairy  Thrall,  The. .  .Mary  Byron 

Faith,  "Better  trust  all  and  be 

deceived " F.  A.  Kemblc 

Faith,    "My   faith   looks   up   to 

Thee" Ray  Palmer 

Faithless   Nelly   Gray Hood 

Faithless  Sally  Brown Hood 

Fallen  Star,  The,.  .George  Dariey 

False  Poets  and  True Hood 

"False   though    She   Be," 

Congreve 
Falstaff's  Song. .  .£.  C.  Stedman 
"  Fame  is  a  Food  that  Dead  Men 

Eat" Austin  Dobson 

Family   Meeting,   The.  .5/>rai;He 

Fancies John  Ford 

Fancy  from  Fontanelle,  A 

Austin  Dobson 

Fanny A.  R.  Aldrich 

Fantaisie Gerard  de  Nerval 

"  c-  -^  Thee  Well "...  Lord  Byron 

II,  A Alice   Brown 

A,  "Flow  down,  cold 
':o  the  s^Ol," .Tennyson 


PAGE 

893 
3098 
2866 
3466 

^77 
726 


2252 

3258 


1657 

426 


1909 
9IS 

3057 
2950 
2265 
2656 
1903 
72  [ 
959 

520 
536 
241 

23S 
246 
231 
245 

237 

23s 


231 

2  1-3 

2919 

38  ro 

2126 
2128 
3746 
308s 

613 
2014 

,3013 
3562 
3142 

3378 
344 

3842 
950 
929 

3354 


Index  of  Titles 


3983 


Farewell,  A,  "My  fairest  child.  1 

have  no  song  to  yive  you" 

Charles  Kingdey 
Farewell,  "Thou  goest,  to  what 

distant  place".  .J.  A.  Symonds 
Farewell,  A,  "With  all  my  will. 

but  much  against  ray  heart" 

Coventry  Palmorc 

Farewell,  The.  "It  was  a'  for  our 

rightfu'   King  " .  .  Robert  Burns 
"Farewell,  but  Whenever" 

Tliotnas  Moore 
"Farewell!   if  ever  Fondest 

Prayer" Lord  Byron 

Farewell  to  Arms,  A Peele 

Farewell  to  the  Fairies. .  .Cor6e< 
"Farmer  went  Trotting,  A" 

Unknown 

Farragut W.  T.  Meredith 

Fastidious  Serpent.  The 

Henry  Johnstone 

Fate .^  M ,  Spaiilding 

Father   Land    and    Mother 

Tongue Samuel  Lover 

Father  Molloy.  . .  Samuel  Lover 
Father  O'Flynn. .  ./I.  P.  Graves 
Father  William.  . .  .Lewis  Carrotl 
Fatherland,  The. . ./.  R.  Lowell 
"  Fault  is  not  Mine,  The,"  Landor 

Fawnia Robert   Greene 

Feast  of  the   Snow,  The 

Chesterton 

Female  Phaeton,  The Prior 

Ferry  Hinkscy.  .Laurence  Binyon 
Fiddler  of  Dooney,  The. .  .Yeats 
Field  Flower.  A.  /.  Montgomery 
Field  of  Glory,  The 

E.  A .  Robinson 
Fight  at  San  Jacinto,  The.  Palmer 
Fighting  Failure,  The,  Appleton 

Fighting  Race,  The Clarke 

Fighting  Temeraire.  The 

Henry  Newbolt 
"Fill  the  Bumper  Fair."  Moore 
Fine  Old  English  Gentleman,  The 
Unknown 
Finnigin  to  Flannigan.  .  .Gillilan 
Fire  of  Drift-wood,  The 

H.  W.  Longfellow 

Fireflies Edgar  Fawcett 

First  Diiy,  The C.  G.  Rossetti 

First  Kiss,  The Watts-Dunton 

F'irst  Kiss  of  Love,  The.  .  .  Byron 

F'irst  Snow-fall,  The Lowell 

First  Song  from  "Astrophel  and 

Stella" Philp  Sidney 

First  Swallow,  The Smith 

First  Tooth.  The.  ..W.B.  Rands 
Firstborn.  The.  ..J.  A.  Coodchild 
Fisher's  Widow,  The.  .  .  Svmons 
Flag  Goes  By,  The,  //.  fl.  Bennett 

Flight,  The Lloyd  Mifflin 

Flight  of  Love.  The.  P.  B.  Shelley 
F'light  of  the  Goddess.  The 

r.  B.  Aldrich 
Flight  of  Youth.  The.  .  ..Stoddard 
Flitch  of  Dunmow.  The 

James  Carnegie 

Florence  Vane P.  P.  Cooke 

"Flow  Gently,  Sweet  Afton" 

Robert  Burns 
Flower,  The. . .  .Alfred  Tennyson 


I2S 

962 


I002 

399 

244 

46 
2507 

2070 
S02 

32.S9 
1958 

i9.';7 
1927 

3260 

8.51 
583 

214 
1904 

992 
196  ,s 

1476 

3067 
2459 
2942 


2444 

2002 

I72I 
1979 

3236 
ISI9 

1259 
680 
686 
3  IS 

.■;i8 
1573 

S6 
24 
1622 
2208 
3.';7S 
100 1 

3103 

351 

2176 
III7 

1425 
2927 


PACE 

Flower  of  Beauty,  The.  .  .Darley    62S 
Flowers.   "I  will   not   have   the 

mad  Clytie".  . .  .  Thomas  Hood  1465 
Flowers,  "Spake  full  well,  in  lan- 
guage quaint  and  olden" 

H.  W.  Longfellow  146.5 
"  Flowers  I  would  Bring,"  de  Vere  546 
Flower's  Name,  Th^.  .Browning     964 

Folk-song Untenneyer  1050 

Follow  a  shadow,  it  still  flies  you 

Ben  Jonson    811 

Fontenoy T.  O.  Davis  2417 

Fool's  Prayer,  The.  ...E.R.  Sill  37O4 

Foot  Soldiers John  B.  Tabb       59 

Footpath  Way,  The Tynan  1679 

For  a  Copy  of  Theocritus,  Dobson  3664 
"  For  a'  That  and  a'  That."  Burns  3034 

For  Annie E.  A.  Poe  1 107 

"For  Charlie's  Sake". . .  .Palmer    308 

For  Ever W.  C   Roscoe    990 

For  He  Had  Great  Possessions 

Richard  Middleton  886 
For  My  Own  Monument.  .Prior  1861 
For  the  Baptist 

William  Drummond  3741 
Forbearance..../?.  W.  Emerson  3076 
Forbidflen  Lure.  The,  F.  S.  Davis  1686 

Foreign  Land.  The Palmare    387 

Foreign  Lands .  .  R.  L.  Stevenson     160 
Foreloper,  The,  Rudyard  Kipling  1703 

Forever. J.  B.  O'Reilly  3571 

"Forever  and  a  Day". .  ..Aldrich    991 
Forget  not  Yet . . .  Thomas  Wyntt    583 

"Forgettin"' Moira  O'Neill    800 

Forging  of  the  hnchor .Ferguson  1606 

Forsaken Unknown  1042 

Forsaken  Garden,  A.  Swinburne  1459 
Forsaken  Merman.  The.  .Arnold  1021 

Forty  Years  Ago Huston    469 

Forty  Ye:i.rs  on.. Edward  Bowen     421 

Fonvard E.  D.  Proctor  3733 

Four-Leaf  Clover Higginsoyi  1472 

Four  Limericks.  .  .Carolyn  Wells  2088 
Four  Things.  .  .Henry  Van  Dyke  2918 

Four    Winds Sara  Tcasdale     830 

Four  Winds.  The.  .  .C.  //.  Luders  11 23 

Four  Years D.  M .  M.  Craik  1099 

Fourth  of  August,  The,  Binyon  2546 
Fragment  in  Imitation  of  Words- 
worth  C.  M.  Fanshawe  1923 

Fraternity /.  B.  Tabb  3036 

Friar  of  Orders  Gray,  The 

Thomas  Percy  2710 

Friend,  A Lionel  Johnson  3001 

FViend  and  Lover.. If.  A.  dr.  Vcre    849 
Friend    of    Humanity    and    the 
Knife-grinder,  The.  .  .Canning  1856 

Friends A.   B.   Brown     112 

Friends E.  V.  Lucas  3000 

Friends   Departed Vaughan  3508 

Frog,  The Hilaire  Belloc  2081 

"From  Greenland's  Icy   Moun- 
tains''  Reginald  Hebcr  3795 

From  Life Brian  Booker    390 

From  Romany  to  Rome.  .Invin  1683 
Frocn  the  .\rabic   .  .P.  B.  Shelley    626 

From  the  Harbor  Hill Kobbi  1041 

From  the  Turkish.  .  .Lord  Bvron  1031 

Frost,  The H.  F.  Gould  1387 

Frost  Spirit,  The.   J.  G.  Whilticr  1388 

Frosted  Pane.  The Roberts  1388 

Fust  Banjo,  De. . .  .Invin  Russell  2190 


39^4 


Index  of  Titles 


Future,  The 

"Fuzzy  Wuzzy". . 


PACE 

.£.  R.  Sill  2976 
.   Kipling  2.533 


G 

Gaffer  Gray. . .  .Thnmas  Ilntcrnjl  igg6 
Garden,  A,  "Sec  how  the  llowers, 

as  at  parade".  Andrew  McirvcH  1,148 
Garden,  The,  "How  vainly  men 

themselves  amvL/.e" . .  .Marvrlt  1446 
Garden  Lyric,  A,  Locker  Lamp.sun  1732 
Garden  of  Prosperine,  The 

A .  C.  S'd'inhurnc  342  % 
Garden  of  Shadow,  The.  Dowson  508 
Garden  Song,  A.  .  .Austin  Dobson  1449 
Garden  That  1  Love,  The 

F.  L.  Henderson  3441 
Garden  Year,  The,  Sara  Coleridge  61 
Gardener,  Th&..A;.  L.  Slevcnson  160 
Gardener's  Song,  The.  .  .  .Carroll  2060 
Garret,  The.  .  .W.  M.  Thackeray  463 
Gates  and  Doors  .  .Joyce  Kilmer  215 
Gates  of  Dreamland,  I'he 

0.  W.  Russell  .?2i6 
Gaudeamus  Igitur,  J.  A.  Symonds  2895 
Gay  Gos-Hawli,  The.  .Unknown  2671 

Geese Oliver    llcrjord  2082 

Geist's  Grave.  .  .Mallhew  Arnold  1828 

General  Summary Kipling  1919 

General    William    Booth    Enters 

into     Heaven Lindsay  3593 

Genius  Loci.  .  .  .Margaret  Woods  3 no 

Genius  of  Death,  The Croly  340S 

Gentleman  of  the  Old  School,  A 

Austin  Dobson  1777 
German  Fatherland,  The,  Arndt  2270 

Gibraltar W.  S.  Blunt  2230 

Gifts James  Thomson     617 

Gipsy  Girl,  The.  .  .Henry  A'ford     344 

Gipsy  Trail,  The Kipling  1677 

Girl  I  Left  behind  Me,  The 

Unknown  986 
Girl  of  Pompeii,  A,  E.  S.  Martin  280 
"Girl  of  the  Red  Mouth" 

Martin  MacDermolt     568 
"Girt  Woak  Tree  that's  in  the 

Dell,  The" ..  .William  Barnes  1404 
Give  a  Rouse.  .  .Robert  Browning  2284 
"Give  all  to  Love".  .  .  .Emerson  502 
Give  Love  To-day.  .Ethel  Talbot  ins 

"Give  Me  Ale" Unknown  19S9 

Give  me  the  Old 

R.  n.  Mcssinger  201 1 
Giving   in   Marriage. ..  ./«i'H«K»    431 

Glad  Day Robertson     139 

Gladness  of  Nature,  The 

W.  C.  Bryant    139 

Glee  for  Winter,  A Dometl  1394 

Glenara Thomas  Campbell  2722 

Glenkindie W.  B.  Scotl  2730 

Glenlogie Unknown     7S3 

Gloaming R.  A.  Bowcn  1315 

Gloucester  Moors,  .W.  V.  Moody  2569 
Glove  and  the  Lions,  The,  Hunt  833 
Gluggity,  Glug. .  .George  Colman  2112 

Gnosis C.  P.  Cranch  297s 

"Go,  Forget  Me " .  . Charle.s  Wolfe    953 

"  Go,  Lovely  Rose  " Waller    930 

"God  Bless  You,  Dear,  To-day" 

John  Bennett    662 
God-Maker,  Man,  The 

Don  Marquis  3065 


"God  Rest  You,  Merry  Gentle- 
men " Unknown 

"  God  Save  Elizabeth  " .  .  Palgrave 
God  Save  the  King 

Henry  Carey(f) 

Godiva Alfred  Tennyson 

God's-Acre.  .  .  .H.  W.  Longfellow 
God's   Judgment   on    a    Wicked 

Bishop Robert  Southey 

God's  Will Mildred  Howells 

God's  World  .  .  .£.  St.  V.  Millay 
Goethe  and  I'Vederika,  Sidgwick 
Going  down  Hill  on  a  Bicycle 

//.  C.  Beeching 

Golden  Fish,  The Arnold 

Golden  Mean,  The Coivper 

"Golden    Slumbers    Kiss    Your 

Eyes" Thomas  Dekker 

Golden  Wedding,  The Gray 

(Joldenrod E.  G.  Eastman 

Gone Mary  E.  Coleridge 

Good  and  Bad  Children 

R.  L.  Stevenson 

Good-Bye R.    W.    Emer.snn 

Good  Company.  .  .  .K.  W.  Baker 

Good   Day,  The, Bashford 

Good  Great  Man,  The. Coleridge 

Good   Inn,  The, U.K.  Viete 

Good  King  Wenceslas  John  Neat 
Good  Morrow,  The  John  Donne 
Good-night.  ...  6".  Wtir  Mitchell 
Good-night,  "Good-night?  Ah! 
no;  the  hour  is  ill".  .  .  .Shelley 
Good-night,  "Good-night,  dear 
friend!     I   say  good-night  to 

thee" H.  A.  Benedict 

Gootl-niglit,    "Little    baby,    lay 

your  head" Jane  Taylor 

"Good  night,  V>a.hci.te," .Dobson 
Good  Tidings  of  Great  Joy  to  all 

People James  Montgomery 

Gradatim /.  G.  Holland 

Grain  of  Salt.  A.  .Wallace  Irwin 
Grammar  in  Rhyme.  .  .  Unknown 
Grammariiin's  Funeral,  A 

Robert  Browning 
"  Grandmither,  Think  not  I  For- 
get"  W.  S.  Gather 

Grape-vine  Swing,  The, 

W.  G.  Simms 

Grasshopper,  The Cnwtey 

Grave  of  Love,  The.  . .  .Peacock 
Graves  of  a  Household,  The 

F.  D.  Remans 
Great  Adventure,  T'\\e,.Thoreau 
Great  Misgiving,  The.  .  .Watson 
"  Great  Nature  in  an  Army  Gay  " 
R.  W.  Gilder 
Great  Voices,  The.  .C.  T.  Brooks 

Greek  Folk  Song Widdemer 

"Green  Grow  the  Rashes,  O" 

Robert  Burns 
Green  Linnet,  The,   Wordsworth 
Green   Little   Shamrock   of   Ire- 
land, The Andrew  Cherry 

Green  Things  Growing.  .  .  .Craik 

Grenier,  Le de  Biranger 

"Grey  Horse  Troop,"  The 

R.  W.  Chambers 

Grief E.   K.   Browning 

Grievance,  A f.K.  Stephen 

"Grieve   not.   Ladies",,,. Bra»cA 


201 

2373 

2231 
2593 
3439 

189 
3736 

1053 

129 

736 

2991 

7.'? 
1226 
14S5 
3005 

100 
2995 

1301  *^ 
2983 
2860 
1700 
3752 
1 142 

679 

703 


1771 

3798 

3707 

208s 

60 

2871 


467 

T=;o9 
865 

3561 
2937 
3428 

1298 
2972 
3506 

727 

IS4I 

2264 
146 1 
3839 

2291 

3353 

1931 

857 


Index  of  Titles 


39^5 


Groves  of  Blarney,  The 

R.  A.  MilUkin  2600 
Crowing  Gray.  .  .  .Austin  Dobson  .561 
GrowinR  Old.  "Sweet  sixteen  is 

shy  and  told  " .  .  Walter  Learned     742 
Growing    Old.    "What    is    it    to 

grow   o\i\" ..  .Matthew  Arnold    418 
Guardian  Angel,  The 

Roherl  Broivning  2620 
Gunga  Din Rudyard  Kipling  2294 

H 

Hack  and  Hew B/zis  Carman  u  ?0 

llail!  Columbia llopkimon  2200 

Hallowed   (Ground Camphclt  34.52 

Hallowed   Places Palmer     6.12 

Hallowe'en John  Mayne  2028 

"Hame,  Hame,  Hame" 

Allan  Cunningham  .■5226 
Hannah  Binding  Shoes ..  Larcom  1624 
Hans  Breitmann's  Vnxty. Leland  2152 
Hai>()iest  Heart.  The.  . .  .Cheney  2904 

Happy  Heart,  The Dekker  2qSi 

Happy  Thought.  R.  L.  Stevenson      gS 
Hare   with   many  Friends,   The 

John  Gay  1853 
"Hark,  Hark!  the  Lark" 

William  Shakespeare  604 
Harp  of  Sorrow.  The.  .  .Clijford  3360 
Harrow    Grave   in    Flanders,    A 

Robert  Offley  .4  shhiirlon  2326 
Harry  Carey's  General  Reply  to 
the  Libelling  Gentry  who  are 
Angry  at  His  Welfare. .  .Carey  lOQ.s 

Harvest E.  M.  II .  Cortiswz  1.570 

"Harvest  Waits,  The" .  .Mifflin  3734 
Hassgesang  Gegen  England 

Ernest  Lissauer  38.16 

Hastings  Mill Fn.x-Smith  i.soi 

Haunted  Palace,  The.  .E.  A.  Poe  3168 
Hawkbit,  The.   C.  G.  D.  Roberts  15.59 
"He  Bringeth  Them  Unto  Their 
Desired  Haven" 

L.  Frank  Tnoker  3537 
He  Fell  Among  Thieves,  Newholt  2797 
"He    Liveth   Long   who   Liveth 

Well" Ilnrntius  Bonnr  3716 

He  Made  the  Night,  Lloyd  Mifflin  1326 
"He  Neser  Smiled  Again" 

/''.  D.  Uemans  2349 
He  Stanfleth  at  the  Door.  .Coxe  38 11 
"He  Whom  a  Dream  Hath  Pos- 
sessed " OSheel  2958 

Health,  A E.  C.  Pinkney    387 

"  Heart  of  my  Heart " . .  Unknown    676 

Heart  of  Oak David  Garrick  2280 

Heart's  Content Unkiurwn  3231 

Heart's  Hope D.  G.  Rossetli  125.S 

Heaven M.  G.  Dickinson  11 12 

"Heaven  Overarches  Earth  and 

Sea" C.  G.  Rossetli  3706 

Heavenward. . .  .Carolina  Nairne  3700 

Hebe /.    R.    Low//  '  852 

"He'd  Nothing  but  His  Violin" 

Mary  K.  Dallas  1202 
Height   of   the   Ridiculous,   The 

0.  W.  Holmes  2138 

Helen _ S.C.  Woolsey  1102 

Helen  of  Kirconnel.  . . .  Unknou-n  1060 

Heliotrope //.    T.    Peck  ii2\ 

Hem  and  Haw.  .  .  .Bliss  Carman  1887 


PACE 

Hemlock  Mountain. ..  .C/eii/orn  1436 
Henchman.  The.  .  J .  G.  Whittier  553 
Henry  Hudson's  Quest.  Stevenson  2382 
Henry  Wadsworlh  Longfellow 

Austin  Dobson  3645 

Her  Dwell ing-Place Murray  1129 

Her  Epitaph T.  W.  Parsons  35.15 

Her  Gifts D.  G.  Ro.':sctti  1257 

Her  Sacred  Bower Campion     587 

Her  Triumph Ben  Jonson     526 

Heraclitus J ohnson-Cary  3529 

Herald    Crane,    'the.  ..  .Garland  1535 
"Here  is  the  Place  where  Loveli- 
ness Keeps  House".  .  .  .Cawe.in  1502 

Hereafter II.  P.  SpofTord  10 12 

Heredity L.  A.  C.  Ward  3731 

"  Here's  a  Health  to  Them  That's 

Awa'" Robert  Burns  227-5 

Heritage,  'I'he J.  R.  Lowell    263 

Hero,  The Robert  N icoll  3244 

Heroes E.  D.  Proctor  2322 

Heron,  The.  .  .E.  ILivcll-Thurlow  1540 

Herve  Riel Roherl  Browning  2.S04 

Hester Charles  Lamb  3547 

High  Tide  at   Gettysburg,   The 

_. W.  11.  Thompson  2502 

High  Tide  on  the  Coast  of  Lin- 
colnshire. The.  .  .Jean  Ingelow  3318 

Hiijher  GckkI,  The Parker  2969 

Higher  Pantheism,  The 

Alfred  Tennyson  2852 
Higher  Pantheism  in  a  Nutshell, 

The A.  C.  Swinburne  1935 

Highland  Mary.  .  .  .Robert  Burns  1071 
Highway.  'I'hc.  .  .Louise  Driscoll  509 
Highwavman,  The. Alfred  Noycs  2809 

Hill.  The Rupert  Brooke  1270 

Hills,  The, Julian  Grenfell  1435 

"Hills  o'  my  Heart "...  Carftery  2267 
Hills  of  Rest,  The.  .A.  B.  Paine  3577 
Hindoo's  Death.  The,  Birdseye  1899 
Hint  from  Hcrrick,  A, 

T.  B.  AMrich  3090 
His  Banner  Over  Me. . .  .  Massey  3768 
His  Further  Resolution  Unkiunvn  814 
His    Heart    was    True    to    Poll 

F.  C.  Burnaiul  2076 
His  Litany  to  the  Holy  Spirit 

Robert  llerrick  3714 
His  Pilgrimage. .  .  .Walter  Raleigh  3451 

His  Winding  sheet llerrick  3454 

Hoch!  der  Kaiser  ...A.M.  Rose  1849 
Hohenlinden .  .  .  Thomas  Campbell  2.140 

"Hold" P.  R.  Chalmers  1832 

Holly-Tree.  The,  Roherl  Southey  1407 
Holy  Baptism.  .  .  .George  Herbert  3721 

"Holy.  Iloly.  Holy" Heber  ^yc^i 

Holy  Innocents.  Christina  Rossetli      85 

Holy  Matrimony Fohn  Kehle  1197 

Holy  Thursday.  .  .William  Blake     174 
Home,   "O.   Falmouth  is  a  tine  - 
town  with  shiiK  in  the  bav"  / 

W.  E.  Henley  ?■' 
Home,   "One  rubber  plant  can 
never  make  a  home"  Unknow 
Home.  "There  lies  a  little  city 

the  hills" E.  R. 

Home.   "Two   birds  withi' 

nest" Dora    C' 

Home.  Sweet  Home. 7.  ' 

"Home  Thi'v  Brought 

rior  Dead". .   Alfrr 


3986 


Index  of  Titles 


Home  Thoughts,  from  Aboard     ^^'^ 

Robert  Browning  1353 

Homeric  Unity.  . .  .Andrew  Lang  3083 

Homeward  Bound. . .  .Allingham  1633 

Honor  and   Desert Patmnrc     384 

Hope  and  Despair.  .Abercromhic  3368 
Hope  and  Fear.  A .  C.  Swinburne  2844 

Hora  Christi Alice  Brown  3772 

Horatian  Ode  Upon  Cromwell's 
Return 'from  Ireland,  An 

Andreui  Marvell  2400 
Horatius  at  the  Bridge.  Macaulay  2329 
Hot  Weather  in  the  Plains — India 

E.  H.  Tipple  3230 
Hound  of  Heaven,  The 

Francis  Thompson  3204 
Hour  of  Death,  The.  . .  .Hemans  34 11 
Hour  of  Peaceful  Rest,  The 

W.  B.  Tappan  3803 
House  by  the  Side  of  the  Road, 

The 5.  W.  Foss  3040 

House  of  Christmas,  The 

G.  K.  Chesterton     213 
House  of  t/ife.  The,  Sonnets  IV, 
V,  XV,  XIX,  XXVI,  XXXI, 
XXXIV,  XLIX,  LXXVIII 

D.  G.  Rossetli  1255 
House  of  Pain,  The.  .F.  E.  Coales  3386 
House  that  Jack  Built,  The 

Unknown  .  49 
Housekeeper, The.  .Charles  Lamb  1514 
"How    Can    the    Heart    Forget 

Her" Francis  Davison    599 

"How  doth  the  little  busy  Bee" 

Isaac  Walts     104 
How  My  Songs  of  Her  Began 

P.  B.  Marston  1260 

How  Often Ben   King  1950 

How  Old  Brown  Took  Harper's 

Ferry E.    C.    Stedman  2479 

"How  Sleep  the  Brave."  Collins  2194 
How  the  Leaves  Came  Down 

Susan  Coolidge  142 
How  the  Little  Kite  Learned  to 

Fly Unknown     115 

"How  They  Brought  the  Good 
News  from  Ghent  to  ALx" 

Robert  Browning  2732 
How  We  Beat  the  Favorite 

A.  L.  Gordon  3344 
How  We  Learn.. Horalius  Bonar  3717 
"How's  My  Boy."  Sydney  Dohell  1612 
Human  Frailty.  William  Cowpcr  ?.SS-i 

Human  Life 4.  T.  de  Vere    416 

Human  Seasons,  The Keats        2 

Humble-Bee,  The,  R.  W.  Emerson  1515 

Humpty  Dumpty Whitney  2034 

Hundred  Years  to  Come,  A 

W.  G.  Brown  3470 
Hunting  Song.  . .  .Richard  Uovey  1662 
Hymn  before  Sunrise  in  the  Vale 

of  Chamouni.  S.   T.  Coleridge  1430 
Hymn  of  Apollo.  .  .P.  B.  Shelley  1306 

Hymn  of  Pan P.  B.  Shehey  3162 

'ymn  of  the  West.  E.  C.  Stedman  2204 
■mn  to  God  the  Father,  A 

John  Donne  37.S9 
T  to  the  Night..  .Longjellow  1327 


I 

>|y" George  Eliot     323 

^\n6" . . .  .Zoe  Akins    680 


PAGE 

"I  Asked  my  Fair,  One  Happy 

Day" S.    T.    Coleridge     726 

"I  do  not  Love  Thee". .  .A'wtora  962 
"I    Fear   no   Power   a   Woman 

Wields" MiGaJfey  1659 

"I    Fear    Thy    Kisses,    Gentle 

Maiden" P.  B.  Shelley     688 

"I  Flung  Me  Round  Him" 

Roden  Noel  3213 
"I    Give    My    Soldier    Boy    a 

Blade" William  Maginn  2287 

"I  had  a  Little  Doggy"  Unknown  46 
"I  had  a  Little  Husband" 

Unknown      43 
"I    Have    a    Rendezvous    with 

Death" Alan  Seeger  2560 

"I  Heard  a  Soldier "...  TreKc/j  927 
I  in  Thee  and  Thou  in  Me,  Cranch  2974 
"I  Lately  Vowed,  but  'twas  in 

Haste" John  Oldmixon     826 

"  I  Like  little  Pussy  "  Jane  Taylor  102 
"I  Love,  and  the  World  is  Mine" 

Florence  Earle  Cnates  1148 
I  Love  My  Jean .  Burns-Hamilton  947 
"I  Love  My  Life,  But  Not  Too 

Well" Harriet  Monroe     681 

"I  Loved  a  Lass". George  Wither  718 
"I    Remember,    I    Remember" 

Thomas  Hood    443 
"I  Saw  My  Lady  Weep" 

Unknown    863 
"I  Saw  the  Clouds"  Bervey  White  -2984 

"I  Saw  Thee" Ray  Palmer  3769 

"I  Saw  Two  Clouds  at  Morning" 

J.  G.  C.  Brairiard  1196 

I  Shall  Not  Care Teasdale  1017 

"I  Shall  Not  Cry  Return". Ga/cs  loSi 
"I  Strove  With  None".  .Landor  3491 
"I  Took  a  Hansom  on  Today" 

W.  E.  Herdey    827 
"I  Wandered  Lonely  as  a  Cloud" 

William  Wordsworth  1473 
"1  Would  not  live  Alway," 

W.  A .  Muhlenberg  3476 

Ichabod J.G.  Whillier  1837 

"I'd  be  a  Butterfly,"  T.  H.  Bayly  1712 
Idea,     Sonnets     I,     IV,     XX, 

XXXVII,  XL,  XLII.  LXI 

Michael  Draylon  1242 

Idler,  The Jones  Very  2970 

If,    "If   life   were   never   bitter" 

Mortimer  Collins  1944 
If,  "Oh,  if  the  world  were  mine, 

Love" J.J.  Roche    740 

"If    I    Could    Shut    the    Gate 

Against  My  Thoughts."  Daniel  3743 
"If  i  Should  Die" .Rupert  Brooke  2546 
"  If  I  Should  Die  Tonight,"  King  1950 

"If  I  Were  Dead" Palmare     296 

If  I  Were  King McCarthy  1786 

"If   Love    Were    Jester   at    the 

Court  of  Death"  F.  L.  Knowles  3474 
If  Only  the  Dreams  Abide 

Clinton  Scollard  2850 
"If  She  be  made  of  White  and 

Red" B.  P.  Borne     570 

"If  She  but  Knew" 

Arthur  O'Shaughtiessy  978 
"If  Spirits  Walk."  Sophie  Jewell  1118 
"If  Thou  Wert  by  my  Side,  my 

Love" Reginald  Beber  1209 

"If  You  were  Here". . .  .Marston    981 


Index  of  Titles 


3987 


PAGE 

II  Penseroso John  Milton  3147 

"I'll  Never  Love  Thee  Marc" 

James  Graham  604 
"I'm  not  a  Single  M.a.n," .Uood  1713 

Immonil James   Oppenheim  2997 

Immorality,  An.  ..  .  Ezra  Pound     452 

Immortalis David  Morion  3401 

Irapenitentia  V\t\m,\ . . .  .Dowson    917 

Impression Edmund    Gossc  1759 

In  a  Rose  Garden. yoAn  Benm'tt  661 
"III  After  Days".  .Austin Dobson  3502 

In  City  Streets Adu  Smith  1674 

In  Early  Spring.  Alice  Meynell  1335 
In  Explanation.  .U^dfttr  Learned     743 

In  Extremis George  Sterling  3466 

In  February Uenry  Simpson     574 

In  Foreign  Parts  .L.  E.  Richards  2084 
"In  God's  Eternal  Studios" 

Paul  Shivell  2869 
"In  Green  Old  Gardens,"  Fane  14S0 

In  Harbor. P.  H.  Payne  3493 

In  Mcmoriam,  "Ah,  not  because 

our  Soldier  died  before  his  field 

was  won" Edwin  Arnold  3648 

In  Memoriam.  "  'Tis  right  for  her 

to  sleep   between "....  Af(7«cs  3S4S 
In   Memoriam.  Parts  I,  XXVII 

LIV,  LV,  LVI.  LXXIII,  CVI. 

CXVII.     CXXVI     CXXVII, 

CXXX,  CXXXI 

Alfred  Tennyson  2898 
In  Memory  of  "Barry  Cornwall" 

A.  C.  Swinburne  3647 
In    Memory   of    Walter   Savage 

Landor A.  C.  Swinburne  ^,626 

In  Our  Boat.  .  .    D.  M.  M.  Craik  1.S97 

In  Sorrow Thomas  Hastings  3808 

In  the  Children's  Hospital 

Alfred  Tennyson  292 
"In  the   Cool  of  the  Evening" 

Alfred  Noyes  1316 
"In  the  Cross  of  Christ  I  Glory" 

John  Bowring  3802 

In  the  Dark George  Arnold  3496 

"In  the  Dark,  in  the  Dew" 

Mary  N.  Prescolt  652 
"In  the  D.iys  of  Old"..  .Peacock  489 
In  the  Fall  o'  Year,  T.  S.  Jones,  Jr.iiii 

In  the  Garden Ernest  Crosby     138 

In  the  Highlands. .  K.  L.  Stevenson  1675 
In  the  Ho'^pitul  U.  IV.  Uowland  3463 
In  the  Lilac-Rain 

FAith  M.  Thomas  3539 
In  the  Twilight.  .  .J.  K.  Lowell  450 
Inchcape  Rock,  The.  .  .  .Southcy  1617 
Incident  of  the  French  Camp 

Robert  Browning  2449 

Inclusions E.  B.  Browning    872 

Indian  Burying  ground.  The 

Philip  Freneau  3438 
Indian  Names.  .L.  11.  Sigourncy  2567 

Indian   Summer Dickinson  1373 

Indifferent,  The Beaumont     812 

Indirection Richard     Realf  2870 

Infant  Joy William   Blake         4 

Ingle-side,  The.  ..  .II nv  Ainslee  3239 
Ingrateful     Beauty    Threatened 

Thomas  Carew  816 
IniR-r  Light.  The.F.  W.  II.  Myers  3730 
Inner  Vision.  The.  .  .Wordsworth  3087 
Inscription  in  a  Hermitage 

Thomas  Warton  1640 


PAGE 

Inspiration,  "If  with  light  head 

erect  I  sing".  .  H.  D.  Thoreau  2961 
Inspiration,  "Life  of  Ages,  richly 

poured". ..  ..S'awMf/  Johnson  2973 
Integer     Vit«,     "Integer     vita; 

scelerisque  purus" Horace  3828 

Inte.ger  Vit»,  "The  man  of  life 

upright".  .  .  .Thomas  Campion  2912 

Inter  Sodales W.  E.  I/cnley  1986 

Interlude.  .  .£//a  Wheeler  lF//fo.t  3472 
Into  the  Twilight.  .  .W.  B.  Veals  2855 
Into  the  World  and  Out.  .  .Piatt       27 

Invention William  Watson  3100 

Invictus W.  E.  Henley  3500 

Invisible  Bride,  The.  .Markham  1132 

Invitation,  An Unknown  1986 

Invocation,  An. . .  .Johnson-Cory  3099 

lo  Victis W.W.  Story  2945 

Ireland,    "Ireland,    oh    Ireland! 

center  of  my  longings,"  Gwynne  2266 
Ireland,  "Thy  sorrow,  and  the 

sorrow  of  the  sea".  .  .  .Johnson  2253 
Irish  Astronomy.. C.  G.  Halpine  1964 
Irish  Love-Song,  An.  .  .Johnson  741 
Irish  Lullaby,  An.  .  .^ .  P.  Graves       88 

Irish  Molly  O Unknown    939 

Irish  Wife,  The.  .T.D'  A.  McGec  1207 
Irishman    and    the    Lady.    The 

William  Maginn  1962 
Isle  of  the  Long  .^go.  The,  Taylor  417 
Isles  of  Greece,  The.  .Lord  Byron  2625 

Israfel E.  A.  Poc  3077 

"It  Cannot  Be". .  .D.  B.  Sickles  3712 
"  It  is  a  Beautious  Evening,  Calm 

and  Free" Wordsworth  13 14 

"It  is  Great  for  Our  Country  to 

Die" J .  G.  Percival  2303 

"It  is  not  Beauty  I  Demand" 

George  Darley     547 
"It  Was  a  Lover  and  His  Lass" 

William  Shakespeare  ti-j 
Italian  Rhapsody./?.  U.Johnson  2613 
"Its  Ain  Drap  o'  Dew" 

James  Ballanline  2992 

Itylus A.  C.  Swinburne  1576 

Ivry T.   B.  Macaulay  2374 

Ivy  Green,  The.  .Charles  Dickens  1489 

J 

Jabberwocky Lewis  Carroll  2059 

Jack  and  Jill Unknown      39 

Jack  and  Joan.  Thomas  Campion     767 

Jack   Frost Gabriel   Seloun     151 

Jackdaw,  The.  .  .  Witl'iam  Cowper  1540 
Jackdaw  of  Rheims,  The.  Barkam  2141 

Jaffar. Leigh  Hunt  3013 

Jam-pot,  The.. Rudyard  Kipling  1939 

Jane  and  Eliza Ann  Taylor     109 

Jane  Smith.  .  .  .Rudyard  Kipling  1926 
Janette's  Hair.  . .  .C.  G.  Halpine  1112 

Jeanie   Morrison Motherwell     955 

"Jenny  Kissed  Me". .  Leigh  Hunt  687 
"Jenny  wi'  the  Aim  Teeth" 

Alexander  Anderson      94 

Jerry  an'  Me Iliram  Rich  1219 

Jerusalem. . .  .John  Mason  Ncale  3689 

Jessie T.  E. ,  Brown    887 

Jessie,  the  Flower  o'   I)unbla,ne 

Robert  Tannahill     544 

Jest  'fore  Christmas Field     220 

"Jesus,  I.,over  of  My  Soul'' 

Charles  Wesley  3791 


3988 


Index  of  Titles 


PAGE 

Jesus  the  Carpenter.  .L/(Wr//  376S 
Jim  Bludso  of  the  Prairie  Belle 

John  Hay  33,57 

Jock  of  Hazeldean . .  .  Waller  Scolt  786 

"Jog  on,  Jog  on".  .  .Shakespeare  2978 

John  Anderson Robert  Burns  1224 

"John  Anderson,  My  Jo" 

C.  G.  Blanden  3560 

John  Barleycorn .  .  .  Robert  Burns  2000 

John  Burns  of  Gettysburg. //a.-/f  2504 

John  Grumlie Cunningham  2118 

"Johnny    Shall    Have    a    New 

Bonnet," Unknown  44 

"Jolly  Good  Ale  and  Old,"  Still  iggo 

Jollv  Jack W.  M.  Thackeray  1847 

Jolly  Old  Pedagogue,  The 

George  Arnold  1746 

Journey  Onwards,  The.  .  .Moore  3360 

Joy  of  the  Morning.  .  .Markham  3100 

Joy-Month D.  A.  Wasson  1579 

Joyful  Wisdom,  The.  .  ,  .Palmare  2953 

Joys  of  the  Road,  The.  .Carman  1694 

Juggling  ieiry .  .George  Meredith  3312 

Jumblies,  The Edward  Lear  2050 

June.  "  I  gazed  upon  the  glorious 

sky" W.  C.  Bryant  3457 

June,  "Over  his  keys  the  musing 

organist" 7.  R.  Lowell  1367 

June,  "When  the  bubble  moon  is 

young  " U.S.  Morris  1369 

"  Just  as  1  Am  " .  .  Charlotte  Elliott  3800 

"Just  for  To-day "...  Pa/-/n"(/se  3808 
"Justine,  You  Love  Me  Not" 

J .  G.  Saxe    853 

K 

Kasidah,  The,  Parts  II  and  IX 

Sir  Richard  Burton  2S87 
Kate  of  Aberdeen.. C«n«/ni7;(i»j     .i;38 

Kate  Temple's  Song Collins     640 

Kathleen  Mavourneen.  Crawford  979 
Kavanagh,  The.  Riihard  Hnvey  2017 
Kearny  at  Seven  Pines.  Stedman  2493 
Keenan's  Charge.  .G.  P.  Lathrop  2497 

Kentucky  Babe R.  H.  Buck       91 

Kentucky  Philosophy.  Robrrlson  2041 

Key-board,  The IValson  3132 

Khristna  and  His  Flute.  . .  .  Hope    916 

Kilmeny James  Hogg  3151 

Kinchinjunga C.  Y.  Rice  1434 

"Kind  are  Her  Answers" 

Thomas  Campion  sot 
Kindness  to  Animals.  .  Unknown  101 
King   John    and    the    .^bbot   of 

Canterbury Unknown  2707 

King  of  Brentford,  The 

W.  M.  Thackeray  1S4S 
King   of   Denmark's   Ride,   The 

Caroline  Norton  1088 
King  of  Dreams,  The.  .  Scollard  2850 
King  of  the  Cradle.  The 

Joseph  Ashhy-Sterry      22 

Kings,  The L.  I .  Guiney  2949 

King's  Ballad,  The.  Joyce  Kilmer  1123 
King's  Highway,  The 

J.  5.  McGroarty  1685 

Kiss,  A Austin  Dobson  1800 

Kiss,  The Ben  Jonson     682 

Kiss,  The .Sara  Teasdale  1194 

Kissing's  no  Sin Unknown    692 

Kitty  Neil J.  F.  Waller     756 

Kitty  of  Coleraine.  .  .  .  Unknown     755 


PAGE 

Knapweed A.  C.  Benson  1491 

Kore Frederic  Manning  13S2 

Kubla  Khan 6'.  T.  Coleridge  3160 

Kyrielle John  Payne  2840 

L 

La  Belle  Dame  sans  Merci.  Keats  1005 

La  Grisette Q.  W .  Holmes     909 

Labor  and  Love.  .Edmund  Gosse  2918 

Lachrimic  Musarum Watson  3630 

Lad  that  is  Gone,  A.  .Stevenson    438 

Laddie K.  L.  Bales  1831 

Ladies  of  St.  James's,  The,  Dobson  177,=; 
Lady  Anne  Bothwell's  Lament 

Unknown  1037 
Lady  Clara  Vere  de  Vere 

Alfred  Tennyson    8,^s 

Lady  Clare Alfred  Tennyson  2727 

Lady  of  Shalott,  The.  .Tennyson  3188 
Lady  Poverty,  The,  "I  met  her 

on  the  Umbrian  Hills,"  Fischer  2934 
Lady  Poverty,  The,  "The  Lady 

Poverty  was  fair".  . .  .Meynell  2934 
Lady's  "  Yes,"  The.  . . .  Browning  O32 
Laird  o'  Cockpen,  The 

Nairne-Ferrier  2 113 
Lake  Isle  of  Innisfree,  The,  Yeats  1634 

L'Allegro John  Milton  3143 

Lamb,  The William  Blake      48 

Lament,  A.  .  .Chidiock  Tichborne     401 

Lament  for  Culloden Burns  2420 

Lament  for  Flodden,  A.  .  .  .Elliot  236S 
Lament  of  a  Mocking-Bird 

Fanny  Kemble  1544 
Lament  of  the  Border  Widow, 

The Unknown  1063 

Lament   of   the   Irish   Emigrant 

//.  .v.  Sheridan  1086 
Lamentable  Ballad  of  the  Bloody 

Brook,  The E.E.  Hale  2406 

Lamp  in  the  West.  The 

Ella   Higginson  3473 
Lamp  of  Poor  Souls,  The 

Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall  ?,$$2 
Lancelot  and  Guinevere,  Gould  281,5 
Land  o'  the  Leal,  The.  .  .  .Nairne  3699 
Land  of  Counterpane,  The 

K.  L.  Stevenson     158 
Land  of  Heart's  Desire,  The 

E.  H.  Miller  1206 
Land  of  Story-books,  The 

R.  L.  Slcjienson     159 
"Land   Which    no   one   Knows, 

The" Ebenezer  Elliott  3,1576 

Landing  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers 

F.  D.  Hemans  2387 

Landscapes Unlermeyer     3060 

Langley  Lane.  .Robert  Buchanan  3383 
"Langsyne,  when  Life  was  Bon- 
nie"  Alexatuier    Anderson     447 

Larrie  O'Dee W.  W.  Fink  1961 

Lass  o'  Gowrie,  The Nairne     773 

Lass  of  Lochroyan,  The  Unknown  26(10 
Lass  of  Richmond  Hill,  The 

James  Upton     6i6 
Lass  that  died  ot  love,  The, 

Richard  Middleton  1052 
Last  Buccaneer,  The,  "Oh,  Eng- 
land   is   a   pleasant   place   for 
them    that's    rich    and    high" 

Charles  Kingsley  1630 


Index  of  Titles 


3989 


Last  Buccaneer,  The,  "The 
winds  were  yelling,  the  waves 
were  swelling."  T .  B.  Macaulay  16,51 
Last  Camp-fire,  The.  .V.  M .  Hall  .?47i 
Last  Hour,  The.  .  .Elhd  Clifford  1205 
Last  Hunt,  The.  .  .IK.  R.  Thayer  27qQ 
Last  Invocation,  The,  Whitman  S404 
Last  Leaf,  The.  . .  .0.  W.  Unlmrs  17(1 

Last  Lines Emily  Broiil'e  .54^6 

Last  Memory,  The Synhuis     928 

Last  Night George  Darky     954 

Last  Redoubt,  The Austin  2531 

Last  Ride  Together,  The 

Rohct  Brnwninq     877 

Last  Sonnet John  Keats  3480 

Last  Verses  .^Motherwell  3496 

Last  Word,  The,  "  Creep  into  thy 

nan-ow  bed".  .Matthew  Arnold  2944 
Last  Word,  The,  "When  I  have 

folded  up  this  tent,"  Knowles    675 
"Late  Lark   Twitters  from  the 
Quiet  Skies,  A,"  W.  E.  Henley  3501 

Late  Leaves W.S.  Larulnr    406 

Late  Wisdom George  Crabbe    403 

Lauriger  Horutius,  "Laurel- 
crowned  Hor;ilius".   Symnnds  2896 
Lauriger     Horatius,     "Lauriger 

Horatius  " Unknown  383 1 

Laus  Infantium .  .  William  Canton     253 

Laus  Mortis F.  L.  Knowles  3487 

Laus  Veneris L.  C.  Moulton    913 

Law  of  the  Yukon,  The,  Service  257s 
Lay  of  .'\ncient  Rome.  . . .  Ybarra  2044 
Lay  of  the  Levile,  The.  .Aytoun  2023 
Leadsman's  Sor^,  The,  bibdin  1632 
L'Eau  Dormante.  .T.  B.  Aldrich     739 

Leave- Taking,  A Swinburne    645 

Leaves Sara    Teasdale  2856 

Leavetaking.  . .  .William  Watson    366 

Leetia  I?oy,  Da T.A.Daly    306 

Left  Behind Elizabeth  Akers  1020 

Legend  of  Heinz  von  Stein,  The 

C.  G.  Leland  2028 
Legend  of  the  Northland.  .Cary     143 

Leisure W.  U.  Davies  2998 

L'Envoi,  "When  Earth's  last 
picture  is  painted,  and  the 
tubes  are  twisted  and  dried" 

Riulyard  Kipling  3504 
L'Envoi,  "Where  are  the  loves 
that  \vc  loved  before,"  Gather  3429 

Leonidas   Geori^e  Croty  2.>i,s 

Les  Amours Charles  Cotton    825 

Lesson  of  the  Water-Mill,  The 

Sarah  Doiidney  2930 
Lessons  from  the  Gorse 

E.  B.  Browning  1486 
"Let  Me  Enjny,"  Thomas  Hardy  2841 
"Let  the  Toast  Pass".  .Sheridan  1099 

Letter  of  Advice,  A Pracd  1809 

Letters,  The.  . .  .Alfred  Tennyson  1177 

Lettice D.M.M.  C'raik  1208 

Letty's  Globe C.  T.  Turner     265 

Lie,  The Waller  Raleigh  3449 

Lied,  "Ins  stille  Land".  Seewis  3832 
Life,  "I  made  a  posy,  while  the 

day  ran  hy"... George  Herbert  2931 
Life,  "  Life!  I  know  not  what  thou 

art" A.  L.  Barbauld  3491 

Life,  "  When  I  consider  Life  and 

its  few  years".  . .  .L.  W.  Reese  28^^ 
Life,  a  Question.  C.  R.  Robinson  2908 


P.VGE 

Life  in  a  Love.  .Robert  Browning     6,58 

Life-Lesson,  A /.  W.  Riley    349 

"Life  on  the  Ocean   Wave,  A" 

Et)es  Sargent  1594 
Light  of  Other  Days,  The,  Moore  454 
Light   Shining  out  of   Darkness 

William  Cnwper  3796 

Light  Woman,  A Browning  1029 

"Like  a  Laverock  in  the  Lift" 

Jean  Ingelow  1200 

Likeness,  A W.S.  Gather  1794 

Lilian Alfred   Tennyson     634 

Lincoln,  the  Man  of  the  People 

Edwin  Markham  3639 
Lines,  "Love  within  the  lover's 

breast Gcnrgc  Meredith  1153 

Lines  Composed  a  Few  Miles 
Above  Tintern  Abbey,  on  Re- 
visiting the  Banks  of  the  Wye, 
During  a  Tour,  July  13,  179S 

William  Wordsworth  2578 
Lines  on  The  Mermaid  Tavern 

John  Keats  1989 
Lines  to  an  Indian  Air.  .  .Shelley  702 
Lines  Written  in  Early  Spring 

William  Wordsworth  1334 
Lion  and  the  Cub,  The.  .  .  .Gay  18^2 
Lion  and  the  Mouse,  The,  Taylor     120 

Lips  and  Eyes Middleton     682 

Listeners,  The,  Walter  de  la  Mare  3219 
Little  and  Great,  Charles  Mackay  2925 
Little  Beach-Bird,  The.  .  .  .Dana  1522 
Little  Bell.  .  .  .Thomas  Weslwood  259 
Little  Billee.  .  .W.  M.  Thackeray  2140 

Little  Black  Boy,  The Blake     156 

Little    Bo-Peep Unknown      ,39 

Little  Boy  \i\\xt.  .  .Eugene  Field     29S 

Little  Breeches John  Hay  3339 

Little   Brother   of   the   Rich,   A 

E.  S.  Martin  i8,so 
Little  Dandelion,  27.  B.  Bostwick     136 

Little  Elf,  The J.  K.  Bangs     248 

Little    Feet.  ..  .Elizabeth    Akers       17 

Little  Fred Unknown      99 

Little  Gentleman,  The,  Unknown     103 

Little  Ghost,  The Tynan    302 

Little  Ghosts,  The,  T.  Jones,  Jr.     436 

Little  GilTen F.  O.  Ticknor  2320 

Little     Gray     Songs     from     St. 

Joseph's G.F.  Norton  3399 

Little  Gustava Cclia  Tha.rlcr     154 

Little  Hunds.  .  .Laurence  Binyon       20 

Little  Mary  Cassidy Fahy     758 

Little  Orphant  Annie. ... /?i7cy  169 
Little  Page's  Song,  A.  ..  .Percy  iis 
Little  Parable,  A..A.  R.  Aldrich  3462 

Little  Raindrops Unknown       48 

Little  Red  L.irk,  The Graves     713 

"Little  Rose  is  Dust,  my  Dear, 

The" G.  H .  Conkling      1139 

Little  Sister  of  the  Prophet,  The 

Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall  3071 

Little  Things J .  F.  Carney     103 

Little    Waves   of    BrefTny,    The 

Eva  Gore-Booth  2605 

Little  While,  A Marquis  2911 

"Little  While  I  Fain  would  Lin- 
ger Yet,  A" P.  H.  Hayne     89s 

Little  White  Lily.  .  .  .Macdonald  137 
Little  Wild  Baby.  M.  T.  Janvier  1035 
"IJttle  Work,  A".  .  .du  Maurier  2910 
Living  Waters,  Caroline  Spencer  3761 


3990 


Index  of  Titles 


PAGE 

Lochaber  no  More.  Allan  Ramsay    040 

Lochinvar Waller  Scnil     784. 

Locksley  Hall.  .Alfred  Tennyson  3205 

Lonely    Road,    The Rand     803 

"LonR  Time  a  Child".  .CnleridKC  408 
LongTrail,  The,  Rudyard  Kipling  1704 
Long  White  Seam,  The,  Innclnw  16 13 

Longing Matlkcw  Arnold     g67 

Longing  for  Home Inaelow    4.^1 

Look,  The Sara  Teasdale    523 

"Lord  of  ISly  Heart's  Elation" 

Bliss  Carman  28,';2 

Lord  Randal Unknown  2681 

Lord  Ullin's  Daughter.  Campbell  2723 
Loss  of  the  Birkenhead,  The 

F.  U.  Doyle  2472 
Lost  but  Found.  Horalius  Bonar  3577 

Lost  Chord,  A A.  A.  Procter  33g8 

Lost  Colors,  The.  .£.  S.  P.  Ward  2464 

Lost  Leader,  The Browning  1836 

Lost  Light Elizabelh  Akcrs  loio 

Lost  Love Andrew  Lang     840 

Lost  Mistress,  The.  . .  .Browning  848 
Lost  Sheep,  The,  E.  C.  Clcphane  3756 

Lotos-Eaters,  The Tennyson  3178 

"Loudoun's  Bonnie  Woods  and 

Braes" Robert  Tannahill     g4Q 

Lovable  Child,  The,.  .  .Poulsson      99 
Love,    "All    thoughts,    all    pas- 
sions, all  delights".  .C()/p(-/(/.i;e  1173 
Love,  "I  leaned  out  of  window" 

Jean  Ingelow    428 
Love,  "Love  bade  me  welcome; 
yet  my  soul  drew  back" 

George  Tlerbcrt  3718 
Love  Among  the  Ruins 

Robert  Browning  1154 
Love  and  Age. . .  .T.  L.  Peacock  790 
Love   and   Death,    "Alas!    that 

men    must   see" Deland  3574 

Love  and  Death,  "In  the  wild 
autumn  weather,  when  the  rain 
was  on  the  sea. .  .  .Mulholland  1104 
Love  and  Life,  "All  my  past  life 

is  mine  no  more,"  John  Wihnot     611 
Love  and  Life,  " '  Give  me  a  fillet, 
Love,'  quoth  I " 

Julie  M.  Lipptnan  924 
Love  at  Sea. . .  .A.  C.  Swinburne  1159 
"Love   Came   Back   at   Fall   o' 

Dew" L.  W.  Reese  1016 

"Love  Hath  a  Language" 

H.  S.  Sheridan    496 
"Love,  I  Marvel  What  You  Are  " 

Joseph  Trumball  Stickncy  S1^ 
Love  in  a  Cottage . .  .N.P.  Willis  732 
Love  in  a  Life.  Robert  Browning  637 
Love  in  Dreams.  .J.  A.  Symonds  8g."; 
Love  in  the  Valley.  .  .  .Meredith  .^,■56 
Love  in  the  Winds.  Ricliard  Uovey  1269 
"Love  in  thy  Youth,  Fair  Maid" 

Unknown    609 
"Love    is    a    Terrible    Thing" 

G.  F.  Norton  1014 
"Love  is  Like  a  Dizziness."  Hogg  750 
Love  is  StToni^.. Richard  Burton     507 

Love-Knot,  The Nora  Perry     798 

"Love  Me  or  Not".  .  .  .Campion     .s8S 

Love  Not Caroline  Norton    871 

"Love  not  me  for  Comely  Grace" 

Unknown     fioi 
Love  on  the  Mountain Boyd    648 


PACE 

"Love  once  was  like  an    April 

Dawn" R.    U.    Johnson    50S 

Love  Symphony,  A 

A  rthur  O'Shaughnessy    647 
Love,  Time  and  Death 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  3458 

Love  to  the  Church Dwight  3707 

LoveTriumph.int.  .F.  L.  Knowles  1153 
"Love  who   Will,   for  J'll   Love 

None" Thomas  Browne     817 

"Love  Will  Find  out  the  Way" 

Unknown    494 
Lovely  Mary  Donnelly 

William  Allingham     554 
Lover  thinks  of  His  I^ady  in  the 

North,  The.  .  ..ShaemasOSheel    996 

Lovers,  The ' .  .Phxhe  Gary  2067 

Lover's  Choice,  The, 

Thomas  Bedingfield     541 

Lover's  Envy,  A Van  Dyke     672 

Lover's  Lullaby,  A. . .  .Gascoigne  yi^ 
Lovers  of  Marchaid,  The 

Marjoric  L.  C.  Picklhall     994 
Lover's  Resolution,  The.  Wither     813 

Lover's  Song,  The E.  R.  Sill     571 

Love's  Calendar W.  B.  Scott  1203 

Love's  Emblems.  .  .John  Fletcher    482 

Love's  Horoscope Crashaw    484 

Love's   Lord ...  Edward    Dowdcn  2977 

Love's  Perjuries '^Iiakcspearc    479 

Love's  Philosophj'.  .  P.  B.  Shelley  688 
Love's  Prisoner. .  Van  Rensselaer  925 
Love's  Resurrection  Day 

L.  C.  Moulton  III 2 

Love's  Rosa  I  y Alfred  Noyes    999 

Love's  Spite A.  T.  de  Vere    S34 

Love's  Young  Dream.  ..  .Monre     864 

Lovesight D.  G.  Rossetli  125,'; 

Lovest  Thou  Me 

William  Cowpcr  3809 

Lovewell's  Fight Unkninvn  2412 

Low-Backed  Car,  The ....  Lover  777 
Lucifer  in  Starlight. .  .  .Meredith  3771 

Lucy William  Wordsworth  107.^ 

Lucy  Gray .  .  William  Wordsworth  290 
Lucy  Lake.  .Newton  Mackintosh  1926 
Lullaby,    "Baloo,    loo,    laramy, 

now  baloo,  ray  dear".  .Nairne  Si 
Lullaby,  A,  "  Upon  my  lap  my 

sovereign  sits" Rowlands       78 

Lullaby,  "Rockaby,  lullaby,  bees 

in  the  clover".  .  ../.  G.  Holland  80 
Lullaby,  "Sweet  and  low,  sweet 

and  low".  .  .  .Alfred  Tennyson  83 
Lullaby  in  Bethlehem  Bashford  218 
"Lullaby,  O  hu\\s.hy" .  .Bennett  83 
Lullaby  of  an  Infant  Chief,  Scott      82 

Lure.  The J.  B.  O'Reilly  1905 

Lycidas John  Milton  3,519 

"Lydia   is   Gone    this   Many   a 

Year" L.W.  Reese  1126 

Lyke-Wake  Dirge,  K.  .Unknown  2652 
Lyric,  A,  "There's  nae  lark  loves 

the  lift,  my  dear".  .Swinburne    646 
Lyric,  "You  would  have  under- 
stood me,  had  you  waited" 

Ernest  Dowson  11 20 

M 
Mabel,  in  New  Hampshire.  Fields     793 
Madonna  Mia,  A.  C.  Swinburne     565 


Index  of  Titles 


3991 


Madrigal,  "My  Love  in  her  attire 

doth  show  her  wit" . .  Unknown 
Ma-sia's  Song  from  "Farewell  to 

Folly" Robert  Greene 

Magdalen Henry   Kingdey 

Magic  Mirror, The.  .H.  M.  Aldcn 
Magpies  in  Picardy .  . .  .  Unknown 
Mahogany  Tree,  The,  Thackeray 

Maid,  The Theodore  Roberts 

"Maid  of  Athens,  ere  wc  Part" 

Lord  Byron 

Maiden  and  the  Lily,  The,  Frascr 

Maiden  City,  The Tonna 

Maiden  Eyes Gerald  Griffin 

Maidenhood,  //.  W.  Longfellow 

Maiden's  Idea  of  a  Husband,  A 

Henry  Carey 

Maid's  Lament,  The Landor 

Maine  Trail,  A,  6".  H.  McGiJfert 

Make  Believe Alice  Cary 

Maltworm's  Madrigal,  The 

Austin  Dohson 

Man Henry  Vaughan 

Man  and  the  Ascidian Lang 

"Man    Called    Dante,    I    Have 

Heard,  A" G.  G.  King 

Man  in  the  Moon,  The. . .  .Riley 
Man  with  the  Hoe,  The 

Edwin  Markham 

Man  With  the  Hoe,  a  Reply,  The 

/.  V.  Cheney 

Mandalay Rudyard  Kipling 

Mannahatta Walt  Whitman 

Man's  Days Eden  Phillpotls 

Man's  Mortality.  Simon  Wastell 

March,  "Blossom  on  the  plum" 

Nora  Hopper 

March,    "Slayer  of   winter,   art 

thou  here  again" Morris 

Marching  Along.  Robert  Browning 

Marco   Bozzaris Halleck 

Margaret  and  Dora.  .  .  .Campbell 
Margaret  to  Dolcino .  .  .  Kingsley 

Marian George   Meredith 

Marian  Drury Bliss  Carman 

Mariana Alfred  Tennyson 

Mariner's  Dream,  The,  Dimotui 
Marquis  of  Carabas,  The.  Brough 

Marriage W.W.  Gibson 

Marriage  and  the  Care  o't 

Robert  Lochore 
Marriage  Charm,  A,  Nora  Hopper 
Married  Lover,  The ....  Palmare 
Marseillaise,  La,  "Allons,  enfants 

de  la  Patrie".  .Rougct  de  Lisle 
Marseillaise,  The,   "  '^'e  sons  of 

freedom,  wake  to  glorj'," 

after  Rougct  de  Lisle 
Marshes  ot  Glynn,  The.. Lanier 
Mary   Beaton's   Song   from 

"  Chastelard, "  A .  C.  Swinburne 

Mary  M orison Robert  Burns 

Marv  Queen  of  Scots.  .  .Turner 
Maryland  Battalion,  The, 

J.  W.  Palmer 
Maryland  Yellow-throat,  The 

Henry  Van  Dyke 

Mary's    Baby 0  Sheet 

Mary's   Lamb Unknown 

Master,  The E.  A.  Robinson 

Master  Mariner,  Tht.  .Sterling 
Masters.  The. . .  .Laurence  Hope 


522 

2079 
3733 
2S49 
2556 

200,S 

2834 

0.^1 

i88o 
2606 
631 
327 

722 
1077 
i6Si 

691 

201S 
369 
189s 

3084 
168 

3041 

3043 
2638 
2568 
2910 
3405 

135 1 

1350 
2283 
2453 
.S44 
1215 
■562 
99S 
873 
161S 
1843 
II9S 

748 
iigg 
1212 

3836 


2271 
1426 

1 160 

697 

3646 


IS43 
214 
40 
3640 
1799 
2947 


PACE 

Master's  Touch,  The Bonar  3717 

Mastery ^ara  Teasdale  293S 

Match,  A A.  C.  Swinburne    641 

Mater  Dolorosa Barnes    301 

Maternity Ingelow     429 

Matin  Song,  " P.ack,  clouds,  away, 

and  welcome,  day  " .  .  Heyivood     696 
Matin  Song,  "Rise,  Lady  Mis-    ■ 

tress,  rise".  . .  .Nathaniel  Field     694 

Maud  Muller J.  G.  Whitlier    905 

Maureen lohn  Todhunter     647 

May,  "  Come  walk  with  me  along 

this  willowed   lane."  Cornwcd  1362 
May,  "May!  queen  of  blossoms" 

Edward  Hovell-Tlmrloiu  1361 

May  Burden,  A Thompson  1358 

May  Margaret.  T.  J.  H.  Marzials  1145 

May-Music R.  A.  Taylor  1150 

M.ay flower.  The.  .£.  W .  Ellsworth  2389 
Meadows  in  Spring,  The 

Edward  Fitzgerald  1346 
Means  to  Attain  a  Happy  Life, 

The Henry    Howard  2979 

Meddlesome  Matty.  ./i««  ruy/or     no 
Mediocrity  in  Love  Rejected 

Thomas    Carew     59S 
"Meet  we  no  Angels,  Pansie" 

Thomas  Ashe    567 
Meeting,  "My  Damon  was  the 

first  to  wake". .  .George  Crabbe    621 
Meeting,  "They  made  the  cham- 
ber   sweet    with    flowers    and 

leaves" Christina  Rosselti  1259 

Meeting  ,at  Night Browning  1157 

Melancholy John  Fletcher  3349 

Memorabilia. .  ./?rtfier/   Browning  3657 
Memorial  Verses.  Matlhew  A  mold  3680 

Memories Arthur  Stringer  1127 

Memor>',   "Marina's  gone,   and 

now  sit  1" ..  .William  Browne    931 
Memory,  A,  "The  Night  walked 

Aowvilhcfky" .  .F.  L.  Knowles  1152 
Memory  of  the  Dead,  The 

J.  K.  Ingram  2262 
Men  Behind  the  Guns,  The 

/.  J.  Rooncy  2297 
Mendicants.  The.  .Bliss  Carman  1692 

Mending  Wall Robert  Frost  3075 

"Merry  Are  the  Bells." 

Unkwnvn      45 
Message,  The,  "Send  home  my 

long-strayed  eyes  to  nie" 

John    Donne     593 
Message,  The,   "Ye  little  birds 

that  sit  and  sing".  .  .Heywood    598 

Messmates Henry  Newbolt  1620 

Metrical  F"eet.  . .  ..S'.  T.  Coleridge  3111 

Middle  Age R.  C.  Lehmann    363 

"Midges  Dance  aboon  the  Burn, 

The" Robert  Tannahill  1652 

Mid-rapture D.  G.  Rosselti  1256 

Midsummer,    "After    the    May 

time  and  after  the  June  time" 

F,.  W.  Wilcox    922 
Midsummer.  "Around  this  lovely 

valley  rise"...^.  T.  Trojvbridge  1364 

Midsummer  Song,  A Gilder  1366 

Midwinter J.  T.  Trowbridge  1393 

"Mighty   Fortress  is  Our  God, 

A" /-■.  //.  Hedge  3806 

Milkmaid,  The.  .  .Austin  Dobson    573 
Miller  of  the  Dee,  The.  .Mackay  2982 


399^ 


Index  of  Titles 


Mimma  Bella,  Sonnets  I,  II,  IV, 
VI,  VIII,  XX 

Eugene  Lcc-Bamillon    ,-523 
Mimnermus  in  Church 

William  Johnson-Cory  1767 
Miniver  Cheevy .  .E.  A.  Robinson  188S 
Minnie  and  Winnie 

Alfred  Tennyson      92 

Minstre!-Boy,  The Moore  2302 

Minstrel's  Song  from  ".'Ella" 

Thomas  Chalterlon  1070 
Miracle  of  the  Dawn,  The 

Madison  Cawein  1308 
Misadventures  at  Margate 

R.  II.  Barham  2120 
Miss  Lou.  . .  .Waller  de  la  Mare  1790 

Miss  Nancy's  Gown Cocke  1802 

Missive,  The Edmund  Gosse    666 

Mr.  Coggs E.   V.  Lucas     162 

Mr.  Finney's  Turnip.  .Unknown  2071 
Mr.    Molony's    Account    of    the 

Ball W.  M.  Thackeray  ig68 

Mistletoe  Bough,  The Bayly  273S 

Mrs.  Judge  Jenkins.  .  Brel  Harle  1948 
Mrs.  Smith.. F.  Lockcr-Lampson  1733 

Mitherless  Bairn,  The Thorn     283 

"Moan,  Moan,  Ye  Dying  Gales" 

Ihnry  Ncele  3351 
Modern  Beauty.  .Arthur  Symom  1004 
Modern  Hiawatha,  The,  Strong  1950 
Modern  Love,  Stanzas  I,  II-,  III, 

XIV,     XVI,     XXVI,     XLI, 

XLIX,  L George  Meredith  1264 

Modest  Wit,  A,.  .  .Setlcck  Oshorn  184S 
Moggy  and  Me. ..  .James  Hogg  1227 

Moly E.  M.  Thomas  1493 

Mon-goos,  The.  . .  .Oliver  Herford  2083 

Monterey C.  F.  Hoffman  2470 

Moods,  The F.  S.  Davis  31O2 

Moon,  The E.  L.  Fallen      57 

"Moon,  so  Round  and  V'ellow" 

Matthias  Barr      49 

Moral  in  Sevres,  A Houiclls  1805 

Mor.ility Matthew  Arnold  3376 

More  Limericks 

Rudyard  Kipling,  el  al.  2089 

Morgan fi.  C  Stedman  2404 

Morning. ..  .lF///ia)n    D'Avenanl     6g,>; 

Morning Jane  Taylor     1 16 

Morning   Serenade Cawein     700 

Morning-glory,    The,     "Was    it 

worth  while  to  paint  so  fair" 

F.  E.  Coates  1494 
Morning-glory,    The,     "We 

wreathed  about  our  darling's 

head  " Maria  Lowell    3 1 2 

Mors  et  Vita 

Samuel  Waddington  3422 

Morte  D'Arthur Tennyson  3181 

Mortifying  Mistake,  A.  .  ..Frail  166 
Mosquito  Triolet,  \.  ..Anderson  20S5 
Moss-rose,  The.  .  .Henry  .\'eu'bolt  3550 

Mother Teresa  Helbnrn     396 

Mother  and  Poet Browning  3555 

Mother  England  .£.  M.  Thomas  2230 
Mother  Goose's  Melodies 

Unknown      31 
"Mother,  Home,  Heaven" 

W.  G.  Brown  3244 
"Mother,    I    Cannot    Mind   my 

Wheel" W.  S.  Lander  1040 

Mother  in  Egypt,  A.  .  .  .Pickthall  3558 


PACE 

Mother  Song,  from  "  Prince  Luci- 
fer"  Alfred  Austin       90 

Mother  Wept Skifisey     289 

Motherhood f.  D.   Bacon     303 

Mother's  Prayer,  The,  . .  .Shorter     304 

Mother's  Song Unknown      77 

Mountain  Heart 's-Ease,  The 

Bret  Harle  1494 
Mountain  Song  Harriet  Monroe  3481 
"Mourners   Came   at    Break   of 

Day,  The". V.  F.  Adams  3514 

Muckle-Mou'd  Meg,  Ballantine  782 
Muckle'  Mouth  Meg,  Browning  781 
"Multum    Dile\it"   .  .  .Coleridge  3387 

Muses,  The E.  M.  Thomas  3097 

Music,     "The    God    of    Music 
dwelleth  out  of  doors."  Thomas  3130 

Music  at  Twilight Sterling  3131 

"Music  I  Heard" Aiken  1129 

Music  in  Camp.  ./.  R.  Thompson  2289 
Music  of  the  Dawn.  . .  .Harrison  1310 
Musical  Instrument,  A 

E.  B.  Browning  3124. 

Mutaliility P.  B.  Shelley  3377 

My  Ain  Countree Demarest  3710 

My  Ain  Fireside Hamilton  3258 

My  Ain  Wife.  .  .Alexander  Laing  1206 
My  April  Lady.  Henry  Van  Dyke    572 

My  Aunt 0.  W.  Holmes  1740 

My  Bed  is  a  Boat 

R.  L.  Sttvenson  161 
My  Birthday ... -Thomas  Moore  358 
My  Bonnie  Mary.. /Jo/jf/-/   Burns     946 

My  Catbird W.  H.  V enable  1533 

My  Child John  Pierponl    318 

My  Cross Zitella  Cocke  3463 

My  Daughter  Louise Greene     322 

"  My  Days  Among  the  Dead  are 

Passed" Robert  Southev  2920 

"My  Delight  and  Thy  Delight" 

Robert  Bridges  1158 

My  Early  Home John  Clare  3233 

My  Familiar J.G.  Saxe  2151 

My  Garden T.  E.  Brown  1446 

My  Grandmother's  Turkey-Tail 

Fan S.  M  Peck  1804 

My  Heart  and  I.  E.  B.  Browning  1085 
"My  Heart  is  a  Lute."  Barnard     620 
"My  Heart  Shall  be  Thy  Gar- 
den " Alice  Meynell     673 

"My  Heart's  in  the  Highlands" 

Robert  Burns  1669 

My  Laddie AmSlie  Rives     676 

My  Lady  Wind Unknown     124 

My  Land T.  0.  Davis  2265 

My  Last  Duchess Browning    846 

My  Last  Terrier.  John  Halsham  1827 

My  Legacy H.   H.  Jackson  3727 

"My  Life  is  Like  the  Summer 

Rose" R.  H.  Wilde  33^8 

My  Little  Love.  .  .C.  B.  Hawley  989 
Mv  Lost  Youth.  B.W.Longfellow  AAA 
My    Love,    "Not    as    all    other 

women  are" J.  R-  Lowell  1213 

"My  Love  for  Thee" Gilder  1263 

"My   Love   She's  but   a.  Lassie 

Yet" James  Hogg  ■  S43 

My  Maryland /.  R.  RandaU  2220 

"My  Mind  to  me  a  Kingdom  Is" 

Edward  Dyer  2987 
My  Mistress'  Boots 

Frederick  Locker -Lampson  1730 


Index  of  Titles 


3993 


PAGE 

"My  Mother  Bids  me  Bind  my 

Hair" Anne  Hunler  942 

"My  Nannie's  Awa'".  .  .  .Burns  944 

My  Old  Kentucky  Home.  Foster  3227 

My  Other  Me.  Grace  D.  Lilchfield  436 

My  Owen.  . .  .E.  M.  P.  Downing  1200 

"My  Own  Cailin  Donn."  Sigerson  1165 

My  Peggy Allan  Ramsey  5,54 

My  Playmate J.  G.  Whillier  972 

My  Prayer H.  D.  Tlioreaii  2961 

My  Queen Unknown  649 

My  Recollectest  Thoughts 

C.  E.  Carryl  2071 

My  Road Oliver  Opdyke  657 

My  Shadow....^.   /-.  Stevenson  158 

My  Share  of  the  W'orld.  .Furlong  628 

My  Sorrow O'Sullivan  3,562 

My  Star Robert  Browning  1,321 

My  Thrush.  .  .  .Mortimer  Collins  i,';8o 
"My  True-love  Hath  my  Heart" 

Philip  Sidney  1141 
My  Wife's  a  Winsome  Wee  Thing 

Rolicrl  Burns  1208 

Mystery. The.  . .  .  Ralph  Hodgson  3776 

Mystic,  The Witter  Bynncr  680 

Mystic's  Prayer,  The 

William  Sharp  2854 

N 

Name,  The Don  Marquis  2868 

Nameless  One,  The.  . .  .Mangan  3,56,1 

Nancy  Uawson [I.  P.  Home    988 

Nanny Francis  Davis  6si 

Nature H.W.  Longfellow  1301 

Nature.  "O  nature!  I  do  not  as- 
pire"  //.  D.  Thoreau  1295 

Nature,    "The    bubbling    brook 
doth  leap  when   I  come  by" 

Jones  Very  1293 

Nautical  Ballad,  A.  .C.  E.  Carryl  2079 

Nearer  Home Pha-be  Cary  3813 

"Nearer  to  Thee".  .S.  F.  Adams  3805 

Nearest   the    Dearest ...  Pa/wore  387 

Nebuchadnezzar.  .  .Ird'in  Rus.tell  2040 

Needle,  The..Vaw;(f/   Woodworlh  2120 
Nell     Gwynnc's     Looking-Glass 

Laman  Blanchard  1766 

Nephelidia. . .  ./4.   C.  Sii<inhurne  1944 

Nested Hahbcrlon  Lulham  1 176 

Net  <jt  Law.  The.  .  .  .J .  J .  Roche  igii 
"Never  (!ive  all  the  Heart" 

W.  B.  Veat<:  511 
"Never  the  Time  and  the  Place  ' 

Robert  Browning  88,5 

New  Arrival.  The.  .  .6".  W.  Cable  1928 
New  Dreams  for  Old 

Cole  Voung  Rice  28,1;  r 
New  England's  Chevy  Ch.ase 

E.  E.  Dale  2426 

New  Jerusalem,  The.  .Unkmmn  3693 

New   Life ■'i.  J.   Burr  13.19 

New  Poet.  A.  .  .William  Canton  269 

Newly-Wedded.    The Praed  iios 

Next  of  Kin C.  G.  RossetU  3460 

Nice  Correspondent.  A 

Frederick  Lockcr-Lampson  i8l2 
Night.         "Mysterious      night! 
Spread  wide  lliy  silvery  plume  " 

J.  A.  Symonds  1324 
Night.    "Night   is   the   time   for 

rest" lames  Montgomery  1325 


Night.  "The  sun  descending  in 

the  West" William  Blake  1321 

Night,   "When   the   time  comes 

for  me  to  die " .  .T.  W .  Rolleston  3469 

Night,   The Hilaire    Belloc  3223 

Night  and  Love.  .  .Bulivcr  Lytton  710 
Night  Court,  The.  .  R.  C.  Mi'lchell  .3055 
Night  for  Adventures -.S7ar/);/c(fe  1701 
"Night  Has  a  Thousand  Eyes, 

The" F.  W.  Bourdillon    863 

Night  of  Gods,  The Sterling  2848 

Night-Piece:  to  Julia,  The 

Robert  Herrick     695 

Nightingale,  The Akenside  IS49 

Nightingale  and  Glow-worm.  The 

William  Cowper     179 
Night's  Mardi  Gras  E.  J.  Wheeler  1328 

Nikolina Cdia  Thaxter     153 

19 14 Rupert    Brooke  2544 

Ninety  and  Nine,  The,  Clcphane  37,';6 

No Thomas  Hood  2048 

No  and  Yes Thomas  A  she    895 

No  Baby  in  the  House. DoW/icr  2$ 
"No  Fault  in  Women."  Herrick  1901 
Noble  Nature,  The.  .Ben  Jonson  2836 

Nocturne T.  B.  Aldrich     711 

Nocturne A.    J.    Burr  1166 

Non  Sum  Quails  Eram  Bonae  sub 

Regno  Cynara; .  .Ernest  Dowson  918 
Nongtongpaw.  .  .  .Charles  Dibdin  iS.so 
Nonsense  Verses,  "The  Window 

has  Four  little  Panes."  Burgess  2086 
Nonsense  Verses.  "There  was  an 

old  man  with  a  beard". .  .Lear  20.^7 

Norah ZoS  Akins  1054 

Northern  Star.  The.  .  .Unknown  1621 
"Not    a    Sou    Had     He    Got" 

R.  B .  Barham  1933 
"Not   Ours   the   \ov.'s," .Barton    865 

"Nothing  to  Wear" Butler  2i,s4 

November C.  L.  Cleaveland  1384 

November M .  L.  Fisher  1385 

Now Harriet     Monroe  2573 

Now  and  Afterwards Craik  3572 

"Now    the    Laborer's    Task    is 

•  O'er J.  L.  Ellerton  3573 

" Now,  What  is  Love". .  .Raleigh  47,5 
Nox  Nocti  Indicat  Scientiam 

William  Habinglon  3786 

Nubia Bayard    Taylor  2640 

Nun,  The Leigh  Hunt     624 

Nuremberg.  ...//.  W.  Longfellow  2632 
Nursery  Song,  A.  .L.  E.  Richards     16.S 

Nurse's  Song William  Blake     i.si 

Nymph     Complaining     for     the 

Death  of  her  Fawn,  The 

Andrrw  Marvell  1817 
Nymph's  Reply  to  the  Passionate 

Shepherd.  The,  Walter  Raleigh  585 
Nymph's  Song.  The.  .  Rodcn  Noel  3213 
Nymph  s  Song  to  Hylas.  The 

William  Morris     S94 

O 

■'O  Captain!  My  Captain" 

Wall  Whitman  3629 
■O  God!  Our  Help  in  Ages  Past" 

Isaac  Watts  3790 

O  Henry Vachel  Lindsay  3610 

"O,  Inexpressible  as  Sweet" 

G.  E  Woodberry    668 


3994 


Index  of  Titles 


PAGE 

"O,   Lay  Thy   Hand   in   Mine, 

Dear" Gerald  Massey  12 28 

"O  Little  Town  of  Bethlehem" 

Phillil>s  Brooks     203 
"O,  Love  is  not  a  Summer  Mood" 

R.  W.  Gilder  504 
"O     Mally's      Meek,      Mally's 

Sweet" Robert  Burns    541 

"O  Merry  May  the  Maid  be" 

John  Clerk    772 
"O  Nancy!  Wilt  thou  go  with 

Me  " Thomas  Percy    618 

"O  Nightingalel  thou  surely  art" 

William  Wordsivorth  1545 
"O,  Saw  Ye  Bonnie  Lesley" 

Robert  Burns  331 
"O,  Saw  Ye  the  Lass". .  .i?ya«  1150 
O  Sleep.  .Grace  Fallow  Norton  3224 
"O    Swallow,    Swallow,    Flying 

South" Alfred  Tennyson    963 

"O  Were  My'  Love  Yon   Lilac 

Fair" Robert  Burns    621 

"O  World".  .  .Geo/'^e  Sanlayana  2907 
"O  World,  he  Nobler".  .Binyon  652 
"O  World,  Be  not  so  Fair" 

Grace  Fallow  Norton  3483 

Obituary T.  W.  Parsons     278 

Oblation,  The.  .A.  C.  Swinburne    903 

Oblivion George   Sterling  2S47 

October's  Party.  .  .George  Cooper     152 
Ode,  "  Sleep  sweetly  in  your  hum- 
ble graves Henry  Timrod  2321 

Ode,  "We  are  the  music-makers" 

Arthur  O'Shaughnessy  3128 
Ode  in  Imitation  of  Alcoeus 

William  Jones  2236 
Ode  in  Time  of  Hesitation,  An 

W.  V.  Moody  221 1 
Ode  on  a  Grecian  Urn.  . .  .Keats  3163 
Ode  on  Solitude,  Alexander  Pope  1635 
Ode  on  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of 

Wellington.  .^//;e(i    Tennyson  3672 
Ode  on  the  Intimations  of  Im- 
mortality   from    Recollections 
of  early  Childhood.  Wordsworth     371 
Ode  on  the  Spring,  An.  . .  .Gray  1343 
Ode    on    the    Unveiling    of    the 
Shaw     Memorial    on     Boston 
Common,  May  31,   1897.  An 

T.   B.  Aldrich  3635 
Ode    Recited    at    the    Harvard 
Commemoration.  .J.  R.  Lowell  2518 

Ode  to  a  Butterfly Higginson  1517 

Ode  to  a  Nightingale Rents  1552 

Ode  to  Autumn . .  .  Thoitias  Hood  1376 

Ode  to  Duty Wordsworth  2955 

Ode  to  Evening.  William  Collins  13 13 
Ode  to  Master  Anthony  Stafford, 

An Thomas  Randolph  1649 

Ode  to  Psyche John  Keats  3164 

Ode  to  the  West  Wind.. Shelley  1378 
Ode  to  Tobacco.  .C.  S.  Calverley  1983 

Odyssey,  The Andrew  Lang  3083 

Of  an  Orchard,  Katharine  Tynan  1414 

Of  Clementina W.  S.  Landor     729 

Of  Corinna's  Singing. .  .Campion    590 

Of  Joan's  Youth Guiney  1054 

"Of   Old   Sat   Freedom   on    the 

Heights" Alfred   Tennyson  2235 

Of  Phyllis.  .  .William  Drummond  527 
Of  the  Last  Verses  in  the  Book 

Edmund  Waller    401 


Of  Those  who  Walk  Alone 

Richard  Burton  382 
Off  Riviere  du  Loup,  D.  C.  Scott  1601 
"Oh,  Breathe  not  His  Name" 

Thomas  Moore  3609 
"Oh,  Death  will  Find  Me" 

Rupert  Brooke  1269 
"Oh,  Earlier  Shall  the  Rosebuds 

Blow" Johnson-Cory  3378 

"Oh  May  I  Join  the  Choir  In- 
visible  George  Eliot  3485 

"Oh  Mother  of  a  Mighty  Race" 

W.  C.  Bryant  2203 
"Oh!  Snatched  Away  in  Beauty's 

Bloom" Lord  Byron  1082 

"Oh,  that  'twere  Possible" 

Alfred  Tennyson  1092 
"Oh!    Where    do    Fairies    hide 

their  Heads" T.  U.  Bayly     23s 

"Oh,  Why  should  the  Spirit  of 

Mortal  be  Proud" Knox  3409 

"Old  Books  are  Best" Chmi  1759 

Old   Churchyard  of   Bonchurch, 

The P.  B.  Marstnn  3436 

Old    Clock   on   the   Stairs,   The 

H.  W.  Longfellow  3242 
Old  Familiar  Faces,  The,  Lamb  453 
Old-fashioned  Poet,  An,  Murray  3089 
Old  Folks  at  Home.  .5.  C.  Foster  3228 

Old  Gardens Arthur  Upson    992 

Old  Grimes A.  G.  Greene  2131 

Old  Home,  The,  Madison  Cawcin  3233 

Old  Ironsides O.  W-  Holmes  2456 

Old  King  Cole..£.  A.  Robinson  1797 
Old  Man  Dreams,  The,  Holmes  461 
Old  Man's  Comforts,  The 

Robert  Southery     405 

Old  Man's  Idyl,  An Rcalf  1222 

Old  Man's  Song,  An,  Le  Gallienne  425 
Old  Mother  Hubbard.  .  Unknown  51 
Old  October.  .  .Thomas  Constable  1383 
Old  Scottish  Cavalier,  The 

W.  E.  Aytoun  2734 
Old  Sergeant,  The.  .  B.  F.  Willson  3332 
Old  Sexton,  The,  Park  Benjamin  3441 
Old  Squire,  The...I'F.  5.  Blunt  16,58 

Old   Superstitions Unknown       66 

Old  Swimmin'-Holc,  The,  Riley     468 

Old  Tune,  An Aiuirew  Lang     920 

Old  Winter Thojnas  Noel  1386 

O'Lincon  Family,  The Plasg  1530 

Omar  for  Ladies,  An 

J.  D.  Bacon  1921 
Omnia  Somnia. . .  .R.  M.  Watson  424 
Omnia  Vincit.  .  .Alfred  Cochrane     744 

On  a  Bust  of  Dante Parsons  3604 

On  a  Certain  Lady  at  Court 

Alexander  Pope  380 
On  a  Contented  Mind. . .  .  Faa*  2978 
On  a  Distant  Prosjiect  of  Eton 

College Thoma'i  Gray  2589 

On  a  Fan Austin  Dohson  1781 

On  a  Fly-leaf  of  Burns's  Songs 

F.  L.  Knowles  3596 

On  a  Girdle Edmuiui  Waller    531 

On  a  Henpecked  Squire. .  .Burns  1919 
On  a  Nightinuale  in  ."^pril,  Sharp  1548 
On  a  Picture  by  Poussin.  Symonds  1079 
On   a   Sculptured   Head   of    the 

Christ M.  L.  Fisher  3751 

On  a  Soldier  fallen  in  the  Philip- 
pines  W.  V.  Moody  2210 


Index  of  Titles 


3995 


PAGE 

On  a  Tear Samuel  Rogers  3380 

On  an  Intaglio  Head  of  Minerva 

T.    B.    Aldrich  1748 
On  an  Old  Song.  .  W.  E.  U.  Laky  3087 
On  Elb.abeth  L.  H.  .  .BcnJonson  3516 
On    First    Looking    into    Chap- 
man's Homer John  Keals  3082 

On  Hampstoad  liea.th.  .Gibson  si<> 
On  her  Coming  to  London 

Edmund  Waller    330 
On  His  Blindness.  .  .John  Milton  2844 

On  Melancholy John  Keats  3349 

On  Music W.  S.  Landor  3131 

"On  Parent  Knees" Jones       21 

On  Salathicl  Pavy. .  .Ben  Jonson  3516 
On  the  Death  of  a  Favorite  Cat, 
Drowned    in    a   Tub   of   Gold 

Fishes Thomas  Gray  1S21 

On  the  Death  of  Joseph  Rodman 

Drake Fits-Greene  Halleck  3608 

On    the   Death   of    Mr.    Robert 

Levet Samuel  Johnson  3628 

On  the  Death  of  Mrs.  Throck- 
morton's Bullfinch.  W.  Cowper  1824 
On  the  Deaths  of  Thomas  Carlyle 

and  George  Eliot.  .  .Swinburne  3Sq6 
On  the  Extinction  of  the  Vene- 
tian Repulilic 

William  Wordsworth  2619 
On  the  Fly-Leaf  of  a  Book  of  Old 

Plays Walter  Learned  1806 

On  the  Grasshoppei;  and  Cricket 

John  Keats  15 10 
On  the  Late  Massacre  in  Pied- 
mont  John  Milton  2404 

On   the   Life-mask  of  Abraham 

Lincoln R.  W.  Gilder  3642 

On  the  Life  of  Man .  .  Henry  King  2837 
On    the    Loss    of    the    "Royal 

George" William  Cowper  2435 

On  the  Moor C.  V.  Rice    307 

On  the  Morning  of  Christ's  Na- 
tivity  John  Milton     223 

On  the  Picture  of  a  "Child  Tired 

of  Play" N.  P.  Willis     280 

On  the  Portrait  of  Shakespeare 

Ben   Jonson  3652 
On  the  Prospect  of  Planting  Arts 
and  Learning  in  America 

George  Berkeley  2563 

On.  the  Quay /.  J.  Bell  1605 

On  the  Receipt  of  My  Mother's 
Picture  out  of  Norfolk.  Cowper  3251 

On  the  Sea John  Keals  1588 

On   the  Tombs  in   Westminster 

Frawis  Beaumont  3517 
On    this    Day    I    Complete    my 

Thirty-si.xth  Year.  Lord  Byron     360 
"On  Wenlock  Edge."  lloustnan    1401 

Once  on  a  Time Banning     517 

Once  on  a  Time Benson  1507 

One  and  One M.  M .  Dodge     164 

One  l)v  One A.  A.  Procter  3761 

One  Gift  I  Ask.  .  .V.  b.  Harrison  3734 
One  Hope,  The..£>.  G.  Rossetii  3473 
"One  Morning,  Oh!   so  Early" 

Jean  Ingclow  1144 

One  Way  of  Love Browning     884 

One  White  Hair,  The 

W.  S.  Landor    362 

One  Word  More Browning  1284 

Only U.P.Spoford        3 


"Only  a  Baby  Small" Barr 

Only  of  Thee  and  Me.  Unlermeyer 

Only  Seven B.  S.  Leigh 

Only  Son,  The.  .  .Henry  Ncwboll 
"Onward,  Christian  Soldiers" 

5.  Baring-Gould 
Opening  of  the  Tomb  of  Charle- 
magne, The.  .  .Aubrey  Dc  Vcre 
Opportunity,  "Master  of  human 
destinies  am  1".  .  .J.  J.  Ingalls 
Opportunity,     "They     do     me 
wrong    who    say    I    come    no 

more" Walter   M alone 

Opportunity,  "This  I  beheld,  or 

dreamed  it  in  a  dream". . .  .Sill 

"Or    ever    the    Knightly    Years 

were  Gone". . .  .W.  E.  Henley 

Oracle,  The A.D.Ficke 

Orchard  at  Avignon,  An 

A .  M.  F.  Robinson 
"Other  World,  The,  //.  B.  Slowe 

Ould  Plaid  Shawl,  The Fahv 

Our  Hired  Girl J.  W.  Riley 

Our  Sister H.N.  Powers 

Our  Wee  White  Rose.  . .  .Massey 

Out  of  Hearing.  .  .  .Jane  Barlow 

Out    Where    the    West    Begins 

Arthur  Chapman 

Outgrown /.  C.  R.  Dorr 

Outward /.  G.  Neihardt 

"Over  the  River".  .A^.  W.  Priest 
"Over  the  Wintry  Threshold" 

Bliss  Carman 

Overflow /.  B.Tabb 

"Owl  and  the  Eel  and  the  Warm- 

ing-Pan,The".  .L.  E.  Richards 

Owl  and  the  Pussy-Cat.  The.  Lear 

Owl-Critic,  The /.  T.  Fields 

"Owre    the    Moor    Amang    the 

Heather" Jean  Glover 

Ozymandias  of  Egypt.  . .  .Shelley 


Paddy  O'Rafther.  .Samuel  Lover 
Pageant  of  Seamen,  The 

May  Byron 

Pain St.  John  Lucas 

Palabras  Carinosas.  T.  B.  Aldrich 
Palm-tree  and  the  Pine.  The 

R.  M.  Milnes 

"Pamela  in  Town Cortissoz 

Pan  in  Wall  Street.  E.  C.  Stedman 
Paradise,   "O  Paradise,  O   Par- 
adise"  ;.../•'.  W.Faber 

Paradise,  "Once  in  a  dream  I  saw 
the   (lowers "...C.   C.    Rosselti 
Paradox  of  Time,  The.  .   Dobson 
Parental  Ode  to  My  Son,  A 

_  ^  Thomas  Hood 

Parting,  "Too  fair,  I  may  not  call 
thee  mine". . .  .Gerald  Massey 
Parting  at  Morning.  .  .  .  Browning 
Parting  Guest.  A.  J.  W.  Riley 
Parting  Houi ,  The,  Olive Cuslance 
Parting  of  the  Ways.  The,  Gilder 
Pass  of  Kirkstone,  The 

William  Wordsworth 

Passer-by,  A Robert  Bridges 

Passing  of  March,  The,  Wilson 

Passionate  Reader  to  His  Poet, 

The Richard  Le  Gallicnne 


PAGE 

i 

62s 
1925 

2324 

3814 
3597 
2921 

2922 
2923 

266 

1414 

3.70S 

7.S8 

171 

389 

26 

3560 

2.S74 
1017 
IS99 
3509 

1349 
1579 

47 

20';2 

i88i 

747 
2844 


i960 

2827 

33.53 

711 

963 

802 
1751 

369s 

370s 
423 

268 

984 
"57 
3507 

98s 
2217 

2582 
1600 
1353 


3996 


Index  of  Titles 


V 


PAGE 

Passionate  Sliepherd  to  his  Love, 

The Christopher    Marlnwe     5S4 

Passion-Flower,  The 

Marf,arrt  Fuller   10^,^ 
Passions,   'Vhe.  .William    Collins  :iiiQ 

Vast John  Galsworlhv     420 

Pastoral,  A,  "Along  the  lane  be- 
side the  mead  " .  .  Norman  Gale     744 
Pastoral,  A,  "  Flower  of  the  Med- 
lar"  Theophilc    Marzials  1167 

Patmos Edith  M.  Thomas  1303 

Patriot's  Pass- Word,  The 

James  Montgomery  2353 

Patterns Amy  Lowell  1134 

Paul  Revere's  Ride. .  .Longfellow  2422 

Peace Rupert  Brooke  2544 

Pence Henry  Vaughan  3605 

"Peace  to  the  Slumbcrers" 

Thomas  Moore  z?02 
Peaceable  Race,  The.  .T.A.  Daly  iq76 

Peaks,  The Stephen  Crane  1433 

Peddler's  Caravan,  The.  .  Rands     161 

Perfect  Woman Wordsworth     380 

Persicos  Odi Horaee  3827 

Persuasions  to  Enjoy Carew     507 

Perugia A.  J.   Burr  2621 

Peschiera A.  If.  Clough  2471 

Pet  Name,  The,  R.  B.  Browning  45^ 
Petrified  Fern.  The.  M.  B.  Bramh  28r,Q 
Pewee,  The.  .  .  .J.  T.  Trowbridge  I'^'^S 
"Philip,  My  King."  D.  M.  Craik     '  21 

Phillida  and  Coridon Breton     716 

"Phillida  Flouts  Me".  .  Unknown     722 
Phillis    and    Corydon,    "Phillis 
kept  sheep  along  the  western 

plains" Robert  Greene.     76S 

Philomel Riihard  BarneHeld  1546 

Philomela,  "Hark!  ah,  the  night- 
ingale"  Matt.tteiv  Arnold  1547 

Philomela,  "The  nightingale,  as 

soon  as  April  bringeth."  Sidney  i.S'Ii 
Philosopher,  A...  J.   K.   Bangs  2QS.i 
Philosopher's  Scales,  The,  Taylor  1879 
Phyllis   and    Corydon,    "Phyllis 
took  a  led  rose  from  the  tangles 

of  her  hair Arthur  Gallon    603 

Pibroch  of  Donald  Dhu.  .  .  .Scott  2277 
Picket-Guard,  The.  .E.L.  Beers  24QI 
Picture  of  Little  T.  C.  in  a  Pro.s- 

pect  of  Flowers,  The,  Marvel!     273 
Pied  Piper  of  Hamelin.  The 

Robert  Browning     102 
Pierrette  in  Memory ....  Griffith  3.58S 

Pilgrim,  The John  Bunyan  iTi% 

Pilgrim  Fathers.  The.  .  .Picrpont  23Q0 
Pillar  of  the  Cloud,  The.  Newman  3804 

J'in.  The Ann  Taylor     108 

Pine,  The Augusta  Webster  1408 

Pines  .ind  the  Sea.  The,  Craneh  i.SQO 
Pious  Belinda.  .William  Congreve     721 

Pipe  of  Tobacco,  The {/.</;<■/•  IQ84 

Piper  on  the  Hill,  The,  Shorter  132 
Pipes  o'  Gordon's  Men,  The 

J.  S.  Glasgow  2307 
Pitcher  of  Mignonette,  A 

H.  C.  Bunncr  i7g6 
"Place  in  Thy  Memory,  A" 

Gerald  Griffin     871 

Plaidie.  The Charles  Sibley     755 

Plahi    Language   from   Truthful 

James Bret  Harte  2174 

Plaint  of  the  Camel,  The,  Carryl  2080 


P.^GE 

Plantation  Ditty,  A.  ..  .Stanton  2043 
Planting  of  the  Apple-Tree.  The 

W.  C.  Bryant  1411 

Play,    The J.    B.    /Cc»vo»  2854 

Playgrounds. .  .L.  Alma-Tademn     no 

Plays W.  S.  Landor   iqio 

"Please  to  Ring  the  Belle."  Hood  2130 
Pleasures  of  Love,  The,.  .  .Blunt  1262 

Pli.ghted D.  M.  M.  Craik  116  r 

Plow,  The R.  II.  Home  1652 

Plymouth  Harbor 

Dollie  Radford    667 
Pobble  Who  Has  No  Toes.  The 

Edward  Lear  2053 
Poet  and  Lark  .  .M .  A.  de  Vere  30SQ 
Poet  and  the  Wooil-louse.  The 

Helen  Parry  Eden  1701 

Poet  Enlists,  A A.  J.  Burr  2';64 

Poetry Ella    Heath  .?o86 

Poets  and  Linnets.  .  .  .Tom  Hood  1038 
Poets  at  Tea.  The.  .  .  Barry  Pain  lo.s  ^ 
Poet's  Song  to  His  Wife,  The 

B.   W.  Proeter   1223 

Politeness Elizabeth  Turner       q8 

Poor  Jack Charles  Dibdin  i  ^q7 

Poor  Kings W .  H.  Davies  2Q08 

"Pope  He  Leads  a  Happy  Life, 

The" Charles   Lever  2137 

Poplar  P'ield,  The Coivper   14 11 

Porphyrin's  Lover Browning   1003 

Port  o'  Heart's  Desire,  The 

J .  S.  McGroarty  1604 
Portrait,  A,  "  I  will  paint  her  as  I 

see  her" E.  B.  Browning    .538 

Portrait.  A.  "  In  sunny  girlhood's 

vernal  life"..../.  Ashby-Sterry  1758 
Portrait.  A.  "Molher  and  maid 

and   soldier,    be.iritig   best" 

Brian  Hooker  3Q3 
Portrait,  The,   "Midnight  past! 

Not  a  sound  of  aught" 

Bulwer  Lvtion  102 ■; 
Post  that  Fitted,  The.  .  .Kipling  2046 
Poster-Girl,  The.  Carolyn  Wells   iq4i 
Power  of  Love.  The.  John  Fletcher     482 
Powerof  Malt.  The.  . .  .Housman  2016 

Power  of  Prayer.  The 

Cli.fford  and  Sidnev  Lanier  20.^8 
Praise.  ....  .Seumas  O'Sullivan     .'582 

Praise  of  his  Lady.  A.  .  .Heywood     37S 

Praise  of  My  Lady Marvis  ^3 

Prayer,  "Lo,  here  a  little  volume. 

but  great   book  "...  .C^.s-feno  3723 

Prayer. Loui-i    Untermcyer  2g4o 

Prayer,  A John  Drinkwaler  20.S1  . 

Prayer,  A Harry  Kemp  20.1Q 

Prayer    for    Pain Neiliardt  2040 

Prayer  in  the  Prospect  of  Death, 

A Robert  Burns  3455 

Prayer  of  the  Beaten  Men,  The 

W.  H.  Woods  2044 
Prayer  to  the  Trmty.. Ed meston  3807 
Precept  of  Silence,  The 

Lionel   Johnson  33."; i 

Pre-Existence P.  H.  Ilayne  28';7 

Prelude.  A.  .  .Maurice  Thompson  3081 
Prelude  to  "The  New  Day" 

A'.  W.  Gilder  1307 
Preludes,  from  "The  An.gel  in  the 

House" Coventry  Patmore    3S4 

Pretty  Girl  of  Loch  Dan,   The 

Samuel  Ferguson     779 


Index  of  Titles 


3997 


PAGE 

Prevision. .......  .-4-  F.  Murray  i.y,^ 

Prime  of  Life,  The,  Waller  Learned   805 

Primrose,  Tlie Robert  Herruk   1405 

Primrose  Dame,  A,  Gleason  While  74° 
Prince  Tatters.  Laura  E.  Richards  15.5 
Prisoner  of  Chillon.  Tlie,  Byron  3273 
Private  of  the  BufTs,  The,  Doyle  2478 
Problem,  The.  .  .R-  W.  Emerson  2966 

Proem       J-  G.  Whillicr  307S 

Progress  of  Poesy,  The.  .  Gray  3ogi 
Promissory  Note,  The.  . .  .  Taylor  1946 

Prospice Robert  browning.  34^14 

Prothalamion.  .Crfw«'!<i  Spenser  117S 

Proud  Maisie Waller  Siolt  1076 

Proverbs Unknoivn      04 

Providence! Reginald  Ueher  3726 

Psalm  of  Life,  A Longfellow  2Q14 

Pulley,  The George  Herbert    370 

Purple  Cow,  The,  Cclelt  Burgess  2085 
Puzzled  Census  Taker,  The,  5<i.ve  2147 
Pyramus  and  Thbbe.  J.  C.  Saxe  2148 

Q 

Qua  Cursum  Ventus Clough  3033 

Queen,  The William  Winter    671 

Queen  Mab,  "A  little  fairy  comes 

at  night" Thomas  Hood     237 

Queen  Mab,  "This  is  Mab,  the 

Mi>;tre.ss-Fairy".  .Boj   Jonson     233 
Queen  of  Hearts,  The.  .  Unknown      39 

Oueen's     Song,    The Eleeker  3214 

Quest,  The,  E.  M.  U.  Corliswz    357 

Question,  The P.  B.  Shelley    867 

Question,  The.... if.  A.  Taylor  3742 
Question  Whither,  The 

George  Meredith  2S60 

Questionings F-  H.  Hedge  2970 

Quid  non  Speremus,  Amantes 

Ernest  Dowson  gig 
Quiet  Life,  The.  ..William  Byrd  1654 

Quiet  Nights,  The Tynan  3222 

Quiet  Singer,  The,  C.  F.  Tnume  3665 
Quiet  Work Matthew  Arnold  1300 

R 

Rabbi  Ben  Ezra Browning    411 

Rabia J-  F.  Clark  29.S3 

Raggedy  Man,  The.  .J.  W.  Rilcy  1(16 
Riiia  on  a  Uravc.  Thomas  Hardy  1133 
Rain  on  the  Roof.  Coatcs  Kinney     4.5S 

Rainbow,  The Wordsworth     366 

Rainy  Dav,  The Longfellow  3350 

Raven.  The E.  A.  Poe  3170 

Razor-Seller,  The.  .  .John  Wolcot  2101 
Rcadin  ov  a  Head-Stwone 

William  Barnes  3569 
"Ready,  Ay,  Ready "..  A/mua/c  2234 
Reaper  and  the  Flowers,  The 

//.  W.  Longfellow  3418 
Reason,  'VViC.  .James  Oppe'nhcim  1164 
"Reason  Fair  to  Fill  My  Glass, 

A" Charles  Morris  I007 

Reasonable  Affliction.  A.  .  .Prior  IQ07 
Rebecca's  After-thought,  Turner  100 
Recessional.  .  .  .  Rudyard  Kipling  2248 
Recessional.  The,  C.  G.  D.  Roberts  3480 
Recognition,  The.  .F.  W.  Sawyer  1935 

Rec()mi>ense Waterman  2929 

Reconciliation,  The.  .  .Tennyson  116S 
Recruit.  The RW.  Chambers  1977 


PACE 

Rectius  Vivcs Horace  3829 

Red   Yi.Qi.\Ko'=.c,  \.  .Robert  Burns     940 
Re<l  Riding  Hood.  .G.  W.  Carryl  2077 

Reeds  of  Innocence Blake     126 

Reformation   of    Godfrey    Gore, 

The W.B.  Rands     114 

Refuge   G.    IF.    Russell  1143 

Refuge William  Winter    921 

Relid  of  Lucknow,  The. .  .Lowell  247s 
Religious  Use  of  Tobacco.  A 

Robert  Wisdome  1983 
Remedy  Worse  than  the  Disease, 

The  ...  .Matthew  Prior  1910 

Remember !...C/;r!s/i-na  Rosselti  1260 

Remember  or  Forget Aide    987 

Remembrance Emily  Bronte  109s 

Renouncement Alice  Meynell  1263 

Renunciation.  K.  .  .Edxvard  Vere    807 
Requiem,  "Hush  your  prayers, 

'tis  no  saintly  soul".  .  .Connetl  3500 
Re(|uiem,  A.  "Thou  hast  lived  m 

pain  and  woe."  Jaines  Thomson  3.S5I 
Requiem,  "Under  the  wide  and 

starry  sky".  .  .  R-  L.  Stevenson  34S5 
Renuiescat,  "  Bury  me  deep  when 

lamdead"..../?.  M.  Walson  1122 
Requiescat,  "Strew  on  her  roses, 

roses" Matllini)  Arnold  109S 

Requiescat,  "Tread  lightly,  she 

is  near" Oscar  Wilde  iiig 

Resignation,  "There  is  no  flock, 
however  watched  and  tended 

//.  l-F.  Longfellow  3510 
Resignation.  "Why,  why  repine, 
my  pensive  friend".  .  .La«fl"''  2993 

Rest       Christina  Rosselti  1260 

"Rest  is  not  Here" Nairne  370t 

Resurrection Harry   Kemp  3.S.i3 

Retirement,  The.  .Charles  Cotton  1641 

Retort,  The G.  P.  Morris  2173 

Retreat,  The.  . .  .Henry  Vaughan    43+ 

Returning R.    G.    Harding  3482 

Reveille   Michael  O'Connor  2286 

Reveille   Louis    Unlcrmeycr  2562 

Reveille.  The Bret  Harle  2487 

Revel,  The,  Bartholomew  Dowling  35<>o 

"Revenge,"  The Tennyson  2377 

Reverie  of  Poor  Susan,  The 

William  Wordsworth     28 1 

Revival  Hvmn /.  C.  Harris  2017 

Rhodora,  the.  .  .R.  W.  Emerson  1497 
Rhyme  of  Life,  A,  C.  W.  Stoddard  349Q 
Rhyme  of  One,  A 

Frederick  Lockcr-Lampson        8 

Riddle,  A William  Cowpcr     683 

Ri(l,jles Unknown      62 

Riddles  Wisely   Exj-xjunded 

Unknown  2683 

Riding  Down Nora  Perry    799 

Rime   of   the   Ancient   Mariner, 

The S.  T.  Coleridge  2747 

Ripe  Grain D.  R.  Goodalc  357.3 

Risposta Unknown  2980 

Rivals William  Walsh     826 

River  of  Life,  The Comphcll     407 

Road,  The Chalmers     760 

Ro,ad  of  Remembrance.  The 

L.  W.  Reese  449 
Robert  Burns,  William  Alexamlcr  3393 
Robert  Louis  Stevenson.  .  .Reese  3(157 
Robert  of  Lincoln.  .  IF.  C.  Bryant  15 ^8 
Robin  Adair Caroline  Keppel    979 


399^ 


Index  of  Titles 


PAGE 

Robin  Hood  and  AUen-a-Dale 

Unknown  2692 
Robin     Redbreast,     "Good-by, 
good-by   to  Summer" 

William    Allingham.  1561 
Robin  Redbreast,  "Little  Robin 
Redbreast  sat  upon  a  tree" 

Unknown      45 
Robin  Redbreast,  "Sweet  Robin, 

I  have  heard  them  say."  Doane  1561 
Robinson  Crusoe.  .  .C.  E.  Carry]  2184 
Rocli  me  to  Sleep 

Elizabeth  Akers    46$ 

Rock  of  Ages A.  N.  Toplady  3797 

"Rocked   in   the   Cradle  of  the 

Deep" E.  n.  Willard  isgg 

Rococo A.  C.  Swinburne    qoo 

Roi  d'Yvetot,  Le. . .  .<fe  Beratiger  3840 

Roll-Call N.G.  Shepherd  2313 

Romance,  "I  will  make  you 
brooches  and  toys  for  your  de- 
light"  R.  L.  Stevenson     654 

Romance,  "My  Love  dwelt  in  a 

northern  land".  .Andrew  Lang  1120 
Romance,    "  You    bells    in    the 

steeple" Ingclow    427 

Rondeau,  The. . .  .Austin  Dobson  3 no 
Rondeau  Redouble.  .John  Payne  542 
Rondel,  "Kissing  her  hair,  I  sat 

against  her  feet".  .Swinburne  1146 
Rondel,  "These  many  years  since 

we  began  to  be". ,  .Swinburne  902 
Ronsard  to  His  Mistress 

W.  M.  Thackeray    635 
Rory  O'More;  or,  Good  Omens 

Samuel  Lover     753 

Rosabelle Walter  Scott  2715 

Rosalind's  Madrigal Lodge    477 

Rosalind's  Scroll .  E.  B.  Browning  1085 

Rosary,  The R.  C.  Rogers  1140 

Rosary  of  My  Tears,  The,  Ryan  3381 
Rose,  A,  "Bloom  in  the  morning, 
thou  shalt  fade  ere  noon" 

Richard  Fanshawe  1500 
Rose,  A,  "'Twas  a  Jacqueminot 

rose" Arlo  Bates     745 

Rose,  The,  "  A  rose,  as  fair  as  ever 

saw   the  north" Browne  1498 

Rose,  The,  "Sweet,  serene,  sky- 
like  flower".  .Ric/iard  Lovelace    696 
Rose  and  Thorn,  The.  . .  .Hayne  1028 

Rose  Aylmer W.  S.  Laitdor     622 

Rose  of  May,  The.  .Mary  Howitt  1499 
Rose  of  Stars,  The.  . .  .  Woodberry    506 
Rose  of  the  World,  The,   "Lo, 
when   the   Lord   made   North 
and  South".  .Coventry  Palmare    385 
Rose  of  the  World,  Tlie,  "Who 
dreamed   that    beauty    passes 
like  a  dream". . .  .W.  B.  Yeats    390 
Rose  to  the  Living,  A,  Waterman  1800 
"Rose  Will  Fade,  A".  . .  .Shorter  1047 

Rosies A.  J.  Hanrahan    925 

Rose-Marie  of  the  Angels 

Adelaide  Crapsey     326 

Roundel  of  Rest,  A Symons  3423 

Rover's  Adieu,  The,  Walter  Scott    94S 

"Row  Gently  Here" Moore     700 

Rowan  Tree,  The Dlairne  3236 

Rubaiyat    of    Omar    Khiyyam, 

The Edward  Fitzgerald  2875 

Rubicon,  The.  .  .William  Winter  3497 


T,    ,  •  ,  PAGE 

Rubies  and  Pearls.  Robert  Herrick  5  28 
Rule,  Britannia,  James  Thomson  2232 
Rule  for  Birds'  Nesters,  A 

Unknown     loi 

Rules  of  Behavior Unknown      98 

Runnable  Stag,  A Davidson  1659 

Rus  in  Urbe Clement  Scott    656 

Rustic  at  the  Play,  The 

George  Sanlayana  2908 
Ruth Thomas  Hood     a  2 

S 
Sabine  Farmer's  Serenade,  The 

F.  S.  Mahony  197 1 

Sacrifice .R.  W.  Emerson  2959 

Safety Rupert  Brooke  2545 

Sag-e  CouQse 

A.  T.  Quilkr-Couch  2082 
Sailor,  The.  .William  Allingham  1625 
Sailor's  Consolation,  The,  Dibdin  2105 

Sailor's  Song T.  L.  Beddoes  159? 

Sailor's  Wife,  The.. W.J.  Mickle  1217 
St.  Agnes'  Eve.  Alfred  Tennyson  3767 
St.   James's   Street 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  2599 
St.  John  Bn.pti:f,t.  .O'Shaughnessy  3740 
St.  Michael's  Mount.  .Davidson  2596 

Saint  Patrick IJenry  Bennett  1966 

Saint  Peray T.  W.  Parsons  2005 

Salad,  A Sydney  Smith  1987 

Sally  from  Coventry,  The 

Walter  Thornbury  2745 
Sally  in  Our  Alley.  ./Tcncy  Carey     769 

Salve T.  E.  Brown  2999 

Samela Robert  Greene     521 

San   Lorenzo   Giustiniani's 

Mother Alice  Meynell  sjys 

Sandman,  The.  Margaret  Janvier  72 
Sandpiper,  The.  .  .  .Celia  Tliaxtcr  1562 
Sands  of  Dee,  The.  ..  .Kingslcy  1619 
Sapientia  Lunse.  .Ernest  Dowson  2995 

Saturday   Night Oppenheim  3024 

Satyrs  and  the  Moon,  The 

Herbert  Gorman     249 

Saxon  Grit Robert  Collycr  2227 

"Say  not   the  Struggle   Naught 

Availeth" A.  H.  Clough  2839 

Scholar-Gipsy,  The Arnold  3305 

"Scorn  not  the  Sonnet" 

William   Words-worlh  ijao 

Scotland  Yet H.  S.  Riddcll  2268 

"Scum  o'  the  Earth",  Schauffler  3052 

Scythe  Song Andrew  Lang  1371 

Sea,  The,  "The  sea!  the  sea!  the 

open  sea" B.  W.  Procter  1592 

Sea,  The,  "There  is  a  pleasure  in 

the  pathless  woocW ..  .Byron  1586 
Sea,  The,   "Through  the  night, 
through  the  m^hl."  .Stoddard  1619 

Sea-Birds Elizabeth  Akers  1522 

Sea  Child,  A Bliss  Carman  1041 

Sea  Dirge,  A Shakespeare  3516 

Sea  Fever John  Mase field  1590 

Sea  Gipsy,  The.  .  .Richard  Hovey  1688 
Sea-mew,  The.  .  .E.  B.  Browning  1563 

Sea-lands,  The Or  rick  Johns     958 

Seal,  A Oliver  Herford  2083 

Sealed  Orders.  . . .  Richard  Burton  3478 

Seaweed FI.  W.  Longfellow  3094 

Second  Coming,  The 

Norman   Gale  3054 


Index  of  Titles 


3999 


Second  Crucifixion,  The 

Richard  Le  Gallicnne  374Q 
Second    Review    of    the    Grand 

Army.  A Bret  Uarle  2513 

Secret,  The G.  R.  Woodherry    505 

Secret  I.ove,  The Russell     627 

Secin'  Things Eugene  Field     172 

Seekers,  The.  .  .  .Jolin  Maseficld  2863 
Self-Dependence.  if  itllhnv  Arnold  2843 

Sentence Wilier    Bynncr  3553 

Sentinel   Songs A.  J.  Ryan  2322 

Separation Matthew   Arnold     966 

Sephestia's  Lullaby,  from  "Men- 

aphon  " Robert  Greene      74 

September George  Arnold  1371 

Serenade,  "Ah,  sweet,  thou  little 

knowest  how" .  .Thomas  Uood     704 
Serenade,  "Awake  thee,  my  lady- 
love"  George  Darley     703 

Serenade, '"  By  day  my  timid  pas- 
sions   stand  " Middleton     714 

Serenade,  "Hide,  happy  damask, 

from  the  stars". //cnry  Timrod     705 
Serenade,   "  Look  out  upon  the 

stars,  my  love  " .  .E.G.  Pinkney    704 
Serenade,    "Softly,   O    midnisht 

hours" A.  T.  de  Vere     701 

Serenade,  "Stars  of  the  Summer 

night" H.   W.   Longfellow     705 

Serenade,  "The  western  wind  is 

blowing  fair".  . .  .Oscar  Wilde    712 
Serf's  Secret,  The,  W.  V.  Moody    667 

Sesotris Lloyd   Mifflin  2847 

Settlers,  The. Laurence  Uousman  3536 
Seven    times   Five — Widowhood 

Jean  Ingclow    430 
Seven  times  Four — Maternity 

Jean  Ingclow    429 
Seven  times  One — Exultation 

Jean  Ingclow    426 
Seven  times  Seven — Longing  for 

Home Jean  Ingclow    431 

Seven  times  Six — Giving  in  Mar- 
riage  Jean  Ingelow    431 

Seven  times  Three — Love 

Jean  Ingelow     428 
Seven  times  Two — Romance 

Jean  Ingclow    427 

Seven  Years  Old Swinburne     255 

Seventy-Six W.  C.  Bryant  2431 

Siiailefl  Pool,  The.  .Norman  Gate     677 

Shadow  Boat,  A Arlo  Bales     437 

Shadow-Child,    The 

Harriet  Monroe  288 
Shadow  Dance,  The.  . .  .Moullon    8s6 

Shadows R.  M.  M lines    837 

Shakespeare.  .  .  .Matthew  Arnold  3653 
Shameful  Death.  William  Morris  2746 

Shamrock,  The M.F.  Egan  1501 

She  and  He Edwin  Arnold  3579 

She  Came  and  Went Lowell    3 14 

"She  Died  in  Beauty". . .  .Sillery  3548 
"  She  is  Far  from  the  Land  " 

Thomas  Moore  1078 
"  She  Walks  in  Beauty  "...  Byron  383 
"She  was  a  Beauty".  .  .  .  Bunner  lyts 
"She  was  Young  and  Blithe  and 

Fair" Harold  Monro  1051 

Sheep  and  Lambs Tynan  3759 

Sheepfol',  De 

5.  P.  McL.  Greene  375s 
Sherauel Edward   Bowen  3578 


Shepherd,  The.  .  .William  Blake  153 
Shepherd  Boy  Sings  in  the  Valley 

of  Humiliation.  The  .  .Bunyan  3714 
Shepherdess.  The.  .Alice  Meynell  393 
Shepherd's  Wife's  Song,  The 

Robert  Greene  1210 

Sheridan's  Ride T.  B.  Read  2510 

Sherwood,  A  Song  of 

Alfred    Noyes  2591 

Shoogy-Shoo,  The Packard     447 

Shrine,  The D.  M .  Dolben    395 

Sic  Itur A.  II.  Clougk  3037 

Sic  Vita W.   S.   Braithwaite  1303 

Siege  of  Belgrade,  The.  Unknown  2072 

Sigh,  A n.  P.  Spojford  loii 

"Sigh  no  More,  Ladies" 

William  Shakespeare    807 

Silent  Noon D.  G.  Rossetti  1256 

Siller  Croun,  The Blamire    gjfi 

Silvia William  Sfiakespeare    519 

Similar  Cases.  . .  .C.  P.  S.  Giltnan  1891 
Simon  the  Cyrenean 

Lucy  Lyttclton  3753 
Simple  Nature. .  .G.  J .  Romanes  1658 

Simple  Simon Unknown      42 

Simplex  MnnAilus.  ..Ben  Jonson  377 
Sin  of  Omission,  The.. Sangster  2926 
Since  We  Parted..  B;//a><T  Lytton  641 
Sincere  Flattery../.  K.  Stephen  1951 
"Sing  a  Song  of  Sixpence" 

Unknown      41 

"Sing   Heigh-Ho" Kingsley    735 

"Sing  on.  Blithe  Bird" 

William  Motherwell     102 
Singer's  Prelude,  The ....  Morris  3080 
Singing  Lesson,  A,  "Far-fetched 
and  dear  bought,  as  the  prov- 
erb rehearses" Swinburne  3086 

Singing  I>esson,  The  "A  nightin- 
gale made  a  mistake. '^  Ingelow     147 
Singing    Man,    The.  ..  .Peabody  io.\$ 
Sir  Galahad.  .  .  .Alfred  Tennyson  2724 
Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert 

n.  W.  Longfellow  2368 
Sir  Lark  and  King  Sun:  A  Parable 

George  M  acdonald    180 

Sir  Patrick  Spens Unknown  2685 

"Sister,  Awake" Unknown  1361 

Skeleton  in  Armor,  The 

H.  W.  LoK'ifellow  3323 
Skeleton  in  the  Cupboard,  The 

Frederick  Lockcr-Lampson  1734 
Skipper  Ire.son's  Ride.  .  .Whittier  2445 
Skylark,  The,  "Bird  of  the  wil- 
derness"  James  Hogg  1566 

Skylark,  The,  "How   Ihe  blithe 
lark  runs  up  the  golden  stair" 

Frederick  Tennyson  1567 
Sleep,   "Come,   Sleep,  and   with 

thy  sweet  deceiving."  Fletcher  3220 
Sleep,    "O    happy    Sieepl    thou 
bear'st  upon  thy  breast" 

A.  L  .Martin  3222 

Sleep,  The E.  B.  Browning  3412 

" Sleep,  Angry  Beauty,"  Campion  694 
"Sleep,  Baby,  Sleep".  .  .  .Wither  75 
"Sleep,  Silence'  Child" 

William  Drummond  3220 
Sleeper,  The.  . .  .Clinton  Scollard  3553 
Sleeping  Beauty.  The ....  Rogers    (S99 

Sluggard,  The Isaac  Walts    106 

Smack  in  School,  The ....  Palmer  2136 


4000 


Index  of  Titles 


Small  Celandine,  The 

William  Wordsworth  1469 
"Smile   and    Never   Heed   Me" 

Charles  Swain     630 

Snail,  The William  Cowper  1514 

Snake,  The Thomas  Moore     831 

Sneezing Leigh  Hunt  2021 

Snow Elizabeth  Akers  13QO 

Snow-Shower,  The,  W.  C.  Bryanl  1391 

Snowdrop W.  W.  Story    854 

"So  Sweet  Love  Seemed" 

Robert  Bridges  q20 
Society  upon  the  Stanislaus,  The 

Bret  Harte  2170 
"Softly  Woo  Away  Her  Breath" 

B.  W.  Procter  3548 
Soldier,  The ....  Rupert  Brooke  2546 
"Soldier,    Rest!    Thy    Warfare 

O'er" Walter  Scott  2301 

Soldier's  Dream,  The,  Campbell  2281 
Solitary-Hearted,  The 

Ilarlley  Coleridge    381 
Solitary  Reaper,  The 

William  Wordsworth     333 
Solitude.  .  .Ella   Wheeler   Wilcox  2929 

Solomon    Grundy Unknown      45 

"Some  Day  of  Days" Perry     658 

"Some  Time  at  Eve".  .  .  .Hardy  3468 
Somebody's  Child.  L.  C.  Moulton  345 
Somebody's  Darling  .  .  .La  Conte  2318 

Sometime M .  R.  Smith  3513 

"Sometime  It  May  be  ".  .Collon     927 

Sometimes T.  S.  Jones,  Jr.     436 

"  Son  of  God  Goes  Forth  to  War, 

The" Reginald  Heber  3794 

Song,  "A  lake  and  a  fairy  boat" 

Thomas  Hood  630 
Song,    "A   violet   in   her   lovely 

hair" Charles    Swain     548 

Song,    "Again   rejoicing   Nature 

sees" '. Robert  Burns  1341 

Song,    "All   the    flowers   of   the 

spring" John   Webster  35x7  • 

Song,  "April,  April".  .  .  .Watson  1354 
Song,  "Ask  me  no  more  where 

Jove  bestows.  .  .r/zowfli  Cartw     530 
Song,  "  At  setting  day  and  rising 

morn" Allan    Ramsay     940 

Song,    "Because   the   rose   must 

fade" R.   W.  Gilder  2S41 

Song,    "Closes   and    courts   and 

lanes" John  Davidson   2598 

Song,  "Come,  Celia,  let's  agree 

at  last" John  Sheffield     612 

Song,  "Earl  March  looked  on  his 

dying  child."  Thomas  Cambbell  1077 
Song,  "  Fain  would  I  change  that 

note  " Unknown      487 

Song,  "Fair  is  the  night,  and  fair 

the  day" William  Morris     977 

Song,  "Flame  at  the  core  of  the 

world" Arthur    Upson  1151 

Song,  "For  me  the  jasmine  buds 

unfold" F.    E.    Coales  1148 

Song,   "Go  and  catch  a  falling 

star" John  Donne     592 

Song,  "Had  I  a  heart  for  false- 
hood framed".  .  R.  B.  Sheridan    620 
Song,  "Has  summer  come  with- 
out the   rose,"  O'Shaughnessy     897 
Song,  "  How  delicious  is  the  win- 
ning"  Thomas   Campbell    490 


PAGE 

Song,  "How  do  I  love  you" 

Irene  R.'McLeod     580 
Song,  "I  came  to  the  door  of  the 

House  of  Love  " .  .A  If  red  Noyes     511 
Song,  "I  made  another  garden. 

Yea".  .  .Arthur  O'Shaughnessy     896 
Song:  "  I  make  my  shroud  but  no 

---  one  knows" Crapsey  3478 

Song,  "I  prithee  send  me  back 

my  heart" John  Stickling     763 

Song,    "I   saw   the   day's   white 

rapture" C.  H.  Towne     892 

Song,  "I  try  to-knead  and  spin" 

L.  I.  Guiney  3361 
Song,    "In   vain   you   tell   your 

parting  lover  " .  .  Matthew  Prior    937 
Song,  "It  is  the  miller's  daugh- 
ter"  Alfred    Tennyson     633 

Song,   "Ladies,   though   to  your 

conquering  eyes" Etherege     594 

Song,  "  Let  my  voice  ring  out  and 

over  the  earth" Thomson     616 

Song,   "Love,  by  that  loosened 

hair" Bliss  Carman     577 

Song,  "  Love  in  fantastic  triumph 

sate" Aphra   Behn    824 

Song,  "Love  is  a  sickness  full  of 

woes'' Samuel  Daniel     478 

Song,  "Love  still  has  something 

of  the  sea".  .  .  .Charles  Sedley    486 
Song,  "Love's  on  the  highroad" 

Dana  Burnett    627 
Song,  A,  "My  dear  mistress  has 

a  heart" John  Wilmot    610 

Song,  "My  Love  bound  me  with 

a  kiss '' Unknown    684 

Song,  "My  silks  and  fine  array" 

William  Blake  looi 
Song,  "Nay  but  you  who  do  not 

love  her".  .  .  .Robert  Browning     553 
Song,  "O  Brignall  banks  are  wild 

and  fair" Waller  Scott  2720 

Song,   "O,  do  not  wanton  with 

those  eyes" Ben  Jonson    592 

Song,  "O,  let  the  solid  ground" 

Alfred  Tennyson    497 
Song,    "0,    like   a    queen's    her 

happy  tread  "  .  William  Watson     577.- 
Song,   "O  mistress   mine,  where  r 

are  you  roaming,"  Shakespeare     930 
Song,     "O     ruddier-   tlian     the       i 

cherry" John  Gay     S3S 

Song,  "O  sweet  delight,  O  more 

than  human  bliss  ".  .  Campion  1141 
Song,    "Often   I    have   heard    it 

said" W.  S.  Landor     686 

Song,  "Oh!  Love,"  they  said,  "is 

King   of   Kings" Brooke    580 

Song,    "Oh!    say    not    woman's 

heart  is  bought" Peacock     489 

Song,    "Oh!    that   we   two   were 

Maying".  ..  .C/mrte  Kingslcy    885 
Song,  "Only  tell  her  that  I  love" 

John  Cutis    613 
Song,  "Over  the  sea  our  galleys 

went" Robert  Browning  3192 

Song,  "Phoebus,  arise" 

William  Drummond  1305 
Song,    "Rarely,    rarely    comest 

thou  " P.  B.  Shelley  3364 

Song,     "See,    see,    she    wakes! 

Sabina  wakes" Congreve     697 


Index  ot  Titles 


4001 


PAGE 

Song,  "Shall  I  tell  you  whom  I 

love"  ..William  liroumc     815 

Song,  "  She  is  not  fair  to  outward 

view"      Hartley  ColcridRC     548 

Song,  "She's  somewhere  m  the 

sunlight  strong  ".Lc  Galhennc    99s 
Song,  "  Sing  me  a  sweet,  low  song 

of  night" Hawthorne  1164 

Song,  "Sing  the  old  song    amid 

the  sounds  dispcrsmg."  (ic  Vere    866 
Song,     "Something     calls     and 

whispers" ,,9;-,?-^'"«  'J°^ 

Song  "Songispoold/'/ZaKfrf'"-"    074 
Songl  "Stay,  stay  at  home    my 

heart,  and  rest  "...  Longfellow  3232 
Song,  "Take  it,  love" 

Richard  Le  Galhenne     Sio 
Song.  "The  linnet  in  the  rocky 

dgfls"         Emily  Bronte  1096 

'^ong    "The  merchant  to  secure 

^  his  treasure  " . .  .Matthew  Prior    7 20 

Song,  "The  moth's  kiss,  first 

Robert  Browtung     688 
Song,  "The  peach  is  pink  with 

such  a  pink  " .  .  .  •  Norman  Gale     574 
Song,  "The  shape  alone  let  others 

prize"   Mark  Akcnside     S37 

Song,  "The  year's  at  the  spring" 

^  Robert  Browning  i333 

Song,  "There  is  many  a  love  in 

the  land,  my  love" .  . .  .Mtller    693 
Song    "There's  a  woman  like  a 

dewdrop".  ■  ..Robert  Browning  1150 
Song,    "'Tis   said    that    absence 

coAquers  love."  F.  W.  Thomas    983 
Song,   "'Tis  sweet  to  hear   the 

merry  lark //•  Coleridge  1554 

Song,  "To  all  you  ladies  now  at 

land"  ..Charles  Sackville    935 

Song,   "Too  late,   alas!   I   must 

confess"         .  .  •  -John  Witmot     612 
Song,  "Wait  but  a  little  while" 

Norman  Gale  1169 
Song  "We  break  the  glass  whose 

sacred  wine "...£.  C.  ««*nfy     90S 
Song,    "We   only    ask    for   sun- 

shine" HH-  Whitney  3386 

Song,  "When  daisies  pied,  and 

violets  blue Shakespeare  2019 

Song,   "When   I   am   dead,   my 

de^t^Ml"  .  .  .  .Chriililin   Rossetti   II02 
s'mg   "When  icicles  hang  by  the 

wall"    ..  .William  Shakespeare  2019 
Song     "Who    has    robbed    the 

ocean  cave" John  Shaw     539 

Song,   "Why  so  pale  and  wan, 

fond  lover" John  Suckling     820 

L       Song,  "Ye  happy  swains,  whose 

hearts  aieirec."  George  Ethercge    808 
Song   "You'll  love  mc  yet!— and 

I    can    tarry" Browning    637 

Song  Against  Women        Wright    829 
Song  for  All  Seas,  All  Ships 

^  Walt  Whitman  1584 

Song  for  St.  Cecilia's  Day,  A 

John  Drydcn  3112 
Song  for  the  Seasons.  .  .Procter  1330 
Song  in  March.  ...W.  G.  Simms  135 1 
Song  My  Paddle  Sings,  The 

E.  Pauline  Johnson   1676 
Song  of  Angiola  in  Heaven 

Austin  Dobson  3202 


r,\c;E 
Song  of  Autumn.  A,  Renncll  Rodd  985 
Song  of  Desire,  A..  F.L.AWo-  1.589 
Song  of  Earlv  Autumn,  A,  Gtlder  i374 
Song  of   Eros   from   "Agathon 

*'  G  E.  Woodberry     507 

Song  of  Fleet  Street,  A.  .Werner  2597 
Song  of  Glenann,  A 

Moira  O  Neill  2605 

Song  of  I-iving,  A ^B«rr  3479 

Song  of  Marion's  Men. ^Bryant  2432 
Song  of  Nature.  R.  W.  Emerson  1296 
Song  of  Parting,  A  ,,  ,  ■  „,^ 
Conipton  Mackenzie  97S 
Song  of  .Sherman's  March  to  the 

Sea  •''■■  «•  ^-  ^y"^  ^512 

Song  of  the  How,  The.  . .  .Doyle  2241 
Song  of  the  Bower,  The 

^  D.  6.  Rossetti    903 

Song  of  the  Camp,  The .  ^ .  Ta^dor  2285 
Song  of  the  Chattahoochee,  The 

''  Sidnev  Lanier  1423 

Song  of  the  Colorado,  The.  .Hall  2571 

Soni  of  the  Forest  Rans,"-,  I'^'j     ,  , 

Herbert  Bashford  1096 

Song  of  the  Four  Seasons,  A 

Austin  Dobson     797 
Song  of  the  King's  Minstrel  The 

Richard  Middlrton  1056 
Song    of    the    Milkmaid    from 

"  Oueen  Mary  " Tennyson     733 

Song  of  the  Old  Love.  .  .  .Ingelow  1097 
Song  of  the  Seasons,  A 

Cosmo  Monkhouse  133 1 
Song  of  the  Shirt,  The.  . .  .Hood  3393 
Song  of  the  Silent  Land 

^  H.  W.  Longfellow  3456 

Song  of  the  Spanish  Main,  The 

John  Bennett  2381 
Song  of  the  Western  Men    The 

R.  S.  Hawker  2407 

Song   of  Thyrsis Jreneau    830 

Song  of  Twilight,  A .  ._ .  Unknown  297 
Song:  On  May  Morning,  Miltnn  1350 
Song,  that  Women  are  but  Men's 

Shadows Ben  Jonson    811 

Song  the  Grass  Sings.  A, 

Charles  G.  Blaiuien  1488 
Song  the  Oriole  Sings,  The 

''  W.  D.  Howells  1556 

Song:  the  Owl.  Alfred  Tennyson  1557 
Song  to  a  Fair  Young  Lady.  Go- 
ing out  of  Town  in  the  Spring 
^  John  Drydcn    934 

Song  to  Amoret,  A Vaughan    6 1 5 

Song  to  Cynthia Ben  Jonson  132,0 

Song  to  David Smart  3783 

Song  to  the  Evening  Star 

Thomas  Campbell  1319 

Songs  Ascending Bynner     579 

Songs  for  Fragoletta.  Le  Galhennc      12 
Songs  from  an  Evil  Wood 

Lord  Dunsany  2557 

The  Songs   I   Sing Blandcn  .3085 

Songs  of  Guthrum  and   Alfred, 

The G.  K.  Chesterton  2823 

Songs  of  Seven Jean  Ingelow     426 

Songs  Without  Sense.  Bret  Harte  2065 
Sonnet,   "Most  men  know  love 

but  as  a  part  of  life."  Timrod  3030 
Sonnet,  The.  "The  Sonnet  is  a 
fruit  which   long  hath   slept 

/.  A.Symonds  3108 


4002 


Index  of  Titles 


PAGE 

Sonnet,  The,  "A  sonnet  is  a  mo- 
ment's monument".  .  .Rosseiti  3107 
Sonnet,  The,  "What  is  a  sonnet? 

'Tis  a  pearly  shell".  .  .  .Gilder  3107 
Sonnet   Composed   Upon   West- 
minster Bridge.  . .  .Wordsworth  2507 

Sonnet  of  the  Moon,  A Best  125.5 

Sonnet  on  Ch\\\on.  .Lord  Byron  3273 
Sonnet,  on  his  having  arrived  to 

the  age  of  twenty-three.  Milton    359 
Sonnets  I,  II,  IV,  VI,  VIII,  XX, 
from  "Mimma  Bella" 

Eugette  Lee-Hamilton    323 

Sonnets John  Masefield  3401 

Sonnets  XVIII,  XXIII,  XXIX, 
XXX,  XXXII,  XXXIII,  LX, 
LXXI,  LXXIII,  CIV,  CVI, 
CIX,  CXVl,  CXXX,  CXLVI 

William  Shakespeare  1246 
Sonnets  after  the  Italian,  Gilder  1264 
Sonnets  from  the  Portuguese, 
Sonnets  I,  III,  VI,  VII,  VIII, 
IX,  X,  XII,  XIV,  XVII, 
XVIII,  XXI,  XXII,  XXVIII, 
XXXVIII,  XLIII 

E.  B.  Browning  1276 
Sonnets  to  Miranda,  Sonnets  I, 

II,  III,  V,  VI,  VIII.  .  .Waison  1271 
Sonnet's  Voice,  The 

Theodore  Walls-Dunlon  3106 
Sonnets  Written  in  the  Fall  of 

igi4 Woodberry  2552 

Sons  of  Martha,   The,   Kipling  3072 

Sorrow A.  T.  de  Vcre  3352 

Sorrows  of  Werther. .  Thackeray  838 
South  Country,  The.  ..  .Belloc  2601 
Sovereigns,  The.  .  .Lloyd  Mifflin  3105 
"Spatially  Yiva." .Bessie  Morgan  2183 
"Spacious  Firmament  on  High, 

The" Jospph   Addison  3787 

"  Sparkling  and  Bright.'-'  Hoffman  2007 
Spider  and  the  Fly,  The.  Howitt     176 

Spinning H.  H.  Jackson  3467 

Spinning  in  April.  ./.  P.  Peabody  1357 

Spires  of  Oxford,  The Letts  2560 

Spirit  of  Sadness.  .Le  Gallienne  3362 
Spirit  of  Wine,  The,  W.  E.  Henley  2013 
Splendid  Spur,  The, 

A.T.  Quillcr-Conch  2959 
Spring,    "Dip    down    upon    the 

northern   ?horc" ...  .Tennyson  1338 
Spring,  "  Spring,  the  sweet  Spring, 
is  the  year's  pleasant  king" 

Thomas  Nashe  1336 
Spring,  "  Spring,  with  that  name- 
less pathos  in  the  air."  Timrod  1344 
Spring,  The.  ..  .William  Barnes  1347 
"Spring  is  Late,  The".  .Moulton  3741 
Spring  Journey,  A,  ^.  F.  Palmer  1147 

Spring  Lilt,  A Unknown  1363 

Spring  of  the  Year,  The 

Allan  Cunningham  3561 
Spring  Passion.  .  .J.  E.  Spingarn  1171 
"Spring  Returns,  The".. Moore  1339 

Spring  Song Bliss  Carman  1689 

Spring  Song  in  the  City 

Robert  Buchanan  1672 
Stabet  Mater  Dolorosa.. rfo  Todi  3821 
Stabet  Mater  Dolorosa,  "Stood 
the  afBicted  mother  weeping" 

Abraham  Coles  3779 
Stains Thcodosia  Garrison  3758 


Stanzas,  "Could  Love  for  ever" 

I.,ord  Byron 

Stanzas,     "In    a    drear-nighted 

December" John  Keats 

Stanzas,  "  Often  rebuked,  yet  al- 
ways back  returning.". 5r(7w;e 
Stanzas,  "Where  forlorn  sunsets 
flare  and  fade".  .W.  R.  Henley 
Stanzas   for   Music,    "There   be 
none  of  Beauty's  daughters" 
Lord  Byron 
Stanzas  for  Music,  "There's  not 
a  joy  the  world  can  give  like 
that  it  takes  away,".  .  .Byron 
Stanzas  from  "The  Triumph  of 
Time".  ....  .A.  C.  Swinburne 

Stanzas  written  on  the  Road  be- 
tween Florence  and  Pisa 

Lord   Byron 

Star,  The Jane  Taylor 

Star  Song R.   U.  Johnson 

Starling's  Spring  Rondel,  A 

James  Cousins 
Star-Spangled  Banner,  The,  Key 
Starry  Host,  The,  /.  L.  Spalding 
Stein  Song,  A.  . .  .Richard  Hovey 
Stepping  Westwaid. .Wordsworth 
Stirrup  Cup,  The.  . .  .John  Hay 
Stolen  Kiss,  A.  .  .  .George  Wither 
Stonewall  Jackson's  Way.  Palmer 
Storm-Child,  The.  .  .  .Af  ay  Byron 

Storm  Fear Robert  Frost 

Storm  Song Bayard  Taylor 

Stormy  Petrel,  The,  B.  W.  Procter 
Story  for  a  Child,  A 

Bayard  Taylor 

Story  of  Augustus  who  would  not 

have  any  Soup,  The,  Hoffmann 

Story    of    little    Suck-a-Thumb, 

The Heinrich    Hoffman 

Strai.ght  Road,  The.  Ellen  Hooper 
Strictly  Germ-proof,  Guiterman 
Strip  of  Blue,  A.  .Lucy  Larcom 
Strong  as  Death.  .  .H.C.  Bunner 
Strong  Hand,  A.  . .  .Aaron  Hill 

Students      Wilkinson 

Stupidity   Street Hodgson 

Suburb Harold     Monro 

"Such  is  the  Death  the  Soldier 
Dies",...    .  '.  .    R.  B.  Wilson 
Sugar-Pium   Tree,   The 

Eugene  Fields 

Sum.mer  Invocation Bennett 

Summer  is  Ended,  The,  Rosselti 
Summer  Longings.  . .  .MacCarthy 
Summer  Wooing,  A.  .  .  .Moulton 
Summum  Bonum.  . .  ..Browning 
"Sun    Rises    Bright   in    France, 

The" Allan    Cunningham 

Sunday  Evening  in  the  Common 

John  Hall  Wheelock 

Sunrise  on  Mansfield  Mountain 

Alice   Brown 

Sunrise  on  Rydal  Vl/ater 

John  Drinkwntcr 
Sunset  City,  The,  //.  .S.  CornwcU 

Sunset  Wings D.  G.  Rossctti 

Superscription,  A,  D.  G.  Rossetii 

Suppose A.  R.  Aldrich 

Surface  and  the  Depths,  The 

Lewis  Morris 
"Surprised  by  Joy."  Wordsworth 


PAGE 
491 
.^395 
2928 
2862 

546 

355 
1585 


354 

41 

673 

1337 
2196 
3729 
1948 

39S 
3507 

683 

228S 

?o 

1385 

l'JI4 
1572 


123 
2973 
2035 
1647 
1080 
1902 
1792 
3061 

859 

2317,1 

1443 

34^)2 
1363 
1032 
689 

3259 


1311 

1436 
3706 
337S 
43.5 
1908 

499 
3S66 


Index  of  Titles 


4003 


Surrender ^/c/'"''' 

Sweet  and  Sour.  Ednmnd  Spcnsc, 

Sweet  Clover AVallaccRM 

Sweet  Innisfallen.  Thomas  Moore 
"SweetSuffolkOwl"  .^Wi- 
SweetWildApnl.  li.F.W 
Sweet  William   and   May   Mar- 

„.jg(.  Unknown 

Swimmere.The. .  G^"'^' ^'"1^1 
Sycophantic  Fox  and  the  Gullible 

Raven,  The G^J,  ■  ^r7\ 

Sympathy .4W.ea  Gyles 


PAGE 
1 166 
28,^ 
1472 
2607 
I55S 
1355 


2676 
3194- 

1854 
923 


T 

Tables  Turned,  The, 

lames  lu     ^.^^.^^^  Wordsuvrth  161 1 

Tacking  Ship  oS  Shore,  Milchdl  159S 
"Take  Back  the   VirRin  Page 

Thomas  Moore     623 

Take  Heart E^D.  Proctor  37 i2 

••Take     O    Take     Those    Lips 

Away  "...  Shakcspearc-Fldcher  683 
Talented  Man,  The,  W.  M.  Praed  1807 
Tarn  O'Shanter.  .  ..Robert  Burns  2106 
Tantalus— Texas.  Joaquin  Miller  1007 
Te  Matyrum  Candidatus 

Lionel  Johnson  37Si 

Tears  •••^-  ^-  ^'^"'^  ^^^^ 

"Tears, '  idle  Tears ' '  . p^'^y""]  454 
Telephone,  The. .  .  .Robert  Frost  658 
•Tell  me,  my  Heart,  if  this  be 

Love"  ..George   Lytllelon    S3S 

Telling  the' Bees.. 7.  G.  Whiltier  1109 

Temple  Garlands Robinson    442 

Temple  to  Friendship.  ..  .Moore     832 

Tenants       W.W.  Gibson  3218 

iennyson . T.H.  Huxley  3663 

Terminus R.W.Emerson    410 

Temarie  of  Littles,  A 

Robert  Uerrick  1723 
Terrible  Infant,  A 

Frederick  Locker-Lampson  1730 

Test   The       M'.  5.  LaK</cr    831 

■•-ihdatta!  Thalatta".  . .  P'own  34Q9 
Thalia  ■■   T.  B.  Aldrich  1750 

Thanatopsis W.  C.  Bryant  3444 

Thanksgiving,  A.  W.  D.  nowclls  2933 
Thanksgiving    to    God    for    His 

House   A   Robert  Herrick  37i3 

That  Pav  Vou  Came Reese    660 

Thiit  ifoly  Thing Macdonald  3774 

TKen  RT.  Cooke     666 

ThenAg'in  " S.W.  Foss  18S9 

Theocritus Oscar  Wilde  3664 

•There  is  a  Green  Hill" 

C.  F.Alexander  3S12 
"There    is   a   Lady    Sweet   and 

K.ind"  Unknown    323 

"  There  is  a  Pool  on  Garda  " 

Clinton  Scoltard  2623 
"There  is  no  Death".  .MrCrewy  3763 
"There  is   None.   O   None   but 

You" Tlwmas  Campion     589 

"There  was  a  Jolly  Miller" 

/s(iaf  BickerslaS  103 
"There  was  a  little  Girl" 

Unknown     113 
"There's  Gowd  in  the  Rrea.st" 

Jamc.';  //o^g  1142 
There's  Wisdom  in  Women 

Rupert  Brooke  1055 


PAGE 

" Thcv  Speak  o'  Wiles" 

■  William  Thorn     493 

"They  Went  forth  to  Battle  but 

They  Always  Fell " ....  0  Vice/  2946 
"This  is  my  Hour".  .Zne  Akins  1318 
"This  is  my  Love  for  You' 

Grace  FaHojf  Norton    6  00 
••This   World   is  all   a   Fleeting 

Show  "  .  .  ■  ■  Thomas  Moore  3"g9 
Thomas  the  K\\ym'ix.  .Unknown  2641 
Thoreau's  Flute 

LoMWo  Jl^-  ^Ifc""  3667 
Thoughts    on    the     Comnwnd- 

ments G   A.  BaJicr     806 

Three  Cottage  Girls,  The 

William  Wordsworth    334 

Three  Fishers,  The Kingi/ey  1620 

Three  Ki ngs.  The .  .  .  .  Lon'lfellow  216 
Three  Ravens.  The.  . .  .  Unknown  26S0 

Three  Seasons C.G.  Rossetli    432 

Three  Shadow.s.  D.G....  Rossctti  640 
Three  Sisters,  The.  .4.  D.  Ficke  1090 
Three  Sonnets  on  Oblivion 

Geor<;c  Slrrling  2847 
Three  Troopers,  The,  Thornbiiry  2743 
Three  Warnings,  Ths.  .  .  .Pjozzi  2102 
Threescore    and    Tun.  .Stoddard     457 

Threnody R"th  G.  Harding  1080 

Threnodv,  A G.  T   Lamgan  2069 

"Thrice  Happy  He.  Dnimmond  1635 
Throstle,  The,  Alfred  Tennyson  1578 
Thunderstorms.  .  .  W.  H  Dames  3110 
Thvsia,    Sonnets    H,    HJ.  jyi^' 

XVI       xxni,      xxxvi, 

XXXVH    XLV,  Morton  Luce  1273 

Tide  River,  The Kingsley  141S 

Ti^cr  The  -  •  William  Blake     140 

Time'and  Grief.  ...W.  L  Bowles  3352 
"Time    I've    Lost    in    Wooing, 

The"  Thomas  Moore     729 

Time  long' Past.  ...P.  B.  Shelley  442 
Time  to  be  Wise.  .  .IF.  S.  Laiuior  1709 
"Time,   You  Old  Gipsy   Man 

Ralph  Hodgson  2S17 

Times  go  by  Turns Southwell  2838 

Time's  Revenge.  .  Walter  Learned  743 
Tired  Mothers.  .  .May  R.  Smith  321 
"'Tis     But     a     Little     Faded 

Flower" E.  C.  Howarth  3303 

"  'Tis  the  Last  Rose  of  Summer" 

Thomas  Moore  1505 

To ,  "One  word  is  too  often 

profaned".    .    .-P-  B.  Shelley     625 

To  ,  "We  met  but  in  one 

giddv  dance". .  .W.  M.  Praed  1714 

To  a   Butterfly Wordsworth  1517 

To   a   Child Wordmorth     125 

To  a  Child  of  Fancy Morris    340 

To  a  Child  of  Quality Prior     276 

To  a  Cricket W.  C.  Bennett  1513 

To  a  Friend  ...  TlarUev  Coleridge  301S 
To  a  Greek  Girl. .  .Austin  Dobson    347 

To  a  Kiss John  Wolcol     686 

To   a   Lady   Asking  Him   How 
Long  he  Would  Love  Her 

Geone  Etherege     594 

To  a  Little  Girl Helm  Eden     267 

To  a  Little  Girl. .  .Gii^lav  Kobhe  267 
To  a  Mountain  Daisy.  . .  .  Burns  1474 

To  a  Mouse Robert  Burns   1507 

To  a  New-born  Baby  Girl 

Grace  Hazard  Conkling        S 


4004 


Index  of  Titles 


To  a  New  Born  Child 

Cosmo  Monkhouse         g 
To     a     New     York     Shop-Girl 

Dressed  for  Sunday..  .  .Branch  ,^021 
,To  a  Pair  of  Egyptian  Slippers 

Edivin  Arnold  1762 
To   a   Poet   a   Thousand    Years 

Hence J .  E.  Flecker  3101 

To  a   Skylark,    "Ethereal   min- 
strel! pilgrim  of  the  sky" 

William  Wordsworth  1566 
To   a   Skylark,    "Hail   to   thee, 

blithe  spirit" P.  B.  Shelley  1569 

To  a  Skylark.  "Up  with  me!  up 

with  me  into  the  clouds" 

William  Wordsworth  1565 

To  a  Snow-flake Thompson  ijqi 

To  a  Swallow  Building  under  our 

Eaves J.  W .  Carlyle  1573 

To  a  Waterfowl.  .  .W.  C.  Bryant  1582 

To   a    Wind-Flower Cawein  1503 

To  a  Wood-Violet.  ...J.B.  Tahb  1503 

To  a  Young  Lady Cowper    332 

To  /Enone Robert  Herrick     595 

To  Age W.  S.  Landor    406 

To   Althea,    from    Prison 

Lovelace    605 
To  Araarantha  that  She  would 

Dishevel  Her  Hair.  . .  .  Lovelace    533 

To  America Alfred  Austin  2226 

To  an  Early  Primrose.  .  .  .White  1496 
To  an  Inconstant.. /JrtAf/'Z  Ayton    809 

To  an  Insect 0.  W .  Holmes  15 12 

To  an  Oriole Edgar  Fawcett  1557 

To  Anne William  Maxwell     692 

To  Anthea,  who  may  Command 

Him  Anything.  Robert  Ilerrick  595 
To  Anthea,  who  may  Command 

Him  Anything  (New  Style) 

Alfred  Cochrane  1755 

To  Arcady C.  B.  Going    664 

To  Autumn John  Keats  1375 

To  Blossoms Robert  Herrick  1504 

To   Celia,    "Drink   to   me   only 

with  thine  eyes".  Ben  Jonson  591 
To    Celia,    "Not    Ceiia,    that    I 

juster  am" Charles  Sedley     610 

To  Celia,  "When,  Celia,  must  my 

old  day  set.  .  .  .Charles  Cotton  609 
To  Charlotte  Pultency.  .  .Philips  273 
To  Chloe ....  William  Carlwright  603 
To  Chloe   Jealous 

Mtitthcv:  riior     jtit, 

To  Chloris Charles  Sedley     720 

To  Critics Walter  Learned    366 

To  Cynthia  on  Concealment  of 

her  Beauty.  .Francis  Kynaston     529 

To  Daffodils Robert  Herrick   1474 

To  Daisies.  .  .  .Francis  Thompson  1479 
To  Daisies,  not  to  Shut  so  Soon 

Robert  Herrick   1477 

To  Daphne Walter  Besant     568 

To  Death Anne  Finch  3407 

To  Delia,  Sonnets  \T,  XII,  XXX, 

XXXVI,      XXXLX,      XLV, 

XLVI,  L,  LI.  Samuel  Daniel   1239 

To  Diane H.  H.  Whitney  1128 

To  Dianeme Robert  Herrick     816 

To  Each  His  Own,  M.  R.  Garvin  3363 

To  Electra Robert  Herrick     684 

To  England   H.G.  Boker  2225 

Xo  F.  C .lortimer  Collitis  1171 


PAGE 

To  Fancy John  Keats  3166 

To  Fanny Thomas  Moore  1711 

To  Flavia.  ...  .Edmund  Waller  600 
To  Hartley   Coleridge 

William  Wordsworth     27.5 

To  Hasekawa Arensberg  2908 

To  Helen,  "Helen,  thy  beauty  is 

to  me" E.  A.  Poe    551 

To   Helen,   "If  wandering  in  a 

wizard's  car".  .  .W .  M.  Praed  791 
To  Her — Unspoken.  A.  J.  Burr  1029 

To  His  Coy  Love Drayton     586 

To  His  Coy  Mistress.  .  .  .Marvcll  607 
To  His  Forsaken  Mistress.  Ayton     80S 

To in  Church Seeger     581 

To  Jane:  the  Invitation,  Shelley  1667 
To  Keep  a  True  Lent... Herrick  3745 
To  Laura  W — ^ — ,  two  Years  Old 

N.  P.  Willis  270 
To  Lesbia,  "  Give  me  kisses!    Do 

not  stay" J .  G.  Saxe    690 

To  Lesbia,  "My  sweetest  Lesbia, 

let  us  live  and  love."  Campion  588 
To  Little  Renee .  ..W.A.  Bradley  6 
To  Lucasta,  Going  beyond  the 

Seas Richard  Lovelace     933 

To  Lucasta,  Going  to  the  Wars 

Richard   Lovelace     9^3 

To  M.  E.  W G.  K.  Chesterton  3482 

ToManon W.  S.  Blunt    851 

To  Marguerite. . Matthew  Arnold  966 
To  Mary,  "  If  I  had  thought  thou 

couldst  have  died" Wolfe  1082 

To  Mary,   "'Thee,  Mary,  with 

this   ring   I   v/ed' ".... Bishop  1225 

To  Mary  in  Heaven Burns  1072 

To  Mary  Unwin.  William  Cowper  1254 

To  Meadows Robert  Herrick   1439 

To  Minerva Thomas  Hood  2048 

To    Mistress    Margaret    Hussey 

John  Skellon  329 
To  Mother  Nature.  F.  L.  Knowles  1 299 
To  Music,  to  Becalm  His  Fever 

Robert  Herrick  3123 
To  My   Grandmother 

Frederick  Locker-Lam pson  1728 
To     My     Inconstant     Mistress 

Thomas  Carcw     507 

To  My  Love J.  G.  Saxe    6yo 

To   Night,    "Mysterious   Night! 

when   our   first   parent    knew"  ■'  ' 

J.B.  White  13 2f 
To  Night,  "Swiftly  walk  o'er  the  "J 

western  wave".  .P.  B.  Shelley  1323 
To  One  in  Paradise.  .  .E.  A.  Poe  1165 
"To  One  Who  Has  Been  Long  in 

Citv  Pent" John  Keats  1655 

To  Oiie  Who  Would  Make  a  Con- 
fession  W.  S.  Blunt  1 26 1 

To  Petronilla H.  H.  Bashford     343 

To  Primroses  Filled  with  Morn- 
ing Dew Robert  Herrick   1496 

To  Rose Sara  Teasdale     272 

To  Roses  in  the  Bosom  of  Castara 

William  Habington     600 

To  Silvia A  nne  Finch    614 

To  Shakespeare  .5.  T.  Coleridge  3652 
To  ?Ae&p.  .  .William  Wordsworth  3221 

To  Song T.  S.  Jones.  Jr.  3088 

To  Spring William  Blake  1342 

To  the  Cuckoo.  "Hail,  beauteous 

stranger  of  the  grows." .Logan  iS3<J 


Index  of  Titles 


4005 


To  the  Cuckoo,  "O  blithe  New- 
comer! I  liuve  heard  " 

William  Wordsworth  15.5S 

To  the  Daisy Wordsworth  1478 

To  the  Dandelion.  ./.  K.  Lowell  14S1 

To  the  Dead  of  'q8 Johnson  2261 

To  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  on  the 

Death  of  Mr  Addison.  Tickrll  3584 
To  the  Fringed  Gentian.  Bryant  14S4 
To    the    Grasshopper    and    the 

Cricket £ci,i;/i   Hunt  1510 

To  the  Harpies  ...AD.  Ficke  3389 
To  the  Man-of-War  Bird 

Wall  Whitman  1542 
To  the  Memory  of  My  Beloved 
Master    William    Shakespeare 

Ben  Jonson  3650 
To  the  Muses. .  .  .William  Blake  3096 
To     the     Nightingale,      "Dear 
Chorister,     who     from     those 
shadows  sends'.  .. />Mmmo/K/  1548 
To  the  Nightingale,  "O  nightin- 
gale,   that    on    yon    bloomy 

spray" John  Milton  1551 

To  the  Pious  Memory  of  the  Ac- 
complished Voung  Lady,  Mrs. 
Anne  Killigrew.  .  .John  Dryden  3524 

To  the  Poets John  Keats  3090 

To  the  Rainbow Campbell  1444 

To  the  Rose:  a  Song.  . .  .Herrick  931 
To  the  Sister  of  Elia.  . .  .Landor  3625 
To  the  Small  Celandine 

William  Wordsworth  1470 
To  the  Terrestrial  Globe.. Gilbert  2075 
To  the  United  States  of  America, 

Bridges  2562 
To  the  V^irginian  \'oyage 

Michael  Drayton  2384 
To  the  Virgins,  to  make  much  of 

Time Robert  Herrick     3  28 

To  the  Western  Wind ....  Herrick     596 

To  the  Willow-Tree Herrick   1406 

To  Violets Robert  Herrick  1501 

To  William  Sharp Scollard  3654 

To  Woman Lord  Byron    834 

To  Youth W.  S.  Landor    ,^54 

Toccata  of  Galuppi,  A 

Robert  Browning  3133 
1^0-Aa.y,    "So    here    hath    been 

^i dawning" Thomas  Carlyle  2920 

.  To-day B.  R.C.  Low    663 

^.Jo-day,  "Why  fear  to-morrow,-—  - 
,     timid  heart".  .  .L.  A.  C.  Ward  2932 

Todlin'  Hame Unknown  2009 

Toil  of  the  Trail,  The.  . .  .  Garland  1684 
Tom  Bowling.  . .  .Charles  Dibdin  162S 
Tom  Dunstan.  .Robert  Buchanan  301S 

Tom  o'  Bedlam Unknown  3142 

Tom  Thumb's  Alphabet 

Unknown      60 
Tommy's  Dead.  .  .Sydney  Dohell  3542 

To-morrow John  Collins     402 

Too  Candid  by  Half Saxe  1909 

Too  Late D.   M.  M.  Craik  1099 

Touch-stone,  The,  Samuel  Bishop    826 
^  Toujours  Amour.  C.  R.  Stedman     793 

Toys,  The Coventry  Palmare     296 

Tragedy,  A,  "Among  his  books 

he  sits  all  day,"  Edith  Nesbit  1019 
Tragedy,   A,    "She   was  only  a 
woman,  famished  for  loving" 

Thiophile  Marzials  1040 


P.\GE 

Tragic  Story,  A Thackeray  2049 

Traveller's  Hope 

Charles  Granville  3478 

Tree,  The Jones  Very  1403 

Trees Joyce   Kilmer  1407 

Tribute,  The.  .Coventry  Palmare    386 

Trifle.  A Henry  Timrod     654 

Triolet,  "All  women  born  are  so 

perverse" Robert  Bridges  1903 

"Tripping     Down      the      Field- 
Path" Charles  Swain     870 

Triumph    of    Forgotten    Things, 

The Edith  M.  Thomas     449 

Triumph  of  Time,  The,  Stanzas 

from A.  C.  Swinburne  1585 

Tola  I'uit R.W.  Kaufman     441 

Troop  of  the  (iuard.  A,  Ha:iedorn  3062 

Tropical  Town dc  la  Selva  3374 

Trosachs,  The Wordsworth  1430 

Trot,  Trot Mary  F.  Butts       84 

True  Beauty.  Francis  Beaumont    811 

Truly  (ireat W.  H.  Davies  1644 

"Trusty,   Dusky,   Vivid,   True" 

R.  L.  Stevenson    394 
"Truth    Doth   Truth    Deserve" 

Philip  Sidney  1212 

Tryst,  A L.  C.  Moiilton  mi 

Tryste  Noel L.  /.  Guiney     209 

Tucking  the  Baby  in  .  Curtis  May       93 
Tuft  of  Flowers,  The 

Robert  Frost  3074 
Turkish  Legend,  A,  T.  B.  Aldrich  2845 

Turn  o'  the  V'ear Tynan  1332 

Turn  of  the  Road,  The./l. /?.  Coe  1158 
Turtle  and  Flamingo,  The,  Fields  2058 

Twa  Corbies,  The Unknown  2680 

Twa  Sisters,  The Unknown  2648 

'Twas  Ever  Thus.  .  .//.  5.  Leigh  1930 

Twenty  Years  Ago Huston    469 

Twickenham  Ferry 

Theophile  Marzials     761 
Twilight,     "  Spirit     of    Twilight 

through  your  folded  wings" 

Olive  Cuslance  13 17 
Twilight,  "When  I  waayoup^the 

twilight  seemed  too  long" 

A.M.F.  Robinson 

Twilight  at  Sea Welb- 

Twilight  Song.  .  .E.  A.  Robins/ 

Twins,  The H.S.  U 

Two  April  Mornings,  The 
^'-^^—.WW^i-Vhrfi' 
Two  Hundred  Years  Ago 

W.  H.  Drun   . 
Two  in  the  Campagna.  Brn 
Two  Lovers,  The,  "The  !c 

her  body  said,"  Richard 
Two  Lovers,  "TXvo  lover 

moss-grown  spring".  . 
Two  Mysteries,  The.  .  . 
Two  Triolets.  Harrison  R 
Two  Villages,  The,  R.  1 


U 

Ulysses AlfreJ  ' 

Unbelief E 

Under  My  Window.  . .  ^ 
"  Under  the  Greenwoc 
William  ^ 
Under  the  Leaves.  .  .| 
Under  the  Lindens. H^.1 


4006 


Index  of  Titles 


PAGE 

Unity Alfred  Noyes     670 

Universal  Prayer Pope  378S 

Unliindness George  Herbert  3722 

Unmanifest  Destiny IJovey  22og 

Unseen  Spirits TV.  P.  Willis  1032 

Unthrift Coventry   Palmare    384 

Until  Death.  ..  .Elizabeth  Akers  1116 
Up  at  a  Villa — Down  in  tiie  City 

Robert  Browning  1865 

Up-hill C.  G.  Rossetti  3415 

Upon  Julia's  Clothes.  .  .  .Herrick  529 
Upon  Lesbia — Arguing.  Cochrane  1754 
Upper  Chamber,  An.  Bannerman  3748 

Urania Matthew  Arnold     639 

Urbs  Beata  Hierusalem  Unknown  3826 
Urbs  Syon  Aurea 

Bernard  of  Cluny  3824 

Urceus  Exit Austin  Dobson  1782 

Ursula.  . R.  U.  Johnson     576 

Useful  Plow,  The, Unknown  1653 


V.  D.  F Unknown  2326 

Vagabond,  The,  R.  L.  Stevenson  1674 

Vagabond  Song,  A Carman  1689 

Vagabonds,  The, ....  Trowbridge  3340 

Vain  Virtues D.  G.  Rossetti  2866 

Valediction,  A..E.B.  Browning  960 
Valerius  on  Women.  .  .  .Heywood  818 
Valley  of  Vain  Verses.  The 

Henry  Van  Dyke  2933 
Valor  of  Ben  Milam,  The 

Clinton  Scollard  2457 
Vampire,  The,  Rudyard  Kipling  1045 

Van  Elsen F.  G.  .Scott  3574 

Vanquished F.  F.  Browne  3609 

V-a-s-e,  The J.  J.  Roche  1886 

Vendor's  Song,  Adelaide  Crapsey  3109 
Veni,  Creator  Spiritu.s,  "Creator 

Spirit,  by  whose  aid."  Dryden  3782 
Veni,    Creator    Spiritus,    "Veni, 
Creator  Spiritus" 

St.  Gregory  the  Great  f?)  3823 
'eni,    Sancte    Spiritus,-    "Come, 
"^^oly  Ghost!  thou  Cre  divine" 

Catharine  Winkworth  3780 
Sancte    Spiritus,    "Veni, 
■     Spiritus" 

Robert  II  of  Frame  3822 
stood  in  Venice,  on 
je-tff  j"i£hs" 

"Ldtd'Hyrotl  2618 
lenice,  thou  Siren  of 
I    wrought" 

J.  A.  Symonds  2610 
away. .   .  Ben  JonSon    479 

: Arthur  Upson  2856 

nsiquts. .  .du  Mauricr  2087 
st  ruinetl  Ilion  Helen 

.W.  S.  Lamior  3089 

im  monarch  of  all  I 
. . .  WH'.iam   Cowper  30,58 
Cat.  Charles  Dauheny  1S22 
d  Over  the  Door  at 
nee  into  the  Apollo 
he  Devil  Tavern 

BenJonson  1988 

vg,  A Laird  105 1 

^aven,  The 

''rancis  Thompson  3770 
.W.  M.  Praed  1715 


f'' 


PAGE 

Vicar  of  Bray,  The. . .  .  Unknown  1835 
Village  Blacksmith,  The 

//.  W.  Longfellow  2916 
Villanelle  of  His  Lady's  Treasures 

Ernest  Dowson  576 
Villon's  Ballade.  .  .Andrew  Lang  1858 
Villon's  Straight  Tip  to  all  Cross 

Coves W.  E.  Henley  1857 

Vine,  The James  Thomson    487 

Violet,  The,  "Down  in  a  green 

and  shady  bed."  Jane  Taylor     106 
Violet,  The,  "O  faint,  delicious, 

spring-time   violet" Story  1502 

Violet  and  the  Rose,  The 

A  u.g!ista  Webster  1503 
Virginians  of  the  Valley,  The 

F.  0.  Ticknor  2223 

Virtue George  Herbert  3720 

Vision  of  Belshazzar,  The,  Byron  2328 
Visit  from  St.  Nicholas,  A 

C.C.Moore     221 

Visitor,  The Chalmers     247 

Vits  Summa  B  re  vis  Spem  Nos 
Vetat  Incohare  Longam 

Ernest  Dowson  3404 
Vivamus,  Mea  Lesbia.  .  .Catullus  3827 

Vixi Unknown  3221 

Vobiscum  est  lope Campion    850 

Voice,  The Norman  Gale    395 

"Voice  by  the  Cedar  Tree,  A" 

Alfred  Tennyson  552 
Voice  from  Galilee,  The,  Bonar  3810 
Voice  of  Christmas,  The 

Harry  Kemp  3750 
Voice  of  the  Grass,  The,  Boyle  1.187 
"Voice  of  the  Western  Wind" 

E.  C.  Stedman  446 
Voice   of   Toil,   The Morris  3017 

W 

Wacht  am  Rhein,  Die 

Max  Schneckenburger  3833 

Waiting John  Burroughs  3495 

Wake,  Lady Joanna  Baillie    6y8 

Waking  Year,  The.  .  .  .Dickinson  1332 
Waldein.7,ainkeit.  R.  W.  Emerson  1398 
Walrus  and  the  Carpenter,  The 

Lewis  Carroll  2062 
Wanderer,  The.  .  .Austin  Dobson  868 
Wander-Lovers,  The  .  .  .Bovey  1686 
W.indering   Knight's  Song,  'I'h'e 

/.  G.  Lnckhart    626 

Wanderlust Gerald   Gould  1679 

Warden  of  the  Cinque  Ports,  The 

H.  W.  Longfellow  3770 
Warren's  Address.  John  Pierpont  2428 
WarriorMaid.The.yl.H.  Bra«c/i  2821 
■Washers  of  the  Shroud,  The 

/.  R.  Lowell  2488 
Waste  Places,  The 

James  Stephens  2819 
Wastrel,  The,  R.  W.  Kaufman  440 
Watch  on  the  Rhine,  The 

Max  Schneckenburger  2269 
Watcher,  The .  .  .  James  Stephens  1089 
Water  Lady,  The,  Thomas  Hood    869 

Waterloo Aubrcv  De  Vere  2452 

Way,  The 5.  H.  Moore  2973 

Way  of  It,  The /.  V.  Cheney  1049 

Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life, 
The Theodore  Parker  3730 


Index  of  Titles 


4007 


PAGE 

Jnder    the    Portrait   of    Milton 

John  Dryden  3647 

Unguarded A.  F.  Murray  1455 

Wayfarer,  The IIuntinv,lon  2854 

"We  Are  Brethren  A',"  Nicoll  3035 
"We  are  Seven".  . .  .Wordsworth  316 
"We  need  not  Bid,  for  Cloistered 

Cell" John  Kehle  3747 

Weakest  Thing,  The,  Browning  3385 
Wearin'  o'  the  Green,  The 

Unknmvn  2249 

Wearyin'  fer  You Stanton    993 

Weather  Wisdom Unknown      66 

Wedded  Bliss.  . .  .C.  P.  S.  Oilman  1898 
^\'eiu'lling  the  Baby,  E.  L.  Beers       15 
Welcome,    .\,    "  Welcome,    wel- 
come, do  1  sing' Browne    527 

Welcome,  The,  "Come  in  the 
evening,  or  come  in  the  morn- 
ing"  T.O.  Davis     63S 

"We'll  go  no  more  a   Roving" 

Lord  Byron  866 
Well  of  St.  Keyne,  The,  Soulhey  2014 
"  Were    but    my    Spirit    Loosed 

upon  the  Air,"  L.  C.  Moullon  1262 
"  Were  I  as  Base  as  is  the  Lowly 

Plain" Joshua  Sylvester  1253 

"Were  My  Heart  as  Some  Men's 

Are" Thomas  Campion    sgo 

West-Country  Lover,  The 

Alice  Brown  669 
"Wet  Sheet  and  a  Flowing  Sea, 

A" Allan   Cunningham  1592 

Wharf  of  Dreams,  The, 

Edwin  Markham  3224 
What  Christ  Said.  .  .  .Macdonald  3774 
"What  do  we  Plant".  . .  .Abbey  1402 
"What  does  little  Birdie  say"' 

Alfred  Tennyson     150 

What  is  Good J.  B.  O'Reilly  2918 

What  is  Love John  Fletcher    4S1 

"What  is  to  Come" ...  .Henley  3422 
What  Mr.  Robinson  Thinks 

J .  R.  Lowell  1839 
What  My  Lover  Said.  . .  .Greene  1149 
What  of  the  Darkness 

Richard  Le  Uallienne  3513 
"What  Riches  Have  You" 

George  Santayana  2907 

When S.C.  Woolsey  3464 

•Whor^  ^  -  I— r" 

liuV^I    IS.     i,„,,        ,.  - 

"When  Banners  are  Waving" 

Unknown  2279 
"WTien  Daffodils  begin  to  Peer" 

William  Shakespeare  1337 
"When,  Dearest,  I  but  Think  of 

Thee" John  Suckling.     601 

"When    Death   to   Either   shall 

Come" Robert  Bridges  1168 

"When  First  I  saw  Her  " 

G.  E.  Woodberry  S7i 
"When  Good  King  Arthur  Ruled 

this  Land  " Unknown      46 

"When  I  am  Dead  and  Sister  to 

the  Dust" Elsa  Barker  3506 

"When  I  Have  Fears" Keats  3488 

When  I  Have  Gone  Weird  Ways 

J.  G.  Neihardl  3498 
"When  I  Loved  You".  ..  .Moore  832 
"When  I  Saw  You  Last,  Rose" 

Austin  Dobson  1782 


"When  I  Was  a  Bachelor" 

,  Unknown 

When  t  was  One-and-Twenty  " 
.  .X.  E.Housman 

When  in  the  Woods  I  Wander 
all  Alone.  •  E.  Hovdl-Thurlow 
"When  Lilacs  I-ast  in  the  Door- 
yard  Bloomed.'  Walt  Whitman 
"When    Lovely    Wom.-.r,,"   Cary 
"When  Lovely  Woman  Stoops  to 

Folly" Oliver  Goldsniith 

"When  Molly  Smiles"  Unknown 
"When    My    Beloved   Sleeping 

r>ics" McLeod 

When  She  Comes  Home.  .Riley 
"Wlien  Spring  Comes  Back  to 

England  " Alfred  Noyes 

"When  that  I  was  and  a  Little 

Tiny    Boy" Shakespeare 

"When    the    Frost    is    on    the 

Punkia'; /.  W.  Riley 

"When   the   Grass   Shall   Cover 

Me" I)ia  Coolbrith 

When  the  Great  Gray  Ships  Come 

In G.W.Carryl 

"When  the  Hounds  of  Spring" 

A .  C.  Swinburne 
When  the  Kye  Comes  Hame 

James  Hogg 
"When  the  Most  is  Said" 

M.  A.  de  Vcre 
When  the  Sleepy  Man  Comes 

C.  G.  D.  Roberts 
When  the  Sultan  goes  to  Ispahan 
T.  B.  Aldriih 
"When  We  are  Parted" 

Hamilton  Aidi 
"When  We  Two  Parted."  Byron 
When  will  Love  Come ....  Bealty 
"  When  You  are  Old  "...  Yeat-' 
"Where    be    You    Going,    You 

Devon  Maid" John  Keats 

"Where  Lies  the  Land."  Clough 
Where  Love  Is.  .  .Amelia  Burr 
"Where  Runs  the  R'^•e^  " 

P.  W.  bmrdillnn 

"While  Shepherds  watched  their 

Flocks  by  Night,"  .Xaliiim  Tale 

Whisperers.  The.  W.   W.  Gibson 

White  Azaleas.  H.  McE.  Kimball 

White  Flag,  The John  Hay 

■  ■■'.:.«.  .lol-lnrl     Thfw  Herrick 

White  Jess^'miiitr^he.  .  ..rabo 
White  Peace,  The. 

William  Sharp 

White  Rose,  A,  /.    B.  O'Reilly 

"Whither  is  Gone  the  Wisdom 

and   the   Power''.  .    .Coleridge 

Whiting  and  the  Snail.  The 

Lewis  Carroll 
"Who  ha.s  Seen  the  Wind" 

Christina    Rossetti 
Whole  Duty  of  Children 

R.  L.  Stevenson 
"Why  Art  Thou  Silent" 

William  Wordsworth 

Why  I  Love  Her Brome 

'Why,  Lovely  Charrnrr" 

Unknown 

Widow.  The.  . Allan  Ramsay 

Widow  Machree.  Samuel  Lover 
Widow   M»*>nc,    The Lever 


P.\GE 

43 

8S7 

1399 

3630 
1923 

1050 
72s 

924 
1 000 

400 
1381 
1114 
2S43 
1339 

775 

3423 

70 

854 

087 
952 
S04 
636 

732 

3414 

6S9 

20s 

3379 
1467 
796 
3608 
3549 

2853 
657 

3096 

1934 

130 

98 

I2S4 
606 

614 

203O 
1974 
1973 


40o8 


Index  of  Titles 


Widowhood   Ingelow 

Widow's  Mite,  The 

Frederick  Locker -Lampson 

Wife,  The Garrison 

Wife  from  Fairyland,  The 

Richard  Le  Gallienne 
Wife  of  Usher's  Weil,  The 

Unknown 
Wife  to  Her  Kusband,  The 

Unknown 
Wife's  ?ong,  A.  .  .W.  C.  Bennett 

Wild  Eden G.  E.  Woodherry 

Wild  Geese.  .Frederick  Peterson 
Wild  Honeysuckle,   The 

Philip  Frencau 

Wild  Ride,  The L.  I .  Guiney 

Wild  Roses pAlgar  Fawcetl 

Wild  Wishes E.  M.  Hewitt 

William  Blake.  .  .James  Thomson 
Willie  and  Helen,  ,  .Hew  Ainslie 
Willie  Winkie.  .  .  .William  Miller 

Willow-tree,  The Thackeray 

Willowwood D.  G.  Rossetti 

Willy  Drowned  in  Yarrow 

Unknown 

Willy  Reilly Unknown 

Wind  and  the  Moon,  The 

George  Macjonald 
"Wind  Me  a  Summer  Crown" 
Smedley 

Windle-Straws Dowden 

Wind's  Song,  The, 

Gabriel  Setoun 
Wind's  Way,  The.  . .  .Conkling 
Wing  Tee  VVee.  .  ./.  P.  Denison 
Winged  Worshippers,  The 

Charles  Sprague 

Wiiiifreda Unknown 

Winter:  a  Dirge.  .  .Robert  Burns 

Winter  Glass,  The Cotton 

Winter  Wish,  A Messinger 

Wisdom F.  M.  Huejer 

Wise L.  W.  Reese 

Wisdom  of  Folly,  The.  .  .  .Fowler 
Wish.  .'..  "  I  c-  sk  not  <hjt  my  bed 

or  death  " Matthew  A  mold 

Wish.  A,  "Mine  be  a  cot  beside 

„  tlie  hill  " Samuel  Rogers 

Wish,  The,  "Well,  then,  I  now  do 

plainly  see".  .Abraham  Cnwlcv 

v\ishes  to  Ilis  Supposed  Mistress 

W'shin,^ William  Ailtngham 

Witch  in  the  Glass,  The. .  Piatt 
With  a  Guitar,  to  Jane.  .Shelley 
"With     Ships     the     Sea     Was 

Sprinkled" Wordsworth 

"With  Strawberries  "...  .Henlev 
Without  and  Within.  /.  R.  Lowell 
Woman,  "Not she  with  traitorous 

kiss  her  Saviour  stung."  Barrett 
Woman,   "There  in   the  fane  a 

beauteous     creature     stands" 

Calidasa 

Woman      with      the      Serpent's 

Tongue,  The.  William  Watson 
Woman's  Last  Word,  A 

Robert  Browning 
Woman  s  Love,  A.  .  Jghn  Hay 
Woman's  Question,  A.  .Procter 
Woman's  Shortcomings,  a 

h.  B.  Brcrwjfiing 


PAGE 
43° 

35St 
394 

IIjO 

2650 

I2l5 

1217 
3209 
1582 

.14S8 

347S 

1498 

664 

3589 

941 

72 

1936 

1258 

106 1 

267S 


33S8 
887 

131 

3374 
1S03 

3754 
1221 
1386 
1994 
2011 
.SI  2 
3.587 
2045 

3450 

1634 

1655 

'1,5s 

157 

3126 


1760 
1764 


377 

1908 

876 
1038 
1162 


PAGE 

Woman's  Thought,  \.  ..  .Gilder    912 
Woman's    Will,    "Men,    dying, 
make  their  wills,  but  wives" 

J.  G.  Sa.xe  1910 
Woman's  Will,  "That  man's  a  fool 
who  tries'  by  art  and  skill" 

Unknown  1910 
Women  Folk,  The.  .  .James  Hogg  749 
Women's  Longing.  .John  Fletcher  1903 
Wonderful    VVorld,    The,    Rands     126 

Wood  Song,  A Hodgson  13  29 

Wood-Dove's  Note,  The,  Miller  1583 
"Woodman,  Spare  that  Tree" 

G.  P.  Morris  1409 
"Woods  that  Bring  the  Sunset 

Near,  The R.W.  Gilder  1400 

"Wooed  and  Married  and  A'" 

Alexander  Ross     746 
Wooing    Song,    from     "  Christ's 

Victory" Giles   Fletcher     476 

"  Word  of  God  to  Leyden  Came, 

The" J.  E.  Rankin  2386 

Word  of  the  Lord  from  Havana, 

The Richard  Hovey  2533 

Wordsworth /.  K.  Stephen  1956 

Wordsworth's  Grave.  .  .  .Watson  3682 
Work   without   Hope 

5.  T.  Coleridge  3373 
World,  The,  "  I  saw  Eternity  the 

other  night".  .Henrv  Vanghan  3696 
World,    The,    "The    World's    a 
bubble,  and  the  life  of  Man" 

Lord  Bacon     399 
World  I  am  Passing  through.  The 

Lydia  M .  Child     408 
"World   is  too   Much  with   Us, 

The" ...  .William   Wordsworth  1292 
World's  Justice,  The.  .  .  .Lazarus  3255 

World's  Music,  The Setoun     127 

World's  Way,  The,  T.  B.  Aldrich  i860 
"Wouldn't  You  Like  to  Know" 

J.  G.  Saxe  734 
"Wreathe  the  YioviX" ...  .Moore  2003 
Wreck  of  the  Hesperus,  The 

H.  W.  Longfellow  2461 
Wreck  of  the  "Julie  Plnnte" 

W .  H.  Drumirtiiml  --U33 
Written  at  an  Inn  at  Henley 

William  Shen^tnne  2988 
Written  in  a  little  Lady's  little 

Album ,      •'";,/'"■,  ''"'•■''7-  ■■^-'1 

•■>>i.m.,  in  iviarch.  .  .  Wordsworth  1352 
Written  on  a  Looking-Glass 

Unknown  1919 
"Wrong  Not,  Sweet  Empress  of 

my  Heart" Waller  Raleigh     586 

Wynken,  BIynken,  and  Nod 

Eugene  Field      68 


Yak,  The Oliver  Herford 

Yankee  Doodle .  Edward  Banesi?) 

Yarn  of  the  "Nancy  Bell,"'The 

W.  S.  Gilbert 

Yarrow  Unvisited .  .  .  Wordsioorth 

Yarrow  Visited WordsT.vorth 

"Yaw,  Dot  is  So"  C.  P.  Adams 
"Ye  Mariners  of  England" 

Thomas  Campbell 
Year  that's  Awa',  The,  Dunlop 
Years W.  S.  Landor 


208? 
2198 

2177 
2  5  84 
2586 


2233 
2000 
407 


Index  of  Titles 


4009 


PACE 

Year's  End,  TJie,  Timothy  Cote    425 
bellow  Jessamine. C.  F.  Wonlion  14QO 

"Yes" R.D.  Blackmorc  1172 

Yes H.C.  Bunncr    804 

Youni;  ami  Old,  Clianes  Kingstcy     417 
Young  Bcichan  and  Susie  Pye 

Unknown  2666 
"Young  May  Moon,  The'' 

Thomas    Moore     Oyy 


PAGE 
Young  Windebank.  . .  .  JKoi)rf.s  2.525 
Your  Lad,  and  my  Lad.  .Tanhh  2563 
Youth  and  Age,  "Verse,  a  breeze 

'mid  blossoms  straying" 

S.  T.  ColeridRC     403 
Youth   and    Age,    "Youth    hath 

many  charms  ".Ccor.iif  Arnold     421 

Youth  and  .\r\ Bmu'nlng     880 

Vouth   in  Arms Monro  2555 


D 


-  1 


V  ► 


V  ; 


w  ^1 


^yfaf 


■%  <^'^ 


-7 


C 


A    t>  V  <^  '■.'  *  •?-' 


-A  *    «    '    ' 


"^y-  v' 


.-^^ 


.-^^^^ 


•^o  o'^" 


.^^    •^^..     ' 


cr 


'^ 


"^.^ 


.<^' 


y  'f 


t^   G 


^*     a'^      -^..y 


*        .l\ 


'^»    ''  i 


.0  o^ 


'"-  '■-'  -^>  .-o."^^ 


0>      -7 


^^._    *«,^-    ^y 


•    >. 


v\^' 


^  "%.  <^ 


vO  O 


^''^'^-^W'.^ 

-f^^^ '.  -^  ^ 


Oc 


O  *  ..      .  -         .  \S^ 


,0  0^ 


^0  -^^         *- 


.'^^ 


\'  .' 


a\      ,  0  N  c  ^     ''^  .0>      ,  V  .  «  <      -C^  .-^^     c  "  ^  *•  ♦     ''b.  . 


^z  ^'  \    AoorSS   BROTHERSA      '-^  '^  «,  ..  '■'V  ^ 

